Edited by: Gianni GIGLIO, Francesco Luigi LEONETTI, Mariacristina FILICE, Chiara ROMANO,
Francesca Romana REINERO, Emilio SPERONE

© 2019 Euroservice S.r.l. – via G. Marconi 69, 87036 Rende (CS) ITALY
                                  COMMITTEES


Organizing committee:
Emilio SPERONE (president - DiBEST), Primo MICARELLI (vice-president - CSS), Luca
LANTERI (1st Secretary – GRIS), Fulvio GARIBALDI (2nd Secretary - GRIS), Donatella BARCA
(3th Secretary – DiBEST), Sandro TRIPEPI (4th Secretary – DiBEST), Sandra IMBROGNO (5th
Secretary – DiBEST).


Scientific committee:
President: Leonard J.V. COMPAGNO (honorary member CSS)
Members: Giacinto BAGETTA (UNICAL), Donatella BARCA (UNICAL), Massimiliano
BOTTARO (Stazione Zoologica “A. Dohrn” - GRIS), Pietro BRANDMAYR (UNICAL), Maria
Carmela CERRA (UNICAL), Rosa Maria FACCIOLO (UNICAL), Fulvio GARIBALDI
(Università di Genova - GRIS), Sandra IMBROGNO (UNICAL), Luca LANTERI (Università di
Genova - GRIS), Olga MANGONI (Università di Napoli “Federico II” - SIBM), Letizia MARSILI
(Università di Siena - GRIS), Carlotta MAZZOLDI (Università di Padova - GRIS), Primo
MICARELLI (CSS - GRIS), Concetta MILAZZO (UNICAL), Fabrizio SERENA (CNR Mazzara
del Vallo - GRIS), Emilio SPERONE (UNICAL), Fausto TINTI (Università di Bologna- GRIS),
Bruno TOTA (UNICAL), Sandro TRIPEPI (UNICAL), Annalisa ZACCARONI (Università di
Bologna).


Executive committee:
Maria ACETO, Ilaria BERNABO’, Lorella DE BUONO, Emanuele DODARO, Mariacristina
FILICE, Gianni GIGLIO, Agostino LEONE, Francesco Luigi LEONETTI, Gianluca MAURO,
Salvatore PANARO, Francesca Romana REINERO, Patrizia Carla RIMA, Chiara ROMANO,
Viviana ROMANO, Emilio SPERONE, Maria Ludovica TORALDO SERRA.
Technical committe:
Vincenzo CIRCOSTA, Luigi COVELLO, Franco Mario D’ACRI, Emanuele DODARO, Damiano
GAROFALO, Francesca GIGLIO, Gianni GIGLIO, Giuseppantonio LACARIA, Alfonso
LAURENZANO, Francesco Luigi LEONETTI, Cristian MARCHIO, Gianluca MAURO,
Salvatore PANARO, Giuseppe RIJLLO, Pierluigi RIZZO, Angelina SORCALE, Alessandro
SPINICELLI.


Communication & Media committee:
Michela CURCIO, Franco Mario D’ACRI, Fiorenza GONZALES, Giuseppantonio LACARIA,
Alessandro SPINICELLI.


Students’ committee:
Silvia Francesca ACETI, Tommaso AIELLO, Alessia AVOLICINO, Vittoria BATTAGLIA,
Laura BEVACQUA, Sharon CHIRIACO, Ylenia FABIETTI, Simone Francesco FERRARO,
Anita FUNARO, Antonio GAETANO, Samira GALLO, Pietro GIOVANNELLI, Luna
GRAZIADIO, Lucia IMPIERI, Letizia GUGLIELMO, Roberta LEONARDO, Marica LOPEZ,
Marco MINERVINO, Gianluca NANIA, Anna PALOPOLI, Giorgio PASCOLO, Lucia
PRANNO, Armando SANTORO, Faustino SCARCELLI, Michele SGAMBELLURI, Chiara
SPADARO, Agnese TIGANI, Anastasia TRIPODI, Giorgia ZICARELLI.
                                                                      October 15, 2019




Dear delegates,


Welcome to EEA 2019 and welcome to Calabria!
DiBEST (Dipartimento di Biologia, Ecologia e Scienze della Terra – University of
Calabria), G.R.I.S. (Gruppo Italiano Ricercatori Squali, Razze e Chimere) and C.S.S.
(Centro Studi Squali) are really pleased to host you at the University of Calabria for
the XXIII edition of the European Elasmobranch Association Meeting.
We hope that this Meeting could represent a crucial forum where scientists,
conservationists, students and all those interested in elasmobranchs will share the
results of their most exciting researches, look for synergies and find new collaborations
and, above all, contribute to the conservation of these amazing marine animals.
Four sessions, two workshops, three key-note speakers, two invited speakers, 71 oral
presentations, 59 posters, 190 delegates from 30 countries inside and outside Europe
will contribute to achieve our goal: to communicate elasmobranchs!
In fact, we believe that there can be no effective conservation without the
communication and sharing of research results, projects, actions, good practices and
ideas. Most oral communications of the Conference will be broadcasted on live
streaming and the best contributions will have the opportunity to be published free of
charge on a special issue of the European Zoological Journal in 2020.
We also strongly wanted to reduce the environmental impact of this event. All the
gadgets are made with ecological or recycled paper, biodegradable plastic, organic
cotton, glass and are BPA free. Drinking water is dispensed from special bottles to
minimize the use of plastic. The plates, glasses and crockery used for the coffee breaks
are made of sugar cane pulp and recycled paper and are completely compostable. The
food is all at km 0 and comes from local companies or from the Calabrian territory.
The University's electricity comes entirely from its own photovoltaic system and its
own geothermal energy plant.
We hope that all the above can create a welcoming and familiar atmosphere of work,
where all together we will contribute to the dissemination of knowledge, protection
and management of elasmobranchs.


      Benvenuti a tutti!
        SESSION I
ELASMOBRANCHS BIOLOGY AND
       PHYSIOLOGY




            1
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology



KEYNOTE SPEAKER


                  The heart of the world's longest living vertebrate:
                                 the Greenland shark




              .

                                           Holly Alice SHIELS

                     Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, UK
                                         Holly.Shiels@manchester.ac.uk




The life span of the Greenland shark is at least 272 years and may be as long as 500 years making
this animal the longest living vertebrate on the planet. It was one of the lesser-known species of
sharks up until 2016 when its extreme longevity was revealed. The finding that they live in the deep,
dark Arctic waters for hundreds of years has captured the imagination of the world and the attention
of scientists. How does an animal born in Shakespeare’s time still patrol the deep today? This extreme
longevity is particularly interesting with respect to the heart, because heart disease is synonymous
with aging in humans. What structures do their hearts have that permit this extreme longevity? Does
the heart underlie the ability of this shark to live so long? We investigated cardiac tissue from 8 sharks
whose ages range between ~ 100±120 to 210 ±120 years old and found significant fibrosis, evidence
of cardiomyocyte proliferation and regeneration and unusual mitochondrial biology. We did not find
evidence of atherosclerosis. These findings will be discussed in relation to the idea of chronological
age versus ‘biological’ age.




                                                      2
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


INVITED SPEAKER


                 Nervous control of ventilation and heart rate
            in the brainstem of the dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula,
                a neuranatomical and neurophysiological study




                                      Edwin (Ted) W. TAYLOR

                            School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, UK
                                          tedwtaylor@hotmail.com



Injection of neural tracers into selected branches of cranial nerves V, VII, IX and X that innervate
respiratory muscles and the heart of the elasmobranch fish, Scyliorhinus canicula identified their
progressive rostro-caudal distribution into discrete nuclei in the brainstem. Efferent activity recorded
from nerves supplying respiratory muscles inserted on the jaws, hyomandibular and gill arches
displayed sequential bursting activity, driving gill ventilation. This activity, which may be derive
from a respiratory rhythm generator located in the reticular formation, was relayed via the trigeminal
Vth nucleus, with subsequent activity in the VIIth, IXth and Xth nuclei reflecting their location in the
brainstem. Forced ventilation is achieved by recruitment of feeding muscles, innervated by occipital
and anterior spinal nerves.
The heart and branchial (gill) circulation in elasmobranch fishes is innervated solely by the
parasympathetic vagus nerve. Recordings from cardiac branches of the vagus showed two types of
activity: units with regular, respiration-related activity and arrhythmic activity that increased during
hypoxia and in response to J-recepter stimulation. Injection of neural tracers into the cardiac nerves
revealed that cardiac, vagal, preganglionic neurons (CVPN) have their cell bodies in two locations in
the brainstem: medial (m) within the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DVN) and a ventro-lateral
scattered distribution (vl) outside of the DVN. Location of these cell bodies by insertion into the
brainstem of recording micro-electrodes revealed that m cells showed respiration-related activity
while vl cells did not. Both cell groups responded to mechanical stimulation of gill arches. Although
tonic, peripheral electrical stimulation of cardiac branches of the vagus inhibited the heart, phasic
stimulation recruited the heart at rates faster or slower than its intrinsic rate. A simple model
attempting to explain the nature and significance of some of these interactions has been proposed.

                                                    3
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


                   Growth and age validation of the thornback ray
                     in the West-Central Mediterranean basin

  Andrea BELLODI1,2, Francesca CAPEZZUTO3,2, Maria C. FOLLESA1,2, Giuseppe LEMBO4,
  Porzia MAIORANO3,2, Michele PALMISANO4, Paola PESCI1,2, Maria Teresa SPEDICATO4,
                         Letizia SION3,2, Pierluigi CARBONARA4

            1
                Department of Life and Environmental Science - University of Cagliari –Cagliari, ITALY
                 2
                   CoNISMa – Consorzio Nazionale Interuniversitario per le Scienze del Mare, ITALY
                        3
                          Department of Biology – University of Bari Aldo Moro, Bari, ITALY
                                    4
                                      COISPA Tecnologia & Ricerca, Bari, ITALY
                                                  abellodi@unica.it




Despite their evolutionary success, many chondrichthyans are increasingly threatened with extinction
as a result of human activities and the conservative life history traits of this group of fishes. In
Mediterranean basin, the thornback ray (Raja clavata), represents among the Rajids the most
commercially utilized species and it is actually included in the IUCN-RedList as Threatened species.
In particular, in the West-Central Mediterranean basin, where the fishing activity is well-developed,
R. clavata represents one of the most important by-catch species mostly for the bottom trawl and long
line fishery. Despite being a very widespread species, some gaps still exist on its biology mostly on
the growth pattern. The lack of biological data constitutes, for the Mediterranean, one of the
impediments in order to assess and take appropriate management measures for this species. Indeed,
stock-assessment models, particularly the analytical ones, require growth parameters as important
input data. The aim of the present study is to fill this knowledge gap. Specimens of R. clavata were
collected during the experimental trawl surveys, commercial landings and discard monitoring in
Sardinia, Central-Southern Tyrrhenian, West Ionian and South Adriatic Sea. Thin sections of
vertebrae were performed in order to determinate the age and calculate the von Bertalanffy growth
function parameters for both sexes in each study area. Moreover, on specimens captured in Adriatic,
Sardinia and West Ionian, the marginal increment analysis (MIA) of the vertebrae was also carried
out as a semidirect ageing analysis validation. In the Adriatic, a mark-recapture experiment, marking
by both external (spaghetti tags) and chemical (oxytetracycline injection) tags, 98 specimens of R.
clavata was also realized. In total two recaptures after 11 and 14 months were recorded with an
increment in total length respectively of 11.4 cm (from 49.5 to 60.9 cm) and 10.3 cm (from 63.5 to
73.8 cm). In both specimens recaptured the oxytetracycline mark together with the subsequent
deposition of a completed annulus (one transparent and opaque ring) was observed on the sections of
vertebrae.




                                                         4
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


 Morphometric analysis of the thornback ray Raja clavata (Linnaeus,
               1758), from the eastern Ionian Sea.

                    Archontia CHATZISPYROU1,2, Aikaterini ANASTASOPOULOU1,
                                  Constantin KOUTSIKOPOULOS2
    1
        Hellenic Centre for Marine Research, Institute of Biological Resources and Inland Waters, Athens, GREECE
                             2
                               University of Patras, Department of Biology, Patras, GREECE
                                                  a.chatzispyrou@hcmr.gr




Morphometric characters have traditionally been used to describe fish population structures and
differences between populations. They have been found to be of taxonomic importance in sex, race
and species identification as well. Knowledge involving the taxonomy, systematics and life history
of rays and skates that inhabit the Mediterranean basin is scarce. Up to date the importance of batoids
in small-scale fisheries in the Greek waters is not well-known, possibly due to the taxonomic
uncertainties concerning several taxa. The aim of this work was to present for the first time the
morphometric characters of Raja clavata in the eastern Ionian Sea, in order to identify differences
between sexes and compare them to other rajids in future references. Intraspecific variation in the
external morphology of the thornback ray was investigated and described on the basis of 35
morphometric variables, from 77 females (140-780 mm in total length) and 63 males (135-690 mm
in total length). For each morphometric value the mean, standard deviation, range and coefficient
variation (CV) were estimated for each sex separately. Regression models were applied to estimate
the relationships between each morphometric character and total length. The pattern of allometry for
each parameter was established by testing the slope (b) of the obtained regression equations against
isometry applying the Student’s t-test. (b = 1 for length-length or 3 for length-weight). The length-
weight relationship was determined according to the following equation: W=a*TLb. Differences
between sexes were tested with t-test. Further investigation on different sizes of R.clavata will
contribute to the knowledge of the stock biology, physiology and ecology.




                                                          5
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


                        Re-evaluating methods to estimate growth
                          from tagging data in elasmobranchs

            Manuel DUREUIL1,2, William AEBERHARD3, Rainer FROESE4, Boris WORM1
 1
     Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, 1355 Oxford St., PO BOX 15000, Halifax, NS, B3H 4R2, CANADA
              2
                Sharks of the Atlantic Research and Conservation Centre, Halifax, NS, B3L 2Y5, CANADA
                      3
                        Department of Mathematical Sciences, Stevens Institute of Technology, USA
                           4
                             GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, GERMANY
                                                 Manuel.Dureuil@dal.ca




The body (somatic) growth of individuals is a vital process that governs many aspects of a species’
life history. Thus, knowledge about growth parameters is critical in many assessment methods. Such
growth parameters are derived by relating individual length to age, with the latter commonly
estimated from growth bands formed in calcified structures. Recent research, however, suggests that
these structures cannot be used for aging in many elasmobranchs (sharks, rays and skates). Alternative
methods from mark-recapture tagging data have been proposed in the past, but have not been
rigorously tested on elasmobranchs. Therefore, the performance of seven different methods in
estimating von Bertalanffy growth parameters for elasmobranchs is investigated here. The
performance of the methods were evaluated in two ways: 1) Estimated growth parameters from
simulated datasets that considered individual growth variability, measurement error and different
scenarios for the length at capture, times at liberty and sample size were compared to the true growth
parameters in the simulation; 2) Growth parameters were estimated from empirical mark-recapture
tagging data for 15 different elasmobranch stocks and compared to literature growth parameters
obtained from length-at-age information. Best practicies when only limited information from mark-
recapture tagging data is available will be presented with practical applications and common pitfalls
discussed.




                                                       6
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


     What’s my destiny? Reproductive impairment following fishing
            capture stress in an Australian Chondrichthyan,
           the southern fiddler ray (Trygonorrhina dumerilii)

                   Licia FINOTTO1, Terence I. WALKER1, Richard D. REINA1

                   School of Biological Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, AUSTRALIA
                                           licia.finotto@monash.edu




The different effects of fishing capture are not just immediate death; unwanted animals are released
back into the environment to an unknown fate, as injuries and physiological, physical and behavioural
consequences can ultimately lead to delayed mortality and/or impact their fitness. In teleosts,
extensive research has highlighted that fisheries stress can negatively affect reproduction by
impairing individuals’ ability to contribute to the increase in population abundance and neonates’
survival and performance. Despite being one of the most threatened aquatic taxa, data on the
reproductive consequences of fishing capture for Chondrichthyans are virtually non-existent,
jeopardizing the assessment of the real consequences of this practice and the development of effective
fisheries management measures. We investigated whether trawling in semi-captive conditions
impairs the reproductive success of pregnant Trygonorrhina dumerilii, a viviparous ray commonly
caught as bycatch in southern Australian recreational and commercial fisheries. To do this we
collected data on the occurrence of stillborn neonates, parturition timing, and neonates’ dimension at
birth, growth rate and performance (boldness, reflex, swimming and burying ability). Results
highlighted that neonates born from mothers subjected to trawling simulation not only have a
significantly lower body mass at birth, as recorded in a previous experiment, but also have a different
allocation of yolk reserves and a lower growth rate, respond differently in the burying test, and swim
for shorter distances when a predator attack is simulated. Smaller size and lower growth rate might
expose neonates to a higher rate of predation, and similarly, the altered burying and swimming
behaviour may be associated with a lower ability to escape from a predator. Further investigation is
needed, but these first data suggest a possible reduction in neonates’ survival rate and parents’ fitness
that can ultimately have severe repercussions on recruitment and population abundance in affected
species.




                                                    7
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


      On the origin of the great white shark Carcharodon carcharias

Patrick L. JAMBURA1, Julia TÜRTSCHER1, Faviel A. LÓPEZ-ROMERO1, Catalina PIMIENTO2,
                                  Jürgen KRIWET1
                          1
                           Department of Palaeontology, University of Vienna, AUSTRIA
                    2
                        Department of Biosciences, Swansea University, UNITED KINGDOM
                                           patrick.jambura@gmail.com




The fossil record of modern sharks mainly consists of isolated teeth due to their poorly mineralized
cartilaginous endoskeleton and a continuous tooth replacement that forms thousands of teeth during
a sharks’ lifetime. As a result, phylogenetic analyses of extinct shark taxa are mostly based on isolated
teeth and therefore often lead to ambiguous results. The great white shark Carcharodon carcharias
is known since the late Miocene, a period in which a number of big lamniform sharks occurred, i.e.,
†Otodus megalodon, †Cosmopolitodus hastalis and †Carcharodon hubbelli, which vanished after the
Plio-Pleistocene marine megafauna extinction (2.5 mya). The evolutionary history of the great white
shark remains highly debated and two hypotheses have been proposed: (1) C. carcharias is closely
related to the megatoothed sharks, including †O. megalodon; (2) C. carcharias shares a more recent
common ancestor with mako sharks and descended from the broad toothed mako shark †C. hastalis.
Although the latter hypothesis is currently favoured, the occurrence of a narrow- and a broad-toothed
form of †C. hastalis further complicates the reconstruction of the evolutionary history of the great
white shark.
Here we report of an exceptional find of two well preserved shark skeletons of a juvenile (TL ~1.7m)
and an adult (TL ~5m) †Cosmopolitodus hastalis from the late Miocene Pisco Formation of Peru,
which display broad teeth. The presence of articulated jaws allowed us to reconstruct the tooth files
of this species and thus a more accurate phylogenetic analysis of lamniform sharks based on dental
characters could be performed, including extinct mako sharks, Isurus spp. Furthermore, geometric
morphometric analyses are performed to visualize the morphospace occupation of Isurus,
†Cosmopolitodus and Carcharodon. This combined approach allowed us to reconstruct the origin of
Carcharodon carcharias and the dental transition from fossil mako sharks to the extant great white
shark.




                                                     8
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


        Gut microbial community structure of hammerhead sharks
                   from the east coast of South Africa

             Kolobe MMONWA1, Antoinette VAN WYK2, Thulane MAKHALANYANE2
             1
              Research & Monitoring, KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board, Umhlanga Rocks, SOUTH AFRICA
         2
             Centre for Microbial Ecology and Genomics, University of Pretoria, Hatfield, SOUTH AFRICA
                                                 lucas@shark.co.za




Sharks are the marine top predators responsible for regulating population of other tertiary and
quarternary consumers (i.e. fishes, seals and dolphins) and maintaining a naturally balanced trophic
chain in the marine ecosystem. However, there is limited understanding on how these marine top
predators are ecologically and biologically adapted to consume and digest such a wide variety of prey
items, without hampering functional traits of the gastro-intestinal tract. Gastro-intestinal microbial
community of sharks plays important different biological roles including development of vertebrae
in juveniles, metabolising a wide variety of complex biomolecules, nutrient absorption and immune
system response. Hammerhead sharks are characterised by intraspecific ontogenetic and sex
partitioning of resources (i.e. habitat and diet) as reflected by satellite tagging, genetics and stable
isotope analyses. However, it’s unknown how gut microbial biota changes between juvenile and adult
sharks (ontogenetic partitioning of resources) and also between female and male individuals (sex
partitioning of resources) within species. This study analysed gut microbial community structure and
composition of two Sphyrna spp. based on 16S rRNA gene tag sequencing at both intraspecific and
interspecific levels. DNA was extracted using Zymobiomics DNA miniprep kit and sequences
generated using paired-end sequencing on the Illumina MiSeq platform following the manufacturer’s
instructions. Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology (QIIME) analyses revealed non-significant
changes in microbial community structure between juvenile and adult individuals and also between
sexes within each species. The core microbiota included Actinobacteria, Flavobacteria, Protobacteria
and Firmicutes whereas Proteobacteria were the most abundant phylum. This suggests gut
microbiome of hammerhead sharks may be shaped by broader biological factors such as the host
genotype and ambient environmental conditions rather than diet.




                                                        9
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


 Distribution and length-weight relationship of four deepwater shark
         species from the Antalya Bay eastern Mediterranean

                              M. Tunca OLGUNER1, M. Cengiz DEVAL1
                     1
                         Department of Fisheries, University of Akdeniz, Antalya TURKEY
                                             olguner@akdeniz.edu.tr



This study contributes to the abundance - biomass index, length-weight relationship (LWR) and
bathymetric distribution of four deepwater elasmobranches (sharks) species obtained by the trawl
fishing in the Antalya Bay (Eastern Mediterranean). The specimens of Centrophoridae (Centrophorus
granulosus, Bloch & Schneider, 1801), Etmopteridae (Etmopterus spinax, Linnaeus, 1758),
Scyliorhinidae (Galeus melastomus, Rafinesque, 1810) and Squalidae (Squalus blainvillei, Risso,
1827) were collected. For bathymetric distribution and survey, a total of 15 successful hauls were
done with an approximately 800 km2 swept area, in five bathymetric strata within 100 m interval
between the depths of 200 - 700 m. There has been limited data on the deep-water shark species in
the Levantine Sea. As yet, a total of 25 specimens of C. granulosus, 586 specimens of E. spinax, 613
specimens of G. melastomus and 99 specimens of S. blainvillei were caught between the depths of
200-700 m. Linear regressions were significant for all species (p < 0.05), with r2 values are greater
than 0.950 as a whole. The coefficients of determination (r2) ranged between 0.845 for the female C.
granulosus and 0.995 for the S. blainvillei corresponding to a mean value of 0.977 (±0.03). The
smallest specimen are caught mostly on the middle bathymetric line of upper slope (300 - 400 m) in
the mesobenthal upper slope (200-500 m) and larger specimen are along the bathybenthal slope (500
- 1000 m) for all four shark species.




                                                      10
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


 Marine heatwaves may elicit haematological and respiratory changes
                in juvenile small-spotted catsharks

       Maria Rita PEGADO1, Catarina SANTOS1, Dayanne RAFFOUL6, Marta KONIECZNA7,
              Ana Luísa MAULVAUT1,4,5, Mário DINIZ2, Regina BISPO3, Rui ROSA1
   1
      MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Laboratório Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências da
                                       Universidade de Lisboa, Cascais, PORTUGAL
2
  UCIBIO, REQUIMTE, Dep. de Química, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Quinta
                                                   da Torre, PORTUGAL
       3
         Dep. de Matemática, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Quinta da Torre,
                                                        PORTUGAL
   4
     Division of Aquaculture and Seafood Upgrading, Portuguese Institute for the Sea and Atmosphere, I.P. (IPMA),
                                                    Lisboa PORTUGAL
   5
     Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research (CIIMAR), Universidade do Porto, Matosinhos,
                                                        PORTUGAL.
                                6
                                  Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Milano, ITALY
                       7
                         University of Gdansk, Faculty of Oceanography and Geography, POLAND
                                                     mrpegado@fc.ul.pt




Our oceans are facing tremendous human-induced changes, including warming. As the temperature
has increased, sudden warming events designated as marine heatwaves have become longer and more
frequent with significant implications over marine ecosystems. As a crucial element of the marine
environment, sharks may also be affected by these environmental changes. Exposure to ocean
warming has shown to impact shark’s predatory behavior, metabolism and overall fitness. However,
the effects that a marine heatwave may have on these animals’ physiology has not been addressed
previously. Thus, the focus of our study was to investigate the impact of a marine heatwave (Δ3 °C)
on the heamatological and respiratory systems of a juvenile temperate shark (Scyliorhinus canicula).
To address this question, sharks were exposed to two treatments: control (18 °C) and category II
marine heatwave (21 °C) for 15 days. We then analyzed the i) normal blood cell counts (e.g.
erythrocytes, leucocytes and thrombocytes), ii) type and amount of EMNAs (erythrocyte nuclear
morphological abnormalities), iii) spleen and heart to body ratios and iv) ventilation rates (before,
initially and during the heatwave). According to our study, exposure to a category II marine heatwave
drastically changed normal blood cell counts and ventilation rates. More specifically, the number of
erythrocyte cells decreased, while the number of leukocyte and thrombocyte cells increased.
Moreover, the amount of ventilation also increased. These findings may evidence that, during a
sudden warming event, shark’s ability to transport oxygen in red blood cells, linked to their need to
ventilate more, might be significantly impaired. Furthermore, an increase of leukocytes and
thrombocytes may explain the vulnerability and stress related to the increased temperature. As marine
heatwaves are expected to aggravate with anthropogenic climate change, there is an urgency that
should eager us to manage and mitigate its impacts.



                                                       11
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


          Paired-laser photogrammetry as a non-invasive technique
                  for estimating shark body size and weight

                           David RUIZ-GARCÍA1,2,3, Pablo GARCÍA-SALINAS1,2,4
                       1
                          Fundación Oceanogràfic de la Comunitat Valenciana, Valencia, SPAIN
                           2
                             Associació LAMNA de la Comunitat Valenciana, Valencia, SPAIN
3
  Marine Zoology Unit, Cavanilles Institute of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biology, Universitat de València, SPAIN
4
  Universitat Politècnica de València. Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología Animal. Grupo de Acuicultura y Biodiversidad,
                                                     Valencia, SPAIN.
                                                  davidrg496@gmail.com




Monitoring trends in shark body size and weight is fundamental for understanding their life history
traits and elucidating population dynamics. Traditionally, size and weight information is acquired
through invasive techniques, involving capture and handling. These protocols may undermine
conservation efforts by causing physical damage, behavioral alterations, premature birth and even the
death of the captured animals. This study tested the effectiveness of laser photogrammetry as a non-
invasive technique for measuring morphometrics from five shark species housed in aquariums. The
measured morphometrics were examined in regression analyses to provide a comprehensive set of
lineal relationships for the estimation of shark total length and weight. The results obtained indicate
that (1) this approach is effort and cost-effective; (2) laser metrics are highly precise, which ensures
the reliability of the gathered morphometric information; and (3) accurate total length and weight
estimates can be obtained from short morphometrics. These insights indicate that laser
photogrammetry is a useful technique for assessing growth and life history parameters from free-
swimming sharks. Therefore, this technique may constitute a valuable tool for aquariums to monitor
sharks’ health status and determine food requirements and medication doses. Furthermore, it has the
potential to provide useful insights when applied to monitor sharks in their natural environments in
order to implement effective management strategies. The compiled also models ease the obtention of
total length and weight data, providing a long-needed resource in shark monitoring programs.




                                                         12
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


             Early development and physiology of a temperate shark
                      under ocean acidification conditions

           Catarina P. SANTOS1, Ricardo LOPES1, Maria R. PEGADO1, Marta PIMENTEL1,
                          Ricardo CYRNE1, José R. PAULA1, Rui ROSA1
   1
       MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Laboratório Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências da
                                 Universidade de Lisboa, Cascais, PORTUGAL
                                               cdcsantos@fc.ul.pt



Sharks play both essential and diverse functional roles in marine ecosystems, having a remarkably
long and successful evolutionary history. However, overfishing and habitat degradation, amidst other
challenges, have ensued a steep population decline over the past decades. As CO2 emissions continue
to increase, ocean acidification (OA) may come to pose an additional challenge to this group. In the
present study, we investigated the potential impacts of OA-conditions (pCO2 ~900 µatm | Δ -0.3 pH
units) over the embryonic development and juvenile metabolic physiology of a temperate shark,
Scyliorhinus canicula. Aiming to evaluate the consequences of early exposure to high CO2 conditions,
newly laid eggs were reared in either control or OA-treatment and, once hatched, individuals
incubated under high CO2 were redistributed between both treatments. Both embryonic development,
namely embryogenesis duration, hatching success, embryo activity, growth rate, body ratios, and
juvenile metabolism, specifically their food intake, routine metabolic rate, maximum metabolic rate
and aerobic scope, were evaluated. Overall, there were no significant changes in neither their
development nor their metabolic physiology, regardless of early exposure to high CO2 levels. While
this study highlights the coping capacity of sharks towards ocean acidification, the multiple and
unpreceded pressures placed upon this group have the potential to undermine their inherent resilience.
Hence, further research regarding different aspects of their biology and the numerous threats of the
near-future is necessary to fully understand how this group may fare in the oceans of tomorrow.




                                                        13
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


      Blood Biochemistry and Hematology of the Dusky Shark
(Carcharhinus obscurus) and Sandbar Shark (Carcharhinus plumbeus)
                 in the Eastern Mediterranean Sea

Tal STAROSTINETSKY-MALONEK1,2, Aviad SCHEININ1, Dan TCHERNOV1,2, Eyal BIGAL1,2,
                      Itamar AROCH3, Danny MORICK1
  1
      Morris Kahn Marine Research Station, Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, ISRAEL
        2
          Department of Marine Biology, Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, ISRAEL
                     3
                       Koret School of Veterinary Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, ISRAEL
                                                   Talsm44@gmail.com




Serum biochemistry and hematology profile are used to assess the physiological status of animal
individuals and populations. Therefore, establishing reference intervals for serum biochemical and
hematological analytes for wild populations of marine keystone species is important for their
conservation. However, no such intervals have been established to date for many species in the
Eastern Mediterranean, including the dusky shark (Carcharhinus obscurus) and sandbar shark
(Carcharhinus plumbeus). In the Mediterranean, C. obscurus and C. plumbeus are classed as data
deficient and endangered species, respectively, according to the IUCN Red List. This study aims to
establish reference intervals for serum biochemical and hematological analytes in these two species.
Blood samples have been collected from wild dusky and sandbar sharks captured during the tagging
seasons that Morris Kahn Marine Research Station has been conducting since 2016. In the winters of
2016 and 2017, blood samples were obtained from 14 C. obscurus and 7 C. plumbeus individuals.
This ongoing study has and will further expand this database during the winters of 2018 and 2019.
To this point, serum samples of 19 C. obscurus (18 females and one male) and 12 C. plumbeus (all
males) individuals were analyzed by spectrophotometry using an autoanalyzer, including 15 analytes:
urea, total proteins, total bilirubin, glucose, cholesterol, triglycerides, inorganic phosphorus, chloride,
sodium, potassium, total calcium, aspartate aminotransferase (AST), gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase
(GGT), amylase, and creatine kinase (CK). For nine animals (four C. obscurus and five C. plumbeus),
packed cell volume has been measured by centrifugation of heparinized capillaries, and manual
leukocyte counts on blood smears have been done by microscopy. Preliminary results of serum
biochemistry of both species are mostly consistent with findings of previous studies describing C.
plumbeus in the Western Atlantic and other shark species in different locations. However, several
analytes showed different values than previously described.




                                                         14
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


   Evolution of the vertebrate adaptive immunity – New perspectives
         given by Chondrichthyans as basal jawed vertebrates

      Tereza ALMEIDA1,2, Yuko OHTA3, Martin FLAJNIK3, Antonio MUÑOZ-MÉRIDA1,
         André MACHADO4, Filipe CASTRO2,4, Pedro ESTEVES1,2, Ana VERÍSSIMO
       1
         CIBIO-InBIO, Centro de Investigacão em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, Vairão, PORTUGAL
          2
            Departamento de Biologia, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade do Porto, Porto, PORTUGAL
     3
       Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland at Baltimore, Baltimore, MD, USA
     4
       CIIMAR/CIMAR, Centro Interdisciplinar de Investigação Marinha e Ambiental, Matosinhos, PORTUGAL
                                              averissimo@cibio.up.pt




Chondrichthyes (sharks, rays and chimaeras) are the most basal jawed vertebrate lineage possessing
the basic features of the human innate and adaptive immune systems, and thus are a key taxon to
understand the emergence and evolution of vertebrate adaptive immunity. However, the few studies
conducted to date have not provided a clear picture of the complexity of the genes involved in
adaptive immunity in this oldest extant vertebrate class. Our results show that for the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I genes, involved in antigen presentation to T cells and
Nature Killer (NK) cells, there is indeed a very high diversity in genetic lineages and copy number
variation across taxa, at least as complex as has been found in mammals. A new lineage of MHC-
linked class I genes was found in all chondrichthyans, which appears to be single copy and likely
monomorphic in Elasmobranchs but multicopy in Holocephalans. The predicted peptide-binding
region is perfectly conserved in all Elasmobranchs tested, suggesting that the resulting protein(s) bind
a unique set of peptides in all sharks and rays, rather than to allele-specific sets of peptides typical of
the polymorphic classical class I molecules. Two previously reported yet poorly studied lineages of
nonclassical MHC class I genes in cartilaginous fish were also examined but have only been found
in sharks so far, although this may be due to a paucity of data for batoids and holocephalans. Our data
clearly demonstrate that there was a division of labor among MHC class I lineages early in vertebrate
evolution, with each lineage likely presenting different types of antigens to different subsets of T cells
and/or NK cells.




                                                     15
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


POSTER CONTRIBUTION



         Comparing life history traits of two sympatric threatened
          smoothhound sharks in the central Mediterranean Sea


          Gabriele BOSCOLO PALO1, Manfredi DI LORENZO2, Fabio FIORENTINO2,
            Salvatore GANCITANO2, Carlotta MAZZOLDI1, Francesco COLLOCA2
                       1
                           Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padova, ITALY.
                                 2
                                   IRBIM-CNR, Mazara del Vallo, TP, ITALY.
                                        gabriele.boscolopalo@gmail.com




Elasmobranchs are among the marine species more threatened even by a moderate fishing intensity.
Consequently, many elasmobranch species are now included in the red list of the International Union
for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN). Effective management of endangered shark species requires
a good understanding of their life histories traits. In this study, we estimated some growth and
maturity parameters of two vulnerable shark species Mustelus mustelus (Linnaeus, 1758) and M.
punctulatus (Risso, 1827) in the central Mediterranean Sea. The study is based on the analyses of
vertebral growth bands; three different asymptotic growth models (e.g. VBGF, Logistic and
Gompertz) have been applied with back-calculated length-at age data obtained using the Fraser-Lee
equation. Results highlight that M. mustelus is a longer living species than M. punctulatus reaching
also bigger sizes-at-ages. The growth parameters (sexes combined) of the two species were: L∞: 185
cm, K/year: 0.16 and t0: -3.2 (M. mustelus); and L∞: 105.5 cm and K/year: 0.27 with a t0:-1.4 (M.
punctulatus). The growth curve of M. mustelus indicates an absolute annual growth rate of 15 cm by
year during the first five years of life (i.e. between 35 and 105 cm TL). Maturity analysis show that
M. punctulatus reaches the size at the onset of sexual maturity (L50%) at 94 cm TL (females) and 86.3
cm TL (males); M. mustelus matures at 105 cm (females) and 88 cm (males).




                                                      16
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


     Morphological features of Dipturus nidarosiensis (Storm, 1881)
                    from two Mediterranean areas

   Pierluigi CARBONARA1, Antonello MULAS2, Marilena DONNALOIA1, Cristina PORCU2,
                      Walter ZUPA1, Maria Cristina FOLLESA2
     1
         COISPA Tecnologia & Ricerca, Stazione Sperimentale per lo Studio delle Risorse del Mare, Bari, ITALY
              2
                Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, ITALY
                                               carbonara@coispa.it




The Norwegian skate Dipturus nidarosiensis (Storm, 1881) has only recently been recorded in the
western and central Mediterranean Sea along the coast of Sardinia, off Algeria in Alboran Sea, in
southern Adriatic and western Ionian Sea. An ancient presence of the Norwegian skate was
hypothesised, despite its misclassification between D. nidarosiensis and other species from the same
genus Dipturus. Infact its misclassification in the fishery data, mostly among the following species:
D. oxyrinchus, D. batis, D. nidarosiensis and Rostroraja alba has not been uncommon since ancient
times. These errors could have led to the underestimation of the risk of a dramatic decline and collapse
of the spawning stock. Morevover, in the IUCN Red-List, the Norwegian skate is listed as near-
threatened and it is considered rare in both the northeast Atlantic and the Mediterranean areas.
Furthermore, due to its biological characteristics, which are similar to other elasmobranchs, such as
low fecundity, slow growth and high length at first maturity, it is particularly vulnerable to
environmental and anthropogenic pressures.
From 2005 to 2019, the catches of Norwegian skate specimens were mostly repeated in two areas:
the Sardinian Seas and Adriatic-Ionian area. In these two areas, a total of 64 specimens were caught
and 10 morphological measurements and 6 meristic counts were taken on all captured specimens.
The present study describes and characterizes, from a morphological point of view, the Norwegian
skate specimens caught in the Sardinia Seas (Central Mediterranean Basin) and southern Adriatic-
Ionian Sea (Central Mediterranean Basin). Morphological comparisons are made to provide further
morphological keys for a correct classification of this species in the Mediterranean Basin. A
multivariate approach analysis highlighted that some morphological features could be used to
recognize two separated groups for the sampling areas (Sardinia; Adriatic-Ionian area), sex (male;
female) and ontogenetic development (juveniles, adult).




                                                         17
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


   Resolving taxonomic confusion in Rajidae (Superorder Batoidea)
   through DNA sequencing: the case of Raja clavata in the eastern
                            Ionian Sea
    Archontia CHATZISPYROU1,2*, Chrysoula GUBILI3, Aikaterini ANASTASOPOULOU1,
                         Constantin KOUTSIKOPOULOS2
     1
         Hellenic Centre for Marine Research, Institute of Biological Resources and Inland Waters, Athens, Greece
                                2
                                  University of Patras, Department of Biology, Patra, Greece
          3
            FisheriesResearch Institute-Hellenic Agricultural Organization Demeter, NeaPeramos, Kavala, Greece
                                                   a.chatzispyrou@hcmr.gr



The Rajidae is a highly diverse family of elasmobranch fishes, including more than 285 species. Raja
clavata is the most common and widespread skate in the N.E. Atlantic and Mediterranean Sea, and
one of the dominant species in commercial landings. Currently, available data are either incomplete
or incorrect due to the high level of morphological variability in rajids. Diversity of coloration
patterns or polychromatism, has been reported previously for batoids (rajids, daysatids,
potamotrygonids), which causes misidentification among closely related species. Therefore,
morphological features are not always indicative of species relatedness. Additionally, several
diagnostic characters distinctively visible in adults can be less evident in juveniles, making the
taxonomy of younger specimens more difficult. In an attempt to minimize the gaps in our current
knowledge on batoid biological traits, taxonomic issues were brought up in the Rajidae family.
Specifically, taxonomic confusion had to be resolved among R. clavata, Raja polystigma and Raja
montagui, which were caught in the eastern Ionian Sea. Our aim was to present an atlas of the
polychromatism patterns of R.clavata, following the reliable identification of specimens using DNA
sequencing. We applied DNA barcoding on 33 samples with taxonomic difficulties, and used the
mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (COI). We demonstrated that all 33 specimens were
identified as R. clavata, confirming that the species exhibits high levels of polychromatism in the
Ionian Sea like in Tunisia, Algeria and Marocco. Our findings show that accurate data from scientific
surveys and landings are essential to assess conservation status and to develop suitable protection and
management plans.




                                                           18
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


               Vibrio harveyi as sanitary problem for elasmobranchs
                            housed in public aquariums

        Daniela FLORIO1, Stefano GRIDELLI2, Elena CAMPESI2, Cristiano DA RUGNA2,
             Andrea GUSTINELLI1, Perla TEDESCO1, Maria Letizia FIORAVANTI1

        1
            Department of Veterinary Medical Sciences, Alma Mater Studiorum Università di Bologna, ITALY
                          2
                            Acquario di Cattolica, Costa Edutainment SpA, Cattolica, ITALY
                                                daniela.florio@unibo.it



In the past few years the knowledge on diseases and the disorders of elasmobranchs housed in public
aquariums has increased, with particular reference to spinal deformities, thyroid pathologies,
neoplasms, reproductive disorders and transmissible diseases (viral, bacterial mycotic and parasitic).
Among these, bacterial infections mainly due to Vibrionaceae play an important role as often related
to episodes of mortality in the presence of predisposing conditions. Vibrio harveyi (syn. V.
carchariae) has been often associated with phenomena of meningitis or skin ulcers in different
species of sharks.
In the Aquarium of Cattolica (RN) over 100 elasmobranchs belonging to 16 different species are
present. In the last few years, most of the occurred episodes of mortality in sharks were caused to
bacteria, in particular V. harveyi. In detail, this pathogen has been identified as aetiological agent of
disease outbreaks leading to the death of 4 young bonnethead shark (Sphyrna tiburo), 5 (4 juvenile
and one adult) of black tip shark (Carcharhinus melanopterus), 3 juvenile bamboo shark
(Chiloscyllium punctatum) and one adult nurse shark (Ginglymostoma cirratum). In these 2 last
species also V. fischeri and Photobacterium damselae subsp. damselae were respectively isolated. In
all cases meningitis and enteritis were observed. All episodes of mortality occurred during the
quarantine period or after their transfer to a new tank.
Therefore, opportunistic pathogens such as V. harveyi need to be considered relevant for the health
of fish maintained in aquarium ecosystem and the application of effective management protocols can
be useful to reduce the stress conditions to which the animals can be subjected especially during the
phases following their transport and acclimatization to new habitat.




                                                        19
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


          First steps on the use of reproduction control techniques
                       in captive elasmobranch species

 Pablo GARCÍA-SALINAS1,2,3, Víctor GALLEGO1, Marina MORINI1, Miriam GARCÍA-COLL1,
            Luz PÉREZ1, Daniel GARCÍA-PÁRRAGA2, Juan F. ASTURIANO1
                                1
                                  Universitat Politècnica de València, Valencia, SPAIN.
                     2
                         Fundación Oceanogràfic de la Comunitat Valenciana, Valencia, SPAIN
                          3
                            Associació LAMNA de la Comunitat Valenciana, Valencia, SPAIN
                                           pablo.garcia@associaciolamna.org




Elasmobranchs are among the most threatened vertebrates on the planet, especially due to overfishing
and habitat destruction. Despite this level of threat, the use of techniques to control their reproduction
has been scarcely investigated as an approach to protect them in the wild or in captivity. Our main
objective was to apply techniques commonly used in other fish species to achieve reproductive
control in elasmobranchs. Four model species (Scyliorhinus canicula, Scyliorhinus stellaris, Galeus
melastomus and Raja montagui) were the target with which to develop techniques that can be
extrapolated to other species. Target species were obtained from fishing by-catch and from public
aquaria.
Urogenital and reproductive systems were anatomically described, and hepatosomatic and
gonadosomatic indexes were calculated from by-catched species. Oocyte diameter was measured
every month to establish their reproductive status through the year. Both in vivo and post-mortem
extraction of sperm was achieved, by massage and gentle pressure near the urogenital pores or by
catheterization with a urethral catheter. Spermatozoa were motile after activation with a Ringer
solution adapted to elasmobranchs even when extracted from the seminal vesicle of dead fish stored
at 4°C for 48 h. Sperm obtained from the cranial portion of the epididymis seemed to be immature
and remained immotile in the 4 species, while it could be activated when was obtained from the
caudal portion of the epididymis.
Sperm volume and spermatozoa characteristics, such as size and number of helical gyres of the sperm
head, size of midpiece and flagellum, and complexity and type of spermatozoa aggregates, were
determined. Despite obvious sperm motility, large cell size (total length: 116-198 µm) made
impossible its evaluation by standard CASA protocols.
The techniques developed with our 4 target species were also tested in other specimens including a
nurse shark (Gynglymosotoma cirratum) and a lesser devil ray (Mobula hypostoma).




                                                        20
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


      Micro-CT imaging reveals the origin of the lamniform sharks

          Patrick L. JAMBURA1, René KINDLIMANN2, Faviel A. LÓPEZ-ROMERO1,
       Giuseppe MARRAMÀ1, Cathrin PFAFF1, Sebastian STUMPF1, Julia TÜRTSCHER1,
                 Charlie J. UNDERWOOD3, David J. WARD4, Jürgen KRIWET1
                         1
                           Department of Palaeontology, University of Vienna, AUSTRIA
                2
                 Haimuseum und Sammlung R. Kindlimann, Aathal-Seegräben, SWITZERLAND
            3
              Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Birkbeck College University of London, UK
                      4
                        Department of Earth Sciences, Natural History Museum London, UK
                                           patrick.jambura@gmail.com




Sharks of the order Lamniformes comprise seven families with 15 extant species, including some of
the most iconic shark species, like the great white shark (Carcharodon carcharias) and †Otodus
megalodon. Lamniform sharks have a rich fossil record dating back to the Cretaceous with the oldest
confirmed members of this group being known from the Barremian (125-130 mya). However, the
origin of this group remains ambiguous, since sharks of the genus †Palaeocarcharias, small benthic
sharks superficially resembling carpet sharks (Orectolobiformes) that are known from Middle
Jurassic deposits (170 mya), are discussed to belong to this order.
We used high resolution micro-CT scans obtained with the micro-CT scanner SkyScan 1173, to
examine the tooth mineralization patterns of extant and fossil shark taxa and found three different
tooth histologies: (1) orthodont teeth that have hollow pulp cavities surrounded by orthodentine, (2)
osteodont teeth that have osteodentine and lack of orthodentine, (3) and pseudoosteodont teeth that
have an osteodont core, which is surrounded by orthodentine. Our results show that exclusively
osteodont teeth are only present in lamniform sharks and, therefore, suggest that this character
represents a synapomorphic trait for this group. Additionally we could show that †Palaeocarcharias
stromeri shares this unique tooth histology pattern with all lamniform sharks, suggesting that this
shark indeed is the oldest known ancestor of this group.




                                                      21
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


    Preliminary results of a bioecological study of haematozoars fish
         parasites rajidae (elasmobranchs) of the Algiers' coast

                 Sabrina KEFIL1,2, Sara LADOUL3, Nadia KECHEMIR-ISSAD2


                     1
                         Department of Biology, University of Algiers1, Algiers ALGERIA.
                     2
                         Laboratory of Biodiversity and Environment: Interactions, Genomes.
                                                    FSB USTHB
                                    3
                                      CVRM. Dely-Ibrahim, Algiers, ALGERIA.
                                             kefilsabrina@gmail.com




Data accumulated during a taxonomic study of Haematozoa of Rajidae (Elasmobranchs) have
allowed a bioecological approach to the parasitism of the two most frequent, Trypanosoma rajae
Laveran and Mesnil, 1902 and Haemogregarina sp Danilewsky, 1885 whose respective prevalences
are: 15.06% and 9.58%. 8.2% of associations of the two parasites have been observed.
The study was conducted on 113 rays belonging to four species of Rajidae (Raja asterias Delaroche,
1809 Raja miraletus Delaroche, 1809; Raja radula Linnaeus, 1758 and Raja undulata Lacepede,
1802) caught at two sampling sites on the Algiers coast: the port of Cap Djinet and
the port of Bou Haroun. Statistical analysis of the data revealed a link between the age of the hosts
and the parasitism. In the case of Trypanosoma rajae infestation, the oldest rays are the most
infested, while in the case of infestation by Haemogregarina sp. host parasitism
evolves in the same direction as age until a certain stage beyond which individuals
defaunent of their parasites. An impact of parasitism on the health of the hosts was sought by the
comparison of formulas leukocytes of parasitized and uninfected specimens; within the limits of the
sample examined. The results do not allow any conclusion on any impact on the leucocyte
composition of the infested hosts. The general parasitism observed in Cape Djinet (40.14%) seems
more important than that of Bou Haroun (30.77%); the numbers treated, do not allow to conclude to
a significant difference statistically.




                                                        22
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


                        Evaluation of oxidative stress biomarkers
                       in the spotted dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula

        Serena LEO1, Mariacristina FILICE1, Emilio SPERONE1, Francesca R. REINERO1,
                           Maria C. CERRA1, Sandra IMBROGNO1
         1
             Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende (CS) ITALY
                                                serena.leo@unical.it




The spotted dogfish Scyliorhinus canicula is the common and widely distributed elasmobranch in the
Northeast Atlantic and Mediterranean Sea. Recent studies have shown that this species has an
important role in the trophic scheme of demersal fish communities, representing an important trophic
link between invertebrates and larger predatory fish. It is also appreciated for the quality of its meat;
this increases its commercial interest. Several studies suggest that this species is particularly
susceptible to changes in environmental conditions, including temperature and oxygen availability,
as well as exposure to pollutants. This can induce oxidative stress that in turn can lead to cellular
damage and detrimental effects. Taking this into consideration, the evaluation of oxidative stress
biomarkers assumes special importance, in an ecological, economical and public health perspective.
However, to date no reference intervals for several oxidative biomarkers, have been reported for this
shark. The aim of this study is to establish specific reference values for oxidative biomarkers in target
tissues of S. canicula in order to assess the physiological status of the animal. Tissues samples (heart,
muscle, gills, liver) have been collected from 32 spotted dogfish captured in the Mediterranean Sea
(Follonica) during the period February-May 2018. Tissues were homogenized and subjected to
spectrophotometric assays to asses the activity of SOD and LDH enzymes, markers of antioxidant
activity and aerobic-anaeribic metabolism, as well as the levels of protein carbonylation and lipid
peroxidation, indicative for oxidative stress damage. Preliminary results has been also analyzed in
relation to tissue heavy metal accumulation.




                                                        23
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


   Assessment of hematological parameters in the juvenile temperate
      shark (Scyliorhinus canicula) exposed to ocean acidification

    Maria Rita PEGADO1, Catarina C.P. SANTOS1, Marta PIMENTEL1, Ricardo CYRNE1,
 Ana Luísa MAULVAUT1,2, Dayanne RAFFOUL1,3, Mário DINIZ 2, Regina BISPO4, Rui ROSA1
   1
     MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Laboratório Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências da
                                   Universidade de Lisboa, Cascais, PORTUGAL
   2
     UCIBIO, REQUIMTE, Departamento de Química, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de
                                           Lisboa, Caparica, PORTUGAL
                             3
                               Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Milano, ITALY
      4
        Centro de Matemática e Aplicações & Departamento de Matemática, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
                                Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, PORTUGAL
                                                 draff016@uottawa.ca




Atmospheric carbon dioxide has been increasing since the industrial revolution with a concomitant
decrease in ocean pH, a phenomenon designated as ocean acidification (OA). OA may pose a threat
to fundamental marine organisms, such as sharks. In this context, the current experiment aimed to
test the effects of OA on different hematological parameters of the juvenile small-spotted catshark
(Scyliorhinus canicula). Eggs were collected and randomly placed in either Control (pCO2 ~ 400
µatm) or High CO2 (pCO2 ~ 900 µatm, Δ -0.3 pH units) treatments, throughout the entire
embryogenesis plus ~90 days after hatching. Hematological analysis was conducted on the number
of normal blood cells (erythrocytes, leukocytes, and thrombocytes); presence of erythrocytes with
nuclear abnormalities, and the erythrocyte cytoplasm to nucleus ratio was measured. Spleen and heart
to body ratios were also evaluated. Overall, OA did not elicit significant differences in the studied
parameters. Nonetheless, the decreasing trend in thrombocyte counts, which may have implications
over clotting time, should foster further research. Although the present findings indicate that these
sharks are possibly resilient to the prolonged OA exposure, future studies should scrutinize the
scarcely recognized multi-stressors impacts (i.e. marine heatwaves, hypoxia, pollution, etc.) that
sharks potentially will have to endure in the near future.




                                                      24
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


 The Cardiac Transcriptome of the World’s Oldest Living Vertebrate

      Daniel M. RIPLEY1, Robert SELLERS 2, John F. STEFFENSEN3, Peter BUSHNELL4,
                   Diego BERNAL5, Holly A. SHIELS1, Adam STEVENS2
                     1
                         Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, UK
               2
                 Division of Developmental Biology and Medicine, University of Manchester, UK
                         3
                           Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, DENMARK
      4
        Department of Biological Sciences, Indiana University South Bend, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
        5
          Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
                                      daniel.ripley@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk




The Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus) is the world’s longest-lived vertebrate, with an
estimated lifespan of 392±120 years. However, the mechanisms facilitating their extreme longevity
remain unknown. Here, we generate the first de-novo transcriptome for the Greenland shark, as a tool
to investigate the basic biology and ageing of elasmobranchs. Cardiac tissue from six Greenland
sharks, between the approximate ages of 110 and 219 years, was collected from Bredefjord and
Qaqortoq Fjords, Greenland, in the spring of 2017. A total of 236 million read pairs survived quality
control, and were used to produce the transcriptome. The assembly process generated 149,000
transcripts with an N50 of 1,202bp, and a BUSCO score of 76.2%, making the transcriptome
comparable in quality to that of other published squaliform elasmobranch transcriptomes. BLAST
searching the transcripts against the whale shark (Rhincodon typus) genome identified 7,218 genes.
Gene enrichment analysis revealed a significant over-representation of genes linked to mitochondrial
function and ribonucleoprotein biogenesis, which is particularly interesting given that changes in
mitochondrial quality are associated with many age-related diseases. A rank regression against total
length, a proxy for age, identified 205 genes (205/7,218; 5x10-2 > p > 1x10-3, 0.99 > |r| > 0.88)
displaying a significant correlation with length, including genes associated with antioxidant
pathways, cardiomyocyte regeneration, and a dilated cardiomyopathy phenotype. This dataset is a
valuable resource for future studies on the Greenland shark, particularly when investigating the
molecular mechanisms underpinning age-related changes in the shark’s physiology.




                                                  25
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


            Identification keys of the chondrichthyans egg-cases of the
                           Mediterranean and Black seas

Cecilia MANCUSI1, Daniela MASSI2, Antonino TITONE2, Romano BAINO1, Fabrizio SERENA2
                      1
                        Environmental Protection Agency-Tuscany Region, ARPAT, Livorno, ITALY
 2
     Institute for Marine Biological Resources and Biotechnologies (IRBIM), National Research Council – CNR, Mazara
                                                   del Vallo (Tp), ITALY
                                                fabrizio.serena@irbim.cnr.it




The egg-cases can assume primary importance in the identification of the species they belong to, and
provide a valid aid in the definition of the occurrence of the various species in different zones, as well
as the exact definition of the deposition and nursery areas. In order to pick out the egg-cases' species
with greater reliability, a dichotomous key for their specific identification has been set. This key
mainly takes into account the morphological features of the egg-cases. A protocol for the standardized
acquisition of morpho-biometric and meristic features is provided as pre-requisite for the most correct
use of the identification key.




                                                          26
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


Isotopic variation in blood components based on their biochemistry: a
               comparison between sharks and fur seals

  Elena TAMBURIN1,2, María José AMADOR-CAPITANACHI1, Felipe GALVÁN-MAGAÑA1,
            Tenaya A. NORRIS3, Fernando R. ELORRIAGA-VERPLANCKEN1
    1
        Instituto Politécnico Nacional. Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, Baja California Sur, MÉXICO.
                                           2
                                             Fundación Alium Pacific, Cali. COLOMBIA
                    3
                      The Marine Mammal Center, 2000 Bunker Road, Sausalito, California 94965, U.S.A.
                                                    elenatambu2588@gmail.com




Researches using stable isotopes analysis (SIA) of carbon (δ C) and nitrogen (δ N) in blood
                                                                               13                       15



components (red blood cells and plasma) are still lacking, considering the challenge of sample
collection in remote areas. There is poor information regarding the effect of tissue biochemical
composition on isotopic ratios and there are few comparisons among different taxa in this regard. We
explore the possibility that tissues biochemistry of different taxa affect isotopic results.
During 2016 and 2017 we collected blood samples from shortfin mako sharks (Isurus oxyrinchus,
n=70) and Guadalupe fur seals (Arctocephalus philippii townsendi, n=25). All the samples were
centrifuged to obtain plasma in the case of mako sharks and serum for fur seals and then prepared for
SIA. We did not find significant differences in δ N values between the two species, but we found
                                                             15



significant differences comparing δ C in plasma of mako sharks (δ C= -17.6 ± 0.9 ‰) and in serum
                                            13                                      13



of fur seals (δ C= -20.3 ± 1.2‰).
                  13



Furthermore, we tested the possible effect of different anticoagulants for sharks and lipids effect for
Guadalupe fur seal samples. We did not find differences between species in both tests.
The lack of significant differences in δ N between the Guadalupe fur seal and the shortfin mako shark
                                                 15



is likely related to their similar trophic level. The δ C differences between the two species are
                                                                   13



probably due to serum and plasma biochemical characteristics, like lipid percentage in each species,
more than differences in foraging area. These biochemistry characteristics in tissues are related to
different adaptations in each taxon. This study shows the importance of developing more research on
the influence of biochemistry features on isotopic results, because that blood component biochemistry
may play a more important role in influencing isotopic signature than differences in foraging area.




                                                           27
Session I: Elasmobranch Biology and Physiology


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


     Egg Hunt: Discovery of ray spawning areas in western Africa?

        Diana ZAERA1, Marek OSTROWSKI1, Claudia JUNGE2, Kathrine MICHALSEN1
                              1
                                 Institute of Marine research, Bergen, NORWAY
                             2
                                 Institute of Marine research, Tromsø, NORWAY
                                              diana.zaera-perez@hi.no




Skates (Rajidae) are oviparous Chondrichthyes which lay egg-cases on the sea floor, and while data
of egg-cases’ occurrence along the strandline exist, underwater field data helping to determine
spawning grounds (presence of viable egg-cases) are very limited. During a demersal survey in
Namibian waters in 2019, large quantities (5 to 21 kg) of ray egg cases were found at three locations.
The egg cases were identified as belonging to the genus Rajella, possibly of the species Rajella
barnardi or R. leopardus. These species were present together with the cases; confirmed by the trawl
catch species identification. Two of the stations were located off the continental slope of Cape Cross
not apart from each other, while the third one was located north off Cape Frio. The area can be
described as confluence zone where warm tropical waters coming from the north meet subtropical
colder waters flowing form the south creating a counter-clockwise water mass movement. The sites
were at depths between 520 and 618 m. Over 90% of the cases were empty, the rest contained a yolk,
which seemed to have been fertilized. Because the cases are made of collagen which breaks down
very slowly, it is difficult to know when the older cases have been laid, but the empty ones were
easily differentiable from the new-laid both by the texture and color. Although the species are not
uncommon in these waters, the collection of such amounts of egg cases, both old and new, is an
unusual observation pointing to a potential spawning area. This knowledge will help drawing a more
detailed picture on the biology and distribution of the local species, which will contribute to
improving their management.




                                                     28
          SESSION II
ECOLOGY, MIGRATION AND FEEDING




              29
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


KEYNOTE SPEAKER


 Using Electronic Tags to Study Migrations, Ecology, Physiology and
          Conservation of Endothermic Sharks and Tunas




                                         Barbara A. BLOCK

                                        Stanford University, USA
                                          bblock@stanford.edu




Over the past 30 years we have pioneered the use of archival and satellite tags to study the ecology,
physiology and habitats of highly migratory tunas and lamnid sharks. Our research has provided large
data sets on many species of endothermic fishes and sharks including the salmon, white and mako
sharks, bluefin, and yellowfin tunas and billfishes. The value of having acquired these large data sets
has given us a better understanding of their migrations, ecology, physiology, and behaviors of these
animals in the wild. Combining these electronic tag data with fisheries data and genomics are key
approaches for establishing life history, population biology, and protections for highly mobile
predators in the open sea.




                                                  30
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

 Habitat use of dusky and sandbar sharks at a warm water discharge
                       of a coastal power plant

           Adi BARASH1,2*, Aviad SCHEININ1,3, Eyal BIGAL1,3, Ziv ZEMAH SHAMIR1,3,
                        Stephane MARTINEZ1,3 and Dan TCHERNOV1,3
                    1
                      Leon Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, ISRAEL
    2
        Sharks in Israel, NGO for the conservation of sharks and rays in Israel and the Mediterranean Sea, ISRAEL
                               3
                                 Morris Kahn marine research station, Sdot-Yam, ISRAEL
                                                 adibarash@hotmail.com




In Israel, dusky and sandbar sharks (genus Carcharhinus) aggregate every winter at the warm water
discharge of coastal power plants. This over wintering pattern is likely thermoregulatory in nature.
Sightings of these species are increasingly rare in the Mediterranean, where shark populations have
declined by 95% over the last decades.
Sharks were tracked by acoustic telemetry, which enables detecting acoustic transmitters (‘tags’) by
fixed underwater receivers. Since 2015, 17 sharks have been caught, measured and tagged in Hadera’s
hot waters, using acoustic tags and satellite tags. Acoustic tags are inserted into the shark’s abdominal
cavity, and satellite tags were attached to the dorsal fins. Both acoustic and satellite transmitters also
recorded depth, and water temperature.
Sharks were detected at the site for a long period (66 days ± 33.3 SD), and remained in the hot
discharge while sea temperature kept decreasing. Daily movement analysis show sandbar sharks
remain close to the bottom during daytime and moved to shallower water at night, while dusky sharks
occupied very shallow water at all times. Data retrieved from one satellite tag showed a sandbar shark
maintained the daily depth movement throughout its journey in open water.
Temperature analysis show sharks stay within the elevated temperature zone throughout the season,
away from the ambient temperature, until they leave the area completely.
While one theory maintains that these aggregations are related to the gestation period in females, the
residency of both female and male sharks suggest both genders benefit from the warm water. It is
possible, that sharks are changing migration to warmer areas with the warm water at the station.
Large scale movement study is crucial to understand the migration routes of these species in the
Mediterranean Sea, and the implications of this phenomenon on their movement.




                                                          31
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


      A new reproduction and nursery ground for sandbar shark,
     Carcharhinus plumbeus: Yumurtalik Bight, Gulf of Iskenderun
                  (northeastern Mediterranean Sea)

                    Nuri BAŞUSTA1, Asiye BAŞUSTA1, Caner E. OZYURT2
                             1
                              Faculty of Fisheries, Firat University, Elazig, TURKEY
                        2
                            Faculty of Fisheries,Cukurova University, Adana, TURKEY
                                              nbasusta@hotmail.com




The sandbar shark, Carcharhinus plumbeus is one of the biggest sharks inhabiting the Mediterranean.
It is a cosmopolitan species and wellknown from Boncuk Cove in Mediterranean coast of Turkey.
Primary nursery grounds, defined as areas where parturition occurs, of Boncuk Cove C. plumbeus
population. The aim of study is to determine secondary reproduction and nursery area of sandbar
shark from Yumurtalık Bight, Eastern Mediterranean Sea. On 24-27 July 2017, Sandbar shark
specimens were accidentally caught at a depth of 7 to 9 m off the Yumurtalik Bight (36°44'44.39"N,
35°42'22.77"E) by a pelagic bluefish longline. A total of 8 specimens (4 females and 4 males) were
transported to the laboratory on ice. Each fish was measured for total length to the nearest 0.1 cm,
weight (W) was weighted to the nearest 0.1 g and sex was determined by the presence of claspers.
Total lengths and weights of C. plumbeus specimens were 54.5-61.0 cm, 930 - 1484 g, for males and
49.6 - 62.4 cm, 918 - 1568 g, respectively for females. In shark species, the embryo is connected to
the mother by an umbilical cord. The umbilical scars are still clearly visible on these newly born
sharks. The open umbilical scar lengths were between 4.1 and 5.0 mm and they were used as an
indicator. Thus, this study provides the records of neonate and juveniles sandbar shark from the
Yumurtalik Bight. It was determined that Yumurtalik Bight can be the second reproduction and
nursery area of the sandbar sharks in the Mediterranean after Boncuk Cove in Gokova Bay, Turkey.




                                                     32
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


     The occurrence of white sharks during the ecotourism season in
            Guadalupe Island: General observations related
                        to environmental factors

 Edgar E. BECERRIL-GARCÍA1,2, Mauricio HOYOS-PADILLA3, Raúl MARTÍNEZ-RINCÓN4,
                           Felipe GALVÁN-MAGAÑA2
                           1
                               Universidad Autónoma de Baja California Sur, La Paz, MEXICO
          2
              Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, MEXICO
                                          3
                                            Pelagios Kakunjá A.C., La Paz, MEXICO
                             4
                               Fins Attached, Marine Research and Conservation, Colorado USA
                           5
                             Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas del Noroeste, La Paz, MEXICO
                                                     bg.ragde@gmail.com




This study aims to provide general information regarding the effect of environmental factors on the
occurrence of white sharks during ecotourism in Guadalupe Island, Mexico. The white sharks
presence and environmental conditions were registered each hour during August-November of 2012-
2014 in Rada Norte Bay (RNB). Analyzed environmental factors included sea surface temperature
(SST), wind direction and speed, tide, moon phase, cloud cover, and water visibility. Sighting records
were used to describe the white shark’s probability of occurrence in relation to environmental factors,
geographical position, and hour. Generalized additive models were applied using the
presence/absence of the sharks as response variable according to the following categories: 1)
Immature males; 2) Mature males; 3) Immature females; 4) Mature females. A total of 6,266 sightings
of white sharks was registered according to sexual maturity during 98 days at RNB. Median from
these records was 59 sightings per day (S.E.=5.96), and 9.82 sightings per hour (S.E.=1.22), with no
significant differences in the sightings per hour related to the year (H2,90=6.35; P = 0.04), as confirmed
by Bonferroni test. Regarding the month, a higher number of sightings per hour were observed during
August (H3,90=21.20; P < 0.01), with no significant differences between the following months. The
model for mature males suggests that there is a higher occurrence in the south part of RNB when SST
is lower than 21°C, after new moon, and at any hour. In contrast, immature males’ occurrence was
higher in the west, during warm SST > 22°C, after full moon nights, and in the morning hours.
Regarding females, mature individuals showed a higher probability of occurrence in the east, during
warm SST > 23° C, early morning, and the last hours of the day. Explanations for these results will
be discussed toward a potential segregation of white sharks in Guadalupe Island.




                                                          33
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


      What does the data from Citizen Science’s program CapOeRa
             (Capsules d’OEufs de Raies, APECS) tell us ?

        Juliette BIACCHI1, Alexandra ROHR2, Eric STEPHAN2, Christian KERBIRIOU3,
                                      Isabelle LEVIOL3
                                     1
                                        University of Poitiers, FRANCE
                                           2
                                             APECS, Brest, FRANCE
                           3
                             Station Marine MNHN-CESCO, Concarneau, FRANCE
                                         juliettebiacchi22@gmail.com



Spatiotemporal variation of the deposition of skate’s eggcases on beaches of the french metropolitan
coast from 2005 to 2017 was studied. Due to the lack of knowledge on skates nowadays, we
hypothesized that eggcases’ distribution can provide additional informations for fishery surveys and
spatio-temporal variations. Data were provided by a citizen science program involving 1900
volunteers. The proximal goal of this project was to evaluate the influence of environmental factors,
detect a long term evolution and define massive strand areas. A methodological challenge consisted
in performing a reliable analysis on a large dataset (~465000 eggcases, 1077sites) based on
opportunistic data where absence or sampling effort were not notified. Fortunately, we were able to
mobilize a second dataset (~240000 eggcases, 30sites) which is more standardized allowing to
investigate temporal autocorrelation. Furthermore for spatial analysis, we established a 5 km buffer
from the coast to collect all types of habitat around. Eggcases of seven species were encountered,
mostly Raja undulata, R.clavata and R.brachyura. Adequate analysis performed on the two dataset
provided the same results within and between year variations. The evolution of egg’s deposition
within a year shows a neat phenology with a peak of increase during winter followed by a decrease
during summer. Eggcase’s deposition from undulate rays tend to increase significantly (26%)
throughout the years. However, for other species it didn’t show any inter-annuals significant trends.
Undulate’s eggs were mostly found near littoral rocks and coarse sands and tend not to be present
near deep habitats while thornback’s eggs can be found near both deep and tidal zones. They are
qualified as opportunistic for habitats and depth according to literature and experts. Blonde ray’s eggs
were found near shallow zones in rocks and sandy bottoms. These results suggest that egg’s
deposition of skates over time can allow us to have more information on the biology and ecology of
species.




                                                  34
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

          Active acoustic sampling of highly-migratory megafauna

          Eyal BIGAL1,2, Roee DIAMANT3, Dan TCHERNOV1,2, Aviad P. SCHEININ1,2
     1
      Department of Marine Biology, Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, ISRAEL
                       2
                         Morris Kahn Marine Research Station, University of Haifa, ISRAEL
  3
    Department of Marine Technologies, Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, ISRAEL
                                             eyalbigal@gmail.com




Active acoustic surveys have been increasingly utilized as a non-extractive method for abundance
estimation. These rely on species identification based on the focal animal’s morphology, i.e., the
dimensions of gas-filled structures such as the swim bladder, lungs, or other air cavities. Acoustic
studies on elasmobranchs, which do not possess such structures, have dealt with the reflectivity of
particularly large species or were unable to produce reliable size estimates, a prerequisite for density
indexing. Furthermore, acoustic surveys typically employ narrow beam sonars which, with respect to
highly-scattered populations, are mainly useful where animals are already known to occur as opposed
to open-ocean waters. Thus, despite the potential usability of this method as the only non-extractive
approach for real-time monitoring of deep-dwelling organisms, it remains limited to species of
prominent acoustic features, as well as local-level surveys.
We employed omni-directional transmitters to emit wideband acoustic signals and produce a time-
delay image of continuously moving targets. The swimming trajectories of sharks and other species
of apex predatory megafauna were compared with ground truth data to establish potential indicators
to identify species irrespective of backscatter. Repetitions were performed in a variety of
environmental settings throughout the Mediterranean marine space of Israel and included species that
are listed as data deficient (DD), endangered (EN), and critically endangered (CR) in this region. Our
findings provide for the non-extractive, fishery-independent sampling of highly-migratory
megafauna across large spatial scales.




                                                      35
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

      The ecological role of the demersal sharks and rays within the
          Calabrian food web of the North western Ionian Sea

 Pasquale RICCI1,2, Francesca CAPEZZUTO 1,2, Angela CARLUCCIO 1,2, Giulia CIPRIANO 1,2,
    Gianfranco D’ONGHIA 1,2, Porzia MAIORANO 1,2, Letizia SION 1,2, Angelo TURSI 1,2,
                                  Roberto CARLUCCI 1,2
                     1
                         Department of Biology, University of Bari Aldo Moro, Bari, ITALY
                                            2
                                              CoNISMa, Roma, ITALY
                                             roberto.carlucci@uniba.it




An Ecopath mass-balance model was applied to explore the ecological role of demersal sharks and
rays (SR) distributed in the Calabrian sector of the North-Western Ionian Sea (Central Mediterranean
Sea). Biomass data (ton/km2y) mostly derived from the standardized biomass index of demersal
species in the time series of the EU MEDITS trawl survey. Landings (ton/km2y) and Discards
(ton/km2y) data of commercial species collected from the time series EU Data Collection Framework,
together with Production, Consumption and Diet data, were used to model the food web in its
stationary state. A total of 58 functional groups (FGs) described the Calabrian food web over the 3469
km2 from Punta Alice to Cape Spartivento between 10-800 m of depth. The demersal SR species
aggregated in the FG of the Shelf SR benthic feeders, the Shelf SR benthopelagic feeders, the Bathyal
SR benthic feeders, the Bathyal sharks benthopelagic feeders and the Blackmouth catshark Galeus
melastomus. Trophic levels (TL), Omnivory Index (OI), Keystoness Index (KSI), Mixed Trophic
Impacts (MTI) and Exploitation rate (E) were estimated to describe their ecological traits. The highest
and lowest TL were estimated for the Bathyal SR benthic feeders (Cetrophorus granulosus, Dipturus
oxyrinchus) (4.94) and Bathyal sharks benthopelagic feeders (Etmopterus spinax, Dalatias licha,
Chimaera monstrosa) (4.26). The OI indicated the Bathyal sharks benthopelagic feeders as more
generalist than the other groups. Within this FG the Etmopterus spinax and D. licha are the more
abundant keystone predators. The highest E rates were estimated for the G. melastomus (0.65) and
Dasyatis pastinaca, Mustelus mustelus, Raja asterias included in the Shelf SR benthic feeders (0.57).
Trawl impacted with the highest negative values of MTI on the Shelf SR benthic feeders (-0.599),
the Bathyal sharks benthopelagic feeders (-0.404), the Shelf SR benthopelagic feeders (Raja
miraletus, Scyliorhinus canicula and S. stellaris) (-0.324) and G. melastomus (-0.154).




                                                       36
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

         Improving distributional knowledge of deepwater sharks
    Brittany FINUCCI1, Malcolm FRANCIS1, Matt DUNN1, Emma JONES2, Craig MARSH3,4,
                           Nokuthaba SIBANDA5, Phil SUTTON1
          1
              National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA), Wellington, NEW ZEALAND
           2
              National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA), Auckland, NEW ZEALAND
                                      3
                                        Big Blue Data Ltd, Auckland, NEW ZEALAND
                                   4
                                     University of Auckland, Auckland, NEW ZEALAND
                            5
                              Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, NEW ZEALAND
                                                   brit.finucci@niwa.co.nz




A recent risk assessment for chondrichthyans (sharks, rays, and chimaeras) found some deepwater
sharks were at relatively high risk of adverse impacts from fishing. Quantitative data for these species
is limited, and some available information has been found to be unreliable. With a better
understanding of spatial distributions, our knowledge of the risk to, and the status of these species
would be more informed. This information would allow for the evaluation of potential stock
boundaries, encourage comparisons of regional population structures, and overall, better inform
fisheries management. Here, we investigate the suitability of several predictive modelling
approaches, including vector-autoregressive spatio-temporal (VAST) models, to estimate spatio-
temporal trends for seven deepwater sharks (Etmopterus granulosus, Centrophorus squamosus,
Deania calcea, Centroselachus crepidater, Centroscymnus owstoni, Centroscymnus plunketi, and
Dalatias licha) regularly caught in New Zealand deepwater trawl fisheries.




                                                      37
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


     Beyond Boundaries: Ecological Niche Modelling of Manta Ray
             Distribution in the Western Central Atlantic

            Francesco GARZON1, Rachel GRAHAM1, Lucy HAWKES2, Matthew WITT 2,3
                                          1
                                           MarAlliance, San Pedro, BELIZE
      2
          College of Life and Environmental Sciences, Hatherley Laboratories, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK
            3
              Environment and Sustainability Institute, Penryn Campus, University of Exeter, Cornwall, UK
                                                l.hawkes@exeter.ac.uk



The Western Central Atlantic (WCA) hosts a population of manta rays whose distribution and habitat
preference is poorly understood to date. Obtaining this kind of information is crucial for effective
conservation planning and implementation. In this study, we use ensemble ecological niche modelling
(EENM) to predict the distribution of two sympatric manta ray species (Manta birostris and M. sp.
cf birostris) in the WCA, and calculate the proportion of predicted suitable habitat that lies within
protected areas. This technique has not been used to study the spatial ecology of manta rays at this
scale before, but could prove to be a powerful tool in conservation planning.
The EENM was developed combining 5,000 occurrence records derived from satellite tracking, diver
observations, and verifiable social media posts. The predictions of the model indicate that suitable
habitat for manta rays should be situated near the coast, in shallow and relatively warmer waters,
especially near chlorophyll-α fronts. In the study region, key predicted suitable areas occur along the
coasts of USA, Mexico, Nicaragua and Venezuela. Only 34% of predicted suitable habitat is
encompassed by the present network of marine protected areas (MPAs), with just 0.2% in areas
completely closed to fishing activities.
The conservative life of oceanic manta rays makes this species sensitive to even moderate increases
in mortality rates; for this reason, the existing MPAs may be likely to offer them little protection. As
manta rays in the WCA are likely isolated from other populations worldwide, recolonization of the
area following local extinction would be extremely unlikely and could even result in the loss of the
endemic M. sp. cf birostris. Future conservation planning in the region should explicitly include
conservation of manta rays in its targets, with particular focus on areas identified as key habitats for
these species co-occurring in the WCA.




                                                         38
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


      Nursery areas: Key research of juvenile Angelshark (Squatina
                 squatina) habitat in the Canary Islands
    David Jiménez ALVARADO1,3, Joanna BARKER1,2, Michael SEALEY1, Eva MEYERS1,4,
                                 María Belén CARO1

                                 ¹Angel Shark Project, CANARY ISLANDS
                         ²Conservation & Policy, Zoological Society of London, UK
                ³EcoAqua, Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Islas Canarias, ESPAÑA
                     ⁴Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig, Bonn, GERMANY
                                        info@angelsharkproject.com




A unique stronghold for the Critically Endangered Angelshark (Squatina squatina) is found in the
Canary Islands, where the species is still frequently encountered by divers and fishers. This provides
a great opportunity to conduct research into Angelshark ecology, as limited understanding of
Angelshark habitat use, movement and site fidelity at is a major factor preventing effective species
protection and conservation.
A key focus for Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands (ASP:CI) (a collaborative initiative between
Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig and
Zoological Society of London) is the investigation of juvenile Angelshark habitat in the region and
identification of Angelshark nursery areas. The definition of shark nursery areas varies greatly in
scientific literature, but ASP:CI have developed a multidisciplinary approach (using citizen science
sightings, satellite imagery, focal surveys and mark-recapture techniques) to test the three nursery
area criteria outlined in Heupel et al. 2007.
Research over the last four years has identified that juvenile Angelsharks are present across a number
of shallow, sheltered beaches in the Canary Islands. The team have identified two confirmed nursery
areas, 13 potential nursery areas and 21 beaches where juvenile Angelsharks are observed. Mark-
recapture work at the largest confirmed nursery area, Playa de Las Teresitas in Tenerife, confirms
that juvenile Angelsharks remain present for up to 15 months.
Data were used to develop a Guidance Document on the identification and protection of juvenile
Angelshark habitat in the Canary Islands, which identifies eight key recommendations to improve
protection of these areas.




                                                    39
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


        Labial Cartilages in Sharks – more to it than meets the eye

                             Claudia KLIMPFINGER¹, Jürgen KRIWET

                        ¹Department of Palaeontology, University of Vienna, AUSTRIA
                                            c.klimpfinger@gmx.at



Labial cartilages are paired structures located outside the jaws whose purpose in sharks is not
completely clear yet. Labial cartilages vary a lot in current shark species, ranging from three pairs to
a complete reduction, from massive to slender and from long to short. In our current work we used
CT-images as a non-invasive method to check for labial cartilages in different shark species
occupying different ecological niches and using different feeding strategies. The goal is to find out if
the labial cartilages are a phylogenetic or an ecological trait. Therefore, we used nine species, which
then were grouped according to their ecological niche into deep living, oceanic and benthic. We were
able to detect that the labial cartilages in the oceanic species – especially in those known for ram-
feeding behavior – were massively reduced while the ones in the benthic species were well conserved
and strongly developed. Among the species classified by us as deep living we saw rather unique
adaptations in the labial cartilages in comparison to the benthic group. For example, the cookie-cutter
shark Isistius brasiliensis has very strong, fused labial cartilages and the ones of the frilled shark
Chlamydoselachus anguineus are very slender. Therefore, we assume that the labial cartilages are an
ecological trait and can give additional information on the feeding behavior in sharks and are also
capable of giving information about the feeding behavior in extinct species, since labial cartilages
were also detected in fossils. In future works we are going to check on as many species as possible
to either confirm or refuse this theory. A phylogenetic signal was not discovered so far and the
developmental basis of these structures still is ambiguous.




                                                    40
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


           Mercury isotopes as tracers of ecology and metabolism
                      in two sympatric shark species

     Gaël LE CROIZIER1,2, Anne LORRAIN2, Sébastien JAQUEMET3, Gauthier SCHAAL2,
            Marina RENEDO1, Lucien BESNARD2, Jeroen SONKE1, David POINT1
1
  UMR 5563 Géosciences Environnement Toulouse (GET), Observatoire Midi Pyrénées (OMP), CNRS/IRD/Université
                           Paul Sabatier, 14 avenue Edouard Belin, 31400 Toulouse, FRANCE
    2
      Laboratoire des Sciences de l'Environnement Marin (LEMAR), UMR 6539 CNRS/UBO/IRD/IFREMER, BP 70,
                                                29280 Plouzané, FRANCE
3
  Laboratoire ENTROPIE, UMR 9220 CNRS/IRD/Université de La Réunion, 15 Avenue René Cassin, BP 92003, 97744
                                           Saint-Denis, La Réunion, FRANCE
                                                  gael.lecroizier@ird.fr




Coastal top predators are exposed to a wide variety of nutrient and contaminant sources due to the
diversity of trophic chains within coastal areas. Here we measured mercury (Hg) isotopes in two co-
occurring shark species (the bull shark Carcharhinus leucas and the tiger shark Galeocerdo cuvier)
and their prey from a coastal ecosystem of the Indian Ocean, to (i) determine the main Hg source for
these marine predators and (ii) explore the relevance of mercury isotopes as tracers of diet
composition and feeding habitat. As Hg is mainly found under the methylmercury form in shark and
teleost fish muscle, Hg isotope signatures (Δ199Hg and δ202Hg) of shark prey suggested that bull
sharks were exposed to methylmercury produced in the water column while tiger sharks were exposed
to mesopelagic methylmercury with additional microbial transformation in shelf sediments. Δ199Hg
values efficiently traced the ecology of the two predators, demonstrating that bull sharks targeted
coastal prey in shallow waters while tiger sharks were mainly foraging on shelf species in deeper
waters. Unexpectedly, we found a large positive shift in δ202Hg between sharks and their prey, leading
to high δ202Hg values in the two shark species. The shift in δ202Hg strongly suggests that significant
Hg demethylation occurs in sharks, representing a protective mechanism to limit the accumulation of
methylmercury and its toxic effects.




                                                   41
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

    Population genomics of the Mediterranean and North Eastern
  Atlantic blue shark, Prionace glauca, and management implications

Agostino LEONE1, Rafaella FRANCH2, Dimitrios DAMALAS3, Antonella ZANZI3,
Emilio SPERONE4, Primo MICARELLI5, Fulvio GARIBALDI6, Persefoni MEGALOFONOU7,
Luca BARGELLONI2, Massimiliano BABBUCCI2, David MACIAS8, Paulo A. PRODÖHL9,
Marco STAGIONI10, Ilaria COSCIA11, Stefano MARIANI11, Fausto TINTI1, Jann MARTINSOHN3,
Alessia CARIANI1

                                    1
                                      Department of Biological, University of Bologna, ITALY.
                 3
                        European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Directorate D, Ispra (VA), ITALY
                     4
                       Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Science, University of Calabria, ITALY
                               5
                                 Sharks Research Center, Aquarium Mondo Marino, 58024, ITALY
                   6
                     Department of Earth Sciences, Environmental and Life, University of Genova, ITALY
         7
           Department of Zoology-Marine Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, GREECE
                          2
                            Comparative Biomedicine and Food Science, University of Padova, ITALY
                         8
                           Instituto Español de Oceanografía, Centro Oceanográfico de Málaga, SPAIN
           9
             Institute for Global Food Security, School of Biological Sciences, Queen’s University Belfast, UK
         10
             Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University of Bologna, ITALY
11
   Ecosystems and Environment Research Centre, School of Environment and Life Sciences, University of Salford, UK
                                                    Agostino.leone2@unibo.it


Global abundance of blue shark (Prionace glauca, L. 1758) has dramatically declined over the last
30 years, which is why, in some areas, this species has been categorized as "Critically Endangered"
by the IUCN. Conservation and management of Mediterranean blue sharks (BS) suffer from a lack
of knowledge regarding population structure and the dynamics of connectivity with contingents in
the adjacent North-eastern Atlantic. Here, we filled in this knowledge gap by measuring genetic
diversity and differentiation of BS individuals (N = 291) sampled across the Mediterranean Sea, and
along the Atlantic continental slope of South- and North-western Europe, based on thousands of novel
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) developed through double-digest Restriction-site
Amplified DNA (ddRAD) sequencing. SNP variation revealed a lack of genetic differences between
Western and Eastern Mediterranean, and Mediterranean and North East Atlantic blue sharks,
indicating the occurrence of a near- or full-panmixia across the North-eastern Atlantic and the
Mediterranean. Therefore, the Mediterranean BS population can be considered an extension of the
North-eastern Atlantic population, which is in contrast with the current stock delineation and
management.
These results are in contrast also with long term tagging data, which suggest that the blue shark don't
cross the Strait of Gibraltar. These contrasting results highlight the need to integrate multidisciplinary
studies to better reveals the connectivity of higly mobile species, such as the blue shark, in order to
take more appropriate conservation actions.
Beyond the region’s population structure, we envision that the developed SNPs could be exploited
for the traceability of BS products globally (e.g. Atlantic vs Pacific), helping to tackle the major threat
to BS populations, represented by the millions of unreported by-caught blue sharks, which enter the
global fin trade each year.


                                                       42
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


                 Shark attack: competitors to large pelagic predators
                 in the Strait of Messina (central Mediterranean Sea)

           Danilo MALARA1, Erika ARCADI1, Pietro BATTAGLIA1, Pierpaolo CONSOLI1,
                           Franco ANDALORO1, Teresa ROMEO1,2
    1
        Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, National Institute of Biology, Ecology and Marine Biotechnology, Sicilian
                                       Interdipartimental Centre, Milazzo (ME), ITALY
                   2
                     Institute for Environmental Protection and Research, ISPRA, Milazzo (ME), ITALY
                                                     danilo.malara@szn.it




Cartilaginous fish represent less than 5% of marine fish species and in the Mediterranean Sea there
are at least 79 species (45 shark species and 34 ray). Some sharks are considered apex predators and
most of them are asynchronous opportunistic feeders.
Predators play central role in marine and terrestrial environment. They exercise top-down control on
lower trophic levels and compete one each other for same resources. Occasionally, opportunistic apex
predators can attack another large predator (i.e. space competition).
The Strait of Messina (central Mediterranean Sea) is a biodiversity hotspot thanks to its unique
hydrodynamic regimes and host different shark species. In the last decade, several shark attacks over
other predators in the Strait of Messina were documented between mainly in July. The attacked
species were primarily swordfish (Xiphias gladius) but natural predation on giant devil ray (Mobula
mobular) was also recorded. Generally, photos and video were taken after the harpooned swordfish
were brought on board and are the only witness of these events. Indeed, most of the event stated here
did happen after the animals were harpooned by feluca boats while swordfish (or other animals) were
dead or life-fighting. These events were characterized by a well visible bite and removal of large
muscle. The cause of the attacks most likely are associated to the weakness of the prey and the smell
of blood and hormones released by injured fish.
Since different species of shark inhabit the Strait of Messina, it is not really easy to identify shark
species from the shape of the bite.There is also a lack of information and identification accuracy in
species that inhabit or migrate throughthe Strait of Messina and therefore more research is needed to
identify and monitor those highly mobile species and also to improve the knowledge on its behaviour.




                                                          43
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


             Shark species inventory in Cabo San Lucas, Mexico,
                 using a touristic platform as methodology

                   Francisco MASCAREÑO-SUAREZ1, Jacopo BRUNETTI2,
                Miguel Ángel ELICECHE-CONSTANTINI2, Clara CALATAYUD1
                              1
                                  Fundación México Azul, Mexico City, MEXICO
                                   2
                                     Cabo Shark Dive, Cabo San Lucas, MEXICO
                                              kiko.masua@gmail.com




Pelagic sharks include oceanic and semi-oceanic species, and are mostly represented by the orders
Carcharhiniformes, Lamniformes, and Squaliformes. Due to their complex life cycle, research on
these organisms can be difficult in terms of logistic and finance. Because of this, the use of touristic
operations and citizen science has been seen as an effective method to study these animals in areas
where their abundance is significant. Due to the characteristics of the study area, we expect to find a
high species richness, as well as seasonal patterns regarding relative abundance of sharks as a function
of environmental factors. The main goal of this study was to create an inventory of pelagic shark
species in Cabo San Lucas, and identify seasonal patterns in their abundance, as well as contribute
data that supports the use of tourism on the study of pelagic species. To do this, submarine censuses
were completed, registering shark species’ richness, relative abundance, sex and size of the
individuals, as well as environmental factors such as sea surface temperature, wind speed, cloudiness
and depth (if possible). We observed 8 species during the censuses, with the most abundant being
Carcharhinus falciformis, Sphyrna zygaena, and Isurus oxyrinchus. Also, we identified seasonal
patterns on the relative abundance of the latter, where I. oxyrinchus was the most dominant species
during the cold season (December-March), S. zygaena during the transitional period (April-June),
and C. falciformis during the warm season (July-November). This is the first formal inventory of
species done for the area, and we were able to demonstrate the viability of touristic operations and
citizen science as tools used for the constant monitoring of these organisms and the establishment of
baselines for these populations. This is especially important since these species are being taken
advantage of by the growing nature tourism sector in Mexico.




                                                     44
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


Of Shark and Men: Data sourced from ecotourism to study the impact
     of environmental conditions on great white shark behaviour

                   Sophie MAYCOCK1, Mike LADLEY2, Christian TUDORACHE1
             1
                 Instituut Biologie Leiden, Sylvius Laboratory, Sylviusweg Be, THE NETHERLANDS
                                     2
                                       White Shark Africa (UK), Mossel Bay, SOUTH AFRICA
                                             sophie.maycock@yahoo.co.uk



Difficulties in sampling large, mobile marine predators, such as great white sharks (Carcharodon
carcharias) have hindered the investigation of behaviour, but collaboration with ecotourism
companies could offer an alternative data resource for scientific research. White Shark Africa (of
Mossel Bay South Africa) volunteered data collected by their onboard crew during tourist excursions
from 2009 through 2011, constituting of over 660 sampling hours and 985 individual shark sightings.
The behaviour observed during each trip was used to assign each shark sighting to a ‘behavioural
state’ (to encompass the overall behaviour of the shark on that trip), termed ‘aggressive’, ‘cautious’
and ‘inquisitive’. Multiple explanatory variables related to weather, environment, seasonality,
anthropic activity, conspecific presence and individual demographics were subjected to generalised
linear models to identify variables which were significantly related to the presence of each
behavioural state. Classification trees were used to analyse how significant variables affected white
shark behaviours.
Cautious behavioural state was found to be related to the order in which sharks arrived at the boat,
the size of the shark and the bait type used. The probability of observing cautious behaviour was
highest for sharks of smaller size (TL) which were first to arrive at the boat, and when baiting with
tuna and snoek. Comparatively, aggressive behavioural state, was found to be related to running
average minimum air temperatures (RTMIN) and arrival time. The probability of observing aggressive
behaviour was highest during early morning sampling and when the RTMIN was low. Inquisitive
behavioural state was also found to be significantly related to arrival time, but also to sea surface
temperature (SST). The probability of observing inquistive behaviours was also highest during early
morning sampling, but also when SST was warmer.
Overall, modelling indicated that environmental conditions, anthropic activity, shark size and the
presence of conspecifics all impacted on white shark behaviour. This study was the first to use
ecotourism data in ethological research and the results indicate that collaboration with ecotourism
operators could be invaluable for the collection of large, high-power data sets. Data sourced from
ecotourism could be used in a wide array of scientific studies, as long as rigorous statistical methods
are applied, and the results interpreted with consideration of the sampling methodology.




                                                     45
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


        Shark Research Hub for Dusky Sharks (Carcharhinus obscurus)
               and Sandbar Sharks (Carcharhinus plumbeus)
                   in the Easternmost Mediterranean Sea

              Aviad SCHEININ1, Eyal BIGAL1,2, Ziv ZEMAH SHAMIR1,2, Adi BARASH2,
          Tal STAROSTINETSKY-MALONEK1,2, Stephane MARTINEZ1,2, Danny MORICK1,
                                       Dan TCHERNOV1,2
  1
      Morris Kahn Marine Research Station, Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, ISRAEL
  2
      Department of Marine Biology, Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, ISRAEL
                                              ascheinin@univ.haifa.ac.il




The Top Predator laboratory of Morris Kahn Marine Research Station has been running a shark-
tagging project in the last 4 years, as part of a long-term ecological research programme. The study
takes place at an anthropogenic, seasonal aggregation area of sharks in the warm discharge waters of
power plants along the Mediterranean coast of Israel. Following the tagging protocol of Sharklab
(Bimini, Bahamas), 51 sharks have been tagged thus far, of which 35 were dusky sharks
(Carcharhimus obscurus; 34 females and 1 male) and 16 sandbar sharks (Carcharhinus plumbeus;
all male). These species are listed by the IUCN as data deficient (DD) and endangered (EN) in the
Mediterranean Sea, respectively. The tagging procedure includes morphometric measurements as
well as DNA, stable isotopes, blood chemistry and microbiome sampling. All tagged sharks are issued
a subcutaneous PIT tag as well as a spaghetti tag. 19 dusky sharks and 10 sandbar sharks were tagged
with acoustic transmitters and an array of 11 receivers was placed within the tagging site and in other
aggregation areas, such as offshore mariculture facilities, throughout Israel’s marine space. Results
indicate thermo-regulated fidelity at human-altered habitats and size as well as sex-dependent
aggregating behaviour. In the Mediterranean Sea, where shark populations have declined
dramatically over the last 70 years, Israeli waters have become an oasis for coastal sharks and a hub
for their research, supported by ground-breaking conservation, legislation and enforcement.




                                                         46
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

                 Emerging Technologies in Acoustic Telemetry:
                         Real-time vs. Data Storage

              Andre STECKENREUTER1, Silvana GERMANA2, Richard VALLEE2
                                    1
                                     Innovasea, Cologne, GERMANY
                                      2
                                        Innovasea, Halifax, CANADA
                                   andre.steckenreuter@innovasea.com




Acoustic telemetry is a well-established tool that has been used around the world for more than three
decades to get an understanding of the spatio-temporal movements and associated behaviour of a
wide range of aquatic animals. New emerging technologies are being developed continuously that
allow for new research applications and designs. Examples for these new technologies are (1) real-
time observations of both aquatic animals as well as their aquatic environment and (2) acoustic data
storage tags.
Applied real-time systems may consist of various underwater sensors, acoustic telemetry tags on
aquatic animals, a surface hub that receives data from the sensors as well as from the tags, and a
cloud-centric database. Such systems are now in use at several global installations. Data access is
available via a mobile phone or laptop that provide real-time notifications when tagged animals are
near receivers or the current state of environmental variables.
Acoustic data storage tags might be used especially for far-ranging animals such as sharks and rays
that might inhabit coastal and pelagic regions at different times of the year. These applications can
be used to get a bigger picture of a species behaviour and its spatio-temporal distribution in order to
address conservation and management measures since data is also collected while animals are outside
of acoustic arrays. Here, we will explore the evolution of the use of acoustic telemetry and how
receiving data in real-time and in acoustic data storage applications will help sustain our ocean
ecosystems.




                                                  47
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


   Habitat use of juvenile white sharks (Carcharodon carcharias) and
   shortfin mako sharks (Isurus oxyrinchus) in a nursery area in the
                  west coast of Baja California, México
      Elena TAMBURIN1,2, Sora L. KIM3, Fernando R. ELORRIAGA-VERPLANCKEN1,
    Daniel J. MADIGAN4, Mauricio HOYOS-PADILLA5,6, Alberto SÁNCHEZ-GONZÁLEZ1,
            Agustín HERNÁNDEZ-HERRERA1, José Leonardo CASTILLO-GENIZ7,
               Carlos Javier GODINEZ-PADILLA7, Felipe GALVÁN-MAGAÑA1
          1
             Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, MÉXICO
                           2
                             Fundación Alium Pacfic, Carrera 26 No. 5C–13, Cali, COLOMBIA
                 3
                   Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of California Merced, USA
     4
       Gulf of California International Research Center, Loma los Frailes S/N, Santa Rosalía, BCS 23920, MÉXICO
             5
               Pelagios-Kakunjá A.C, Sinaloa 1540. Col. Las Garzas, C.P. 23070, La Paz, B.C.S., MÉXICO
     6
       Fins Attached: Marine Research and Conservation 19675, Still Glen Drive Colorado Springs, CO 80908, USA
   7
     Centro Regional de Investigación Pesquera de Ensenada, Instituto Nacional de la Pesca (INAPESCA), MÉXICO
                                              elenatambu2588@gmail.com




Information like habitat preferences and trophic ecology regarding juvenile white sharks
Carcharodon carcharias (WS) and shortfin mako sharks Isurus oxyrinchus (MS) is lacking. This
study investigates the habitat use of juvenile MS and WS in the nursery area of Sebastian Vizcaino
Bay (SVB) using stable isotope analysis in multiple tissues. During 2015 and 2016, we collected
muscle (n=165), blood samples (n=147), red blood cells (RBC; n=62) and plasma (n=70) of young
MS and muscle (n=6), RBC (=2) and plasma (n=2) of young WS. The size range for MS was 64.5-
196 cm of total length (TL) and for WS it was 130-292 cm TL.
Shortfin mako and white sharks had significant differences for muscle tissue in δ C values (W =
                                                                                              13



255.5, p < 0.0001), but not in δ N values (W = 1189.5, p = 0.08).
                                  15



We did not find significant differences in δ13C values (W = 228, p-value = 0.045) and δ15N values
(W = 420.5, p-value = 0.8) of whole blood between shortfin mako and white sharks. In addition,
sharks with similar TL of both species (MS > 102 cm TL and WS <186 cm TL) showed a similar
pattern of δ15N values for whole blood, RBCs and plasma.
MS and WS with similar total length (MS> 102 cm TL and WS < 186 cm TL) reflected in their tissues
(muscle, blood, RBC and plasma) the regional baseline 15-N enriched isotopic signature of SVB,
suggesting that SVB has a unique isotopic signature (isoscape). The similarity in isotopic niche and
isotopic composition between shortfin mako and white sharks in multiple tissues reflecting large and
short time periods suggest shared resource and common habitat use inside SVB throughout extended
times confirming their residency in this area during their earlier life stages.




                                                      48
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

Temporal variability in whale shark (Rhincodon typus) presence in the
    South Ari Marine Protected Area, Maldives, Indian Ocean
          Silvia VALSECCHI1, Caterina LANFREDI2, Arianna AZZELLINO3, Alessandra SAVINI1,
            Valentina Alice BRACCHI1, Fabio MARCHESE1, James HANCOCK4, Richard REES4

      1
      Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences DISAT (DISAT), University of Milano Bicocca (MI), ITALY
2
    CoNISMa (The National Inter-University Consortium for Marine Sciences) U.R.L.Politecnico di Milano (MI), ITALY
                         1
                           Environmental Engineering Department (DICA), Politecnico di Milano (MI), ITALY
            4
              Maldives Whale Shark Research Programme (MWSRP), MALDIVES & UNITED KINGDOM
                                            s.valsecchi@campus.unimib.it




Whale sharks are usually observed in coastal areas throughout the highly productive tropical and
subtropical regions. The Indo-Pacific sub-population is declining mainly due to fisheries catches,
bycatch and vessel strikes. Accordingly, in 2016 the species was assessed as “Endangered” on the
IUCN Red List. Despite conservation concerns, there are still substantial gaps in the knowledge of
whale shark ecology. This study investigates the temporal variability of whale shark presence in the
South Ari Atoll Marine Protected Area (S.A.MPA). Even if the area is very limited (about 42km2) it
appears to be an important aggregation site for the species in the Maldives archipelago. Since 2012
the Maldives Whale Shark Research Programme (MWSRP) has been collecting data year-round
within the MPA. Due to the heterogeneity of the effort among different years only data collected
between 2014 and 2017 has been considered in this study. A total of 572 sharks encounters have been
reported in this period. Concurrently, in situ Sea Surface Temperature (SST) has also been collected.
Sightings per Unit of Effort (SPUE) was calculated based on the number of survey trips carried out
per month and per year during favorable environmental conditions (e.g. wind speed not exceed 3 in
the Beaufort scale and partial and total clouds covered conditions). Generalized Linear Models have
been used to analyse the temporal variability of the SPUE. No significant difference has been
observed in SPUE across the study period. However, taking into consideration data on a monthly-
year basis, the species’ occurrence presents significant differences (P-level < 0.01). Further analysis
revealed that SST could be a significant covariate. The understanding offered by this study provides
additional information upon which to base an appropriate management strategy in the MPA for this
wide-ranging species.




                                                         49
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

   The historical occurrence of the angelshark Squatina squatina and
     common skate Dipturus intermedius in Dutch coastal waters

Roeland A. BOM1, Monique VAN DE WATER2, Aafke BRADER2, Henk W. VAN DER VEER1,
                             Anieke VAN LEEUWEN1

   1 Department of Coastal Systems, NIOZ Royal Netherlands Institute for Sea Research, and Utrecht University,
                                              NETHERLANDS
                      2 Stichting Het Wereld Natuur Fonds-Nederland, NETHERLANDS
                                              mwater@wwf.nl




The North Sea is known for its natural richness. Yet it is also one of most intensively exploited seas
in the world, and, as a result, fish species have disappeared or populations are reduced to low numbers.
There is a growing call to restore the natural richness of the North Sea but, it is often unclear what
this is, because baseline studies date back 60 years at best.
Elasmobranchs are an example of a group of species of which populations in the North Sea have
marginalized over the past century. These includes the critically endangered angelshark Squatina
squatina and common skate Dipturus intermedius.
We review the historical abundance and some life-history aspects of these species in the Dutch marine
waters using a variety of historical sources.
Palaeontological sources dating back to the origin of the North Sea suggest that these species always
have been present in the area. Written historical sources from the 16th to the 19th century suggest
that the angelshark used to be fairly common and that the common skate was indeed common.
Catch reports indicate that the angel shark started to decline at the onset of the 20th century and went
locally extinct in the 1970s. Landings and fishery-independent data of common skate show a similar
picture. The start of the decline coincides with the onset of steam-powered fisheries whereas the
demise follows on the intensification of diesel-powered beam-trawlers. Historical reports and catch
data indicates that angelsharks mainly visited the area in summer to reproduce. Common skates were
mainly caught in winter and these were mostly young individuals that supposedly used the area as
nursery grounds.
Our study shows that if we base our ideas of a North Sea ecosystem on a baseline view after 1900 we
may have overly low expectations of its potential natural richness.




                                                       50
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


Movement evaluation of elasmobranch species in the northern-central
      Adriatic Sea using a conventional tagging approach

Matteo BARBATO1, Sara BONANOMI2, Diego BORME3, Federico CALI’2, Sasǎ RAICEVICH4,
                       Antonello SALA2,5, Carlotta MAZZOLDI1
                          1
                              Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padova ITALY
                                            2
                                              CNR-IRBIM, Ancona, ITALY
               3
                 Istituto Nazionale di Oceanografia e di Geofisica Sperimentale - OGS, Trieste, ITALY
                                               4
                                                 ISPRA Chioggia ITALY
   5
     DG Joint Research Centre (JRC) Directorate D - Sustainable Resources Unit D.02 Water and Marine Resources
                                            matteo.barbato.1@phd.unipd.it




The decline of elasmobranch populations in the Mediterranean Sea highlights the need of developing
effective management strategies. The biological traits of such organisms include internal fertilization,
hence decoupling mating from egg release/parturition, a longer life and a slower growth rate
compared to most teleosts, making elasmobranch populations particularly vulnerable to fishery
exploitation. Because of their biology, these species distribution may vary drastically among life
stages (e.g. adults vs juveniles, pregnant vs non-pregnant females) and sexes. Movements across
Mediterranean water bodies, between mating, parturitions, feeding areas and the occurrence of
aggregations in a specific area are fundamental points for understanding their ecology. Therefore,
integrating movement information in management strategies of these species is a crucial step forward.
Such data on pelagic and benthic species are scarce throughout the Mediterranean Sea and especially
in the Adriatic Sea. In this study, we adopted a conventional tagging approach in the Adriatic Sea
using “spaghetti” tags in collaboration with professional and recreational fishermen, elasmobranchs,
caught as target or bycatch, were tagged and released after species identification, recording size, sex
and maturity (for males by clasper calcification and for females TL50 was used if known) and storing
release coordinates in Tshark.org database. So far, we tagged 592 individuals (12 species) among
which the majority are smooth-hound sharks (Mustelus mustelus and M. punctulatus), eagle ray
(Myliobatis aquila) and pelagic sting ray (Pteroplatytrygon violacea). We received 6 recapture
reports out of 301 of tagged Mustelus spp, ranging between 6 months to 5 days after release, and 1 of
pelagic sting ray, after 2 months and 15 days after release. The longest distance recoded was of 20
nautical miles (NM) for Mustelus spp and 125 NM for P. violacea.
As this approach relies on the recapture reporting, the collaboration between research institutions
across Mediterranean countries, and between researchers and fishermen as well, is fundamental to
increase recapture information.




                                                       51
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


       Reconstructing past and present behaviours, occurrence and
    seasonality of elasmobranch species through the recovery of Local
                          Ecological Knowledge
         Matteo BARBATO1, Claudio BARRÍA2, Andrea BELLODI3, Sara BONANOMI4,
       Diego BORME5, Ilija ĆETKOVIĆ6, Ana I. COLMENERO2, Francesco COLLOCA7,
    Fabio CROCETTA8, Egemen DEMİR9, Francesco DE CARLO10, Manfredi DI LORENZO7,
     Maria Cristina FOLLESA3, Fulvio GARIBALDI11, Gianni GIGLIO12, Ioannis GIOVOS13,
     Giulia GUERRIERO14, Olfa HENTATI15, Ana JEVREMOVIĆ16, Claudia KRUSCHEL16,
    Mohamed KSIBI15, Luca LANTERI11, Francesco Luigi LEONETTI12, Alessandro LIGAS10,
              Adriano MADONNA14, Sanja MATIĆ-SKOKO17, Renata MIMICA18,
          Dimitrios K. MOUTOPOULOS19, Antonello MULAS3, Vedrana NERLOVIĆ20,
      Konstantinos TSOUKINDAS19, Ana PEŠIĆ6, Cristina PORCU3, Emilio RIGINELLA8,
      Emilio SPERONE12, Sezginer TUNÇER9, Dario VRDOLJAK17, Carlotta MAZZOLDI1
  1
    Department of Biology - University of Padova, Padova, ITALY; 2Institut de Ciències del Mar (ICM-CSIC),Bacellona, SPAIN;
3
Department of Life Sciences and Environmental, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, ITALY; 4IRBIM-CNR, Ancona, ITALY; 5 Istituto
   Nazionale di Oceanografia e di Geofisica Sperimentale - OGS Trieste, Trieste, ITALY; 6University of Montenegro, Institute of
    Marine Biology, Kotor, Montenegro; 7IRBIM-CNR, Mazara del Vallo, ITALY; 8 Department of Integrative Marine Ecology,
Stazione Zoologia Anton Dohrn, Napoli, ITALY; 9COMU, Marine Science and Technology Faculty, Çanakkale Merkez/Çanakkale,
    TURKEY; 10CIBM/Soc. Coop. Aplysia, Livorno, ITALY; 11Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra dell'Ambiente e della Vita –
 University of Genova, Genova, ITALY;12DiBEST, University of Calabria, Arcavacata di Rende, ITALY; 13iSea-2. Technological
   Educational Institute of Western Greece, Thessaloniki, GREECE; 14Federico II di Napoli, Napoli, ITALY; 15Higher Institute of
 Biotechnology of Sfax, Sfax,TUNISIA; 16University of Zadar, Zadar, CROATIA; 17Institute of Oceanography and Fishery, Split,
CROATIA; 18Fishery Office, Rijeka, CROATIA; 19Technological Educational Institute of Western Greece, Thessaloniki, GREECE;
                          20
                             University of Split, University Department of Marine Studies, Split, CROATIA
                                                     matteo.barbato.1@phd.unipd.it




Elasmobranchs constitute a target or bycatch of a wide variety of fishing techniques. Such
anthropogenic pressure has brought to a drastic reduction of local populations across the
Mediterranean Sea. Moreover, limited-data collection and species misidentification, among others,
have led to a scarcity of historical data on species occurrence and abundance trends in several taxa.
Such information is particularly valuable to study migration dynamics and behaviour variations, as
well as to reconstruct historical trends. To fill this data gap, the use of local ecological knowledge
from professional fishermen can be considered as a valuable source of semi-quantitative information
on several aspects of species ecology, abundance and behavioural aspects.
Through a questionnaire survey, fishermen operating with diverse fishing gears such as bottom and
pelagic trawlers, set nets and longlines were interviewed by trained researchers with the aid of photo-
identification materials. A total of 211 interviews were collected across nine Mediterranean FAO-
GSA sub-areas (9, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 28). Results covered a wide range of elasmobranch
species with regard to coastal, pelagic and deep-sea environment. Interviewers indicated species that
were abundant in the past, declined recently and showed size variation compared to past catches.
Moreover, fishermen reported aggregation sightings/events, seasonal movements and species-
specific fishing area. The present study constitutes a baseline regarding abundance and distribution
of elasmobranch species in historical times and may represent a valuable tool for data deficient taxa.
It also gives new insights on elasmobranchs behavioural and ecological aspects and highlights priority
species and suitable geographic areas for conservation and behavioural studies.


                                                             52
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


 Preliminary data on Zooplankton community structure in Nosybe
Madagascar – Whale shark (Rhincodon typus) feeding ecology project

Paolo BAVA1,2, Primo MICARELLI1, Emilio SPERONE3, Iole DI CAPUA4, Isabella BUTTINO4,5

                    ¹Sharks Studies Center – Scientific Institute, M. Marittima (GR), ITALY
                                       ²Università Bicocca Milano, ITALY
                              ³DiBEST, University of Calabria, Rende (CS), ITALY
                                ⁴Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Napoli, ITALY
                 ⁵Institute for Environmental Protection and Agency, ISPRA, Livorno, ITALY
                                             paolob2v@gmail.com




It is known that juveniles whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) have tendency to gather, seasonally, in a
few coastal areas around the world to feed on zooplankton; however little is known about their food
preferences. The CSS (Centro Studi Squali) scientific coordinator of the project “Whale shark feeding
ecology” (in partnership with University of Calabria, University of Siena, ISPRA, University of
Naples Federico II, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn), in 2016, started the study of these
aggregations. During field observations we collected zooplankton samples and we observed feeding
behaviour of sharks to understand the main characteristics of the zooplankton community that appears
to cause said gatherings.
So far two expeditions (2017 and 2018) have been carried out in the channel of Mozambique, in the
coastal waters of the Nosy Be (MG). Here whale sharks are present in the last four months of the
year: data were collected in the eastern part of the island in late November-early December which is
the peak season for whale shark sightings in the area.
Zooplankton samples were collected vertically from 10 m depth to surface, using a net with 200 µm
mesh aperture. The samples were concentrated using a 50µm filter and fixed with alcohol (70%) and
lugol (1%). At the same time, location, water temperature and transparency, shark presence/absence
and feeding behaviour were recorded.
Quantitative and qualitative analysis of zooplankton samples were performed at Stazione Zoologica
Anton Dohrn and ISPRA laboratories. We calculated zooplankton biomass and abundance. We
identified at species level the most important zooplanktonic taxa (copepods, chetognats etc) and
moreover we calculated their size spectra.




                                                    53
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


                     Deepsea sharks of Guatemala:
        New records of the Atlantic sixgill shark Hexanchus vitulus

      Cristopher AVALOS-CASTILLO1, Omar SANTANA-MORALES2,3, Elisa AREANO1,
                           Edgar E. BECERRIL-GARCÍA3,
                            1
                                 Fundación Mundo Azul, Guatemala city, GUATEMALA
                                      2
                                        ECOCIMATI A. C., Ensenada, MÉXICO
          3
            Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, MEXICO
                                                  bg.rage@gmail.com




The knowledge of Hexanchus vitulus (Springer & Waller, 1969) and other deep-sea sharks in the
Caribbean Sea is considered scarce, as these species are unfrequently captured by local artisanal
fishers and therefore scientific research regarding its biology has not been developed. The present
study reports the first record with morphometry data of H. vitulus in this area, in order to provide
useful information for future comparisons of specimens in other coastal regions. A total of ten
Atlantic six gill sharks was captured offshore El Quetzalito, Guatemala (15.740379 N, -88.274621W)
by artisanal fishers at using longlines and fishing nets at a depth of 275-365 m. The date of capture,
fishing gear, used bait, sex, total length, precaudal length, and fork length were registered from each
shark. Taxonomic identification was carried out through the description published by Compagno et
al., (2005) and Daly-Engel et al., (2018). All the specimens were identified as H. vitulus due to the
presence of six gills, a slender body with brown dorsal and white ventral coloration, narrow head and
mouth, anterior serrations on lower teeth, and large eyes. These characteristics are the same described
for H. nakamurai, because H. vitulus has been describes as a cryptic species with no evident external
differentiation known to date. The length of the specimens ranged between 61-165 cm TL, with a
mean of 142 ± 29 SD cm TL. Most of the captured sharks were considered mature individuals with
the exception of a juvenile female caught in 2015. Sex ratio of this sample was 2.3:1 (Males:Females),
where 90% of the sharks were mature individuals. The high quantity of mature sharks in this sample
differs from what observed in other relatively close areas like Belize. Arguments regarding a potential
segregation between mature and immature individuals related to locality and month are presented.




                                                        54
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


               The presence of Remora remora on Mobula birostris
             in the largest Marine Protected Area of North America

                     E. BECERRIL-GARCÍA1, Miguel A. GUTIÉRREZ-ORTIZ2,3,
                     Paul A. PRECIADO-GONZÁLEZ2,3, Arturo AYALA-BOCOS2
         1
             Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, MEXICO
                         2
                           Ecosistemas y Conservación: Proazul Terrestre A.C., La Paz, MEXICO
                            3
                              Universidad Autónoma de Baja California Sur, La PAZ, MEXICO
                                                  bg.ragde@gmail.com




The ecology of mantas and echeneids in the Eastern Tropical Pacific is poorly understood. In this
study we describe the frequency of interactions between the vulnerable Mobula birostris and its
symbiont Remora remora, through the participation of scientists and tourists in a marine protected
area. Data were obtained by the analysis of underwater pictures of observed mantas with remoras
during 139 diving days at sea during the years 2016-2017. A total of 273 records of mantas with
remoras was registered from 207 identified individuals. Estimated size of mantas ranged from 250-
550 cm DW, with an average size of 380 ± 50 cm SD. Sex ratio of mantas was 1.3:1 (Female:Male)
as observed from our sample of 89 females (42.9%), 68 males (32.8%), and 50 individuals (24%) for
which sex could not be determined. The remora species observed in all the mantas was the common
remora Remora remora. Average number of remoras attached to the mantas was 1.6 ± 0.56 remoras
per manta. Estimated size of the remora ranged between 40-80 cm TL, with an average of 60 cm ±
10 cm SD. During the study period, there were no significant differences between months and the
number of remoras per manta (H7,271=5.13; p=0.64). Most of the mantas usually had one or two
remoras, 43 % (n=117) and 53.5 % (n=147), respectively; while 2.5% of the mantas (n=5) were
observed with three remoras, and only two individuals with four (0.9%). Although a higher number
of remoras in female mantas was observed, there was no significant differences according to the
morphotype or sex of the mantas (H3,208=7.90; p=0.04) confirmed by the Bonferroni post-hoc test.
The study of this host-symbiont interaction is discussed in terms of the potential insights that this
kind of research could provide regarding the ecology of mantas and remoras if compared with other
aggregation sites.




                                                         55
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


    Correlation between phytoplancton abundance and whale shark
              feeding behaviour at Nosy Be (Madagascar)

Francesco BOLINESI1, Martina ARPAIA1, Marica LOPEZ2, Emilio SPERONE2, Gianni GIGLIO2,
   Giorgia ZICARELLI2, Vittoria BATTAGLIA2, Samira GALLO2, Chiara ROMANO2, Mario
   AFFUSO1, Emanuela SERINO1,Anna PALOPOLI2, Sandro TRIPEPI2, Primo MICARELLI3,
                           Carlotta BARBA4, Olga MANGONI1
                         1
                         Department of Biology, University of Naples “Federico II”, ITALY
              2
                  Department of Biology, Ecology and earth Sciences, University of Calabria, ITALY
                                3
                                  Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima (GR) ITALY
                                     4
                                       Manta Diving, Nosy Be, MADAGASCAR
                                            francescobolinesi@gmail.com




In the years 2017, 2018 and 2019 the feeding behavior of the whale shark has been studied off Nosy
Be Island (Madagascar). In particular, the investigations involved the description of the behavioral
modules of the whale shark and their relationship with the phytoplankton communities. In total, 65
phytoplankton samples were collected in the following four behavioural conditions:0 - absence of
whale sharks; 1 - presence of swimming whale sharks; 2 - presence of whale sharks in horizontal
feeding; 3 - presence of whale sharks in vertical passive feeding; 4 - presence of whale sharks in
vertical active feeding. All samples were immediately filtered and then frozen to be subsequently
analyzed by HPLC to identify the total biomass and contribution of the different functional groups of
phytoplankton. In total 8 phytoplanctonic taxa have been identified: Prasinophyceae, Dinoflagellata,
Cryptophyceae, Primnesiophyceae, Pelagophyceae, Chlorophyceae, Cyanobacteria and
Bacillariophyceae. Among them, Cryptophyceae were the most abundant. Our results seemed to
highlight a certain correlation also between behavioral feeding intensity exhibited by sharks and the
total biomass of phytoplancton. In particular, this appeared more evident with some groups of algae
that might be involved in the release of the dimethyl sulfonio propionate (DMSP). This substance is
produced by algal organisms in response to predation by zooplankton organisms. Since DMSP is a
substance characterized by a strong odor, the results could demonstrate the fundamental role of smell
in the identification of food sources by the whale shark, as confirmed for marine birds.




                                                        56
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


Effects of biological acoustic signals and shipping noise on behavioural
     parameters in small-spotted catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula)

      Giovanni DE VINCENZI1,2,3, Primo MICARELLI4, Salvatore VIOLA5, Gaspare BUFFA6,
            Virginia SCIACCA1-3, Vincenzo MACCARRONE6, Valentina CORRIAS1,
                     Francesca Romana REINERO4, Francesco FILICIOTTO1
  1
     National Research Council - Institute for Biological Resources and Marine Biotechnology, Messina, ITALY
               2
                 Departmnt of Life Science and Systems Biology, University of Torino, Torino, ITALY
                          3
                            Association eConscience – Art of Soundscape, Monreale, ITALY
                                 4
                                   Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima (GR), ITALY
  5
    National Institute of Nuclear Physics - National Laboratories of the South (INFN-LNS), Catania (CT), ITALY
     6
       National Research Council - Institute for the Study of Anthropic Impacts and Sustainability in the Marine
                            Environment (IAS–CNR), Campobello di Mazara (TP), ITALY
                                              gioggio.devincenzi@gmail.com




Despite in recent years the interest about the human-made noise effects on marine animals have
received notably increasing, at date few studies have investigated the potential role of acoustic
masking on animal’s bio-ecological relationship. In this study, we exposed twelve specimens of
small-spotted catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula, Linnaeus 1758) to biological and anthropogenic
sounds in order to assess their behavioural changes potentially referable to pray presence and masking
effect due to the shipping noise.
Specifically, the sharks held individually in aquarium were exposed to three acoustic experimental
conditions differentiated in their spectral (Hz) components (biological and anthropogenic mixed
sources) and intensity (dB re 1 µPa) levels. Swimming behaviour and spatial distribution of the
specimens were recorded. The results highlighted significant differences in time spent in swimming
and in spatial use of the aquarium among the experimental conditions. The sharks concentrated their
swimming behaviour in the aquarium’s lower sections when the intensity levels of the biological
acoustic sources were higher than the anthropogenic ones. Conversely, when the intensity levels of
the anthropogenic sources were higher than the biological, the specimens showed the highest values
of time spent in swimming, and changed their spatial distribution highlighting an aquarium occupancy
in favour of the less noisy sections.
In conclusion, in this study was hypothesised that the environmental soundscape could play an
important role in the small-spotted catshark prey-predator relationship and that the impact of masking
effect can strictly depends on the acoustic intensity levels.




                                                         57
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


   First assessment of the genetic structure of deepwaterblackmouth
             catshark (Galeus melastomus Rafinesque, 1810)
               in Atlantic and Mediterranean populations
          Simone DI CRESCENZO, Alice FERRARI, Alessia CARIANI, Fausto TINTI

    Department of Biological, Geological & Environmental Sciences (BiGeA), University of Bologna, Bologna,
                                                    ITALY
                                      simone.dicrescenzo@studio.unibo.it



The worldwide abundance of Galeusmelastomus in the biological composition of fishery bycatch led
to consider this species as a key-taxon for understanding the mysterious biology and ecology of sharks
living in deep ecosystems. With the present work, we aim to unravel the population structure of the
blackmouth catshark in the Mediterranean Sea and adjacent North-Eastern Atlantic with the use of
nuclear molecular markers (simple sequence repeats, SSRs) and compare our results with recent
findings based on mitochondrial DNA supporting total panmixia in the species. Given the absence of
species-specific microsatellite markers we attempted the cross-amplification of a panel of 129 SSRs
developed for Centroselachus crepidater, Galeorhinus galeus, Hexanchus griseus, Mustelus
antarcticus, M. canis, M. henlei, M. mustelus, Negaprionbrevirostris,Scyliorhinuscanicula, Squalus
acanthias and S. mitsukurii on blackmouth catsharks collected during scientific surveys undertakenin
different years. The rationale of the chosen methodology was based on the calculation of genetic
distances between NADH2 sequences (1044bp long) derived from 595 species of elasmobranchs.
Our strategy focused on testing first SSRs markers developed on closely-related species. Then, we
assessed highly polymorphic markers developed on non-closely-related species. After a pilot gradient
amplification on few individuals from three different geographic macro-areas, we screened a total of
24 samples at the established conditions. To date, 16 microsatellite loci have been classified as
potential candidates for the successful cross-amplification on Atlantic and Mediterranean samples of
G. melastomus. These candidate loci will be applied in the population genetic analysis delineated in
the Atlantic Ocean (two sites) and in the Mediterranean Sea (five sites). Hopefully, the higher
resolution power of the markers chosen for this study will be able to disclose any signal of genetic
structure of the blackmouth catsharks and will contribute to improve the knowledge on deep-sharks.




                                                     58
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


           Recent attacks by White Shark in the Strait of Messina

        Achille DE SANCTIS1, Antonio DI NATALE2, Gianni INSACCO1, Bruno ZAVA1,3
               1
                   Museo Civico di Storia Naturale, via degli Studi 9, 97013 Comiso (Ragusa), ITALY
                                 2
                                   Aquastudio, via Trapani 6, 98121 Messina, ITALY
                       3
                        Wilderness Studi Ambientali. Via Cruillas, 27, 90146 Palermo, ITALY
                                             wildernessbz@hotmail.com




According to Boldrocchi et alii (2017) the information on the diet of white sharks in the
Mediterranean inferred from stomach content analyses of 103 stomachs revealed among other prey
items 45 bony fish and 5 cartilaginous fish. The most common teleost prey groups were tuna (Thunnus
spp.) and swordfish (Xiphias gladius). In the Strait of Messina motorboats known as “feluche” or are
used to catch the swordfish. These have a 20-25 m high mast, on the top of which sighters and
helmsmen are placed: on the front there is a walkway up to 45 m long, at the end of which the
harpooner is standing. In this sector of the sea, the press often reports the presence of large sharks. In
the present note we report three shark attacks (documented by photographs) on Red Tuna and
Swordfish in the Strait. On April 5, 2017, during the ascent of a 70 kg line-caught red tuna, a white
shark launched an attack that documented a bite that removed about 30 kg of flesh from the ventral
region. The second attack took place on August 1, 2019 in the water in front of S. Agata of Messina
on a swordfish hooked by a feluca, “Felicia II”; the swordfish after being harpooned fell to the sea
bottom at a depth 80 metres, where it remained for about 20 minutes. Subsequently the fish it was set
on board allowing to record a bite that ha detached about 20 kg of flesh, the entire weight of the fish
was estimated at around 107 kg. The third attack was observed by the same fishermen on August 5,
2019. A swordfish swimming below the surface was successfully attacked by a white shark which
cut off its tail. The same swordfish was subsequently harpooned and hoisted on board on the feluca.




                                                         59
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


             An updated check-list of elasmobranchs of Calabria

    Francesco Luigi LEONETTI1, Gianni GIGLIO1, Armando SANTORO1, Ilaria BERNABÒ1,
     Gianluca MAURO2, Pierluigi RIZZO1, Faustino SCARCELLI1, Pietro GIOVANNELLI1,
       Agostino LEONE1, Primo MICARELLI3, Vincenzo CIRCOSTA1, Sandro TRIPEPI1,
                       Leonard J.V. COMPAGNO3, Emilio SPERONE1
        ¹ Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende (CS), ITALY
                                          ²Amphibian Diving, ITALY
                  3
                    Sharks Studies Center – Scientific Institute, Massa Marittima (GR), ITALY
                                        francescoluigi.leonetti@unical.it




Despite Calabria represents an interesting study area due to its geographic position, nothing is known
of the presence of sharks and rays in this region. Data presented in this work come from nineteen
years of opportunistic fishing surveys (from 2000 to 2019). Our data shows that 53 species of
elasmobranchs are present in Calabrian seas: 30 of these are sharks, 22 are rays. To these, 1 species
of Chimaeras must be added. All they represent about the 50% of species reported for the
Mediterranean. The more widespread encountered species were Hexanchus griseus, Scyliorhinus
canicula, Prionace glauca, Raja asterias and Raja clavata. Very interesting is also the presence and
distribution in the study area of species such as Cetorhinus maximus, Carcharodon carcharias, Isurus
oxyrhincus, Sphyrna zygaena and Mobula mobular. Also, information on localities and specimens
has been presented. We report also new records of Alopias superciliosus, Carcharhinus obscurus and
Sphyrna mokarran.




                                                     60
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


                                   The diet of deep-sea sharks

                                  Ulrich MARTIN1, Jérôme MALLEFET1
           1
               Earth and Life Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-La-Neuve, BELGIUM
                                              Ulrich.martin@uclouvain.be




The deep-sea can be defined as the part of the oceans below 200 meters. The organisms living there
can be qualified as deep-sea organisms. However, a lot of these organisms display vertical movements
bringing them above 200 meters, making it difficult to classify them. Deep-sea organisms are thus
considered here to be organisms spending most of their life cycle below 200 meters. Due to the
technical difficulties linked to deep-sea study, a lot remains to be discovered about the organisms
living in the depths of the oceans. The trophic structure and interactions inside the deep-sea food-
webs remain poorly known for a lot of taxa, including deep-sea sharks.
Here, we first try to separate the known shark species between deep-sea and surface species. We then
try to review the available knowledges on deep-sea sharks’ diet. Most of the information come from
stomach contents but the use of more recent techniques is increasing in order to assess deep-sea
sharks’ trophic ecology. Stable isotope analyzes and fatty acid profiles have proved to provide useful
information in this regard and have been included in our review.




                                                       61
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


    Effect of environmental and temporal variables on the relative
 abundance of Carcharhinus falciformis and Sphyrna zygaena in Cabo
                         San Lucas, Mexico

        Francisco MASCAREÑO-SUAREZ1, Clara CALATAYUD1, Jacopo BRUNETTI2,
                Miguel Ángel ELICECHE-CONSTANTINI2, James KETCHUM3
                             1
                                 Fundación México Azul, Mexico City, MEXICO
                                  2
                                    Cabo Shark Dive, Cabo San Lucas, MEXICO
                                     3
                                       Pelagios Kakunjá A.C., La Paz, MEXICO
                                               kiko.masua@gmail.com




Environmental factors have an important effect on sharks. It has been observed that the horizontal
and vertical movements of these animals, as well as their distribution, abundance, and use of habitat,
can be influenced by biotic and abiotic factors. Due to the fact that pelagic sharks possess specific
environmental preferences, and the area of Cabo San Lucas is characterized by drastic oceanographic
variability between the warm and temperate seasons, we expect the relative abundance of these
organisms to be influenced by environmental factors, especially temperature and chlorophyll
concentration. The main goal of this study was to determine which environmental and temporal
variables (month and hour) have significant influence over the relative abundance of Carcharhinus
falciformis and Sphyrna zygaena in Cabo San Lucas. To do this, submarine censuses were completed,
where we registered the relative abundance of these species, as well as environmental factors such as
sea surface temperature, wind speed, and water color. Also, satellite data regarding chlorophyll a
concentration was downloaded. These variables were incorporated into generalized linear models
(GLM), where the relative abundance was the response factor. For C. falciformis, we found
significant differences for temperature, chlorophyll concentration, month of the year, and hour (GLM,
p<0.001). Its relative abundance was greater with warm waters (29.7±0.3ºC), whereas it was lower
with high concentrations of chlorophyll (0.15±0.002 mg/m3). Also, they were more abundant during
Autumn and between 5 and 6 pm. In contrast, water color was the only variable that showed
significant differences for S. zygaena (GLM, p<0.01), with green water resulting in greater relative
abundance. This is the first study to characterize the abundance and temporality of two highly
exploited shark species in the region, and we found differences amongst them. Our results give
valuable information in terms of management and conservation efforts in the area.




                                                    62
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


    Preliminary data on population trends of Great White Shark,
 Carcharodon carcharias (Linnaeus, 1758), in Gansbaai (Southafrica)
                      between 2009 and 2019

        Primo MICARELLI 1, Davide BONSIGNORI1,3, Francesca Romana REINERO1/2,
                                   Emilio SPERONE2
                                 1
                                   Sharks Studies Center – Scientific Institute, ITALY
              2
                  Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, ITALY
                    3
                      Dipartimento Scienze della vita e ambiente. Politecnico delle Marche, ITALY
                                           direzione@centrostudisquali.org




Since 2000, the CSS team (Sharks Studies Center), as part of the project: "Ecology and Ethology of
the Great White Shark", has been collecting ethological data during Scientific Expeditions organized
in South Africa in Gansbaai, 200 km east of Cape Town. In Gansbaai Bay and around Dyer Island
and Geyser rock, there is a large population of White Sharks that can be observed thanks to the support
of local ecotourism operators authorized to reach the best field observation sites. Research activities
about ethological and ecotoxicological analyses, covered between 2003 and 2019, were developed in
collaboration with: University of Calabria and Siena in Italy and Stellenbosch University in South
Africa. In order to enable proper data collection, it was necessary to develop techniques to identify
white sharks that consist mainly of the collection of various biometric and environmental data in
special sheets, as well as photographs of animals with special attention to the dorsal fins. After the
first years of optimization of the techniques and of staff involved, it was necessary to identify the
individual specimens and, between 2009 and 2019, it was possible to create a db. Since 2009 to 2019,
between march and may, 423 different white sharks were catalogued for a total of 440 hours of field
observations from the boat and 220 hours of observations from the cage, including 99 photographs
of unique dorsal fins. In this work the preliminary results, related to the trends of the population
present in Gansbaai Bay are presented and discussed.




                                                        63
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


         Sharks in hot waters: effects of a simulated marine heatwave
            over the foraging behaviour of a temperate catshark

       Catarina P. SANTOS1, Maria R. PEGADO1, Dayanne RAFFOUL1,2, Marta KONIECZNA1,
                        Paulo JORGE1, Pedro C. MIRANDA3, Rui ROSA1
   1
     MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Laboratório Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências da
             Universidade de Lisboa, Avenida Nossa Senhora do Cabo 939, 2750-374 Cascais, PORTUGAL
                               2
                                 Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Milano, ITALY
3
  Instituto de Biofísica e Engenharia Biomédica, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, PORTUGAL
                                                   draff016@uottawa.ca



Marine heatwaves (MHWs) are known to have large-scale implications over entire ecosystems,
however, their effects over key predators, such as elasmobranchs, are still poorly understood.
Although multiples studies have revealed several developmental, physiological, and behavioural
implications of temperature increase in this group, this has yet to be addressed in an MHW context.
In the present study, we investigated the effects of a simulated MHW over the foraging behaviour of
juvenile temperate sharks (Scyliorhinus canicula). Treatment conditions were chosen to reflect a
realist MHW scenario based on previous events detected in the wild (15 days, Δ 3 °C above
climatological normal; category II). Following exposure, the animal food intake, foraging motivation
and response to both olfactory and electrical cues were assessed. While no changes were observed in
food intake, cue response, and foraging time, there was an increase in the number of turns and biting
events. These behavioural changes may indicate changes in foraging efficiency, which not only have
the potential to undermine the coping capacity of shark juveniles but also to induce changes in the
predation dynamics. As anthropogenic climate change continues unabated, MHWs are expected to
increase in frequency, duration and intensity, which may further challenge the foraging efficiency of
these key predators, with potential cascading consequences in ecosystems already subjected
increasing pressure.




                                                      64
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


                      Behavioural complexity in white sharks:
                       influence of age, sex and environment

     Emilio SPERONE1, Angelo CAROTENUTO2, Lorenzo LEPORATI, Giuseppe RIJLLO1,
       Gianni GIGLIO1, Ylenia FABIETTI1, Sharon CHIRIACO1, Vincenzo CIRCOSTA1,
         Luna GRAZIADIO1, Chiara SPADARO1, Agnese TIGANI1, Sandro TRIPEPI1,
                     Primo MICARELLI3, Leonard J.V. COMPAGNO3
        ¹ Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende (CS), ITALY
                        ²Department of Biology, University “Federico II”, Naples, ITALY
                  3
                    Sharks Studies Center – Scientific Institute, Massa Marittima (GR), ITALY
                                            emilio.sperone@unical.it




From 2005 to 2018 the individual surface behaviour of bait-attracted white sharks during ecotourism
activites has been studied off Dyer Island Nature Reserve (South Africa). Observations were made
from a commercial cage-diving boat both by observers and by a drone. A total of 235 white sharks
has been identified. The individual behavioural units observed were: parading, bait following, visual
inspection, breach, tail slap, tail stand, spy hop, repetitive aerial gaping, and head-up vertical
emerging. We compared the exhibition of these behaviors and the complexity of the ethograms to
both biological (sex, age) and environmental (tides, cloud cover, underwater visibility, sea surface
conditions, temperature, time of the day) factors. We observed no correlation between behavior and
sex of the white sharks, while a significant correlation was observed comparing ethograms of mature
and immature white sharks: young sharks performed more complex ethograms with a higher number
of behavioural units than adult ones. Regarding the effects of environmental conditions, the sequence
and structure of individual behaviors were affected in particular by cloud cover and tides.




                                                     65
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


   Occurrence of the basking shark (Cetorhinus maximus) in French
   waters. 20 years of data from a public sightings recording scheme

                                   Eric STEPHAN1 and Alexandra ROHR1
              1
                  Association Pour l’Etude et la Conservation des Sélaciens (APECS), Brest, FRANCE
                                                  asso@asso-apecs.org




Since 1998, a public basking shark sightings recording scheme is established in French waters. The
aim is to gather simple data on occurrences to locate any sightings hotspots and, in the long term, to
detect possible variations in spatial and seasonal distribution of the sightings. Highlighting such areas
could help to minimize conflict between this species of conservation concern and human activities.
This type of projects involving members of the public are recognised for contributing also in terms
of public awareness. This is something important to make possible the implementation of new
measures to better protect basking sharks.
We analysed data collected between 1998 and 2017 (20 years). 1857 sightings representing 2409
sharks were recorded. Data were analysed in term of spatial, inter-annual and seasonal distribution.
Inter-annual and seasonal distribution were investigated globally and for several geographical areas
(Mediterranean Sea, Bay of Biscay, Celtic Sea, Channel and south North Sea).




                                                        66
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


           First insights into the trophic ecology of young White Sharks
           (Carcharodon carcharias) in Baja California waters, Mexico

 Elena TAMBURIN1,2, Fernando R. ELORRIAGA-VERPLANCKEN1, Colombo ESTUPIÑAN-
MONTAÑO1,2, Daniel J. MADIGAN3, Alberto SÁNCHEZ-GONZÁLEZ1, Toby DALY-ENGEL4,
      Mauricio HOYOS PADILLA5,6, Michelle WCISEL7, Felipe GALVÁN-MAGAÑA1
            1
            Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, MÉXICO
                           2
                             Fundación Alium Pacific, Cra. 26 No. 5C–13, Cali, COLOMBIA
   3
     Gulf of California International Research Center, Loma los Frailes S/N, Santa Rosalía, BCS 23920, MÉXICO
           4
              Florida Institute of Technology, Department of Ocean Engineering and Marine Sciences, USA
            5
              Pelagios-Kakunjá A.C, Sinaloa 1540. Col. Las Garzas, C.P. 23070, La Paz, B.C.S., MÉXICO
   6
     Fins Attached: Marine Research and Conservation 19675, Still Glen Drive Colorado Springs, CO 80908, USA
                                 7
                                   Michigan State University Museum, East Lansing, USA
                                              elenatambu2588@gmail.com




White sharks are usually defined as generalist predators, with a well described ontogenetic dietary
shift that occurs between the subadult and adult stages. Yet the majority of published studies have
focused on large and mature individuals, so the information about feeding habits is still lacking for
young white sharks. It is imperative to improve information about the trophic ecology of white sharks
across life-stages to better understand habitat shifts and their early life movements inside nursery
areas, which are determined by resources availability. This study provides the first insight into the
trophic ecology of young white sharks using stable isotopes analysis (SIA) in muscle tissues to
characterize prey contributions and ontogenetic changes in habitat use. We collected muscle of 21
white sharks from Sebastian Vizcaino Bay (SVB) during the period 2015-2018, including five
newborns, three YOY and three juveniles. White shark isotopic values did not vary by sex (δ N                   15



values: W = 52, p = 0.8 and δ C values: t = 0.25, p = 0.8) as well as age classes (δ N values: W =54,
                                13                                                          15



p = 0.4 and δ C values: t = -0.9, p = 0.4) and we did not find variation based on size classes for δ C
                13                                                                                              13



and δ N. However, we found changes in prey composition across white shark life stages, with
      15



significant changes throughout ontogeny. Mixing model indicate a high use of coastal areas for
foraging, which likely represents the shift from the embryo’s typical maternally-derived isotopic
signature incorporated in offshore foraging regions to the postpartum isotopic composition,
incorporated by neonates from inshore nursery habitats, including SVB. This study reinforces the
assertion that coastal areas, like SVB and the prey preferences that take place in this area (from
previous research) are critical for the development and to the successful foraging of young white
sharks, providing relevant knowledge regarding this species.




                                                      67
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


      Composition of the diet of three Etmopterus species off Angola

                                  Diana ZAERA¹, Claudia JUNGE¹

                                  ¹Institute of Marine Research, NORWAY
                                            diana.zaera-perez@hi.no




Three species of lantern sharks occur in Angolan waters: Etmopterus polli, E. pusillus, and E. spinax,
along the continental slope at depths down to 1000 m. As part of the regional cooperation between
Norway and Angola annual surveys were carried out on board the R/V Dr Fridtjof Nansen. During
these surveys, 4162 individuals were collected, Total length (TL), sex, maturity and stomach content
were recorded. The specimen’s length range was: 10 to 27 cm TL for E. polli, 10 to 55 cm TL for E.
pusillus and 10 to 35 cm TL for E. spinax. Food items were identified to the lowest possibly taxon,
weighed, measured and grouped into three taxonomic groups: teleosts, cephalopods, crustaceans and
remains (e.g. squid beaks, scales and otoliths). Prey importance was evaluated by using the index of
relative importance (IRI), expressed as percentage (%IRI). To determine if there were significant
diﬀerences in stomach contents between sexes and maturity stages, multivariate analysis of variance
(MANOVA) were done. The dependent variable used was the Index of Relative Fullness (IRF).
Preliminary results show that these species consumed a relatively wide range of prey items belonging
to three major groups: teleosts (10 families), crustaceans (7 families), and cephalopods (4 families).
For all three Etmopterus species, cephalopods were the most frequent prey. The other categories
varied in importance in the diet by species and life history stage. There were no significant differences
in the diet of males and females, but we found an ontogenetic dietary shift, reflected in the importance
of teleosts between immature and mature specimens. E. polli had the highest dietary diversity and
seem to feed mainly on fast moving prey. This study provides the first quantitative investigation of
the diets of three species of sharks belonging to the Etmopteridae family off Angola.




                                                   68
          SESSION III
ELASMOBRANCHS AS BIOINDICATORS




              69
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


              Organochlorine compounds in several species of shark
                    sampled in three different world areas

       Guia CONSALES1, Daniele CAGNAZZI2, Primo MICARELLI3, Sandro TRIPEPI4,
Emilio SPERONE4, Matt Kenyon BROADHURST5, Simone RIZZUTO6, Francesca SCHILLACI1,
                        Daniele COPPOLA1, Letizia MARSILI1,7
                1
                  Department of Physical, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Siena, ITALY
  2
      Marine Ecology Research Centre, School of Environment, Science and Engineering, Southern Cross University,
                                                       AUSTRALIA
                       3
                         Sharks Study Center, Aquarium Mondo Marino, Massa Marittima, ITALY
             4
               Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Science (DiBEST), University of Calabria, ITALY
           5
             NSW Department of Primary Industries, Fisheries Conservation Technology Unit, AUSTRALIA
                                6
                                  Lancaster University - Lancaster Environment Center, UK
                            7
                              Inter-University Center of Cetacean Research (CIRCE), ITALY
                                                consales@student.unisi.it




Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) such as organochlorine compounds (OCs) are still exploited in
some countries both for special permit and for the non-regulation of these products. Marine apex
predators like sharks have the potential to accumulate and biomagnify OCs due to their position in the
trophic food web. In this study we analyzed hexachlorobenzene (HCB), dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane
and its metabolites (DDTs) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in 59 muscle samples from by-caught
and free ranging sharks of 6 different species collected in 3 different areas: Mediterranean Sea,
northern New South Wales (Australia) and Dyer Island (South Africa). Overall, South African
specimens were the most impacted by PCBs and Mediterranean species by DDTs. Nevertheless, ratio
between pp’DDE/pp’DDT in South African sharks suggested a recent use of this xenobiotic along
with DDT fingerprint in Australian specimens, while unusually high values of op’ DDT isomers are
probably linked to the use of an industrial (non-insecticidal) DDT.




                                                         70
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


  From purse seine bycatch data to population trends: deriving an
abundance index for the silky shark based on its associative behaviour
             with floating objects in the Indian Ocean
           Alexandra DIALLO1, Mariana TRAVASSOS TOLOTTI1, Philippe SABARROS1,
                           Laurent DAGORN1, Manuela CAPELLO1
      1
          Institut de Recherche pour le Developpement (IRD), UMR MARBEC (IRD, Ifremer, Univ. Montpellier,
                                                CNRS), Sete - FRANCE
                                                 alexandra.diallo@ird.fr




Classified as vulnerable to near-threatened on the IUCN red list, the silky shark, Carcharhinus
falciformis is a pelagic species. The species is vulnerable to overfishing due to its spatial distribution
and biological characteristic. Using data from French and Spanish tropical tuna purse seine fishery,
this study proposes a new method to derive an abundance index for silky shark’s populations in two
areas of the Indian Ocean. Two models were used: the first one describes the dynamics of sharks
associated to floating objects (FOBs) used by tuna purse seiners in a social and in a non-social case.
The second one illustrates the exchanges of individuals between the FOB-associated population and
an external pool of sharks. The parameters estimated of the first model were obtained with fitting
analysis. They were then integrated to the second model, allowing to derive an abundance index for
the silky shark in statistical units of space and time and therefore the construction of temporal series
of the population trend. This methodology has the potential to be applied to many other species
associating with FOBs and serve as a tool for fisheries management.




                                                       71
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


 Challenging the data and status quo: the case of deepwater species in
   the high north – do we need dedicated elasmobranch surveys?

                 Claudia JUNGE1, Marlén K. MYRLUND1, Ole Thomas ALBERT1
                            1
                                Institute of Mairne Research IMR, Tromsø, NORWAY
                                                 claudia.junge@hi.no




Deepwater species are in general more difficult to study compared to species in shallower waters due
to the difficulty of access. This is limiting many studies to determining the presence and population
composition at a very specific timepoint only, that is, the timepoint of catch, usually via a trawl. The
power of such data therefore lies in the establishment of time series with many repeated measurements
over a long time span, ideally also covering a large enough spatial area to capture the entire population
range. We analysed >30 years of survey data from the Institute of Marine Research in Norway
spanning minaly the North Sea and the Norwegian Sea focussing on deepsea sharks, skates and
chimaera. We focussed on annual or bi-annual survey series that have been ongoing for at least 25
years. All survey series are designed to monitor the population status of commercial species like
redfish, greenland halibut and shrimps and are based on trawl catches. Species-specific distributions,
and changes over time, can be detected, as well as developments of population composition (e.g. size
and gender) by such time series. However, critical information like presence/absence and continuous
distribution along different habitat types are typically not possible to assess, and neither are “realistic”
number for species not typically caught in trawls. We would like to present a few discussion points
about the pro’s and con’s for dedicated chondrichthyan surveys and possible methodological
additions to existing surveys, including the critical question about cost/benefit for e.g. rare, threatened
or indicator species.




                                                      72
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


          Using a coastal shark species as sentinel in marine pollution
                             biomonitoring surveys

         Alexandre MARQUES1, Luís M.F. ALVES1, Marco F.L. LEMOS1, Sara C. NOVAIS1
  1
      MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, ESTM, Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, 2520-641, Peniche,
                                                 PORTUGAL
                                            sara.novais@ipleiria.pt




Marine contamination is worse than ever. To have an indication of stress or susceptibility,
understanding how contamination correlates with key biological endpoints is essential. Sharks tend
to accumulate high amounts of contaminants throughout their lives, bioaccumulating pollutants
present in the water and biomagnifying the pollutants from their prey. Many shark species are caught
and consumed all over the world, making them relevant for economical and public health reasons. To
understand possible consequences of contamination, the present work aimed to quantify the levels of
some metals in Scyliorhinus canicula and also measure biochemical biomarkers related with
oxidative stress and energy metabolism. Moreover, efforts were made towards understating how the
contamination-response patterns varied between lethal and less-invasive/non-lethal sampling. Sharks
caught off the coast of Portugal by a commercial trawling boat were sampled. For each individual,
levels of 13 metals were measured in both skin and muscle, while biochemical parameters were
measured in several tissues including muscle, liver, blood and skin. Arsenic (As), iron (Fe), and zinc
(Zn) had the higher mean values of all measured metals. There was a tendency for higher metal
accumulation in skin, with differences being found between life-stages and genders. Furthermore,
some analysed sharks surpassed stipulated guideline limits for human consumption of mercury (Hg)
and As. Regarding the biochemical responses, suitable biomarker candidates could be identified as
several significant correlations were observed between the physiological parameters and contaminant
accumulation levels. When comparing lethal and non-lethal sampling some promising similarities
were observed, especially when using skin biopsies, indicating good potential for being used as proxy
for deeper tissues in future biomonitoring efforts. This study further highlights the effectiveness of
combining biochemical parameters and pollutant body burden determinations to assess effects of
contamination and demonstrates the great potential of sharks to be used in biomonitoring studies of
the marine environment.




                                                        73
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

           Half a century of global decline in oceanic sharks and rays

     Nathan PACOUREAU1, Cassandra L. RIGBY2 Peter M. KYNE3, Richard B. SHERLEY4,
    John, C. CARLSON5, Daniel FERNANDO6, Malcolm P. FRANCIS7, Rima W. JABADO8,
 Sonja V. FORDHAM9, Katelyn B. HERMAN10, Kwang-Ming LIU11, Andrea D. MARSHALL12,
 Riley A. POLLOM1, Evgeny V. ROMANOV13, Colin A. SIMPFENDORFER2, Jamie S. YIN1,14,
                  Holly K. KINDSVATER14,15 and Nicholas K. DULVY1

       1
        Department of Biological Sciences, Earth to Ocean Research Group, Simon Fraser University, CANADA
   2
     Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries and Aquaculture & College of Science and Engineering, James Cook
                                                     University, AUSTRALIA
           3
             Research Institute for the Environment & Livelihoods, Charles Darwin University, AUSTRALIA
  4
    Environment and Sustainability Institute, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, UK
    5
      NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service, Southeast Fisheries Science Center, Panama City Laboratory, USA
                                               6
                                                 Blue Resources Trust, SRI LANKA
                   7
                     National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research, Wellington, NEW ZEALAND
                                     8
                                       Elasmo Project, Dubai, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
                       9
                         Shark Advocates International, The Ocean Foundation, Washington, DC, USA
                                             10
                                                Georgia Aquarium, Atlanta, GA, USA
              11
                 Institute of Marine Affairs and Resource Management, Taiwan Ocean University, TAIWAN
                                      12
                                         Marine Megafauna Foundation, Truckee, CA, USA
                              13
                                 CAP RUN - NEXA, 97420 Le Port, Île de la Réunion, FRANCE
                              14
                                 Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Natural Resources, USA
       15
          Department of Fish and Wildlife Conservation, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, USA
                                                      n.pacoureau@gmail.com




Overexploitation is the primary cause of fish extinction risk, yet individual species declines are
difficult to track, particularly in the high seas. This knowledge gap impedes progress towards Aichi
Biodiversity Targets and Sustainable Development Goals. We take advantage of newly available
timeseries for 53 timeseries of 18 species of oceanic sharks and rays to measure changes in abundance
by calculating the Living Planet Index. Worldwide, the abundance of oceanic sharks and rays has
declined by 71% since 1970, with the steepest ongoing decline occurring in the Indian Ocean. Recent
catch quotas, prohibitions, and international trade regulations provide some hope, yet without a
drastic improvement in implementation of management there is a real risk of worldwide collapse of
these populations and a disruption of their ecological function.




                                                        74
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


Bioaccumulation and trophic transfer of Cadmium in Brown smooth-
hound Mustelus henlei in Las Barrancas, Baja California Sur, Mexico

  Laura PANTOJA1, Ana Judith MARMOLEJO1, Felipe GALVÁN-MAGAÑA1, Arturo TRIPP1,
                       Fernando ELORRIAGA1, Laura ARREOLA2
              1
                Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas Instituto Politécnico Nacional, La Paz, MEXICO
   2
       Centro Interdisciplinario de Investigaciones y Estudios sobre Medio Ambiente y Desarrollo, Ciudad de Mexico,
                                                           MEXICO
                                                 lali.pantoja1990@gmail.com




We analyzed the concentration of cadmium in the mesopredator Mustelus henlei in an area influenced
by a natural deposit of phosphorite and by coastal upwellings. Both processes provide Cd in a natural
way. In the Las Barrancas, Mexico, M. henlei is one of the most important coastal sharks in the
artisanal fishery of the region, representing an important source for human consumption. Due to the
risk that it may constitute for human health, it is necessary to know the concentrations of Cd in muscle
and liver, the risk to consumers and evaluate the biomagnification of this element in the trophic chain.
The concentrations of Cd in the muscle of M. henlei were lower than the limits of detection, then the
meat of this species does not constitute a risk to human health. However, the liver hade average
concentrations of 0.96 µg g-1 (0-6.07, min-max), these values are above what is established by the
official Mexican Norm, probably due to the high influence of the phosphorite deposits present, and
to the upwelling events in the study area. The Mann-Whitney U test showed that had statistically
significant differences in Cd between females 0.65 µg g-1 (0.26-4.85, min-max) and males 1.21 µg g-
1
  (0.43-6.07, min-max): this is probably ta consequence of the metabolic characteristics of each sex.
The linear regression showed that there was no relationship between the length of M. henlei and the
Cd concentration: this let speculate that probably there is no bioaccumulation of the Cd in the liver
as the organisms increase in size. The analysis of Cd in the main prey of M. henlei using the factor of
biomagnification (FBM) indicated that red crab (P. planipes) with respect to M. henlei was: FBM=
1.08; whereas the chub mackerel (S. japonicus) was 4.57, which indicates a higher biomagnification
of this element in chub mackerel.




                                                          75
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


           First determination of organochlorine pollutants (OCs)
                   in oceanic manta rays, Mobula birostris
     Tania PELAMATTI 1,2, Edgar M. HOYOS PADILLA2, Iliana A. FONSECA PONCE 1,3,
                 Lorena RIOS MENDOZA4, Rogelio GONZALEZ ARMAS1,
             Ana J. MARMOLEJO RODRIGUEZ1, Felipe GALVÁN MAGAÑA1.
                                    1
                                   CICIMAR-IPN, La Paz, (BCS), MÉXICO
                                2
                                  Pelagios Kakunjá, La Paz, (BCS), MÉXICO
                     3
                       Proyecto Manta Pacifico Mexicano, Puerto Vallarta, (JAL) MEXICO
                            4
                              University of Wisconsin-Superior, Superior (WI), USA
                                             tpelamatti@gmail.com




Oceanic manta rays Mobula birostris, are broadly distributed in tropical and temperate waters and
their populations are in decline worldwide. In the Mexican Pacific Ocean, they are protected from
fishing activity, with a permanent ban for their capture, possession and commerce in the whole
country. For this reason, data on their ecology and toxicology must be obtained in non-invasive ways
and the biopsies taken from free-ranging animals are a useful tool for toxicological studies. Data on
persistent organochlorines (OCs) in sharks and rays are scarce, in manta rays are unknown.
Occupying a low trophic level, manta rays could be an early sentinel for the contamination levels in
the area. Although many of these persistent organic pollutants are nowadays banned in many
countries of the world because of their negative effects on wildlife, they are still found in the
environment due to their persistence and slow degradation. Concentrations of OCs such as
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and organochlorine pesticides (OCPs) were determined in skin and
muscle biopsies of free-ranging oceanic manta rays in Revillagigedo Archipelago and Banderas Bay,
where they aggregate in the Mexican Pacific Ocean. Biopsies were taken during scuba and freediving
using a pole spear and underwent chemical extraction and subsequent analysis with a gas
chromatograph equipped with mass spectrometer (GC-MS) to identify and quantify individual PCB
congeners and OCPs. PCBs were detected in biopsies, while no OCPs were detected in any sample.
This is the first time that persistent organochlorines are investigated in manta rays and represent a
baseline for future studies. OCs can interfere with reproduction in fish and could pose a serious threat
to the vulnerable populations of oceanic manta rays around the world.




                                                    76
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


      Trace elements concentration in target tissues of a population
      of lesser spotted dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula, from Central
                            Mediterranean Sea

  Francesca Romana REINERO1,2, Emilio SPERONE1, Primo MICARELLI2, Sandro TRIPEPI1,
     Marco MINERVINO1, Cristian MARCHIO1, Gianluca NANIA1, Laura BEVACQUA1,
                                  Donatella BARCA1
         1
             Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende (CS) ITALY
                                 2
                                   Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima (GR) ITALY
                                                 fr.reinero@gmail.com




Humans, in addition to represent a direct threat to sharks, also indirectly exerts a strong pressure on
these animals, due to the continuous release of polluting elements in the water and the atmosphere.
Sharks, as predators at the top of marine food chain, act as final receptors for a series of polluting
elements that are regularly discharged into the sea. The goal of this research was to delineate and
compare trace elements concentration rates in vertebrae, skin and liver of a population of lesser
spotted dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula, from Central Mediterranean. 75 sharks were collected in the
Tyrrhenian Sea, 12 miles off of Rocchette Punta Ala. 46 trace elements were analyzed in 75 vertebrae,
12 livers and 12 pieces of skin. Vertebrae were processed with LA-ICPMs, while liver and skin
through acid attacks combined with ICPMs. The most abundant and potentially toxic elements were:
lead, arsenic, manganese, zinc, nickel, copper, cadmium and iron. Lead, arsenic and manganese
showed highest concentrations in the vertebrae, due to the diet of the sharks that is composed of
crustaceans, bony fish and shellfish that accumulate many of these elements. Iron and nickel showed
highest concentrations in the skin of the samples, due to their presence in the water column, especially
along the coast where sharks were collected. At the end, cadmium, zinc and copper showed highest
concentrations in the liver, due to their ability to induce trace elements binding metallothionein (MT),
which chelates trace metals and reduce the concentration of cadmium.




                                                        77
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


                             How shiny are shark teeth?
                      Major element quantification in bioapatite

             Martina SAVIOLI2, Luca MEDICI1, Annalisa FERRETTI2, Simona CLO3,
                                  Daniele MALFERRARI2
         1
          Institute of Methodologies for Environmental Analysis, National Research Council of Italy, C.da S.
                            Loja-Zona Industriale, I-85050, Tito Scalo (Potenza), ITALY
2
  Department of Chemical and Geological Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via Campi 103, I-41125,
                                                  Modena, ITALY
                              3
                                MedSharks, Via Ruggero Fauro 82, 00197 Rome, ITALY
                                             martina.savioli@unimore.it




Elasmobranchs are among the most successful vertebrates in the Phanerozoic, with a stratigraphic
distribution ranging from the Silurian to Recent times and a global distribution. Like other vertebrates,
they share the use of bioapatite in making mineralized tissues. Bioapatite represents a unique archive
of physical and chemical environmental information. Indeed, bioapatite lattice can accommodate iso-
and hetero-valent substitutions during life or after burial and diagenesis, with a variation of the
chemical composition during geological time. Chemical and crystal-chemical data can be achieved
by different analytical tools, like laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-
ICPMS). As LA-ICPMS results are affected by physical-chemical preperties of the sample matrix,
an internal standard is usually required to correct and validate the analytical results. Unluckily, an
exclusive internal standard is so far missing for bioapatite, strongly affected by isomorphic
sobstitutions. A possible solution can be the calibration with external standards which, however, are
not so diffused. We propose herein a new method to prepare home-made matrix-matched calibration
standards to measure major element concentrations. The method has been tested on living and fossil
shark teeth. The final goal is the development of a reliable tool for chemical characterization by LA-
ICPMS on small sized samples, avoiding the use of electron microprobe, that is considered a more
appropriate technique, but which is more expensive, less diffused and, in any case, once again strictly
dependent on the calibrating standards. Our technique can be useful to study teeth of living
elasmobranchs in order to find possible chemical and crystal-chemical variation in bioapatite related,
for example, to specific habitat, age, gender, etc.




                                                       78
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


  Trace elements and isotopes analysis on historical samples of white
  sharks (Carcharodon carcharias) from central Mediterranean Sea.

        Laura BEVACQUA1, Edgar E. BECERRIL-GARCIA2, Fernando ELLORIAGA-
      VERPLANCKEN2, Diego JUARISTI-VIDEGARAY2, Francesca Romana REINERO1,2,
    Primo MICARELLI3, Felipe GALVAN-MAGANA2, Gianni GIGLIO1, Donatella BARCA1,
                           Sandro TRIPEPI1, Emilio SPERONE1

         1
             Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende (CS) ITALY
             2
             Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas Instituto Politécnico Nacional, La Paz, MEXICO
                                  3
                                    Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima (GR) ITALY.
                                              laura.bevacqua9@gmail.com



Both trace elements and isotopes analysis were performed on two samples of vertebrae of White
Sharks Carcharodon carcharias from Favignana Island (Sicily, central Mediterranean). For the trace
elements analysis, the ICP-MS associated by Laser Ablation allowed us to find 36 trace elements.
More samples were taken, on the same vertebrae, along a transect that goes from the most central part
of the vertebra to the distal one. Among these 36 trace elements we have been detected high
concentrations of Pb, Fe, Zn, Sr, Ba and U. Fluctuations of these elements can be caused by different
kind of processes such as variations in temperature, nutrition, uptake of urban pollutants and
proximity to industrial areas. The stable isotopes (δ15N and δ13C) analysis has been performed through
IRMS (Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometry) and allowed us to understand the trophic levels of
individuals. The two white shark vertebrae showed different isotopic values. The first individual
(seven growth layers) presented isotopic ranges from 9.6‰ to 10.8‰ (δ15N) and from -16.5‰ to -
13.0‰ (δ13C); this showed a mean ± SD value of 10.3 ± 0.4‰ for δ15N and -14.6 ± 1.3‰ for δ13C.
The second individual (five growth layers) presented isotopic ranges from 9.8‰ to 11.1‰ (δ15N) and
from -16.9‰ to -15.0‰ (δ13C), displaying a mean ± SD value of 10.8 ± 0.6‰ for δ15N and -15.8 ±
0.8‰ for δ13C. In terms of δ15N values, there were not significant differences (U = 6, p =0.07346)
between the two individuals; however, there were significant differences (t = -1.8, p =0.049256) in
δ13C values, both at a significance level of 0.05. The absence of differences between the trophic level
of the individuals could be related to the trophic level of their preys at the time of age. The differences
observed in the case of δ13C are probably correlated to the fact that the first shark was feeding near
the coast, while the other feed more offshore.




                                                         79
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


       Microbial infection in sharks as a bioindicator for the state of the
               environment in the eastern Mediterranean Sea

 Eyal BIGAL1,2, Danny MORICK1,2, Nadav DAVIDOVICH3, Natascha WOSNICK4, Ziv ZEMAH
                   SHAMIR1,2, Dan TCHERNOV1,2, Aviad P. SCHEININ1,2
  1
      Department of Marine Biology, Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, ISRAEL
                       2
                         Morris Kahn Marine Research Station, University of Haifa, Haifa, ISRAEL
                                    3
                                      Israeli Veterinary Services, Bet Dagan, ISRAEL
            4
              Departamento de Zoologia, Centro Politécnico, Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, BRAZIL
                                                   eyalbigal@gmail.com




Streptococcus agalactiae (group B streptococcus; GBS) is a zoonotic agent that has a wide range of
hosts including both bony and cartilaginous fishes. We describe meningoencephalitis as a result of S.
agalactiae (serotype Ia) infection in a female sandbar shark (Carcharhinus plumbeus; Nardo, 1827)
that stranded on the eastern Mediterranean coast of Israel in 2018. Based on post-mortem
examination, histopathology, and bacterial identification, we conclude that this pathogen was the
etiologic agent. C. plumbeus is an endangered (EN) species in the Mediterranean Sea according to
the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red list, with a decreasing number of
mature individuals in the population. Information on pathogen prevalence in apex marine predators
could inform about potential risks to threatened species and provide indication on the state of the
environment in this region. Our findings improve current knowledge about the health status of sharks
and warrant further research into the interaction between microbial and high-level organisms in the
marine environment.




                                                         80
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


           Cartilaginous fish as bioindicator in the Algerian basin

                           Sara LADOUL1, Sabrina KEFIL2, Farid HEMIDA1
                                   1
                                     ENSSMAL, Dely-Ibrahim, Algiers, ALGERIA
                2
                    Laboratory of Biodiversity and Environment, USTHB, FBS, Algiers, ALGERIA
                                             sladoul.enssmal@gmail.com



Pollution of marine organisms by heavy metals can occur by direct contamination via the environment
or by ingestion of contaminated preys. In order to monitor ecosystems by apprehending their
disturbances, it is important to identify bio-indicator species potentially capable of informing about
the quality of the environment in which they live. Some sharks and rays as Mustelus sp., Scyliorhinus
canicula (Linné, 1758) and Raja sp. may be used as potentially bioindicators. Closely related and
part of the same communities, these species occur in the same habitat, each one occupying a distinct
ecological niche whose functioning is defined by competition or by prey-predator system. These
cartilaginous fish belong to the characteristic community of Diplodus vulgaris (Sparidae). The
Thalassa campaign data were used and related to distribution, species diversity and associated fauna.
These results are provided by behavioral studies (abundance, spatial distributions, communities), and
monitoring of this bony fish, and are also a first step towards the ecosystem approach to fisheries
(EAF).




                                                      81
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


    Biomagnification of trace elements in the blue shark Prionace glauca
                      in Baja California Sur, Mexico

      Ariagna LARA LORENZO1, Felipe GALVÁN MAGAÑA1, Laura ARREOLA MENDOZA2,
             Fernando ELORRIAGA VERPLANCKEN1, Rogelio GONZÁLEZ ARMAS1,
                           Ana Judith MARMOLEJO RODRIGUEZ1
1
    Departamento de Pesquerías y Ecología Marina, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas del Instituto Politécnico
                               Nacional (CICIMAR-IPN), La Paz, Baja California Sur, MEXICO
    2
      Centro Interdisciplinario de Investigaciones y Estudios Sobre Medio Ambiente y Desarrollo del Instituto Politécnico
                                    Nacional (CIIEMAD-IPN), Ciudad de México, MEXICO
                                                      ariagna@gmail.com




One of the most abundant and consumed sharks worldwide is the blue shark, Prionace glauca. Due to
its high trophic position, it can accumulate large concentrations of potentially toxic elements in its
tissues and constitute a risk to human health due to its consumption. As the main route of uptake of
trace elements is gastrointestinal, the objective of this study was to determine the biomagnification
of mercury (Hg), selenium (Se) and cadmium (Cd) through the main preys of Prionace glauca, on
the coast Western Baja California Sur, Mexico. Low average levels of the three trace elements
analyzed in the shark muscle tissue were found (Hg = 0.43 ± 0.35 µg g-1 wet weight; Se = 0.53 ± 0.43
µg g-1 dry weight; Cd = 0.24 ± 0.81 µg g- 1 wet weight). These values are below the maximum
permissible limits so that their meat is suitable for human consumption. Among the female and male
individuals no statistically significant differences were found for any of the elements studied. The
main prey of the blue shark were the giant squid Dosidicus gigas and the prawn Pleuroncodes
planipes, being the latter who provided the greatest contribution of mercury to the blue shark and
Dosidicus gigas of selenium. In the case of cadmium, biomagnification did not occur because both
preys had higher concentrations of this metal concerning the shark.




                                                            82
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


         White blood cells number is correlated to parasitic charge
           in the small spotted catshark Scyliorhinus canicula

      Cristian MARCHIO1, Francesca romana REINERO1,2, Francesco Luigi LEONETTI1,
     Gianni GIGLIO1, Mariacristina FILICE1, Francesca RIVIELLO1, Marco MINERVINO1,
     Primo MICARELLI2, Emilio SPERONE1, Sandra IMBROGNO1, Concetta MILAZZO1
         1
             Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende (CS) ITALY
                                 2
                                   Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima (GR) ITALY
                                               cristian_marchio@alice.it




Hematology is now a useful diagnostic tool in human and domestic mammalian medicine and is
becoming such also in the clinical evaluation of fish. Most of the current knowledge of fish
hematology derives from research carried out on agnate organisms like missine and lampreys, on a
few species of elasmobranchs and on some species of teleosts, although standardized hematological
methods and reference intervals for elasmobranchs have not yet been established. The goal of this
research was to compare the number of white blood cells present in the specimens of a population of
lesser spotted dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula) from central Mediterranean Sea with the parasitic
charge. 75 sharks were collected in the Tyrrhenian Sea, 12 miles off of Rocchette Punta Ala, in
Tuscany. Helminth communities were analyzed in the stomach, spiral valve, liver, gills, mouth and
nostrils of all the sharks collected, while hematological analysis has been performed taking blood
samples from venous sinus of the cardiac cavity of 32 sharks. Complete blood analysis has been
performed for 10 samples, while for the remaining 22 only the leukocyte count was carried out using
the fluorescence flow cytometry method. All the hematological parameters were correlated with each
other, but just the correlation between the number of white blood cells and parasitic charge for the 32
sharks considered was extremely significant and inversely proportional, as the parasitized sharks
showed fewer white blood cells than the not parasitized ones. The possible explanation of this result
can be found in the immunosoppression from accumulation of trace elements (Hg, Pb, Cd, Cu, As,
Zn) in the tissues of lesser spotted dogfish, as already demonstrated in some studies carried out on
green frogs and bony fish.




                                                        83
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


       Vertebrae as novel target for trace elements accumulation in
             Small-spotted Catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula)

 Marco MINERVINO, Laura BEVACQUA, Cristian MARCHIO, Francesca Romana REINERO,
                        Donatella BARCA, Emilio SPERONE
                      Department of Biology, University of Calabria, Rende (CS) ITALY
                                      Marcominervino90@gmail.com




Elasmobranchs are top-predator organisms, essential to maintain trophic web equilibrium in the
marine environment. Therefore, fishery and pollutants represent a real threat for these organisms,
besides the high lipid content of their diet makes them bioaccumulators organism. Bioaccumulation
was previously studied in liver, gills, gut, but little is known about elasmobranch vertebrae. These are
an interesting target to study for their structure. Indeed vertebrae are made up of concentric rings, the
external are later formed and the inners are the oldest. For this reason, the vertebrae study could allow
to evaluate the correlation between pollutants absorption and life traits.
Small-Spotted Catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula) was chosen as model because its benthic habits and
its ecological importance make it a suitable candidate to study the environmental pollution.
Seventy-five specimens were collected in the ‘Golfo di Follonica’ (Italy).
To assess accumulation in vertebrae structure, we analyzed two different parts: the centre and the
more external ring. This helped us to denote differences between juvenile and adult stages
respectively. Trace element content was assessed through LA-ICP-MS.
Results showed a decrease in Pb accumulation during life stages, the same occurred for arsenic and
nickel. On the opposite, zinc concentration increases in the external section of vertebra compared to
the inner one. This changes could be due to different feeding habits of S. canicula. Indeed, the
juveniles feed on small crustaceans and mollusks, organisms known to accumulate arsenic, nickel.
On the other hand, adults use to pray fish, with a higher content of Zn. Our data confirm that vertebrae
are a reliable marker of pollutant-metals accumulation, and S. canicula is a good candidate for
pollution biomonitoring and shark’s conservation studies.




                                                    84
 Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


 POSTER CONTRIBUTION


                  Shark skin biopsy sampling as a potential non-lethal
                     and less-invasive marine biomonitoring tool

           Alexandre MARQUES1, Luís M.F. ALVES1, Marco F.L. LEMOS1, Sara C. NOVAIS1
    1
        MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, ESTM, Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, 2520-641, Peniche,
                                                   PORTUGAL
                                              sara.novais@ipleiria.pt



Anthropogenic derived contamination is a daily threat to marine resources. Long-living and slow
growing, higher trophic level animals like sharks are usually the most affected. Studies have been made
to assess the impacts of contamination on sharks, but they mostly rely on very invasive or even lethal
sampling. Non-lethal methods must be developed and optimized, with blood and skin biopsies being
already used with some success in large endangered animals like cetaceans. This work aimed to assess
the potential of skin biopsies to be used as sole tissues in the assessment of metal contamination and
biochemical responses in sharks, using the Atlantic lesser-spotted dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula) as
test species. A total of 74 specimens were captured of the shore of Portugal, aboard a commercial
trawling vessel, and sampled for skin and muscle once arrived at the lab (in the same day). A total of
13 metals, along with several energy metabolism and oxidative stress related biochemical responses
were measured. Overall, skin tissue tended to harbour greater metallic contamination when compared
to muscle. However, positive correlations were found between skin and muscle metal levels, across all
tested elements. Biochemical responses, mainly energy metabolism related, also seemed to be similarly
influenced by the same metal contaminants in both tissues. All correlations and interactions found in-
between metals and biomarkers point to a pattern of similar response both in deeper muscle and skin
biopsies. Therefore, this work highlights the potential of skin biopsy to be used as substitute for deeper,
more invasive (and lethal) muscle sampling. Studies like this one, encompassing comparisons between
sub cellular responses to contamination levels in deeper tissues and skin biopsies, are a crucial and
most needed step in validating non-lethal methodologies to be used in future efforts to gather
ecotoxicological data and to protect larger endangered shark species.




                                                          85
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


  Occurrence of anthropogenic litter in stomach contents of demersal
         elasmobranchs from the southern Tyrrhenian Sea
    Cristina PEDÀ1, Michela D’ALESSANDRO1, Federica LAFACE1, Pietro BATTAGLIA2,
     Pierpaolo CONSOLI2, Francesco LONGO2, Franco ANDALORO2, Teresa BOTTARI3,
    Saša RAICEVICH1, Silvio GRECO2, Giuseppe SABATINO4, Maria Teresa CACCAMO4,
                          Salvatore MAGAZÙ4, Teresa ROMEO1,2

                                         1
                                        ISPRA, Milazzo (ME), ITALY
                                        2
                                          SZN, Milazzo (ME), ITALY
                                        3
                                          CNR, Rome, ITALY
  4
    Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Physical Sciences and Earth Sciences, University of Messina,
                                                   ITALY
                                         mhldalessandro@gmail.com




To date, available information on marine litter ingestion in Mediterranean elasmobranchs is still very
poor, although these species have an important role in the marine trophic web as predators. This study
reports the anthropogenic litter ingestion in four elasmobranch species caught by trawlers and
longliners in the southern Tyrrhenian Sea: the lesser-spotted dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula (n= 27;
mean total length TL 40.5 ± 6.3 cm), the velvet belly dogfish, Etmopterus spinax (n= 16; mean TL
21.2 ± 7.7 cm), the blackmouth catshark, Galeus melastomus (n= 12; mean TL 20.7 ± 3.0 cm) and
the thornback ray Raja clavata (n= 6; mean TL 65.8 ± 2.8 cm). A total of 61 stomach contents were
examined by direct visual sorting at a stereo microscope in order to identify the anthropogenic litter.
Once isolated, litter particles were counted and categorized by shape, colour and size. Overall, 18
litter particles were identified from the stomach contents of 14 demersal elasmobranchs (23% of total
occurrence, O%). In details, litter items were recorded in seven S. canicula (O%= 25.9), four G.
melastomus (O%= 33.3), three R. clavata (O%= 50), whereas no litter ingestion was observed in E.
spinax. Transparent and white colours resulted the debris with the highest frequency of ingestion
(O%= 25). Fragments were the most common litter in stomachs of both S. canicula (O%= 87.5%)
and R. clavata (O%= 75), whereas in G. melastomus fragments and filaments occurred with the same
frequency (O%= 50). Most litter particles (55.5% of total debris) had a size less than 5 mm. This is
the first time that litter ingestion is observed in R. clavata in Mediterranean waters. Some of these
species could be considered as indicators for litter ingestion in marine demersal habitats.




                                                       86
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


   Morphological and molecular characterization of gastrointestinal
         parasites in Mustelus mustelus from Adriatic Sea

        Perla TEDESCO1, Andrea GUSTINELLI1, Monica CAFFARA1, Andrea MARSELLA2,
                Anna TOFFAN2, Eleonora CACCHI1, Maria Letizia FIORAVANTI1
           1
           Department of Veterinary Medical Sciences, Alma Mater Studiorum University of Bologna, ITALY
   2
       Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie, ITALY
                                               perla.tedesco@unibo.it




Increasing interest in the management and conservation of elasmobranchs highlights the importance
of acquiring further knowledge of their biology and ecology; in this respect, important information
can be derived from the analysis of their parasite fauna. Parasitological investigations focused on
elasmobranchs from Mediterranean Sea are scarce; the compilation of accurate and updated checklists
is further complicated by the occurrence of old records of infection and the doubtful identity of the
shark host. A healthy specimen of Common Smoothhound, Mustelus mustelus, (total length: 66 cm)
fished as bycatch in northern Adriatic Sea was subjected to a complete parasitological examination.
Collected parasites were processed for morphological and morphometric analyses aimed at
identifying them to the species level. Parasite identity was confirmed through amplification and
sequencing of 28S rDNA. Nematodes belonging to the species Acanthocheilus rotundatus (15
specimens) were recovered from the stomach and the proximal intestine, while cestodes belonging to
the species Calliobothrium verticillatum (5 specimens) were collected from the spiral valve.
Calliobothrium spp. are known to parasitize different species of Mustelus around the world’s oceans.
Particularly, C. verticillatum has been reported in M. mustelus from Northeastern Atlantic and only
one report dating back to the 50s on this parasite in M. mustelus from Mediterranean Sea exists. Our
results would therefore confirm the occurrence of this host-parasite association in Mediterranean
waters. Acanthocheilus rotundatus has been described infecting M. mustelus from Adriatic Sea based
on morphological evidence; our work provides the first sequence data of A. rotundatus from
Mediterranean Sea, since only sequences of specimens collected in extra-Mediterranean areas were
available so far. Updated knowledge on the parasite fauna of M. mustelus from Adriatic Sea would
contribute to elucidate aspects of the ecology, biology and health status of elasmobranchs from
Mediterranean Sea, providing useful information for their proper management and conservation.




                                                         87
          SESSION IV
CONSERVATION AND COMMUNICATION




              88
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


KEYNOTE SPEAKER


       Forty-five years of shark conservation: from "Jaws" to 2019




                                        Sarah L. FOWLER

                               Save Our Seas Foundation, SWITZERLAND
                                       Sarah@SaveOurSeas.com



Jaws, the novel, was published in 1974 and the film released in 1975. Forty-five years ago, about 800
species of sharks, rays and chimaeras were known to science and the global human population was
around 4 billion. Today, about 1,250 chondrichthyan fishes have been described and the human
population is roughly 7.5 billion. This presentation reviews the history of shark conservation and
management since the 1970s and current challenges faced as the year 2020 approaches.




                                                 89
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


INVITED SPEAKER


           Use of genomics for applied elasmobranch conservation




       Diana A. PAZMIÑO1,2, Lynne VANHERWERDEN2, Floriaan DEVLOO-DELVA3,4,
                                  Gregory E. MAES 2,5,6
             1
                 Galápagos Science Center, Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Galápagos, ECUADOR
                                        2
                                          James Cook University, AUSTRALIA
                    3
                      School of Biological Sciences – QMS, University of Tasmania, AUSTRALIA
                                   4
                                     Oceans and Atmosphere, CSIRO, AUSTRALIA
              5
                Laboratory of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Genomics, University of Leuven, BELGIUM
    6
      Laboratory for Cytogenetics and Genome Research, Center for Human Genetics, Genomics Core, BELGIUM
                                                dapazmino@usfq.edu.ec

The advent of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies has seen a transition from conservation
genetics to genomics (from gene to genome scales), which is informing our understanding of species and
improving conservation outcomes based on these insights. This technology has provided access to
thousands of genome-wide markers, collectively capable of providing reliable inferences about
demographic patterns and enabling detection of local adaptation. Examples of applied genomics in
elasmobranch conservation and forensics at different levels, from species to individuals are becoming
more common as we develop genomic resources for non-model species. For species identification, when
diagnostic external morphological characters are lacking, or when identifications rely on body parts, the
use of non-expensive techniques such as mtDNA sequencing is often used. However, when dealing with
closely related, recently diverged species, as is the case of the Galapagos (Carcharhinus
galapagensis) and dusky (C. obscurus) sharks, the combination of mtDNA and genome-wide diagnostic
markers is required to distinguish the species. This also allows other biologically relevant patterns of
genetic variation to be explored, such as those that arise due to hybridization. A first population
connectivity assessment of C. galapagensis in the Eastern Tropical Pacific resulted in the development of
1,873 high-resolution SNP markers. A selected subset of SNPs was further used to successfully assess
hybridisation patterns between this, and C. obscurus. Future steps include the use of such markers as
forensic tools to develop a cost-effective PCR-based essay to rapidly distinguish the two species from
carcases or body parts. Likewise, the development of worldwide genomic resources capable of detecting
population structure at large as well as fine geographic scales is crucial at the population level to identify
particular signatures of selection and local adaptation that can lead to provenience-detecting markers.
Finally, at the individual level the inference of the sex-determination systems in new species is leading
the way towards the identification of sex-linked markers that can aid sex identification from fin or tissue
samples. Current efforts using in silico and PCR validations are showing that SNP markers can be
effective at assigning the correct sex in at least twelve of the sixteen species tested. Applying fundamental
knowledge towards the development of molecular traceability tools is the logical and much needed step
towards shark conservation.


                                                     90
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


   A world platform to support data collection on endangered shark
                  species in the Mediterranean Sea

      Filippo BARGNESI1,2, Stefano MORO3,4, Agostino LEONE5, Francesco FERRETTI6,7
        1
         Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona ITALY
                                   2
                                     Cattolica Aquarium, Cattolica (RN), ITALY
               3
                 Department of Environmental Biology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome ITALY
               4
                 Department of Environmental Biology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome ITALY
     5
       Department of Biological, Geological & Environmental Sciences, University of Bologna, Ravenna ITALY
                        6
                          Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford University, Monterey (CA) USA
              7
                Department of Fish and Wildlife Conservation, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg (VA) USA
                                              f.bargnesi@pm.univpm.it




In the Mediterranean Sea, sharks are currently one of the less frequently observed groups of animals.
Scientific surveys do not provide enough observation effort to collect relevant data on the presence
and distribution of the species, and fisheries data have been historically scattered and rarely adequate
in terms of taxonomic resolution. Following the IUCN regional assessment 57% of the species are
listed as endangered and 25 % as still data deficient. New monitoring strategies need to take place in
the area to improve data collection, and new technologies can create a link between people and
scientists. Data management is crucial in these cases. Here we present sharkPulse, a collaborative
international project aiming to involve divers, fishermen, surfers, beachgoers and other ocean users
in sharing image-based sightings of sharks. To facilitate users participation the sharkPulse team has
developed a web platform (http:\\sharkpulse.org) and a mobile application (IOS and Android). All
the data collected are available and shared online with summary tables and distribution maps. To
break linguistic barriers and boost participation, the project has created national focal points in several
parts of the world (Italy, UK, New Zealand, South Africa, Greece). From 2016, the Italian national
focal point has focused his activity on the Mediterranean Sea, collecting more than 900 photographic
records of 35 shark species. Here we present a first exploration of these data and highlight some
emerging patterns: i) possible identification of strongholds for rare and endangered species; ii)
seasonal shifts in pelagic shark distributions; and iii) presence of newborns and immature specimens
for broad-ranging species such as the shortfin mako (Isurus oxyrinchus) for which these sightings are
more frequent (75% of the records) than adults. Integrated collection and analysis of these data can
improve scientific understanding of sharks in the Mediterranean Sea, fill the data gap that has
historically characterized the basin on these species, and stimulate conservation and recovery actions.




                                                      91
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


                  Shark and Ray Forensics, a conservation tool
                     for the Western Indian Ocean region

                    Tamaryn ASBURY1, Aletta BESTER-VAN DER MERWE1
                      1
                          Department of Genetics, Stellenbosch University, SOUTH AFRICA
                                                   aeb@sun.ac.za




Worldwide, ocean and coastal threat is driven by the rapid expansion of fisheries and global trade
markets, whereby overfishing activities and habitat degradation have severely altered elasmobranch
populations. The western Indian Ocean is an important conservation area for sharks and rays as this
region is a global hotspot for biodiversity and for threatened species. The harvesting of elasmobranchs
in this region is amongst others driven by the international shark meat and shark fin trade. In this
study, we assessed marine forensics as a tool for complementing traditional identification methods –
through the development of a mini-barcoding assay as well as High Resolution Melt (HRM) analysis,
relevant to elasmobranch species occurring in the western Indian Ocean region. This involved the
testing and optimisation of the standard barcoding region of the cytochrome oxidase c subunit 1
(COI), using traditional barcoding primers as well as two sets of nested PCR primers in a multiplex
assay. Preliminary results (only a 22% species identification success rate) indicated the limitations of
using only the traditional COI primers and warrented the inclusion of additional gene regions for
species identification of future shark forensic cases. In this study, a mini-barcoding multiplex assay
comprising three primer sets were optimised and applied to a wide range of shark forensic case
studies, involving confiscated shark fins possibly for illegal trade. Furthermore, a HRM approach
was validated based on six southern African houndshark species and further optimised for additional
commercially exploited species such as hammerhead S. lewini and S. zygaena, copper C. brachyurus,
dusky C. obscurus, bull C. leucas, blacktip C. limbatus and blue shark P. glauca. Ultimately, these
approaches can be combined to develop a relatively fast and cost-effective identification protocol that
can be applied to identify most, if not all, elasmobranch species involved in trade regionally.




                                                      92
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

   Reducing bycatch and mortality in the Med: the project proposal
        eLIFE (elasmobranch low impact fishing experience)

   Massimiliano BOTTARO1, Francesca BATTISTELLI2, Flavia BINDA3, Periklis KLEITOU4,
   Alessandro LUCCHETTI5, Carlotta MAZZOLDI6, Giovanni MOSCA7, Augusto NAVONE8,
                       Bruna VALETTINI9, Giulia VISCONTI10

¹Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn - Italian National Institute for Marine Biology, Ecology and Biotechnology, ITALY
                                                   ²Legambiente, ITALY
                                             ³Consorzio Mediterraneo, ITALY
                              ⁴Marine and Environmental Research (MER) Lab., CYPRUS
      5
        Italian National Research Council, Institute for Biological Resources and Marine Biotechnology, ITALY
                                  6
                                    University of Padua, Department of Biology, ITALY
                                                      7
                                                        Softeco, ITALY
                            8
                              Marine Protected Area of Tavolara-Punta coda Cavallo, ITALY
                                                9
                                                  Costa Edutainment, ITALY
                                     10
                                        Marine Protected Area of Isole Pelagie, ITALY
                                                massimiliano.bottaro@szn.it


Over-exploitation and fishery by-catch leads to an increasing decline of elasmobranchs worlwide;
with unpredictable consequences for the health and structure of the ecosystems
According to IUCN, the Mediterranean Sea is amongst the three top regions where the biodiversity
of sharks and rays is seriously threatened. Considering the European waters, the IUCN reveals that
half of the assessed elasmobranch species, 39 out of 73, are threatened at Mediterranean level.
Despite some recent efforts in EU to reduce shark by-catch and mortality (i.e., adoption of the
European Commission's Action plan for the Conservation and Management of Sharks, and adoption
of the Council Regulation (EU) 2017/127), the EC goals are far from being achieved, and
conservation actions need to be set up. Current legislation only prevents retention and trade,but not
the actual capture or the mortality that may occur as a result.
The factors that contribute to the by-catch and the mortality of elasmobranch during fisheries capture
are - in fact - many, but the major is the fishers’ attitude. The consciuous and responsible behavior of
the employees in commercial fishing activities is fundamental to mitigate the impact of their actions
on the marine biodiversity, cartilaginous fishes included.
The project eLIFE (elasmobranch low impact fishing experience), has been recently funded by the
EU’s LIFE programme for the protection of the enviornment. It aims to reduce the elasmobranch by-
catch and mortality by promoting best conservation practices in the context of the EU commercial
fishing activities in the Mediterranean Sea.
It targets several sharks listed as endengered or critically endengered in the Red List of the European
marine fishes of the IUCN and it includes the partecipation of 3 EU countries (Italy, Cyprus and
Greece). eLIFE is based on the direct involvement of the professional fishers, and will test the
efficiency of using low impact fishing gears and correct methods of manipulation for the
elasmobranch incidental caught, as well as the use of digital technology, like satellite tags and a
smartphone application to monitor the efficency of the conservation actions and to obtain new spatial
information.

                                                       93
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


                How key stakeholders can help secure the future
                   of the Critically Endangered Angelshark

          María Belén CARO1, Joanna BARKER1,2, Michael SEALEY1, Eva MEYERS1,4,
                               David Jiménez ALVARADO1,3
                                 1
                                    Angel Shark Project, CANARY ISLANDS
                          2
                            Conservation & Policy, Zoological Society of London, UK
                 3
                   EcoAqua, Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Islas Canarias, SPAIN
                      4
                        Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig, Bonn, GERMANY
                                          info@angelsharkproject.com



The Angelshark (Squatina squatina) was once widespread throughout the Eastern Atlantic and
Mediterranean Sea, but now is one of the most threatened fish in European waters. Indeed, the angel
shark family is identified as the second most threatened elasmobranch taxon after a global review of
extinction risk by the IUCN. A unique stronghold remains for the Angelshark in the Canary Islands,
but even here the species is under threat.
Given the importance of forging bonds with key stakeholders to secure the future of this species,
Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands (ASP:CI), a collaboration between Universidad de Las Palmas
de Gran Canaria, Zoological Society of London and Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander
Koenig, has developed a number of tools to engage interested parties and encourage them to provide
information to aid scientific research. Our focus is on the recreational sector, specifically divers and
fishers.
This year, ASP:CI has re-launched best practice guidelines in collaboration with the recreational
fishing sector to a) encourage fishers to safely release any accidentally caught Angelsharks, b) report
these encounters and c) gain the trust of the fishing community and raise the awareness on the species.
In addition, we completed the first Count the Angels event in Fuerteventura, which brings together
dive centres to complete a census of Angelsharks across the island via coordinated diving. A total of
7 dive centres participated, 24 Angelsharks sighted and over 882 diving hours were completed during
this event. This not only reinforces the bond with the diving community, but enables greater coverage
across large stretches of coastline to better understand Angelshark presence, and in the future,
calculate abundance metrics.
These tools will ensure and reinforce the bond between scientists and the recreational community, a
key task when working with a Critically Endangered species.




                                                     94
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

                      Longline fishery in a marine reserve –
              catching protected megafauna in the Galapagos Islands

 Florencia CERUTTI1, Nicolás MOITY1, Manuel DUREUIL2,3, Jorge RAMÍREZ-GONZÁLEZ1,
    Harry REYES4, Kayla BUDD1,5, José MARÍN-JARRÍN1*, Pelayo SALINAS-DE-LEÓN1,6

       1
           Department of Marine Biology, Charles Darwin Research Station, Charles Darwin Foundation, Av Charles
                                        Darwin s/n, Puerto Ayora, Galapagos, ECUADOR
            2
              Dalhousie University, Department of Biology, 1355 Oxford Street, Halifax, NS, B3H 4R2, CANADA
           3
             Sharks of the Atlantic. Research and Conservation Centre (ShARCC), Halifax, Nova Scotia, CANADA
             4
               Galápagos National Park Directorate, Av Charles Darwin s/n, Puerto Ayora, Galapagos, ECUADOR
                                5
                                  Department of Biology, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire, USA
                     6
                       Pristine Seas, National Geographic Society, Washington, District of Columbia, USA
                     *
                      Current Address: Fisheries Biology Department, Humboldt State University, California, USA
                                                   florenciacp@gmail.com




Marine megafauna (elasmobranchs, mammals, turtles, birds) is important from an ecological point of
view because it occupies upper trophic levels and is also often essential for marine tourism. Species
belonging to this group are often heavily impacted by fishing due to their longevity, late sexual
maturity and low reproductive output, which affect the capability to recover from depletion. In the
Galapagos, marine megafauna is protected throughout the marine reserve and is the main attraction
for marine tourism, generating millions of dollars in revenue annually. Multiple artisanal longlining
projects were carried out since the 1990s with the aim of redirecting fishing effort from the depleted
coastal-demersal species to pelagic fish, such as yellowfin tuna, Thunnus albacares and swordfish,
Xiphias gladius. All these projects have resulted in high bycatch of megafauna. Despite its importance
in the archipelago, megafauna is still being caught as bycatch in the longline fishery, without
independent scientific studies to evaluate its impact, largely due to poor objective definition, data
collection, and enforcement. To fill in this knowledge gap, we analyzed data of the fifth longline
fishing project (2012-2013) to describe the fishery, identify variables affecting bycatch, and suggest
mitigation strategies. This experimental project involved twelve fishing vessels, which deployed
42,007 hooks catching 4,893 individuals belonging to 33 species, mostly yellowfin tuna. Of those,
16 species were protected megafauna, particularly blacktip sharks, Carcharhinus limbatus and
oceanic manta, Manta birostris. These species were regularly captured during the two fishing seasons
and in all the four bioregions that occur in the archipelago, suggesting little potential to mitigate their
catch. As an alternative, we identified 14 hotspots where yellowfin tuna and swordfish could be
harvested through more selective fishing techniques. In an archipelago where the main economic
activity is marine wildlife tourism, the implementation of an extractive and unselective activity such
as pelagic longline fishing should be avoided to ensure the preservation of the Galapagos marine
ecosystem and its booming tourism industry.




                                                         95
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


          Using local ecological knowledge to reconstruct trends in
              elasmobranch populations in the Strait of Sicily

 Virginia CARROZZI1, Manfredi DI LORENZO1, Andrea SIMONETTI2, Francesco COLLOCA1
                                 1
                                     CNR-IRBIM, Mazara del Vallo, ITALY
                                      2
                                        University of Turin, Torino, ITALY
                                            francesco.colloca@cnr.it




Fishers have a rich knowledge of the resources and the environment in which they work, that is rarely
utilised to provide advice on the status of exploited populations. Fishers “local ecological knowledge”
(LEK) can be used to reconstruct species trends, like sharks, that currently are at very low biomass
due to overfishing. In this study we used the historical memories of Sicilian fishers to gather data on
change in fishing practices and capture of cartilaginous species in the Strait of Sicily over the last
decades. We conducted interviews with 27 retired trawl fishers from Mazara del Vallo harbour (SW
Sicily) using a pre-defined questionnaire with a series of open and fixed questions and comparing to
the present abundance. The questionnaire included specific questions about the trends they perceived
in cartilaginous fish occurence abundance between 1940s and 2000s (according to three main time
periods 1940-1960, 1961-1980 and 1981-2010), in order to facilitate the estimation of eventual
changes over time. A total of 29 species were mentioned by fishermen during interviews, including
large pelagic sharks (Carcharhinidae, Sphyrnidae and Lamnidae), mesopredatory demersal sharks
(Squalidae, Hexanchidae, Centrophoridae, Oxynotidae, Triakidae, Scyliorhinidae and Squatinidae)
and batoids. Overall shark catches were perceived to have diminished since the early 1940s: about
95% of fishers reported the decline of commercially important species (e.g. Mustelus spp.) and
indicated species that could have been depleted (e.g. Squatina spp., Sphyrna spp.).
Our study shows that LEK of fishers can be beneficial for reconstructing long-term population trends
of exploited species when traditional standard data on fisheries catch or species relative abundance
from surveys is limited or only available for recent periods. The results obtained cleary indicate the
rapid and alarming decline of elasmobranchs in the Strait of Sicily highlighting the need for urgent
conservation measures to be adopted.




                                                     96
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


       Molecular identification of endangered marine predators by
       barcoding ancient museum rostra of Mediterranean sawfish
                               populations

        Valentina CROBE1, Caterina BERGONZINI1, Elisabetta CILLI2, Alice FERRARI1,
         Agostino LEONE3, Francesco FERRETTI4, Fausto TINTI1, Alessia CARIANI1
         1
             Department of Biological, Geological & Environmental Sciences, University of Bologna, ITALY
                      2
                        Department of Cultural Heritage, University of Bologna, Ravenna, ITALY
                                   3
                                     AZTI, Marine Research Division, Derio, SPAIN
                    4
                      Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford University, Pacific Grove, California, USA
                                               valentina.crobe2@unibo.it




A growing concern in conserving threatened animals affected by human impact has been significant
worldwide. Among marine animals, sawfishes (Chondrichthyes, Pristidae) are considered one of the
most endangered families among elasmobranchs, resulting in extinction in many coastal areas around
the world, including the Mediterranean Sea. Here, sawfish occurred with two species, Pristis pristis
and P. pectinata, until the second half of the last century and are now considered Critically
Endangered/Possibly Extinct. The historical occurrence of sawfish in the area is documented by
bibliographic/ archival records and numerous preserved historical rostra available in museum
collections. In this study we attempted to genetically characterize the historical remains of sawfish
from several European museums and to enable, in the future, the preliminary investigation of their
evolutionary and ecological relationships with global samples.
A total of 80 rostra specimens, dated from 1813 to 1959 and catalogued as unknown origin or
Mediterranean (11), were collected from 11 European museums and were properly prepared for
ancient DNA genetic analysis. Taxonomic identification at the species level was obtained through
PCR amplification of small fragments (150 bp) of two mitochondrial markers commonly used for
species identification (i.e., the mitochondrial COI and the NADH2). Sequence comparison with
currently available ones from public repositories and phylogenetic tree analyses indicated that the
historical specimens belonged to four species, P. pristis, P. zijsron, P. pectinata, and Anoxypristis
cuspidata, with a high frequency of mismatches (69%) between molecular identification and species
museum cataloguing, when present. These preliminary data also showed the presence of two
sequence sub-clusters in the poorly barcoded species P. zijsron.
With the expansion of this initial analysis, we will contribute to increase the limited molecular data of
these critically endangered large predators and to exploit historical genetic data for reconstructing
phylogenetic/phylogeographic extent of the possibly extinct population of Mediterranean sawfish.




                                                        97
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


  Involving stakeholders in the evaluation of Atlantic shark fisheries
        management strategies and why they matter to sharks

                                        Thaya Mirinda DINKEL1
          ¹Department of Marine Sciences and Applied Biology, University of Alicante, Alicante, SPAIN
                                       thayamirindadinkel@gmail.com




Shortfin-mako (Isurus oxyrinchus) and blue shark (Prionace glauca) are the two most captured
pelagic shark species in the Atlantic Ocean. Since 1990 Spanish longline fleet has been registered for
the highest by-cacth of both species in the Atlantic Ocean. About shortfin-mako, concern has been
raised after the last evaluation for the northern Atlantic in 2017 made by ICCAT and the stock
assessment update meeting held in 2019. It stated the population being overfished and suffering from
overfishing. About blue shark, although capture levels appear to be within sustainable fishing limits,
it is subject to high exploitation rates in the Atlantic. Uncertainties in assessment results suggest that
additional management actions could be considered for both species. In this study different fisheries
management strategies were evaluated for shortfin-mako and blue shark in the Atlantic from the
stakeholder’s perspective. Local Ecological Knowledge (LEK) was considered to be useful as
fishermen possess a unique knowledge based on their continued interaction with the species and the
environment. Information was collected through personal interviews with fishermen from the Spanish
longline fleet and surveys sent out to scientists and NGOs. Interviews allowed to collect fishermen’s
observations on variations of abundance, distribution patterns, size of capture and seasonal
fluctuations for both species. SWOT-analysis was used to study the different factors to be taken into
account for various management measures. Main management strategies proposed by stakeholders
were time-area closure, especially for blue shark juveniles during the summer months in the Sole
Bank, minimum capture size and a quota system. This study suggests that management could be
supported by involving stakeholders due to their knowledge about the species and environment.
Lastly, observations of fishermen about ecological features of both species could be used as a valid
aid for future scientific studies.




                                                      98
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


          SharkPulse: taking the pulse of global shark populations

  Francesco FERRETTI1,2, Z. Y. C. LIU2, Filippo BARGNESI3,4, Stefano MORO2, C. BUTNER,
               S. HADDOCK6, T. HASTIE7, S. JORGENSEN8, F. MICHELI2,9
              1
                  Department of Fish and Wildlife Conservation, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA
                      2
                        Hopkins Marine Station of Stanford University, Pacific Grove, CA, USA
                                         3
                                           Acquario di Cattolica, Cattolica, ITALY
                                  4
                                    Universita' politecnica delle Marche, Ancona, ITALY
                                         5
                                           Universita' La Sapienza, Roma, ITALY
                        6
                          Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute, Moss Landing, CA, USA
                           7
                             Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
                                      8
                                        Monterey Bay Aquarium, Monterey, CA, USA
                             9
                               Stanford Center for Ocean Solutions, Pacific Grove, CA, USA
                                                       ferretti@vt.edu




Many species of sharks and their relatives are declining worldwide at a rapid rate because of their
vulnerable life histories exposed to impacts of fishing and habitat modification. For this reason, they
are among the most endangered animals in the ocean. Meanwhile, they are also the most poorly
quantified groups of animals in the ocean as basic information on abundance and distribution is
lacking for about half of their species. Lack of data is hampering conservation assessment and policy
actions and has thus become one of the biggest issues for shark conservation. Available solutions for
developing effective conservation actions and reverse loss include exploring alternative sources of
information and unconventional methods to collect and analyze abundance and distribution data. Here
we show how to transition from data deficient to big data for many shark species. By taking advance
of the surge of information on human ocean use and communication, we show how crowdsourcing,
web data-mining and machine learning can fill this critical information gap. We integrated these
approaches in a modular crowd-sourcing platform that combines social network and web site
crawling, web applications, smartphone technology, and image analysis to build the largest database
of shark sighting available today. We will show how these data can be used to produce species
distribution and models to inform conservation assessments and promote protection and recovery
plans.




                                                        99
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


   Spatial variability of Chondrichthyes in the North Mediterranean

     Maria C. FOLLESA1,2, Martina F. MARONGIU1,2, Walter ZUPA3, Andrea BELLODI1,2,
       Alessandro CAU1,2, Rita CANNAS1,2, Francesco COLLOCA4,5, Mirko DJUROVIC16,
 Igor ISAJLOVIC6, Angélique JADAUD7, Chiara MANFREDI8,9, Panagiota PERISTERAKI10,11,
        Cristina PORCU1,2, Sergio RAMIREZ-AMARO17, Francisca Salmerón IMÉNEZ12,
      Fabrizio SERENA4, Letizia SION13,14, Ioannis THASITIS15, Pierluigi CARBONARA3
             1
                   Department of Life and Environmental Science - University of Cagliari, Cagliari, ITALY
                                                 2
                                                   CONISMA –UNICA, Roma, ITALY
                                            3
                                              COISPA Tecnologia & Ricerca, Bari, ITALY
            4
              National Research Council – Institute for Coastal Marine Environment, Mazara del Vallo, ITALY
         5
           Department of Biology and Biotechnology “C. Darwin” BBCD, Sapienza University of Rome, ITALY
                                   6
                                      Institute of Oceanography and Fisheries, Split, CROATIA
                                   7
                                     IFREMER-UMR MARBEC, LHM, Sète Cedex, FRANCE
        8
          Laboratorio di Biologia Marina e Pesca di Fano, Dip.to Bi.Ge.A. - Università di Bologna, Fano, ITALY
                                                 9
                                                   CONISMA –UNIBA, Roma, ITALY
    10
       Hellenic Center for Marine Research, Institute of Marine Biological Resources and Inland Waters, GREECE
                           11
                              University of Crete, Biology Department, Stavrakia, Heraklion, CRETE
              12
                 Instituto Español de Oceanografia (IEO). C.O. de Malaga Puerto Pesqueros Fuengirola SPAIN
                                   13
                                      Department of Biology – University of Bari, Bari, ITALY
                                                14
                                                   CONISMA –UNIBA, Roma, ITALY
                               15
                                  Department of Fisheries and Marine Research, Nicosia, CYPRUS
                          16
                             Institute of Marine Biology, University of Montenegro, MONTENEGRO
                                     17
                                        I EO- Centro Oceanográfico de Baleares, Palma, SPAIN
                                                         follesac@unica.it




Thanks to the availability of the MEDITS survey data, a picture of the occurrence, abundance and
distribution of Chondrichthyes in the Mediterranean basin was done. During the spring-summer
MEDITS period (2012-2015), 41 Chondrichthyes, including 18 sharks (5 Orders and 10 Families),
22 batoids (3 Orders and 4 Families) and 1 chimaera, were detected from several Geographical
Subareas (GSAs). In general, it is possible to observe that batoid species had a preferential
distribution in the shelf (10-200 m) while “shark” species were more frequent in the slope (200-800
m). Only three species, the Carcharhiniformes Galeus melastomus, Scyliorhinus canicula and the
Torpediniformes Torpedo marmorata were caught in all several GSAs studied. On the shelf, the
Rajidae family was represented in primis by Raja clavata and then by R. miraletus, R. polystigma
and R. asterias. The slope was characterized by the prevalence of the blackmouth catshark G.
melastomus in all GSAs followed by S. canicula, E. spinax and Squalus blainville. Throughout a
comparison between the maps of trawling fishing pressure in Mediterranean (Sbrana et al., 2013) and
our maps of abundance’s species it is clear that the most affected areas, as Adriatic sea and Spanish
areas (with the exception of the Baleares islands) registered low abundance of Elasmobranchs but
other areas with high level of pressure, as the South western of Sicily, presented high level of
abundance, showing that, in this case, other environmental drivers work together with the fishing
pressure to define the levels of biomass and density. Results of Generalized Additive Models (GAM)
highlighted the depth range (followed by the temperature) as one of the most important drivers
influencing the distribution of both batoid and shark species.



                                                      100
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


    “Winners & Losers”, a vulnerability analysis of sharks, rays and
         chimaeras in the Gulf of California (GoC), Mexico

    Karla C. GARCÉS-GARCÍA1,2, Javier TOVAR-ÁVILA3, Leonardo CASTILLO-GÉNIZ3,
Carlos J. GODÍNEZ-PADILLA3, Mercedes JACOBO-CERVANTES3, Benigno HERNÁNDEZ DE
      LA TORRE3, Emilio ROMERO-BELTRAN3, María del Carmen JIMÉNEZ-QUIROZ3,
             David CORRO-ESPINOSA3, Robert W. DAY1, Terence I. WALKER1
                     1
                       Department of Zoology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, AUSTRALIA
            2
                University of Veracruz. Faculty of Biological and Agricultural Sciences Tuxpan, MEXICO
                          3
                            The National Fisheries Institute of Mexico (INAPESCA), MEXICO
                                            kgarces@student.unimelb.edu.au




Fisheries contribute to food security and poverty alleviation, particularly in developing countries such
as Mexico. Therefore, it is important to assess the risks to fisheries resources in a comprehensive
way. The vulnerability analysis of 106 species of pelagic, coastal and demersal chondrichthyans in
the Gulf of California area performed in this study involves two regions (the southern and entrance),
two timescales (2050 and 2099), four types of fishing and eight climate change stressors. The risk
from fishing stressors is related to exposure to the demersal prawn fishery, the artisanal fishery, the
industrial shark fishery, and the sardine fishery from 2006 to 2017, also depending on the species’
productivity and susceptibility. The risk from climate change stressors was assessed by how species
are likely to be affected by eight climate change stressors (rising water temperature, increasing storm
frequency and intensity, changing currents and upwelling, increasing salinity, decreasing DO and
chlorophyll-a and increasing ocean acidity). The assessment was based on the species’ sensitivity and
adaptability to changing habitats and on indicators of what may happen based on IPCC emissions
scenarios for the area by 2100. We have assessed which species of chondrichthyans are likely to be
highly affected (“Losers”) and those considered “Winners” by assigning each species to six
ecological groups (EGs) (a novel and flexible way to allocate a great number of species) based on
species’ lifestyle and habitat. The EGs of shelf-inshore, shelf-reef and shelf-sand (≤75 m) are likely
to have high exposure risk to the climate change stressors under medium and high emission scenarios,
whereas exposure risk from fishing stressors was high for the EGs of shelf-inshore and shelf-sand
(≤75 m) in both regions.




                                                        101
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


      Toxic soup: Fins from top traded shark species in Hong Kong and
          China found not recommended for human consumption

Laura GARCIA BARCIA1, Juana ARGIRO1, Elizabeth BABCOCK2, Yong CAI3, Stanley SHEA4,
                              Demian CHAPMAN1
              1
                 Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University, North Miami (FL) USA
 2
     Division of Marine Biology and Fisheries, Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, Miami (FL) USA
              3
                Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, Florida International University, Miami, (FL) USA
                               4
                                 BLOOM Association, Central, Hong Kong, HONG KONG
                                                    lgarc391@fiu.edu




The trade of shark-derived products is a primary driver of the decline in shark populations globally.
Shark fin is one of China’s top dried seafood products and, with over 80 shark species currently
present in the Hong Kong (HK) trade, shark fin soup is an asian delicacy on high demand. The high
position of sharks in marine food webs and their relatively long life spans mean that they can often
have high concentrations of heavy metals in their tissues. Heavy metals including mercury (Hg),
Methylmercury (MeHg), lead (Pb), arsenic (As), cadmium (Cd) and selenium (Se) all have adverse
health effects on humans, especially in pregnant women and children. Shark meat contains high
values of Hg, often surpassing the recommended human consumption advisory limits. To date, little
is known about the risks of consuming shark fin products on a regular basis, and virtually no studies
have addressed this issue. Here, we analyze processed shark fins from the China and HK markets
(n=267) for Hg, MeHg, Pb, As, Cd and Se to obtain novel information on their heavy metal
concentrations and to inform consumers of the risks of ingesting fins from a suite of species (n=9)
currently heavily traded. Results indicate all shark species in the study are above maximum
consumption Hg limits established by HK and US EPA. A complex of Blacktip species, Carcharhinus
longimanus, Prionace glauca, Sphyrna lewini and Sphyrna Zygaena all surpass the European
comission’s Hg limits (1ppm) and WHO/JECFA’s MeHg potential tolerable weekly intake (1.6
𝜇gMeHg/kg bw). P. glauca samples were found to surpass inorganic As maximum levels established
by WHO/JECFA (70.59% samples > 3 𝜇giAs/kg bw ). Results show high inter and intra-specific
variation in Hg, As and MeHg concentrations, as well as low Cd, Se and Pb concentrations for the
majority of individuals.




                                                        102
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


  Baselines for butterfly babies: towards a mediteranean study model

       Pablo GARCÍA-SALINAS1,2,4, David RUIZ- GARCÍA 1,3, Jaime PENADÉS-SUAY1,3
                   1
                       Associació LAMNA per a l’estudi dels Elasmobranquis, Valencia, SPAIN
                                     2
                                       Fundación Oceanogràfic, Valencia, SPAIN
                                      3
                                        Universitat de València, València, SPAIN
                               4
                                 Universitat Politècnica de València. ,Valencia, SPAIN
                                              pgarcia@oceanografic.org



The spiny butterfly ray, Gymnura altavela, is a benthic batoid found on soft bottoms in shallow coastal
waters in the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea, where it is considered a Critically
Endangered species on certain areas of its distribution. As G. altavela is a species with a patchy and
discontinuous distribution, the identification, characterization and protection of its congregation areas
may be the key issue for the future of the species. Its big size, calmed behaviour and presence in
beaches with a high tourist activity make this species an emblematic animal for conservation plans.
To evaluate this purpose, a series of monthly surveys were conducted during a year in areas located
in Alicante (South-Eastern Spain) with different level of tourism. In each survey, the number of spiny
butterfly ray marks found in the sediment with its length, width and location depth were recorded.
Live animals found were also measured in length and width, and pictures of the pectoral fins and tail
were taken for photoidentification. A total of 26 different alive animals were found during the daily
surveys, showing a disc width range of 77-112 cm for males and 53-157 cm for females. The alive
specimens found were resting on the bottom covered by sediment beside seagrass meadows of
Posidonia oceanica or Cymodocea nodosa. Only juvenile specimens (<64 cm width) were found
resting in sand patches within C. nodosa meadows. The occurrence of females was constant
throughout the year, while male occurrence was higher in spring. During the period October-June,
coinciding with the months of less tourism, spiny butterfly ray specimens and its marks were observed
in all the surveyed areas, whereas during June-September period, coinciding with the tourism season,
no animals or its marks could be observed in the areas with high level of tourism activities.




                                                      103
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


        The development of a long-standing citizen science project:
                       the Great Eggcase Hunt

                              Rebecca GILLHAM1, Cat A. GORDON1
                                           1
                                             The Shark Trust, UK
                                          rebecca@sharktrust.org




As a long-standing citizen science project of the Shark Trust, the Great Eggcase Hunt (GEH) has
received nearly a quarter of a million records to date. Initially developed to engage the public in shark
conservation and to find out more about the diversity and broad distribution of oviparous
elasmobranchs in British waters, the GEH now regularly receives records from around the world,
including as far afield as Ecuador.
Surprisingly little is known about the distribution and habitat of the spawning and nursery areas of
skate and oviparous sharks, and the eggcases of many species have yet to be described. Citizen
science engagement can support broader scientific initiatives in areas where data may be otherwise
limited and can strengthen inferences made on important habitats. Data obtained from the project so
far has allowed us to detail the morphological characteristics of 13 species found around the British
Isles, with an additional paper on the distribution of juvenile stages and eggcases of skate in prep.
Collaborations with partner organisations - the Dutch Shark Society (Netherlands) and APECE
(Portugal) - and the translation of the GEH smartphone app into the corresponding languages has
allowed the reach and scope of the project to broaden. The increased accessibility of GEH
identification and recording materials has resulted in improved accuracy of submissions of spent
eggcases, an increase in submissions of in-situ sightings, and from fish markets, scientific trawls and
commercial fisheries. Photographic capabilities within the app have enabled more records to be
verified to species level.
As the Trust continues to develop the GEH and make it more accessible internationally, our objective
is to expand on the existing species-specific knowledge of oviparous elasmobranchs. As a result, this
could help inform on the nominal distribution of egg-laying grounds and potentially aid conservation
measures on a local and international level.




                                                  104
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


     Preliminary evidences of illegal elasmobranch fishing in Libya

                     Sara Al MABRUK1, Jamila RIZGALLA2, Ioannis GIOVOS3
           1
             Zoology department, Faculty of Sciences, University of Omar Al-Mukhtar, Al-Beida , LIBYA
              2
                Depatment of Aquauclture, Faculty of Agriculature, Univeisty of Tripoli, Tripoli, LIBYA
     3
       iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of the Aquatic Ecosystems, Thessaloníki, GREECE
                                            ioannis.giovos@isea.com.gr



Social media networks are emerging as an important additional tool for monitoring wildlife especially
in areas with low data availability. Libya is located in the central Mediterranean and is considered a
data scarce area regarding its marine biodiversity. Few information is also available about
elasmobranch species, however this country has been recently identified among the top priority
countries for elasmobranch conservation with low conservation likelihood and yet high fisheries
pressure. For this work, in the context of an ongoing project, we performed a rapid assessment on
social media for detecting elasmobranch occurrences from Libya. A total of 55 records of
elasmobranch occurrences collected, with the vast majority (93.73%) resulting from (professional
and recreational) fishing activity, while the rest were observations of divers and marine users. All
records identified to the species level resulting in fifteen different species but one observation was
recorded as Squatina sp. as the identification to the species level was not possible. Carcharhinus
plumbeus (≈16%), Glaucostegus cemiculus (≈14%), Squatina squatina (≈10%) and Rhinobatos
rhinobatos (≈10%) were the most commonly posted species. The vast majority of the observation
depicted fished individuals of which ≈78% species listed Endangered or Critically Endangered in the
IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, while ≈60% were species protected by the Barcelona
Convention and consequently Recommendation GFCM/42/2018/2 (amending GFCM/36/2012/3); in
both cases, Libya is a signatory party. This is a very first step on a long-term project that aims to
understand the elasmobranch diversity in Libya and bring into light information about their fishing
and trade. Hereby we present the first data collected through the social media network FacebookTM,
however in the near future further observation will be collected and findings will be complemented
with fish and auction market surveys and questionnaires to all relevant stakeholders.




                                                      105
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


             Putting the spotlight on Mediterranean angel sharks

                                     Cat A. GORDON1, Ali R. HOOD1
                              1
                                  The Shark Trust, , The Millfields, Plymouth, UK
                                               cat@sharktrust.org



Angel sharks (Squatinidae) are considered one of the most threatened Families of chondrichthyans in
the world. Of the 22 species, three are present in the Mediterranean – Sawback Angelshark Squatina
aculeata, Smoothback Angelshark S. oculata, and Angelshark S. squatina – all three are Critically
Endangered. Population sizes and geographic ranges of these species have declined primarily due to
overfishing and habitat loss. With angel sharks now rarely encountered, reliance falls on fisheries
data, reports of incidental catch, citizen science, social media, and interviews with fishers to increase
knowledge on distribution.
The Mediterranean has revealed itself to be a hotspot of extinction risk for chondrichthyans. In 2012,
the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean (GFCM) banned the retention of 24 species
of exceptionally threatened elasmobranchs, including the three species of angel sharks. Although
protected on paper, these species remain exposed to fisheries pressure by those coastal states yet to
act on their commitments.
The complex and multijurisdictional nature of the Mediterranean (with >20 coastal states and
territories) creates a need for collaborative action to build capacity for angel shark conservation.
Drawing on the expertise of the Angel Shark Conservation Network, a group of regional experts were
brought together in Tunisia (in March 2019) to begin development of a Regional Action Plan for
these imperiled species. The Action Plan outlines key threats, goals, objectives, and actions needed
to achieve the vision that: Mediterranean angel sharks are restored to robust populations, fulfilling
their ecological roles in healthy ecosystems.
This work follows on from the development of the Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean Angel Shark
Conservation Strategy which provides a framework for improved protection, guiding future research,
management, policy and conservation actions.




                                                      106
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


        High levels of mislabeling in elasmobranch meat products –
        Investigating species utilisation with DNA barcoding in the
                               Mediterranean

 Chrysoula GUBILI1*, Archontia CHATZISPYROU2, George MINOS3, Anastasia IMSIRIDOU4,
                                 Andrew M. GRIFFITHS5
    1
     Hellenic Agricultural Organization-DEMETER, Fisheries Research Institute, Nea Peramos, Kavala, GREECE
                         2
                           Hellenic Centre for Marine Research, Anavyssos, Athens, GREECE
3
  Laboratory of Biology & Histology, Microscopy & Image Analysis, Systematics & Biometry, Department of Nursing,
                               International Hellenic University, Thessaloniki, GREECE
       4
         Department of Food Science and Technology, International Hellenic University, Thessaloniki, GREECE
         5
           Department of Biosciences, Geoffrey Pope Building, University of Exeter, Stocker Road, Exeter, UK
                                                   c.gubili@inale.gr


Food authenticity has received an increasing focus due to high profile cases of mislabeling, with
increasing numbers of investigations identifying sales of endangered or prohibited species that were
illegally caught or landed under international and/or national legislation. A total of 160 shark products
(steaks or fillets) were examined from fishmongers and markets across Greece and Italy from over a
decade. Both countries follow food and safety legislation regarding elasmobranch meat sales, which
require specific commerial designation on labels - “Galeos” and “Palombo” for Greece and Italy that
are restricted to only Mustelus spp.. The barcode (a partial sequence of the mitochondrial cytochrome
c oxidase subunit I gene, COI) was used to analyze samples, and species were identified by reference
to genetic databases (BOLD and GenBank). The results revealed differences in patterns of species
utilisation between countries, with Italy showing a higher level of mislabeling and prohibited species
in sales. About three quarter of products (73.75%) originated from species that are locally listed as
threatened by the IUCN red list (vulnerable, endangered and critically endangered). The mislabeled
products represent 57.76% of all sales, and of them, 47.31% originated from species with current
prohibitions on landings or CITES listings. This includes large sharks (i.e. H. griseus, H. perlo, A.
vulpinus) that bear little resemblance to Mustelus spp. and likely demonstrate deliberate substitution.
Mislabeled products are providing a route for prohibited and protected sharks to enter the food supply
chain and be sold to consumers who are misguided and unaware they are purchasing endangered
species.




                                                     107
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


              School shark (Galeorhinus galeus) stock assessment
                            off the Algerian coast

                                           Farid HEMIDA¹

                    ¹ENSSMAL-Campus universitaire de Dely Ibrahim, Algiers. ALGERIA
                                       hemidafarid@yahoo.fr




Galeorhinus galeus (Linnaeus, 1758) is a demersal shark, belonging to the Galeomorphii superorder
and the Triakidae family. A follow-up, carried out in the late nineties, allowed to establish the total
length frequencies distributions of 414 individuals.
The analysis of size structures allowed determining the growth and exploitation parameters required
by the Thompson and Bell model (1934). This model designed for the length-based analysis,
evaluates the impact of a variation in fishing effort with mesh change effect in short and long-term
catch forecasts. Input data are provided by the Jones technique (1983), which, by pseudo-cohort
analysis (VPA), determines mortality coefficients.
Changes in fishing mortality F (VPA) show that the smallest classes are the least fished (low F
values). Juveniles are not vulnerable to exploitation; this phenomenon partly assures the state of the
stock, but do not overshadow the fishing pressure suffered by the parents. Such observation reflects
an overexploitation situation, recruitment type. The Thompson and Bell model calculates F-factors
and corresponding biomass, Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY) and Maximum Sustainable
Economic Yield (MSEY). It suggests increasing the current fishing effort at least three times without
any collapse risk for the population but without appreciable production gain. This analysis put the
last touches on the hypothesis given by the cohort analysis. The results reflect a high vulnerability of
the school shark due to its occurrence on the different biotopes.
In order to the stock for sustainability, the effort must be transferred to other sea bottoms and reduce
current individuals size to 130-140 cm of total length. It is therefore necessary to gather ecological
information, for the analysis risks of this stock. While hoping an implementation of policies for catch
and bycatch of vulnerable sharks in the whole Mediterranean.




                                                  108
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


                Mako Sharks: overfished yet overlooked.
         Exploring the latest advice & management opportunities

                                            Ali HOOD

                                         The Shark Trust, UK
                                          ali@sharktrust.org




The Shortfin Mako (Isurus oxyrinchus) is the world’s fastest shark, and sought for its meat, fins and
sport. Overfished and overlooked by fisheries managers for decades, North Atlantic mako are now
on the brink of population collapse. Since 2004 Scientific advisors to the International Commission
for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) have warned that the stock was overfished, that
overfishing was likely, and that the South Atlantic stock was likely fully exploited.
Subsequent ICCAT stock assessments culminated in stark advice in 2017. With evidence for the
North Atlantic showing a 90% probability that the stock is overfished and experiencing overfishing,
ICCAT scientists recommended the most effective immediate measure: a complete prohibition of
retention. Yet despite the clarity of scientific advice Parties to ICCAT adopted a Recommendation
which did not cap landings and has failed to stop overfishing. To this day mako sharks remain a No
Limits species in high-seas fisheries.
In 2019 several publications have furthered the understanding of the plight of mako sharks: updated
projections and new scientific advice from ICCAT reinforcing the severity of the population decline;
publication of an IUCN Red List reassessment recognising Shortfin Mako as now globally
Endangered; and listing proposals for Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) (result pending at the time of writing).
In the context that the fleets from the European Union (EU) take more makos than any other ICCAT
Party - and with the EU a cosponsor of the 2019 CITES Appendix II listing proposal - this talk will
explore the pressing need for management for makos (with an empahisis on the actions of the EU),
and consider the opportuntiies for complimentarity between Wildlife Treaties such as CITES and the
Regional Fisheries Management Organisations such as ICCAT.




                                                109
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


           A roadmap for interesting and effective shark research
                     communication on social media

       Lars JAKOBSEN1, Juliane BOCKWOLDT1, Marlen MYRLUND2, Claudia JUNGE2
                1
                    Department of Language and Culture, University in Tromsø, Tromsø NORWAY
                           2
                             The Institute of Marine Research (IMR), Tromsø, NORWAY
                                               Lars_jako@hotmail.com



Part of the job as a researcher is to communicate research with the public and make information
accessible, but how to do it efficiently can be a challenge. Social media is a great platform for reaching
a large amount of people and if handled correctly it can be a very efficient communication tool. There
is also a value in being mentioned and talked about by utilizing social media as well as legacy mass
communication channels to enrich information exchanges between the scientific community and
public audiences about elasmobranch. By using social media effectively for outreach such as
interactions with reporters/newspapers and activly participating in discussion on social media, can
assist the researchers field by promoting his/her scientific impact. My thesis and guidelines is a great
startingpoint for any researcher that wants to use social media for elasmobranch communication. The
communication guidelines I created in my Bachelor are based on social media studies, marketing
strategies and my own thesis. The Institute of Marine Research used these guidelines in a
communication project, to get public citizens to report sightings of basking sharks in Norwegian
waters. The basking shark has become a rare sight due to overfishing/low reproductive rate. Due to
the rarity of the shark in Norwegian waters it was important that we reached a broad audience.
Through The Institute of Marine Research communication channels on social media and traditional
outlets such as newspapers/radio our reach went farther than expected and we had an overwhelming
positive feedback from the public with a 33% increase of yearly reported observations. From 37
reports over five years, to 21 reports in 1 month. Ultimately this study demonstrates that our
communication strategy and social media guidelines are an effective way of research communication
and this contribution may be especially relevant for scientists using social media for elasmobranch
research communication.




                                                     110
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


                     Data Collection and Conservation Campaign
                        for Sawfishes (Pristidae) in Indonesia

                            Armelle JUNG1, Dharmadi2, George BURGESS3
                1
                    DRDH – Des Requins et Des Hommes, BLP-Technopole Brest-Iroise, FRANCE
                          2
                            Research Center for Fisheries and Development, INDONESIA
                       3
                         Florida Museum of Natural History, Gainesville, UNITED STATES
                                      armelle@desrequinsetdeshommes.org




Sawfishes (Pristidae) are one of the most rare and endangered rays that deserve urgent global initiative
to conserve them. Indonesia has issued regulation to prevent the extinction of the species i.e.
Government Decree no. 7 in 1999. However, recent evidences stated that the fishing (targeted and
by-catch) still occurred across the Indonesian waters. This paper aims to share the experience on
developing data collection framework and conservation campaign entirely dedicated to preserve these
species. In 2017, INDONESAW, an international collaborative project, has been established to
address these conservation issues. Specific social media and communication material were produced
and published. Additionally a network of seven focal points was selected and trained in order to
perform sensitization data collection and community education of this charismatic species. The
challenges to deal with ecological and socio-economic aspects as well as recommendations are
discussed in this paper.




                                                   111
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


                                    Stars Aligning
                         Studying the sharks of the Saba Bank,
                     a bidoveristy hotspot in the Dutch Caribbean

         Irene KINGMA1, Paddy WALKER1, Peter DE MAAGT2, Tadzio BERVOETS3,
      Ayumi KURAMAE4, James THORBURN5, Melanie MEIJER ZU SLOCHTEREN3,
   Guido LEURS6, Jurgen BATSLEER7, Robert NOWICKI8, Francois MILLE9, Gian NUNES10
                         1
                         Dutch Elasmobranch Society, Amsterdam, THE NETHERLANDS
                 2
                     EUREOPEN SPACE AGENCY (ESTEC), Noordwijk, THE NETHERLANDS
                          3
                            Nature Foundation Sint Maarten, Cole Bay, SINT MAARTEN
                             4
                                Saba Conservation Foundation, SABA (Dutch Caribbean)
                                     5
                                       Sint Andrews University, UNITED KINGDOM
                                  6
                                    Rijksuniveristeit Groningen, THE NETHERLANDS
                                7
                                  Wageningen Marine Research, THE NETHERLANDS
                                   8
                                     Mote Marine Lab, Sarasota FL, UNITED STATES
                              9
                                Sint Eustatius National Park, STATIA (Dutch Caribbean)
                                             10
                                                Arikok National Park, ARUBA
                                                 kingma@elasmobranch.nl



We present on an international expedition for shark research to the Saba Bank in the Dutch Caribbean
organised by the Dutch Elasmobranch Society (NEV), the Saba Conservation Foundation (SCF) and
the Nature Foundation Sint Maarten (NFSM) in July 2019.
The Saba Bank is the largest submarine atol in the Atlantic Ocean approximatelely 60km long and
40km wide. The atol is a hotspot for marine biodiversity with high coral coverage and abundant fish
populations. Only limited research has been done on the elasmobranchs in the area. This is why the
overall goal of the research expedition was to gain insight into the role the Saba Bank plays in the
life cycle of the elasmobranch species that come there within Wider Caribbean region. The research
focussed on:
Tagging tigers
We tested a new satellite tag technology developed by the European Space Agency that will allow
battery life of tags to extend well beyond what the current tag technology can do, and at a fraction of
the cost.
Nurse shark bycatch
Working with the local fishermen on reducing bycatch of nurse sharks in lobster traps. Part of this
research is learning more about the behaviour of the sharks in and around the traps. Mote Marine lab
have developed a video system that can be used to register shark behaviour.
Shark connectivity and population genetics
Stable isotope analysis combined with an existing acustic telemetry array to learn more about the
connectivity between different areas and the way these species use the Saba Bank. This will be
combined with a close kin genetics study to help estimate population size.
Stress levels in captured sharks
Taking blood samples (lactate, Ph) of captured animals to assess their welfare when handled on board.




                                                   112
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


                   Abundance and distribution of the white shark
                           in the Mediterranean Sea

      Stefano MORO1,2, Giovanna JONA-LASINIO2, Barbara BLOCK3, Fiorenza MICHELI3,
      Giulio DE LEO3, Fabrizio SERENA5, Massimiliano BOTTARO6, Umberto SCACCO7,
                                  Francesco FERRETTI3,4
               1
                 Department of Environmental Biology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, ITALY
                  2
                    Department of Statistical Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, ITALY
                        3
                          Hopkins Marine Station of Stanford University, Pacific Grove (CA), USA
               4
                 Department of Fish and Wildlife Conservation, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg (VA), USA
                      5
                        Italian National Research Council (CNR), Mazara del Vallo (TP), ITALY
                                     6
                                       Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Naples, ITALY
                     7
                       Institute for Environmental Protection and Research (ISPRA), Rome, ITALY
                                                stefano.moro@uniroma1.it




Conservation of apex predators is a key challenge both in marine and terrestrial ecosystems, and
sharks represent one of the most endangered groups in the ocean as a consequence of fishing
exploitation, high vulnerability and a generalized lack of data on ecology and conservation status.
This situation is particularly critical in the Mediterranean Sea due to its millenarian history of
exploitation.
Even if the white shark is a rare but persistent inhabitant of the Mediterranean Sea, its ecology in the
area is still largely unknown. We have scarce information about white shark distribution and habitat
use, aspects that are critical for conservation and management. The species is currently assessed as
“Critically Endangered” according to the IUCN Regional Redlist criteria.
In this study, we built the most comprehensive database of white shark occurrence records in the area
(773 observations) and used them to characterize the spatial and temporal patterns of abundance of
Mediterranean white sharks within a large temporal window (1860-2016). We fitted generalized
additive models to standardized occurrence rates and used spatially disaggregated information on
human coastal population abundance as a proxy of observation effort. Our results suggest a complex
trajectory of population change characterized by a historical increase and a more recent steep
reduction (61.5%) since the second half of 20th-century. Declines ranged between 52% and 97%
across different Mediterranean sectors, with a contemporary regional contraction of the spatial
distribution.
For the first time, these results would inform conservation assessments, underlining the importance
to produce status assessments based on population trends that are not suspected but quantitatively
inferred. Furthermore, our analyses resulted instrumental to advance new hypotheses on the white
shark occurrence and ecology in the Mediterranean Sea and to plan tagging programs with the purpose
of collecting high-quality ecological data such distribution, population structure, foraging and habitat
use.




                                                     113
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


 Bycatch of batoids in trammel nets in the Valencian region (Spanish
   Mediterranean): a case of unreported and unregulated fishing

      Jaime PENADÉS-SUAY1,2, Julia CHAUMEL1,3, Manuel MERCHÁN4, Jesús TOMÁS1,
                                  Ohiana REVUELTA1
      1
          Department of Zoology, Cavanilles Institute of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biology, Paterna, SPAIN
       2
          Associació LAMNA per a l’estudi dels elasmobranquis en la Comunitat Valenciana, València, SPAIN
          3
            Department of Biomaterials, Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Potsdam, GERMANY
                                         4
                                           Asociación Chelonia, Madrid, SPAIN
                                                  jaime.penades@uv.es




The biggest threats to batoids (rays and skates) in the Mediterranean are overfishing and bycatch. The
protection of these species is challenging, particularly due to inadequate labeling in fishing ports or
inadequate fisheries regulations. Small-scale vessels in the Mediterranean make up 83% of the total
fishing fleet, being fixed nets (trammel and gill nets) the most common used gear. In the Valencia
region (Spanish Mediterranean) trammel nets are the most common (51%). In this fishery batoids are
an important element of bycatch, although catch data on these species is scant. The present study aims
to: 1) describe the impact of bycatch (CPUE) for batoid species in trammel nets in the Valencia
region, 2) address diversity, spatial and seasonal differences in batoids bycatch composition, and 3)
identify and propose direct measures to asses this issue on the unreported and unregulated fishing
practices in the region. From January to December 2017, both onboard observation on fishing vessels
and sampling of catches at the landing site were carried out in three different ports of the Valencian
region. In total, 81 sets from 14 vessels were monitored, giving a record of 429 batoid specimens of
12 different species and five families (Dasyatidae, Gymnuridae, Myliobatidae, Rajidae and
Torpedinidae). The most abundant were Torpedo marmorata (25,8%; total average), Torpedo
torpedo (25,4%) and Raja radula (16,3%). All the catches were discarded, sold privately or sold at
market without identification at species level. There was not significant correlation between batoid’s
size and the panel mesh size of trammel nets. Data collected showed seasonal differences in size and
total biomass, with a higher rate of captures of larger specimens during the period from March to
June. Our results highlight the need of further studies in the area and future implementation of
mitigation measures, such as adequate reporting of catches.




                                                         114
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


            Actions towards collaboration for an improved sharks
                 bycatch management in the Mediterranean:
              conservation, communication and citizen science

     Giulia PRATO1, Simone NIEDERMUELLER2, Emirjeta ADHAMI3, Monica BARONE4,
              Pierluigi CARBONARA5, Rezart KAPEDANI6, Fabrizio SERENA7
                                          1
                                                WWF Italia, Roma, ITALY
                             2
                                 WWF Mediterranean Marine Initiative, Roma, ITALY
                          3
                            Instiute for Nature Conservation in Albania, Tirana, ALBANIA
   4
     Fishery Resources Consultant, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Roma, ITALY
                                     5
                                       COISPA Tecnologia & Ricerca, Bari, ITALY
                                        6
                                          Fishery resources consultant, ALBANIA
                                        7
                                          IRBIM-CNR, Mazara del Vallo, ITALY
                                                      g.prato@wwf.it



The Mediterranean Sea is considered as one of the most dangerous places for sharks and rays in the
world, with more than 50% of its species under risk of extinction. Fisheries bycatch is the main threat
to sharks and rays in the region. Full evaluation of fisheries impact on shark populations, however, is
hampered i.a. by the lack of data on post-release survival rates, highly dependent on fishing strategy
and handling practices during the release of the animal, and on key nursery areas and migration routes.
Proper monitoring programs are lacking in the majority of Mediterranean countries. Existing bycatch
recording systems, including paper based and electronic fisheries logbooks as well as voluntary
reporting tools developed by citizen science initiatives, often lack harmonization and interoperability
and frequently show weak sustainability and user ownership. Furthermore, fishers and often also port
authorities lack capacity to identify protected species and are not aware of legislation and procedures
for landing and marketing.
The SafeSharks project focuses on the Southern Adriatic adopting a comprehensive approach
including 1) stakeholder engagement to raise awareness of the fishing sector on shark status and
create ownership to the issue, 2) roundtables of relevant actors (scientists, seafood market and fishing
sector, NGOS, authorities) to address key needs in order to improve monitoring, control and
surveillance of sharks bycatch and facilitate collaboration, 3) satellite tagging to assess post release
survival rates and establishment best handling and release practices and 4) seafood fraud risk
assessment in the main Italian markets linked to the Southern Adriatic. Preliminary results of the
project will be presented, together with the outcomes of the workshop “A Mediterranean where
sharks, rays, skates, and chimeras are valued and managed for sustainability: From Citizen science to
implementation of regulation for bycatch of vulnerable sharks and rays in the Mediterranean”.




                                                     115
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


    Baseline assessment of the coastal elasmobranch fauna of eastern
           Cabo Verde using baited remote underwater video

  Zeddy T. A. SEYMOUR1, Rachel T. GRAHAM2, Ivy E. BAREMORE2, Francesco GARZON1,
                                José Luis MONTEIRO1

                                  1
                                   MarAlliance, Sal Rei, Boavista, CABO VERDE
                              2
                                  MarAlliance, San Pedro, Ambergris Caye, BELIZE
                                            rachel@maralliance.org




An increasing onus on tropical elasmobranch management has revealed a paucity in data on
abundance, distribution and fisheries. The Republic of Cabo Verde is drafting their national plan of
action for sharks, and a lack of coastal fisheries dependent and independent information on
elasmobranchs necessitates the creation of a baseline. We combined baited remote underwater video
(BRUV) and interviews with traditional fishermen to create the first assessment of the diversity,
distribution, and fisheries involvement of elasmobranchs around the eastern islands of Sal, Boavista
and Maio, including the remote offshore reef João Valente.
Over 200 hours of footage revealed 216 elasmobranchs spanning 16 species from 6 taxonomic
families. Three findings were particularly notable: i) CPUE was highest in Maio, the island with the
smallest human population; ii) Carcharhinidae spp. were observed in considerably greater abundance
in Sal, followed by Boavista; meanwhile Maio and João Valente displayed an absence of large-bodied
Carcharhinids; iii) Species richness was consistent across islands, with Boavista and Sal recorded
diversity. Results from 207 fisher interviews revealed that 88% of fishers fished sharks, with
endangered scalloped hammerheads cited as the most widely captured species. Most fishers (95%)
noted a decline in marine resources over the past 5-10 years, with 70% perceiving significant
reductions in sharks captured. Cabo Verde’s eastern islands hosts high relative diversity and
abundance of coastal elasmobranchs compared to West Africa; higher trophic level species show
evidence of intensive exploitation notably with increasing proximity to the capital city Praia. Results
of this study are conservative: although fishers interviewed were anonymous and care was taken with
the structure and delivery of survey questions, fishers were often reluctant to share information as
many believe elasmobranch fisheries to be illegal. Nonetheless, our study suggests that artisanal and
semi-industrial fisheries are strongly impacting coastal shark populations.




                                                    116
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


The fish of Turkey’s past: A recent history of disappeared species and
  commercial fishery extinctions for the Black and Marmara Seas

             Aylin ULMAN1,2, Mustafa ZENGIN3, Nazli DEMIREL4, Daniel PAULY1
                  1
                     Sea Around Us, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, CANADA
                                 2
                                   Mersea Conservation Consulting, Fethiye, TURKEY
                              3
                                Central Fisheries Research Institute, Trabzon, TURKEY
             4
               Institute of Marine Sciences and Management, Istanbul University, Istanbul, TURKEY
                                                 uaylin@hotmail.com



To document the rapidly declining abundance of Turkish marine resources, a timeline of commercial
fisheries extinctions and a list of threatened or extirpated marine species are presented for the Black
Sea and Sea of Marmara for Turkey. Turkish nationally reported fisheries data were compared over
a 50 year period from 1967 (the first year data were spatially allocated) to 2016 to assess which
species are now extirpated (i.e., currently completely absent from the reported catch data), and which
species have become commercially extinct (i.e., whose catch declined by 75-99.9%). Other important
taxa, with special attention paid to sharks not captured by the statistics, are discussed using accounts
from peer-reviewed literature, grey-literature and personal accounts from local scientist and fishers.
The Black Sea has 25 extirpated species and 19 commercially extinct marine species, while the Sea
of Marmara has 22 extirpated species and 32 commercially extinct species. We interpret these
extinctions and declines as indications of potential ecosystem collapses and urge management to be
more effective in rebuilding the Turkish marine fisheries, before it becomes too late.




                                                    117
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


   A blank area on the map – Molecular identification and shark
population dynamics: implications for conservation based on artisanal
                               fishing

         Melany VILLATE-MORENO1,2, Juan CUBILLOS-MORENO1,2, Nicolas STRAUBE3,
                  Juliana LOPÉZ-ANGARITA2, Alex TILLEY2, Herwig STIBOR1
    1
        Aquatic ecology department, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Planegg- Martinsried, GERMANY
                               2
                                 Fundación Talking Oceans, Carrera, Bogotá, COLOMBIA
                  3
                    Zoologische Staatssammlung München, Sektion Ichthyologie, München, GERMANY
                                                 mvillate20@gmail.com



Coastal ecosystems are highly affected by elevated fishing pressure, targeting a higher number of
species in continental waters and being sharks and rays among the most disturbed and harvested
species. The increasing demand for shark fins and meat in combination with by-catch captures has
led shark populations all over the world to an alarming decline. The Eastern Tropical Pacific (ETP)
represents an optimal opportunity to serve as a case study for shark conservation, carrying the
potential for worldwide implications. However, the lack of information is still a key problem for the
establishment of definitive conservation and management policies. The largest part of elasmobranch
landings from artisanal fisheries are juvenile sharks; captured sharks are landed finless, decapitated,
and ready to be processed. These, together with the lack of taxonomic knowledge from fisherman
and fisheries control agents, make proper identification a challenging task. Therefore, the use of
genetic tools for the identification of the shark species is crucial, due to the high observed abundance
of juvenile sharks collected, the presence of cryptic species and important genetic population units
that might probe essential for conservation and establishment of baselines for further shark research
in the ETP. Here, we present barcoding and genetic diversity results from the mitochondrial NADH2
gene used for the identification of 12 species from shark landings in the Northern Colombian Pacific
region (ETP) from 2016 to 2018. Two species categorized as threatened under the IUCN Red List,
Sphyrna lewini (Endangered) and Carcharhinus falciformis (Vulnerable) occurred frequently in the
samples analyzed (21% and 18%, respectively). Our findings are of great importance, particularly for
threatened species, as the genetic diversity results showed low values compared to other species in
the study. This study is the baseline for further research in the area aiming for understanding shark
population dynamics, connectivity between populations as well as the identification of nursery areas.




                                                      118
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION



        Using science fuel to drive a change: a case study involving
       microplastics, whale sharks and stakeholders in the Maldives
          Alina M. WIECZOREK1, Ibrahim SHAMEEL2, Iru ZAREER2, Katie HINDLE2,
                                  Giulia F. DONATI3,4
          1
            Ryan Institute, School of Natural Sciences, National University of Ireland Galway, IRELAND
                             2
                               Maldives Whale Shark Research Programme, MALDIVES
        3
          Landscape Ecology, Department of Environmental Systems Science, ETH Zurich, SWITZERLAND
             4
               Landscape Ecology, Swiss Federal Research Institute WSL, Birmensdorf, SWITZERLAND
                                           Alina.Madita@googlemail.com




Due to their remote location and increasing tourism, the Maldives struggle with their waste
management. The environmental consequences of this are reflected in the results of a recent study
reporting microplastics to be particularly abundant in this Archipelago. However, the Maldives, being
a biodiversity hotspot, also feel the great responsibility to protect their unique marine habitats, home
to many threatened species, including the endangered whale shark (Rhincodon typus). Whale sharks
are of high economic value to this “island nation” as the opportunity to encounter them lures tourists
from all over the world and tourism has become the largest economy of the Maldives. It would thus
be prudent from an ecological and economic point of view to protect and preserve their habitats and
achieve good environmental status. Here, we aim to open the dialogue with key stakeholders (tourism
sector, policy makers, local scientists and the general public) by using findings of microplastic
ingestion by whale sharks. Indeed, their feeding strategy, filtering up to 614 m3/h of sea water, make
them particularly prone to microplastics ingestion. This is of concern as microplastic ingestion by
other fish species has been shown to cause reductions in food uptake and predatory performance, and
act as a vector of toxins, which can bioaccumulate and lead to endocrine disruption and hepatic stress.
To operate at the science-society-policy interface we first engaged with stakeholders through a survey
to create a shared problem framing. Second, we conducted workshops with each stakeholder
individually during which we communicated our scientific findings and developed collaborative
solutions to tackle the issue of plastic pollution. Future project developments will aim to empower
and support stakeholders to implement their solutions, but also to contribute to their current and future
efforts when introducing new regulations for marine protection.




                                                    119
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

        Presence of Squatina oculata in Sicilian and Maltese waters

             Alan DEIDUN1, Gianni INSACCO2, Fabrizio SERENA3, Bruno ZAVA2, 4
                   1
                    Department of Geosciences, University of Malta, Msida MSD 2080, MALTA
               2
                 Museo Civico di Storia Naturale, via degli Studi 9, 97013 Comiso (Ragusa), ITALY
 3
   National Research Council, Institute for Marine Biological Resources and Marine Biotechnologies (CNR-IRBIM),
                                            Mazara del Vallo (TP), ITALY
                                   4
                                     Wilderness Studi Ambientali. Palermo, ITALY
                                             wildernessbz@hotmail.com




The Smoothback Angelshark Squatina oculata is commonly found in warm-temperate and tropical
waters of the eastern Atlantic continental shelves and upper slopes, at depths ranging from 20 to 500
m, but mostly between 50 and 100 m. S. oculata is rarely distributed in the Mediterranean basin. To
date this species has, in fact, been rarely encountered in Gulf of Gabes, Tunisia and, more generally,
in the southern regions of the Mediterranean Sea. In 2007, four specimens were recorded from
southern Italy (Strait of Sicily). The present study contributes recent data on the rare occurrence of
the Smoothback Angelshark along the south-eastern Sicilian coasts through four musealized
specimens and through four photographic records, besides reporting an underwater observation for
Maltese waters.




                                                     120
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


             Supporting species-specific reporting of elasmobranchs
                       in the Falkland Islands’ fisheries

                    Emma BAGNALL1, Thomas FARRUGIA2, John RICHARDSON1
             1
               Shark Trust, 4 Creykes Court, The Millfields, Plymouth, PL1 3JB, UK, emma@sharktrust.org
       2
           Falkland Islands Fisheries Department, Bypass Rd, PO Box 598, Stanley, Falkland Islands, FIQQ1ZZ
                                              TFarrugia@fisheries.gov.fk.




The waters surrounding the Falkland Islands are highly productive, supporting a diverse abundance
of elasmobranchs, including ~18 species of skate. Commercial fisheries operating in these waters
land 5,000-7,000 tonnes of skate each year. The fisheries consist of ‘foreign fleets’, strictly managed
by the Falkland Islands Fisheries Department (FIFD). Most skate species are caught in trawl and
longline fisheries. At present, all retained skate are recorded as a single multispecies assemblage,
however, observer data suggests that certain species are much more commonly caught than others.
Species-specific reporting (SSR) is imperative for building baseline data on individual species
populations and distribution and for monitoring changes in species assemblages. SSR can also be
used to help provide advice for better management and policies to ensure long-term sustainable
fisheries and species diversity.
Drawing on the Trust’s extensive experience creating identification (ID) materials, the FIFD and the
Shark Trust began a collaborative project to develop accurate ID materials for skate to aid transition
to SSR. An ID placard for the eight species of skate most commonly caught in the Patagonia Toothfish
Longline Fishery was produced and translated into three languages (English, Korean, Spanish) and a
framework for an ID guide was developed. The project has now expanded to include all skate species
and other elasmobranchs caught as bycatch across all fleets. In addition, the skate, Dipturus chilensis
(Guichenot, 1848), was recently re-described as a new species of skate (D. lamillai sp. nov.) endemic
to the Falkland Islands – this has been updated on the original placard. The Shark Trust has now
produced a second placard and an extended ID guide, (18 skate, one ray, six sharks) suitable for
fishers, observers and the general public.
This collaborative work highlights the importance of SSR as a platform for effective global fisheries
management.




                                                        121
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


     Monitoring Whale Shark populations in the Northern Red Sea
                  using Individual Identification

       Hadas GANN-PERKAL1, Yaara GROSSMARK1, Shira SALINGRE2, Adi BARASH3
         1
             Sharks in Israel, NGO for the conservation of sharks and rays in Israel and the Mediterranean Sea
                                2
                                  School of Zoology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, ISRAEL
                     3
                       Leon Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, ISRAEL
                                                   gp.hadas@gmail.com



Whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) are defined by the IUCN as an endangered species, with numbers
around the world quickly declining. They inhabit all tropical and warm-temperate seas, the Red Sea
being the northern most part of its distribution.The Whale Shark Project, run by the NGO 'Sharks in
Israel', aims to monitor the population and record all sightings of this species in an ongoing data and
photo base. Up until 2019, whale shark sightings along the Israeli coast of the Aqaba bay in the Red
Sea were rather rare, adding up to only a handful a year at best. However, in 2019, a record high of
whale shark encounters in Israel were recorded. To date, there have been 22 observations of this
species in 2019, beginning in April and continuing into early August with most sightings occurring
in April (n=7) and July (n=11). Simple photo analysis reveals that all encounters were of at least four
different individuals, all juveniles and sub-adults, estimated at a length of up to 5 meters. Additional
analysis via Wildbook software allows for further definition of the individuals via visual mark
mapping and gives the collected data a global context by unveiling information about the specific
individual in different geographic locations. Monitoring the whale shark population in Israel and
mapping their whereabouts can allow to establish a tailormade conservation plan, designed to protect
the species on a global level.




                                                          122
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


  Another recent record of the uncommon sharpnose sevengill shark
   Heptranchias perlo in the Balearic Sea (Western Mediterranean)

                        Javier GUALLART1, Gabriel MOREY2, Àlex BARTOLÍ3
         1
             Marine Biology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, Universitat de València, Burjassot, SPAIN
                            2
                              Research Department, Asociación Ondine, Marratxí, SPAIN
                         3
                           Department of Conservation Biology, Submon, Barcelona, SPAIN
                                               javier.guallart@uv.es



On June 26, 2019, a sharpnose sevengill shark Heptranchias perlo was captured in the Eivissa
Channel by a trawler fishing boat targeting to the red shrimp Aristeus antennatus. It represents the
second substantiated historical record of the species around Balearic Islands (Sub-Area GSA05 of
General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean) and up to date the third one in all the
Mediterranean Spanish waters.
This species is cataloged as Data Deficient for the Mediterranean by the IUCN. Thus, we consider of
great interest to record and spread the observations and catches that may be done on this species, in
order to contribute to further assessments on its current conservation status.
The specimen was captured at depth range 465-515 m at a location (average trawl coordinates) of
38°58’N 00°24’E. The specimen was an immature female of 643 mm TL. It had threadlike uteri and
macroscopically recognizable but undeveloped ovaries (only with small previtelogenetic oocytes).
The stomach contents was relatively abundant and contained pieces of squid arms (but no beaks) and
a medium-sized piece of an unidentified teleost. Samples of muscle and liver of the shark were taken
and preserved in order to be used for possible future studies.
A review of the recent records of H. perlo in the Mediterranean is also presented.




                                                       123
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


         Another piece of the evolutionary history of Atlantic skates
      (Chondrictyes, Rajiformes): integrating DNA barcoding approach
                        and phylogenetic inferences

                 Valentina CROBE1, Alice FERRARI1, Fausto TINTI1, Alessia CARIANI1
 1
     Department of Biological, Geological & Environmental Sciences (BiGeA), University of Bologna, Bologna, ITALY
                                               valentina.crobe2@unibo.it



Conservation and long-term management plans of marine species need to be conceived upon a
universally recognized key-feature: species identity. This important assignment resulted particularly
arduous among skates (order Rajiformes), in which the phenotypic similarity between some taxa and
the individual variability in others, entangled accurate species identification.
This study confirms the power of DNA barcoding for the discrimination between skate species across
the Atlantic Ocean and for its use as effective tool to minimize the risk of species misidentification
and to elucidate species boundaries. In this perspective, this work compiles and establish a new fully
available and well-curated barcode library, the ELASMO-ATL project, which gathered biological
and molecular information of 432 skate specimens and covered coastal waters of four FAO Major
Fishing Areas (27, 34, 47, 41) of the Atlantic Ocean.
The evolutionary histories of 34 skate species were estimated with two concatenated mitochondrial
markers (COI and NADH2) through Bayesian and species level phylogeny analyses. It was possible
to discover a new evolutionary lineage within the genus Raja in the southern-most part of its
distribution area and to enable deepening the relationship between South-African endemic species of
Rajella. Once again, Western South African coasts and oceanographic fronts may play a fundamental
role among skates’ speciation events in which the paleoclimatic and paleogeographic history joined
to hydrography events could have contributed to the formation of refugial areas, characterized by
geographical isolation. Subsequent contact zones in these areas between Senegal and Angola seems
to constitute a continuum/cline of genetic change among some Raja species.
These data successfully resolved many taxonomic ambiguities and demonstrated a highly cohesive
monophyletic clustering among the order laying the foundations for further inference of evolutionary
patterns suitable for addressing management and conservation issue.




                                                        124
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


                 Elasmobranch fisheries and trade in North Aegean:
                       Six months of systematic monitoring

                Ioannis GIOVOS1, Nikolaos DOUMPAS1, Dimitrios LOUKOVITIS2,
        Roxani NAASAN AGA- SPYRIDOPOULOU1, Georgios ROMANIDIS-KYRIAKIDIS1,
                    Francesco TIRALONGO3,4, Dimitrios K. MOUTOPOULOS5
       1
          iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of the Aquatic Ecosystems, Thessaloníki, GREECE
  2
      Lab of Agrobiotechnology and Inspection of Agricultural Products, School of Agriculture, International Hellenic
                                        University, Sindos, Thessaloniki, GREECE
                                     3
                                       Ente Fauna Marina Mediterranea, Avola, ITALY
       4
         Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University of Catania, Catania, ITALY
         5
           University of Patras, Department of Animal Production, Fisheries& Aquaculture, Mesolonghi, GREECE
                                                ioannis.giovos@isea.com.gr




The Hellenic seas host about 67 species of elasmobranchs, 25 of which are protected, while the
regulation of fishing for another 5 species is declared. The status of elasmobranch exploitation in
Greece remains ambiguous, due to the fact that elasmobranch landings are recorded in aggregated
categories while they are also commonly misreported; consequently accurate species-specific data
are not available in a country level. Mislabeling of elasmobranch products is a common phenomenon
in several markets around the globe and a recent study revealed that is a reality for Greece as well.
Our work aims at monitoring the landings and the marketed products of elasmobranchs in the four
major ports of the North Aegean Sea. The selected area is a hotspot for elasmobranchs as
approximately 40% of their landings takes place. In this work we provide systematic data on a
seasonal basis for quantifying the issue. Monthly visits in Alexandoupoli, Kavala, Michaniona
(Thessaloniki) and Volos take place, collecting species-specific data in the auction markets and
landing sites and flesh samples of elasmobranchs products from the fish markets for genetic
identification and chemical analysis. In addition, interview based surveys are conducted to traders
and consumers for better understanding the market incentives. In six months, a total of 442 species-
specific records of elasmobranchs were gathered from the four auction markets and landing sites, 101
samples of elasmobranch products and 30 samples for chemical analysis. More than 30 questionnaires
from traders and 100 from consumers were collected. Illegal fishing, trade and mislabelling is evident
in the four sites, with some extremely threatened and protected species like Gymnura altavela
(Linnaeus, 1758) being quite common. Traders, fishmongers and fishermen lack knowledge on the
applied legislation as well as on the conservation status of these species, while the lack of conectivity
between legislations, reinforce mislabelling and illegal trade.




                                                          125
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


 Characteristics of whale shark Rhincodon typus around the island of
  St Helena, South Atlantic & the comparative impact of ecotourism

                                               Katie HINDLE1
                            1
                                Department of Environment, University of York, UK
                                           katie_hindle@hotmail.com




328 whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) were identified using photographs and pattern recognition
software between 2013 and 2017 around the island of St Helena in the South Atlantic. The highest
number of whale sharks were recorded in the month of January. This is probably due to the sharks
exploiting a seasonally abundant food source, such as tuna (Scombridae spp.) and other fish spawn
in the waters around St Helena. Other behaviours observed included females remaining stationary in
an inverted arc posture with males swimming around them, which is associated with mating
behaviour in other shark species. The mean total length of the sharks was 7.63 metres, and of the
sharks whose sex was determined 45.9% (133) were female, and 54.1% (157) male. Of those males,
only one was juvenile as determined by clasper morphology. Worldwide, aggregations of whale
sharks tend to consist of majority juvenile males. The combination of mature male and female whale
sharks in the study area and the observed courtship behaviour means it is possible that the waters
around St Helena are of global importance for whale shark mating.
The St Helena aggregation was compared to an aggregation in the Maldives with 315 whale sharks
identified over 10 years. Whale sharks in the Maldives bore a significantly higher injury rate (82.2%,
p<0.001, X2 test) than those in the St Helena aggregation (9.1%), with anthropogenic injuries in
Maldives at 54.9%, compared to 2.4% in St Helena. This may be a consequence of the greater number
of weakly regulated ecotourism boats targeting the Maldives aggregation compared to the tightly
regulated and limited ecotourism for whale sharks around St Helena.




                                                      126
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


        Uncommon elasmobranch acquisitions in Sicilian museums

                    Gianni INSACCO1, Giovanna POLIZZI2, Bruno ZAVA1, 2

                            ¹ Museo Civico di Storia Naturale, Ragusa, ITALY
                              ² Wilderness Studi ambientali, Palermo, ITALY
                                       wildernessbz@hotmail.com



An important role that museums continue to play is the acquisition of new specimens with particular
regard to endangered or critically endangered species. The Museo Civico di Storia Naturale di
Comiso (Ragusa), founded in 1991 has more than 27,000 specimens from zoological and
paleontological samples. In 2017 the Museum was recognized as a "Scientific Institution registered
at the CITES Secretariat D. M. 87, 23.03.1994, IT030”. The elasmobranch collection is represented
by 45 Mediterranean and 10 exotic species (14 Orders, 24 Families). A long series of international
contacts with research institutes and taxidermy cabinets has allowed the acquisition of some rare
specimens. Among these there are a recently acquired adult female of Chlamydoselachus anguineus
Garman, 1884, of 180 cm TL, caught in 2015 in the waters of Suruga Bay, Japan Pacific Ocean and
a female of Oxynotus paradoxus Frade, 1929, about 50 centimeters LT, caught in 2017 in the waters
of the Gulf of Biscay, France, northeast Atlantic Ocean. Wilderness is an institution that deals with
environmental studies. Founded in 1991, it has always paid particular attention to the problems of
nature conservation. The company is regularly listed on the CITES list as a subject that carries out
research and teaching activities. The Wilderness collection, taxidermised with the freeze-dry
technique, is represented by 49 Mediterranean and 20 exotic species. It recently acquired a specimen
of Mustelus fasciatus (Garman, 1913) from La Paloma, Rocha, Uruguay, a C. anguineus and a
juvenile of Mitsukurina owstoni Jordan, 1898, fished in 2015 in the waters of Suruga Bay, Japan and
a female of O. paradoxus, caught in 2016 in the Irish waters. All the new acquisitions were treated
with modern taxidermy techniques: the two C. anguineus, M. fasciatus and M. owstoni with freeze-
dry in Austria and the two O. paradoxus as dry preparations in Concarneau, France.




                                                 127
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


 Mission (im)possible: identifying skate species accurrately, fast, easy
                   and untrained, is that possible?

   Claudia JUNGE1, Marlén K. MYRLUND1, Rupert WIENERROITHER1, Otte BJELLAND1,
   Arve LYNGHAMMAR2, Lars JAKOBSEN1,2, Nicolas STRAUBE3, Ole Thomas ALBERT1
                               1
                                   Institute of Mairne Research IMR), NORWAY
                                     2
                                       Univeristy of Tromsø (UiT), NORWAY
                                      3
                                        Univeristy of Bergen (UiB), NORWAY
                                                Claudia.junge@hi.no




The identification of and distinction between some skate species is not trivial! It is already
challenging to find time during busy research surveys to spend that extra time to e.g. count thorns on
a huge skate and evaluate a set of additional criteria to unambigiously identify its species ID, but what
about commercial fishing vessels? We conducted a set of workshops in 2019 to develop an easy ID
guide for skates in Norwegian waters (~13 species) which will be tested by some commercial fishing
vessels as well as some of our own research surveys until the end of 2019, followed by a feedback-
based revision of this living resource. In addition, we aim to produce a wings-based ID guide for 2020
comprising the top landed skate species in Norway, which is intended as a resource for the landing
sites. We will present some drafts of this wing ID for discussion. Training workshops on the use of
these different resources are planned from 2020 onwards. We will present our stakeholder driven
approach as well as examples of simple criteria which save time. We expect this initiative to increase
the industry-participation and to ultimately yield more accurate species-specific data.




                                                     128
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


   New grey reef shark (Carcharhinus amblyrhynchos) nursery in the
      Mozambico channel close to Nosy be Island – Madagascar

                                   Primo MICARELLI1, Emanuele VENANZI2
   1
       Sharks Studies Center – Scientific Institute (Centro Studi Squali – Istituto scientifico) Massa Marittima, ITALY
                                         2
                                           Manta diving. Nosy be, MADAGASCAR
                                               direzione@centrostudisquali.org




Grey reef sharks (Carcharhinus amblyrhynchos), are included in the IUCN red list as near threatened,
however, their biology is still relatively little known. Discordant data are available on their tendency
to be site fidelity, studies carried out in Australia indicate limited reef fidelity and evidence of large-
scale movements within northern Australian waters, while site fidelity and residency of grey reef
sharks on the outer slope of coral reefs in Palau, Micronesia, over a period of two years and nine
months were detected regularly throughout another study and sharks displayed strong inter-annual
residency with greater attendance at monitored sites during summer than winter months. However, it
is commonly believed that Grey reef sharks display strong levels of site fidelity that persist across
years, at least for some components of the population. Site fidelity is a common phenomenon in many
species, including whitetip (Triaenodon obesus), tawny nurse (Ginglymostoma cirratum), blacktip
(Carcharhinus melanopterus), Caribbean (C. perezi) and grey reef (C. amblyrhynchos) sharks. The
degree of fidelity appears to vary according to life history stage, availability of resources and area of
suitable habitat. Site fidelity is also common in adult reef sharks, although typically more sporadic
when compared to juveniles, which might be partially explained by ontogenetic increases in the size
of home ranges. Off Nosy be in Madagascar in the Mozambique channel, we have identified a new
probable nursery that is being monitored by CSS (Centro Studi Squali) since 2017, thanks to the
logistical and underwater support of the Manta Diving. Around the pinnacle of a coral reef at about
15-30 meters depth, grey reef sharks patrol daily, specimen sizes between 50cm and 200cm. The
importance of identifying and reporting nursery areas for this species, is a priority to promote its
proper conservation.




                                                            129
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


Nursery survey of Nursehound, Scyliorhinus stellaris (Linnaeus, 1758),
 around Monte Argentario peninsula (Tuscany, Italy) with new tools:
           Poseidon R.O.V. (Remote Operative Vehicule)

               Primo MICARELLI 1, Francesca Romana REINERO1,2, Emilio SPERONE2
       1
           Sharks Studies Center – Scientific Institute (Centro Studi Squali – Istituto scientifico) Massa, ITALY
              2
                Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende, ITALY
                                             direzione@centrostudisquali.org



The Nursehound, Scyliorhinus stellaris (Linnaeus, 1758), is a benthonic catshark present inshore and
offshore in the northeast and eastern central Atlantic, over the continental shelf between southern
Scandinavia and Senegal, and is also distributed throughout the Mediterranean. This species is fished
by bottom trawls, gill nets, bottom set long lines, handlines and fixed bottom nets, and occasionally
by pelagic trawls. Although limited data are available on the exploitation and trends in abundance,
declines have been indicated in the Mediterranean Sea, particularly around the Balearic Islands and
in the northwest Mediterranean. The capacity for resilience of this species is affected by a low level
of interconnectivity between isolated populations around islands far from the continental coast. Few
informations are available on its biology; however, it is a large bodied species and is likely more
vulnerable to population depletion than the Smallspotted Catshark (S. canicula), which also occurs
in the region. Given its large size, patchy distribution and evidence of decline in the Mediterranean
Sea, an assessment of at least Near Threatened is warranted (IUCN Red List. 2009). In 2018 Sharks
Studies Centre activated a new project aimed at locating, around Monte Argentario Pensinsula in
Tuscany (Ita), the presence of Nursehound Nursery using Poseidon R.O.V.(Remote operative
vehicule), an underwater drone that can operate up to 120 meters deep with 5 hours of autonomy. The
project, partially funded by the Tuscany Region (Go Green 2018), will allow to identify eggs
spawning areas. The first 2 years of observations, 2018 and 2019, are presented and discussed.




                                                           130
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


                    A different way to analyze opportunistic data:
                   the Mediterranean White Shark as a pilot study

          Stefano MORO1,2, Giovanna JONA-LASINIO2, Francesco COLLOCA3,4,
Gianluca MASTRANTONIO5, Fabrizio SERENA3, Filippo BARGNESI6, Francesco FERRETTI7,8
               1
                    Department of Environmental Biology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, ITALY
                        2
                          Department of Statistical Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, ITALY
                        3
                          Italian National Research Council (CNR), Mazara del Vallo (TP), ITALY
     4
       Department of Biology and Biotechnology “Charles Darwin”, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, ITALY
        5
          Department of Mathematical Sciences “G.L. Lagrance”, Polytechnic University of Turin, Turin, ITALY
          6
            Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona, ITALY
                  7
                    Department of Fish and Wildlife Conservation, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg (VA), USA
                         8
                           Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford University, Pacific Groove (CA), USA
                                                 stefano.moro@uniroma1.it




Sharks represent one of the globally most endangered groups of fish, particularly in the Mediterranean
Sea where 57% of the species are considered threatened by the IUCN. Occurrence sightings are
increasingly scarcer in the area and targeted surveys are rare and limited to specific sectors. However
new opportunities are emerging to exploit unconventional sources of data such as new methods to
analyze citizen science data and other opportunistic sightings.
Analyzing opportunistic records is challenging for two main reasons. First, no systematic surveys
were carried out to collect these data. Hence, no information was recorded about sampling or
observation effort. Second, opportunistic records are presence-only data so they need to be modeled
while making inferences about possible processes generating absence and regimes of sampling effort.
In this pilot study, we combined all the available data on the white shark presence in the
Mediterranean Sea collecting information from different sources (MEDLEM-Mediterranean Large
Elasmobranchs Monitoring and sharkPulse), and used these data to test a different approach in
characterizing the spatial distribution of the species in the area from presence-only data. We used
spatio-temporal Point Processes Models (PPM) both in a Maximum likelihood and Bayesian
framework to analyze the Mediterranenan white shark distribution. In this way we obtained the
probability of occurrence of the species in the area on a set of covariates associated to the point pattern
itself (i.e. SST, fishing effort), controlling for the observation effort through the use of a simple proxy
based on coastal human population trajectories.
This approach can be surely extended to other species and different areas and might represent a useful
tool to better characterize elasmobranchs distribution patterns and conservation status all around the
world, as well as postulating new ecological hypotheses on species so far understudied for a lack of
conventional scientific and adequate fisheries data.




                                                      131
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


                             The Elasmobranchs collections
                        in the Italian Natural History Museums

       Paola NICOLOSI1, Sabrina LO BRUTTO2,4, Cecilia MANCUSI3, Simone FARINA1,
                  Enrico BELLIA4, Marco ARCULEO2, Fabrizio SERENA5
                              1
                                   Musem of Natural History, University of Pisa, ITALY
                 2
                      Department STEBICEF, Section Animal Biology, University of Palermo, ITALY
                    3
                      Agenzia Regionale per la Protezione Ambientale della Toscana (ARPAT), ITALY
                           4
                             Museum of Zoology "P. Doderlein", University of Palermo, ITALY
   5
     Institute for Biological Resources and Marine Biotechnology, Italian National Research Council (CNR), ITALY
                                                  paola.nicolosi@unipi.it



The museums of natural history are the headquarters of the history of our Planet and are fundamental
institutions, highly useful for the dissemination of scientific culture in the world. The preserved
specimens have gone from simple collections of objects to teaching and scientific research tools. The
museum exhibits, in addition to witnessing the presence of species in their natural environments, have
become an important resource for research, necessary to understand the phylogenetic and taxonomic
relationships among also the living organisms, nowadays increasingly threatened with extinction due
to anthropogenic reasons. With the global biodiversity crisis, the museums of natural history have
assumed the role of bank of the biodiversity definitively.
The Mediterranean basin is known as one of the biodiversity ‘hot-spot’ in relation to the presence of
many endemic species. However, since the Mediterranean is one of the most exploited seas on the
Planet, the biodiversity is highly threatened. Regarding the study on Italian sea-life conservation, the
elasmobranch collections of the museums become an important heritage favorable to improve the
biological knowledges and the historical trends of this species community. For these reasons, a
detailed study on the chondrichthyans collections stored in the main Italian museums was carried out.
We present here a general picture of the all information gathered thanks to the collaboration among
various Italian institutions.




                                                       132
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


         Global review of elasmobranch entanglement in anthropogenic
            marine debris & New citizen science platform: ShaREN
                    (Shark and Ray Entanglement Network)

                  Kristian J. PARTON1, Tamara S. GALLOWAY2, Brendan J. GODLEY1
         1
           Centre for Ecology and Conservation, School of Biosciences, University of Exeter, Penryn, Cornwall, UK
 2
     Biosciences, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, Geoffrey Pope Building, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK
                                                   kp336@exeter.ac.uk



Numerous marine taxa become entangled in anthropogenic marine debris, including cartilaginous
fishes (class: Chondrichthyes, e.g. elasmobranchs [sharks, skates and rays], holocephalans
[chimaeras]). Here we present research that has been conducted on the susceptibility of these taxa to
entanglement in marine debris using a systematic literature review complemented by novel data
collection from the social media site Twitter. We present our new online citizen science platform
ShaREN (Shark and Ray Entanglement Network) to further aid data collection on the topic of
elasmobranch entanglement. Our literature review yielded 47 published elasmobranch entanglement
events (N = 557 animals) encompassing 34 species in all 3 major ocean basins. The most common
entangling objects were ghost fishing gear (74% of animals). While investigating Twitter, we found
74 cases of elasmobranch entanglement, representing 26 species. On Twitter, ghost fishing gear was
again the most common entangling material (94.9% of animals). Entanglement in marine debris is
symptomatic of a degraded marine environment and is a clear animal welfare issue. We highlight a
relative paucity of scientific data on this subject and collaborate with the Shark Trust UK to create
ShaREN, to further data collection and enable scientists to accurately quantify elasmobranch
entanglement risks and locate interaction hotspots globally.




                                                          133
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


      Shark fishery between socio-economic and conservation issues


     Alessandra RAFFA, Venera FERRITO, Luana ROSSITTO, Anna Maria PAPPALARDO

         Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University of Catania, ITALY
                                            alessandra-raffa@unict.it



Serious concerns have been expressed by researchers about the vulnerability of shark species in the
Mediterranean Sea. The state of conservation of many species is not known due to the lack of data
and also the continuous bycatch, only roughly estimated, removes these organisms from their habitat
indiscriminately. According to FAO, Italy is one of the biggest consumers of shark meat. The market
for these products is very wide for both fresh and frozen products and the import from all over the
world is also high. Cases of mislabeling about shark are frequently recorded: the major case is the
sale of blue shark (Prionace glauca) as the most valuable dogfish (Mustelus spp.) the cost of which
is higher than the other traded sharks. A research carried out on samples collected at the fish market
of Milan, showed that 77% of the dogfish samples were found to belong to other genera of sharks.
During a study conducted by us on the species authentication of seafood products, 30 samples of slice
labeled as swordfish, bought in the local markets of Sicily, were processed using the consolidated
method of DNA barcoding based on a relatively long fragment of 650 bp of the COI gene. A 20% of
the samples were found to belong to various species of sharks in substitution of swordfish. The species
of elasmobranchs detected were P. glauca, Scyliorhinus canicula, Mustelus mustelus, Isurus
oxyrinchus and Oxynotus centrina. Based on the IUCN data 2016, three of the above species (??) are
considered critically endangered in the Mediterranean Sea, one species is vulnerable (??). From the
molecular analyses we start to collect data on these species, in particular we try to bring more details
from the first part of the fish supply chain: fishermen.




                                                     134
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


       The elasmobranch community in the central Mediterranean:
          change in diversity, abundance and habitat influence

    Letizia SION1, Francesca CAPEZZUTO1, Pierluigi CARBONARA2, Roberto CARLUCCI1,
     Angela CARLUCCIO1, Porzia MAIORANO1, Angelo TURSI1, Gianfranco D’ONGHIA1

                    ¹Department of Biology, University of Bari Aldo Moro, Bari, ITALY
    ²COISPA Tecnologia and Ricerca, Stazione Sperimentale per lo Studio delle Risorse del Mare, Bari, ITALY
                                            letizia.sion@uniba.it



In the marine ecosystems the cartilaginous fishes represent the oldest and most ecologically diverse
vertebrates filling the upper levels of aquatic food webs with possible top-down control on the
midlevel consumers. Because of their K-selected life-history (e.g. slow growth, late attainment of
sexual maturity, long life spans, low fecundity) these species are particularly vulnerable to the human
activities, mainly to the overexploitation, and many of them are at risk of extinction. Although sharks
and skates play a key role in the biological communities, the effects of their decline on the marine
ecosystem, due mostly to fishing activity, are still poorly known.
Considering data coming mainly by scientific surveys (e.g. MEDITS) carried out in the last thirty
years, the authors provide information on the species diversity and fluctuations of abundance of the
chondrichthyes caught on the soft bottoms of the north-western Ionian Sea, focusing the analysis on
the species composition change and variable vulnerability and exposure to fishing of the different
species. In this respect, recent acquisitions on the distribution and abundance of elasmobranches in
sensitive habitats of the Ionian and South Adriatic Sea, such as cold-water coral habitats and canyons,
are reported. Since these habitats, less accessible to fishing, can provide a natural refuge for these
vulnerable species, large-scale connected protected areas can be a potential management option for
the cartilaginous fish conservation.




                                                     135
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


                      Why not catch the big fish?
  Fatty acids to support a more sustainable fishing of elasmobranchs
Giuseppe RIJLLO1,2, Cristian MARCHIO1, Francesca RIVIELLO1, Francesca Romana REINERO1,
                             Concetta MILAZZO1, Alberto FELICI2
                     1
                         Department of Biology, University of Calabria, Rende (CS) ITALY
                                2
                                  University of Camerino, Camerino (MC) ITALY
                                            rijllo.giuseppe@gmail.com




Every year in Europe thousands of elasmobranchs die for fishing and many of them are caught for
commercial and human consumption. There is no shame in saying that elasmobranchs can represent
a small variation to the constant consumption of bony fish. Raja clavata is one of the most common
species of elasmobranchs employed along Adriatic coasts for this use. For this research, 30 specimens
of Raja clavata has been collected by trawl from December 2018 till March 2019. From each
specimen we obtained biometric data and then we removed fillets. The samples have been processed
to obtain fatty acids profiles.
Fatty acids have been extracted using Bligh e Dyer (1959) method and gaschromatography has been
employed for the determination of fatty acids profiles. The rays with the larger dimensions showed a
greater concentration of polyunsaturated fatty acids than smaller ones.
This relationship between concentration of fatty acids and dimensions of the rays can lay the
groundwork for a responsible and higher quality fishing activity. In fact, from one hand fatty acids,
in particular polyunsaturated, are essential for human health. From the other hand, since these acids
are more present in bigger animals (that maybe have already reproduced more than once), it appears
useful the promotion of selective fishing activities towards the dimensionality of rays. Since in our
country there are no limits and few regulations for the elasmobranchs fishing, these two issues could
be used as useful points for the development of a more sustainable future fishing.




                                                      136
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


    Increasing knowledge about sharks on primary school students’:
        perceptions towards their vulnerability and conservation
        Chiara ROMANO1, Patrizia C. RIMA 1, Giuseppe RIJLLO1, Marco MINERVINO1,
           Elena CANESSA2, Simona AIELLO1, Maria AVERSA1, Filomena GRECO1,
                 Giorgia SCRIVANO1, Chiara SPADARO1, Emilio SPERONE1,3
              1
               ISOETES Association, Natural History Museum, University of Calabria, Rende (CS) ITALY
        2
            ADM, Museum Educational Association of Natural History Museum of Genova, ITALY
             3
               Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, ITALY
                                            chiararomano1979@gmail.com




For most people the word “shark” conjures images of terror and fear. As one of the greatest marine
predators, sharks easily receive a reputation as killing machines; in reality, however, sharks have far
more to fear from humans than humans do from sharks. Misconceptions, lack of knowledge and
negative attitudes towards sharks act as barriers preventing actions required to tackle threats to shark
populations, limiting the success of global shark conservation initiatives. Shark conservation would
become more sustainable if public understanding of this predatory fish and an appreciation of its
ecological significance could be promoted.
To provide essential baseline data for planning of these educational efforts, this project investigated
the perceptions of 9 to 11 years-old primary school student’s in Rende, CS, (South Italy) about sharks,
and their understanding of ecological concepts and shark-related knowledge. The aim of this study
was:
1- to investigate primary school students’ understanding of ecological concepts and their shark-
related knowledge level and to explore their misconceptions about sharks;
2- to collect students’ perceptions or beliefs about this top predator before and after the presentation
to observe if theese change;
3- to examine any correlations among students’ conceptual knowledge, perceptions and beliefs for
sharks.
Twelve question items were developed to assess students’ perceptions and conceptual understanding
of sharks. We submitted the questionnaire to the students before and after a 30 minute long
presentation about biology, behavior, relationship with human and conservation of sharks. The
presentation has increased the knowledge about sharks in the primary school students. For the two
specific questions about the risk of a shark attack and the danger of sharks, we found more right
answers in the after-test than in the before-test. The submitted test after presentation showed more
students with a new positive view on sharks.
The findings indicate that these students lack sufficient knowledge and possess misconceptions about
sharks and their ecological significance in the marine ecosystem.




                                                       137
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


   Development and validation of an eDNA metabarcoding protocol
                 to survey elasmobranch diversity

Luca CAMINITI1, Ana VERISSIMO2, Miguel PAIS3, Jorge FONTES4,5, Rita P. VASCONCELOS6,
                                Sofia HENRIQUES3
           1
              Department of Earth, Environment and Life Sciences, University of Genoa, Genoa, ITALY
                2
                  Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recurso Genéticos, Vairão, PORTUGAL
 3
   Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, PORTUGAL
                            4
                              Institute of Marine Research, Horta-Faial, Azores, PORTUGAL
            5
              Okeanos Research Centre of the University of the Azores, Horta-Faial, Azores, PORTUGAL
                           6
                             Instituto Português do Mar e da Atmosfera, Lisboa, PORTUGAL
                                    averissimo@cibio.up.pt; lucacaminiti01@gmail.com




Assessing the presence, abundance and population status of marine elasmobranchs of high
conservation concern is challenging given the harmful effects of many traditional sampling
techniques and the logistical difficulty of studying these generally elusive, highly mobile and low
abundance taxa. In this context, we are developing a non-invasive environmental DNA (eDNA)
metabarcoding assay to improve detection of elasmobranch species from water samples, aiming at
improving knowledge on them and ultimately to contribute to their conservation.
The methodological workflow assesses eDNA metabarcoding efficiency in detecting species
diversity, including validation of the method under controlled conditions prior to implementation in
the field. For this purpose, method development and validation were carried out using water samples
from the Lisbon Oceanarium, a closed system where species diversity and abundance is known, and
field testing was performed in the Marine Protected Area of Arrábida, Portugal, where there is some
previous knowledge on elasmobranch diversity.
Several steps were performed to optimize both sampling and molecular analysis, including choosing
filter pore size diameter, eDNA extraction methods and specificity and consistency of PCR
amplification. Two mitochondrial gene regions were tested as molecular barcodes, namely the
cytochrome oxidase subunit I (COI) and the NADH dehydrogenase subunit II (ND2), and checked
for specificity to elasmobranch eDNA and taxonomic resolution. Nitrocelloluse membrane filters
with 0.45 µm pore diameter performed best for water sample filtration coupled to Qiagen DNeasy
Blood and Tissue kit for eDNA extraction. The eDNA metabarcoding assay for ND2 proved highly
specific to elasmobranch taxa and detected the species present in the main tank of Lisbon
Oceanarium. Field testing showed the importance of inhibitor removal prior to PCR amplification.




                                                    138
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


             Updating records of Squatina aculeata Cuvier, 1829
         in the central and eastern Mediterranean Sea (2011-2018)

        Bruno ZAVA 1,2, Gianni INSACCO2, Maria CORSINI-FOKA3, Fabrizio SERENA4
                     1
                         Wilderness Studi Ambientali. Via Cruillas, 27, 90146 Palermo, ITALY
               2
                  Museo Civico di Storia Naturale, via degli Studi 9, 97013 Comiso (Ragusa), ITALY
   3
     Hellenic Centre for Marine Research, Institute of Oceanography, Hydrobiological Station of Rhodes, GREECE
     4
       National Research Council, Institute for Marine Biological Resources and Marine Biotechnologies, ITALY
                                              wildernessbz@hotmail.com




The three angelshark species living in the Mediterranean Sea, Squatina aculeata Cuvier, 1829, S.
oculata Bonaparte, 1840 and S. squatina (Linnaeus, 1758), are listed as Critically Endangered Species
for the basin. Alerted fishermen operating in the central and eastern Mediterranean waters provided
information on the accidental capture of S. aculeata. Data on the captures of fifteen S. aculeata
specimens collected between 2011 and 2018 from the Aegean and Libyan seas and from the waters
of the Sicilian Channel and western Sicily are reported, adding information on the distribution and
biology of this Critically Endangered elasmobranch species of the Mediterranean Sea. Data on sex,
weight, depth of captures, fishing gears and the vessel names are given.




                                                      139
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


   First Documented Angelshark Squatina squatina (Linnaeus, 1758)
           from the Saroz Bay (North Agaean Sea), Turkey

                         Aytuğ ZİLİFLİ1, Sezginer TUNÇER2, Alkan ÖZTEKİN3
         1
             Çanakkale Onsekiz Mart UniversityGraduate School of Natural and Applied Sciences, TURKEY
                    2
                      Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Marine Science and Technology, TURKEY
                  3
                    Canakkale Onsekiz Mart Universtiy, Fishing and Proccesing Techology, TURKEY
                                             aytugzilifli@stu.comu.edu.tr




In this study, one female specimen of Angelshark (Squatina squatina) was incidentally caught by a
commercial fisherman at a depth of 13 m on 10 May 2019 from Kabatepe Coast (North Aegean Sea,
Turkey). The specimen was measured with a caliper and a precision scale in order to obtain
morphometric and meristic characters including, total length, standard length, caudal length, gills
opening, pre-first dorsal length, pre second dorsal length, pelvic to caudal space, eye diameter,
pectoral origin, anal origin, Outer nostils, nostils between inner commers, mouth length, mouth width,
first dorsal fin length, second dorsal fin length. Additionally, digestive tract and stomach content of
the angelshark was examined under a loop and a stereomicroscope (Olympus, SD30 only when
needed). Morphometric and meristic characters of the captured specimen are compared with the other
Mediterranean records. According to our examination, upper and lower beaks of the cuttlefish (Sepia
officinalis), Seranus scriba as a whole were identified. Moreover, leaves of Posidonia oceanica,
Zostera marina associated with macro plastic litter (a part of plastic bag) were found in the stomach
content. Detection of the macro plastic litter part in the stomach of the Angelfish is firstly recorded
with this study.




                                                      140
ONOMASTIC INDEX                      Barker J. – 39, 94
                                     Barone M. – 115
Adhami E. – 115                      Barrìa C. – 52
Aeberhard W. – 6                     Bartolì A. – 123
Affuso M. - 56                       Başusta A. – 32
Aiello S. – 137                      Başusta N. – 32
Al Mabruk S. – 105                   Batsleer J. – 112
Albert O.T. – 72, 128                Battaglia P. – 43, 86
Almeida T. – 15                      Battaglia V. - 56
Alvarado D.J. – 39, 94               Battistelli F. – 93
Alves L.M.F. – 73, 85                Bava P. – 53
Amador-Capitanachi M.J. – 27         Becerril-Garcìa E.E. – 33, 54, 55, 79
Anastasopoulou A. – 5, 18            Bellia E. – 132
Andaloro F. – 43, 86                 Bellodi A. – 4, 52, 100
Arcadi E. – 43                       Bergonzini C. – 97
Arculeo M. – 132                     Bernabò I. – 60
Areano E. – 54                       Bernal D. – 25
Argiro J. – 102                      Bervoets T. – 112
Aroch I. – 14                        Besnard L. – 41
Arpaia M. – 56                       Bester-Van Der Merwe A. – 92
Arreola Mendoza L. – 75, 82          Bevacqua L. – 77, 79, 84
Asbury T. – 92                       Biacchi J. – 34
Asturiano J.F. – 20                  Bigal E. – 14, 31, 35, 46, 80
Avalos-Castillo C. – 54              Binda F. – 93
Aversa M. – 137                      Bispo R. – 11, 24
Ayala-Bocos A. – 55                  Bjelland O. – 128
Azzellino A. – 49                    Block B.A. – 30, 113
Babbucci M. – 42                     BockWoldt J. – 110
Babcock E. – 102                     Bolinesi F. – 56
Bagnall – 121                        Bom R.A. – 50
Baino R. – 26                        Bonanomi S. – 51, 52
Barash A. – 46, 31, 122              Bonsignori D. – 63
Barba C. – 56                        Borme D. – 51, 52
Barbato M. – 51, 52                  Boscolo-Palo G. – 16
Barca D. – 77, 79, 84                Bottari T. – 86
Baremore I.E. – 116                  Bottaro M. – 93, 113
Bargelloni L. – 42                   Bracchi V.A. – 49
Bargnesi F. – 91, 99, 131            Brader A. – 50

                               141
Broadhurst M.K. – 70                        Chiriaco S. – 65
Brunetti J. – 44, 62                        Cilli E. – 97
Budd K. – 95                                Cipriano G. – 36
Buffa G. – 57                               Circosta V. – 60, 65
Burgess G. – 111                            Clo S. – 78
Bushnell P. - 25                            Colloca F. – 16, 52, 96, 100, 131
Butner C. – 99                              Colmenero A.I. – 52
Buttino I. – 53                             Compagno L.J.V. – 60, 65
Caccamo M.T. – 86                           Consales G. – 70
Cacchi E. – 87                              Consoli P. – 43, 86
Caffara M. – 87                             Coppola D. – 70
Cagnazzi D. – 70                            Corrias V. – 57
Cai Y. – 102                                Corro-Espinosa D. – 101
Calatayud C. – 44, 62                       Corsini-Foka M. – 139
Calì F. – 51                                Coscia I. – 42
Caminiti L. – 138                           Crobe V.– 97, 124
Campesi E. – 19                             Crocetta F. – 52
Canessa E. – 137                            Cubillos-Moreno J. – 118
Cannas R. – 100                             Cyrne R. – 13, 24
Capello M. – 71                             D’Alessandro M. – 86
Capezzuto F. – 4, 36, 135                   D’Onghia G. – 36, 135
Carbonara P. – 4, 17, 100, 115, 135         Da Rugna C. – 19
Cariani A. – 42, 58, 97, 124                Dagorn L. – 71
Carlson J.C. – 74                           Daly-Engel T. – 67
Carlucci R. – 36, 135                       Damalas D. – 42
Carluccio A.– 36, 135                       Davidovich N. – 80
Caro M.B. – 39, 94                          Day R.W. – 101
Carotenuto A. – 65                          De Carlo F. – 52
Carrozzi V. – 96                            De Leo G. – 113
Castillo-Geniz J.L. – 48, 101               De Maagt P. – 112
Castro F. – 15                              De Sanctis A. – 59
Cau A. – 100                                De Vincenzi G. – 57
Cerra M.C. – 23                             Deidun A. – 120
Cerutti F. – 95                             Demir E. – 52
Ćetković I. – 52                            Demirel N. – 117
Chapman D. - 102                            Deval M.C. – 10
Chatzispiyrou A. – 5, 18, 107               Devloo-Delva F. – 90
Chaumel J. – 114                            Di Capua I. – 53

                                      142
Di Crescenzo S. – 58                         Fordham S.V. – 74
Di Lorenzo M. – 16, 52, 96                   Fowler S.L. – 89
Di Natale A. – 59                            Franch R. – 42
Diallo A. – 71                               Francis M.P. – 37, 74
Diamant R. – 35                              Froese R. - 6
Diniz M. – 11, 24                            Gallego V. – 20
Dinkel T.M. – 98                             Gallo S. – 56
Djurovic M. – 100                            Galloway T.S. – 133
Donati G.F. – 119                            Galván-Magaña F. – 27, 33, 48, 67, 75,
Donnaloia M. – 17                                 76, 79, 82
Doumpas N. – 125                             Gancitano S. – 16
Dulvy N.K. – 74                              Gann-Perkal H. – 122
Dunn M. – 37                                 Garcés-García K.C. - 101
Dureuil M. – 6, 95                           Garcia Barcia L. – 102
Eliceche-Constantini M.A. – 44, 62           García-Coll M. – 20
Elorriaga-Verplancken F.R. – 27, 48,         García-Párraga D. – 20
      67, 75, 79, 82                         García-Salinas P. – 12, 20, 103
Esteves P. – 15                              Garibaldi F. – 42, 52
Estupiñan-Montaño C. – 67                    Garzon F. – 38, 116
Fabietti Y. – 65                             Germana S. – 47
Farina S. – 132                              Giglio G. – 52, 56, 60, 65, 79, 83
Farrugia T. – 121                            Gillham R. – 104
Felici A. – 136                              Giovannelli P. – 60
Fernando D. – 74                             Giovos I. – 52, 105, 125
Ferrari A. – 58, 78, 97, 124                 Godínez Padilla C.J. –48, 101
Ferretti F. – 91, 97, 99, 113, 131           Godley B.J. – 133
Ferrito V. – 134                             Gonzales Armas R. – 76, 82
Filice M. – 23, 83                           Gordon C. – 104, 106
Filiciotto F. – 57                           Graham R.T. – 38, 116
Finotto L. - 7                               Graziadio L. – 65
Finucci B. – 37                              Greco F.- 137
Fioravanti M.L. – 19, 87                     Greco S. – 86
Fiorentino F. – 16                           Gridelli S. – 19
Flajnik M. – 15                              Griffiths A.M. – 107
Florio D. – 19                               Grossmark Y. – 122
Follesa M. C. – 4, 17, 52, 100               Guallart J. – 123
Fonseca Ponce I.A. – 76                      Gubili C. – 18, 107
Fontes J. – 138                              Guerriero G. – 52

                                       143
Gustinelli A. – 19, 87                  Ketchum J. – 62
Gutiérrez-Ortiz M.A. – 55               Kim S.L. – 48
Haddock S. – 99                         Kindlimann R. – 21
Hastie T. – 99                          Kindsvater H.K. – 74
Hawkes L. – 38                          Kingma I. – 112
Hemida F. – 81, 108                     Kleitou P. – 93
Henriques S. – 138                      Klimpfinger C. – 40
Hentati O. – 52                         Konieczna M. – 11, 64
Herman K.B. – 74                        Koutsikopoulos C.- 5, 18
Hernández De La Torre B. -101           Kriwet J. – 8, 21, 40
Hernández-Herrera A. – 48               Kruschel C. – 52
Hindle K. – 119, 126                    Ksibi M. – 52
Hood A.R. – 106, 109                    Kuramae A. – 112
Hoyos Padilla – 33, 48, 67, 76          Kyne P.M. – 74
Imbrogno S. – 23, 83                    Ladley M. – 45
Imenez F.S. – 100                       Ladoul S. – 22, 81
Imsiridou A. – 107                      Laface F. – 86
Insacco G.– 59, 120, 127, 139           Lanfredi C. – 49
Isajlovic I. – 100                      Lanteri L. – 52
Jabado R.W. – 74                        Lara Lorenzo A. - 82
Jacobo-Cervantes M. – 101               Le Croizier G. – 41
Jadaud A. – 100                         Lembo G. – 4
Jakobsen L. – 110, 128                  Lemos M.F.L. – 73, 85
Jambura P. L. – 8, 21                   Leo S. – 23
Jaquemet S. – 41                        Leone A. – 42, 60, 91, 97
Jevremović A. – 52                      Leonetti F.L. – 52, 60, 83
Jiménez Quiroz M. - 101                 Leporati L. – 65
Jona-Lasinio G. – 113, 131              Leurs G. – 112
Jones E. – 37                           Leviol I. – 34
Jorge P. – 64                           Ligas A. – 52
Jorgensen S. – 99                       Liu KM. – 74
Juaristi-Videgaray D. – 79              Liu Z.Y.C. – 99
Jung A. – 111                           Lo Brutto S. – 132
Junge C. – 28, 68, 72, 110, 128         Longo F. – 86
Kapedani6 R. – 115                      Lopes R. – 13
Kechemir-Issad N. – 22                  Lopez M. – 56
Kefil S. – 22, 81                       Lopéz-Angarita J. – 118
Kerbiriou S. – 34                       López-Romero F.A. – 8, 21

                                  144
Lorrain A. – 41                               Mastrantonio G. – 131
Loukovitis D. – 125                           Matić-Skoko S. – 52
Lucchetti A. – 93                             Maulvaut A.L. – 11, 24
Lynghammar A. – 128                           Mauro G. – 60
Maccarrone V.- 57                             Maycock S. – 45
Machado A. – 15                               Mazzoldi C. – 16, 51, 52, 93
Macias D. – 42                                Medici L. – 78
Madigan D.J. – 67                             Megalofonou P. – 42
Madonna A. – 52                               Meijer Zu Slochteren M. – 112
Maes G.E. – 90                                Merchá M. – 114
Magazu S. – 86                                Meuers E. – 94
Magigan D.J. – 48                             Meyers E. – 39
Maiorano P. – 4, 36, 135                      Micarelli P. – 42, 53, 56, 57, 60, 63, 65,
Makhalanyane T. – 9                                70, 77, 79, 83, 129, 130
Malara D. – 43                                Michalsen K. – 28
Malferrari D. – 78                            Micheli F. – 99, 113
Mallefet J. – 61                              Milazzo C. – 83, 136
Mancusi C. – 26, 132                          Mille F. – 112
Manfredi C. – 100                             Mimica R. – 52
Mangoni O. – 56                               Minervino M. – 77, 83, 84, 137
Marchese F. – 49                              Minos G. – 107
Marchio C. – 77, 83, 84, 136                  Miranda P.C. – 64
Mariani S. – 42                               Mmonwa K. – 9
Marín-Jarrín J. – 95                          Moity N. – 95
Marmolejo Rodriguez A.J. – 75, 76, 82         Monteiro J.L. – 116
Marongiu M.F. – 100                           Morey G. – 123
Marques A. – 73, 85                           Morick D. – 14, 46, 80
Marramà G. – 21                               Morini M. – 20
Marsella A. – 87                              Moro S. – 91, 99, 113, 131
Marsh C. – 37                                 Mosca G. – 93
Marshall A.D. – 74                            Moutopoulos D.K. – 52, 125
Marsili L. – 70                               Mulas A. – 17, 52
Martin U. – 61                                Muñoz-Mérida A. – 15
Martinez S. – 31, 46                          Myrlund M. – 72, 110, 128
Martínez-Rincón R. – 33                       Naasan Aga- Spyridopoulou R. – 125
Martinsohn J. – 42                            Nancock J. – 49
Mascareño-Suarez F. – 44, 62                  Nania G. – 77
Massi D. – 26                                 Navone A. – 93

                                        145
Nerlović V. – 52                     Preciado-González P.A. – 55
Nicolosi P. – 132                    Prodöhl A.A. – 42
Niedermueller S. – 115               Raffa A. – 134
Norris T.A. – 27                     Raffoul D. – 11, 24, 64
Novais S.C. – 73, 85                 Raicevich S. – 51, 86
Nowicki R. – 112                     Ramirez-Amaro S. – 100
Nunes G. – 112                       Ramírez-González J. – 95
Ohta Y. – 15                         Rees R. – 49
Olguner M.T. – 10                    Reina R. D. - 7
Ostrowski M. – 28                    Reinero F.R. – 23, 57, 63, 77, 79, 83, 84,
Öztekin A. - 140                           130, 136
Ozyurt C.E. – 32                     Rendeo M. – 41
Pacoureau N. – 74                    Revuelta O. – 114
Pais M. – 138                        Reyes H. – 95
Palmisano M. – 4                     Ricci P. – 36
Palopoli A. – 56                     Richardson J. – 121
Pantoja L. – 75                      Rigby C.L. – 74
Pappalardo A.M. – 134                Riginella E. – 52
Parton K.J. – 133                    Rijllo G. – 65, 136, 137
Paula J.R. – 13                      Rima P.C. – 137
Pauly D. - 117                       Rios Mendoza L. – 76
Pazmiño D.A. – 90                    Ripley D.M. – 25
Peda C. – 86                         Riviello F. – 83, 136
Pegado M.R. – 11, 13, 24, 64         Rizgalla J. – 105
Pelamatti T. – 76                    Rizzo P. – 60
Penadés-Suay J. – 103, 114           Rizzuto S. – 70
Pérez L. – 20                        Rohr A. – 34, 66
Peristeraki P. – 100                 Romanidis-Kyriakidis G. – 125
Pesci P. – 4                         Romano C. – 56, 137
Pešić A. – 52                        Romanov E.V. – 74
Pfaff C. - 21                        Romeo T. – 43, 86
Pimentel M. – 13, 24                 Romero Beltran E. – 101
Pimiento C. – 8                      Rosa R. – 11, 13, 24, 64
Point D. – 41                        Rossitto L. – 134
Polizzi G. – 127                     Ruiz-García D. – 12, 103
Pollom R.A. – 74                     Sabarros P. – 71
Porcu C. – 17, 52, 100               Sabatino G. – 86
Prato G. – 115                       Sala A. – 51

                               146
Salinas-De-Leon P. – 95                          Steffensen J.F. – 25
Salingre S. – 122                                Stephan E. – 34
Sánchez-González A. – 48, 67                     Stephan E. – 66
Santana-Morales O. – 54                          Stevens A. – 25
Santoro A. – 60                                  Stibor H. – 118
Santos C. – 11                                   Straube N. – 118, 128
Santos C.C.P. – 13, 24, 64                       Sutton P. – 37
Savini A. – 49                                   Tamburin E. – 27, 48, 67
Savioli M. – 78                                  Taylor E. W. - 3
Scacco U. – 113                                  Tchernov D. – 14, 31, 35, 46, 80
Scarcelli F. – 60                                Tedesco P. – 19, 87
Schaal G. – 41                                   Thasitis I. – 100
Scheinin A.P. – 14, 31, 35, 46, 80               Thorburn J. – 112
Schillaci F. – 70                                Tigani A. – 65
Sciacca V. – 57                                  Tilley A. – 118
Scrivano G. – 137                                Tinti F. – 42, 58, 97, 124
Sealey M. – 39, 94                               Tiralongo F. – 125
Sellers R. – 25                                  Titone A. – 26
Serena F. – 26, 100, 113, 115, 120, 131,         Toffan A. – 87
     132, 139                                    Tomás J. – 114
Serino E. - 56                                   Tovar Ávila J. – 101
Seymour Z.T.A. – 116                             Travassos Tolotti M. – 71
Shameel I. – 119                                 Tripepi S. – 56, 60, 65, 70, 79
Shea S. – 102                                    Tripp A. – 75
Sherley R.B. – 74                                Tsoukindas K. – 52
Shiels H. A. – 2, 25                             Tudorache C. – 45
Sibanda N. – 37                                  Tunçer S. – 52, 140
Simonetti A. – 96                                Tursi A. – 36, 135
Simpfendorfer C.A. – 74                          Türtscher J. – 8, 21
Sion L. – 4, 36, 100, 135                        Ulman A. – 117
Sonke J. – 41                                    Underwood C.J. – 21
Spadaro C. – 65, 137                             Valettini B. – 93
Spedicato M. T. – 4                              Vallee R. – 47
Sperone E. – 23, 42, 52, 53, 56, 60, 63,         Valsecchi S. – 49
     65, 70, 77, 79, 83, 84, 130, 137            Van De Water M. – 50
Stagioni M. – 42                                 Van Der Veer H.W. – 50
Starostinetsky-Malonek T. – 14, 46               Van Leeuwen A. – 50
Steckenreuter A. – 47                            Van Wyk A. – 9

                                           147
Vanherwerden L. – 90
Vasconcelos R.P. – 138
Venanzi E. – 129
Verissimo A. – 15, 138
Villate-Moreno M. – 118
Viola G. – 57
Visconti G. – 93
Vrdoljak D. – 52
Walker P. – 112
Walker T. I. – 7, 101
Ward D.J. – 21
Wcisel M. – 67
Wieczorek A.M. – 119
Wienerroither R. – 128
Witt M. – 38
Worm B. – 6
Wosnick N. – 80
Yin J.S. – 74
Zaera D. – 28, 68
Zanzi A. – 42
Zareer I. – 119
Zava B. – 59, 120, 127, 139
Zemah Shamir Z. – 31, 46, 80
Zengin M. – 117
Zicarelli G. – 56
Zilifli A. – 140
Zupa W. – 17, 100




                               148
Sponsored and Supported by




                             149
