IAZA native ray and
skate focus group the project is now also monitoring the European captive population via
EAZA. This presentation explains the method behind the current breeding program, its
progress so far and the challenges involved in managing a breeding program restricted to a
captive population with a small founder population.


               14 animals, only 3 breeding correctly?
               Juvenile ray rearing husbandry guide available
               BIAZA: British & Irish Association of Zoos & Aquaria




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                             56



Session 5B: Stakeholder engagement

Using community-based data collectors to assess the status of the traditional
shark fishery in Madagascar.
Frances Humber, Andriamahaino, E., Beriziny, T., Botosoamananto, R., Godley, R.,
Gough, C., Ramahery, V. and Broderick, A.
Blue Ventures Conservation/ University of Exeter
Madagascar’s >5,000 km coastal waters harbour an estimated 123 elasmobranch species.
Despite the enormous biodiversity and economic and social value of Madagascar’s sharks,
the country has no coherent shark conservation strategy.
A major barrier to establishing effective, national-scale conservation of sharks is the paucity
of information on their ecology, fisheries and socioeconomic value, in particular for isolated
fishing communities where dried shark fins are a significant source of income.
We monitored shark landings in 19 villages in SW Madagascar between 2007-2012 using
community-based data collectors from each village. Community members were trained to
collect biological and fisheries data on sharks landed in the traditional fishery (non-motorised
vessels), and to use digital cameras to visually record catch to verify species and size.
In six years >20,000 shark landings, of more than 25 different species, were documented, of
which 20% were classified as immature. Two species, Scalloped Hammerhead Sphyrna
lewini and Sliteye Shark Loxodon macrorhinus, accounted for 66.5% of landings. Community
focus groups suggested the decline in numbers recorded since 2009 was due to a reduction
in shark fishing in this region, with migrant fishers moving to less exploited shark fishing
grounds.
Despite the unreliability of national export statistics, it is likely that the fishery in
Madagascar’s EEZ is severely underreported. We estimate that up to 40,000 sharks/year
are landed in the traditional fishery in the Toliara Province alone. Combined with recent by-
catch and illegal fishing estimates of 4300 tonnes/year, there is a clear need for
management action across all fishing sectors.
Madagascar, small-scale fisheries, community-based monitoring, Sphyrna lewini,
Loxodon macrorhinus.




                 No official government for 5 years




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                           57



Session 5B: Stakeholder engagement

“Science & Fishery Collaboration”: a new collaborative approach to scientists
and fishermen actively working together to provide evidence and inform policy
needs.
Stuart J. Hetherington and Bendall, V.A.
Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (CEFAS), UK
Cefas scientific research combines a variety of different approaches in order to collect high
resolution temporal, spatial, behavioural and biological data of elasmobranches to meet UK
policy need. Such approaches include direct engagement and collaboration with UK
commercial fishermen, whose livelihoods are ultimately affected by changes to stock
assessments, advice and management of their fisheries.
Through Defra and EU funded elasmobranch research programmes, Cefas scientists
engage and work in partnership with fishermen who regularly encounter elasmobanch
species, rapidly and efficiently collecting valuable ‘real-time’ data, required by stock
assessors and policy makers. Key to the success of these programmes is direct
engagement with fishermen, utilisation of commercial fishing vessels as ‘scientific platforms’
and direct harnessing of fisher expertise and knowledge.
Different approaches will be described highlighting examples of current Cefas research
programmes with their suitability for application in two very different commercial fisheries;
the South West UK off-shore gill net fishery with a by-catch of Spurdog Squalus acanthias,
Porbeagle Lamna nasus, and Common Skate Dipturus batis ‘complex’; and the South East
UK inshore mixed fishery with a restricted quota of Thornback Ray Raja clavata, leading to
substantial discarding of the species.
New collaborative roles expected of the fisherman, the scientist, the advisor and the policy
maker in such collaborative approaches will be illustrated, along with the potential benefits,
challenges and impact of each approach.
Fisheries management, engagement, Porbeagle, Spurdog, Common Skate, Thornback
Ray.



        Need to think at the start - how do we feed this into policy advice




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                             58



Session 5B: Stakeholder engagement

Shark hand signals for shark identification.
Riccardo Sturla Avogadri
Shark Academy, Italy
Hand signals are the common way for scuba divers and swimmers to communicate
underwater. Divers use signals for emergency purposes, routine communication and for
general reasons such as to indicate a marine life form to the buddy.This communication
method has multiple advantages: it is simple, effective and easy to use. Each signal is
characterized by a gesture, which immediately identifies the shark in question. It refers to
gestures one can make with one or two hands and are completed by the position of the arm.
These signals let one not only communicate the type of shark which is coming close, but
also to know in which direction to look. As a matter of fact, if a seabed shark is signalled
(benthonic) the diver will look among the rocks and not upwards, as instead one would if it
referred to a surface shark (pelagic). The information therefore supplies, the position of the
shark, and would not only be used in case of danger, but having once checked the shark
species, the diver could decide to avoid the wrong type of behaviour, with incorrect
movements, inciting the shark to attack, but would also make taking photos and filming
easier, as well as confirming the precise identification or a useless encounter in the case of
uncertainty. It is important to be able to directly encounter the shark head on if one is trying
to identify it and to get out of the water with both the same opinion about the sighting: this
lets one be more precise in filling in any identification file. To know the movements of
differing shark species and their habitat, gives indirect information about the whole marine
ecosystem.
Shark photo, rare shark, common shark, hand signal, scientific names.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                               59



Session 5B: Stakeholder engagement

Bycatch or targeted fisheries? Artisanal shark fishing in Fiji, South Pacific.
Kerstin B.J. Glaus, Kalchhauser, I. , Burkhardt-Holm, P. and Brunnschweiler, J.M.
Program Man-Society-Environment, Dept of Environmental Sciences, University of Basel
Artisanal fisheries comprise more than 95 % of the world’s fishermen. Although the main
purpose of artisanal fisheries is supposedly subsistence, in fact excess catch or high value
products such as shark fins are increasingly sold to gain additional income.
Here, we present a first quantitative description of artisanal shark fishing in Fiji. Our major
aim was to explore the extent of targeted and bycatch fisheries. 254 semi-structured
interviews were conducted with fishermen from villages and communities associated with the
coastline of Viti Levu, Vanua Levu, Taveuni, Ovalau and a number of islands of the
Mamanucas and Yasawas. Of 254 fishermen interviewed, 15 % reported to target sharks,
and 70 % reported to have sharks as bycatch while only 15 % do not catch sharks at all.
Those specifically targeting sharks are mainly interested in selling shark fins, reflecting Fiji’s
role as a turntable in international shark fin trade. Of the 70 % having sharks as bycatch, 18
% reported to sell fins. The most commonly captured species were Blacktip Reef Sharks
Carcharhinus melanopterus and Whitetip Reef Sharks Triaenodon obesus.
To confirm these reports and to account for difficulties in species identification by non-
experts, 25 tissue samples collected from fishermen and/or local markets were analyzed
using the COI locus. We identified ten coastal shark species and confirmed catch reports of
endangered or vulnerable species such as Sphyrna lewini and Nebrius ferrugineus.
Additionally, we found several cases of misidentification by fishermen, highlighting the
importance of molecular approaches in managing artisanal small-scale fisheries.
Elasmobranchii, small-scale fisheries, quantification, bycatch.


 Nearly 70% intentional bycatch driven by fin trade
 UK had the mixed species SRX catch & naming problems sorted out




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                         60



Session 6: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks and Basking Sharks

Basking Shark Watch and wider science and conservation in the NE Atlantic –
an update.
Jean-Luc Solandt, Richardson, P., Witt, W., Ranger, S., Duncan, C. and Pikesley S.K.
Marine Conservation Society, UK
25 years of Basking Shark watch sightings have revealed considerable spatio-temporal
trends of shark occurrence in the British Isles. Hotspots of shark sightings persist in the
Southwest, Isle of Man and western Scotland. The treatment of the data to reduce the
impact of observer bias has shown that strong North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) years are
persistent with longer Basking Shark surface sightings seasons, and that sea surface
temperature (SST) appears to be the key signal of the onset of Basking Shark surface
feeding. Other research has suggested that a reduction in surface plankton concentration
appears to lead to the tailing off of the Basking Shark sightings. Concomitant conservation
work focused around the UK Biodiversity Action Plan for the species has led to the
successful annexation of the species on the Bonn Convention of Migratory Species since
tagging studies have proven international migrations of the species. Although there has been
considerable progress in the conservation and knowledge of essential habitat requirements
of the species at different spatial scales, fundamental questions such as population
numbers, and population trends are still beyond us. Despite these issues, an international
Basking Shark conference on the Isle of Man in 2009 recommended that the database is
continued, because of its long-term spatio-temporal time series. It demonstrates that public
sightings schemes have considerable worth when combined with rigorous scientific
research, and applied conservation work.
Basking Shark, hotspots, migrations, science, public sightings.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                               61



Session 6: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks and Basking Sharks

Diel patterns in vertical movement and locomotor activity of Whale Sharks at
Ningaloo Reef.
Gleiss, A.C., Serena Wright, Liebsch, N., Wilson, R.P. and Norman, B.
Bioscience, College of Science, Swansea University
Activity patterns of animals often relate to environmental variables such as food availability
and predation pressure. Technological advances are providing us with new tools to monitor
and better understand these activity patterns. We used animal-attached data loggers
recording acceleration and depth to compare activity patterns and vertical habitat use of
Whale Sharks Rhincodon typus at Ningaloo Reef, Western Australia. Whale Sharks showed
a moderate reverse diel vertical migration but exhibited a clear crepuscular pattern in
locomotory activity. Peak activity occurred at sunset, whereas vertical movement peaked
prior to this. Typical ram surface filter feeding could be identified and occurred primarily
during sunset and the first hours of night. At such times, direct observations indicated whale
sharks were feeding on tropical krill swarms. Diel patterns in activity and diving suggest that
whale sharks have tuned their diving behaviour in anticipation of the formation of these high-
density patches which appear to only be periodically, but predictably available at sunset. Our
results confirm that diel patterns in vertical habitat selection and vertical movements do not
necessarily reflect patterns in activity and foraging behaviour. Direct quantification of activity
and behaviour is required in gaining accurate representation of diel activity patterns. We also
note that by combining behavioural tracking with environmental monitoring we can start to
identify and map regions of seasonal importance, including hotspots for feeding and
spawning for example.
Telemetry, acceleration, behaviour, feeding, DVM.

surface @ night
See paper about mixed effects models. allows to deal with autocorrelation in the data

Elliott Hazen. Scott Hamilton: fish biology @ moss landing.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                           62



Session 6: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks and Basking Sharks

Structure and dynamics of an unexploited population of the Reef Manta Ray
Manta alfredi.
Lydie I. E. Couturier, Dudgeon, C.L., Pollock, K.H., Jaine, F.R.A., Bennett, M.B.,
Townsend, K.A., Weeks, S.J. and Richardson, A.J.
School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland, St Lucia QLD 4072,
Australia.
Reliable abundance assessments are essential to the study of population dynamics and
underpin conservation biology and management of a species. Although fishing pressure is a
major threat to manta spp., information on the trends and status of many of the species’
subpopulations is lacking. Here we use photographic identification and mark-recapture
methods to report on the site affinity, size and structure of an unexploited subpopulation of
Manta alfredi in eastern Australian waters. A total of 716 individuals were identified between
2007 and 2012, including 636 at Lady Elliot Island (LEI), southern Great Barrier Reef. Over
60% of individuals were resighted at least once during the study period. Multiple resightings
within and among years imply a high degree of site affinity to aggregation sites by
individuals. One individual was sighted 11 times at LEI within a 27-year period. The sex ratio
of this manta ray subpopulation was significantly biased toward females with an overall 1.3:1
female-to-male ratio. Overall, females were more likely to be resighted than males, however,
site visitation at LEI varied between sexes. Robust design population models were used to
estimate the population size of the winter aggregation at LEI over a 4-year period. The
model estimated up to 532 individuals in the population within one winter season and that
survivorship of M. alfredi between consecutive years was exceptionally high (φ~1). Our
findings highlighted the importance of aggregation sites for M. alfredi subpopulations, and
provide a valuable baseline to assist in the status assessment of exploited manta ray
subpopulations.
Abundance, aggregation, photographic-ID, program-Mark, survival, site-affinity.
  Sean Williams? Camera with laser frame to know the size




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                          63



Session 6: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks and Basking Sharks

Vertical foraging strategies of Basking Sharks in coastal waters and their
implication for population surveys.
Emmett M. Johnston, Griffin, D.C. and Houghton, J.D.R.
Queens University Belfast / Irish Basking Shark Study Group
The adoption of the distance sampling survey method for estimating Basking Shark density
and relative abundance has proven difficult because estimates of time at the surface, under
varying conditions, are poorly understood (Sims et al., 2003; Southall et al., 2005; Campana,
2008). Here we explore how variance in vertical prey (zooplankton) distribution under
different sea states account for variance in the period of time sharks spend in the top metre
of the water column where they are detectable during surveys. Vertical prey distribution was
recorded by variable depth sampling (1-30 metres) across a grid of nine coastal sample sites
located at Malin Head, Ireland. Zooplankton samples were taken via Von Dorn Bottle and
vertical plankton net hauls during calm (Force 0-2) and moderate (Force 3-4) conditions.
Shark positions throughout the water column (i.e. depth) were determined at one second
intervals using CEFAS G5 Time Depth Recorders (TDR’s) attached for 1-6 days (N=11
sharks). By considering the vertical movements of predators concurrent with estimates of
prey field and weather we determined survey weightings applicable to mixed coastal water
habitats during calm and moderate conditions.
Shark, behaviour, prey, zooplankton, distance sampling.


Graham Hill, The Deep in Hull. Kessel & Hussey Sudan project, acoustic & sat tracking.
Red sea, manta rays oct-dec
Illegal fishing in MPAs. 1500 liveaboards from Egypt
Info gathering from divers. Still considered pristine
3.6m wingspan, into tonic




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                            64



Session 6: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks and Basking Sharks

Basking Sharks and oceanic fronts: remotely-sensed ocean front metrics for
improving understanding of marine megavertebrate habitat use.
Kylie L. Scales and Miller, P.I.
Plymouth Marine Laboratory, UK
Oceanic fronts delineate between water masses, manifesting as enhanced horizontal
gradients in temperature, salinity, density, turbidity or colour. Bio-physical coupling along
fronts can drive the formation of pelagic foraging hotspots. Many, taxonomically diverse
marine vertebrates are known to associate with fronts, including several pelagic sharks and
the giant manta Manta birostris. For example, the planktivorous Basking Shark Cetorhinus
maximus is known to exploit rich foraging opportunities afforded by zooplankton aggregation
along fronts over a range of spatial scales. Recent advances in remote sensing, coupled
with animal tracking/biologging, can now generate high-resolution, individual-level insights
into the physical drivers of habitat selection. Composite front mapping enables objective
detection of thermal and chlorophyll-a fronts and the derivation of metrics quantifying frontal
activity in an animal’s proximal environment. Use of these methods has improved
understanding of levels of association between basking sharks and fronts in the North
Atlantic. Our findings show strong associations in some cases, with sharks following the
surface profile of thermal fronts for several days. Recent collaborative work also identifies
persistent open ocean frontal zones as a ‘front line’ in shark conservation, as hotspots of
overlap between high-use habitat and intensive pelagic longlining activity. Broad-scale,
objective detection of frontal zones and their spatiotemporal dynamics could help in
identification of priority conservation areas in the open oceans, where sharks and rays
remain largely unprotected from deleterious interactions with anthropogenic activity.
Oceanic front, remote sensing, habitat use, marine megavertebrate, Basking Shark.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                     65




                                            POSTER
                                         PRESENTATIONS




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                  66



Evidence of sexual conflict in                     Shark hand signals for shark
Potamotrygon motoro Chondrichthyes-                identification.
Potamotrygonidae at Rio Negro Basin.               Riccardo Sturla Avogadri
Maria Lúcia Góes de Araújo; Melo, S. And           Shark Academy, Italy
Lessa, R.
                                                   Hand signals are the common way for scuba
DIMAR-UFRPE                                        divers and swimmers to communicate
Potamotrygon motoro (Müller & Henle, 1841)         underwater. Divers use signals for emergency
is a freshwater stingray member of                 purposes, routine communication and for
Potamotrygonidae family. It exhibits a             general reasons such as to indicate a marine
wide distribution in the Neotropical Region. At    life form to the buddy.This communication
Rio Negro basin, Amazonas State, Brazil, this      method has multiple advantages: it is simple,
species reach sexual maturity with 39.0-42.00      effective and easy to use. Each signal is
cm disc width, 4-5 years. The reproductive         characterized by a gesture, which immediately
cycle events (mate, ovulation, gestation and       identifies the shark in question. It refers to
birth) are regulated by the level of the river.    gestures one can make with one or two hands
Dermal bites wounds are visible in female and      and are completed by the position of the arm.
male skins during the dry season. In the           These signals let one not only communicate
complex       reproductive     behaviour      of   the type of shark which is coming close, but
elasmobranchs male bites female as a               also to know in which direction to look. As a
precopulatory mechanism to have female             matter of fact, if a seabed shark is signalled
acquiescence during courtship. Records were        (benthonic) the diver will look among the rocks
done of females bit the mating males, and the      and not upwards, as instead one would if it
authors suggest a sexual hierarchy during the      referred to a surface shark (pelagic). The
copulation event. To understand the meaning        information therefore supplies, the position of
of male dermal bites of P.motoro from Rio          the shark, and would not only be used in case
Negro basin, 65 adult male skin were analysed      of danger, but having once checked the shark
and compare with teeth morphology of male          species, the diver could decide to avoid the
and female tooth forms. Ours results indicate      wrong type of behaviour, with incorrect
that P .motoro has teeth sexually dimorphic,       movements, inciting the shark to attack, but
females teeth with rhombic posterior margin,       would also make taking photos and filming
mature males with cuspidate posterior margin.      easier, as well as confirming the precise
All scars in male skins were impressions of        identification or a useless encounter in the
male cuspidate form of teeth. Despite the adult    case of uncertainty. It is important to be able to
sexual ratio at mate area be 1:1, these findings   directly encounter the shark head on if one is
suggest the occurrence of male dispute during      trying to identify it and to get out of the water
the mating season of Potamotrygon motoro at        with both the same opinion about the sighting:
Rio Negro basin.                                   this lets one be more precise in filling in any
                                                   identification file. To know the movements of
Potamotrygon      motoro,      male,     sexual
                                                   differing shark species and their habitat, gives
conflict, Rio Negro.
                                                   indirect information about the whole marine
                                                   ecosystem.
                                                   Shark photo, rare shark, common shark,
                                                   hand signal, scientific names.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                  67



Influence of sexual maturity and age on              OLSHARK program: preliminary results
the bathymetric distribution of Dipturus             of first satellite tagging of Thresher.
oxyrinchus in the Sardinian seas                     Shark Alopias pelagicus in Eastern
(Central Western Mediterranean).                     Tropical Pacific.
Andrea Bellodi, Mulas A., Follesa M.C.,              JUNG, A., Cécile Brigaudeau, Moreno, L.A.,
Cannas R., Cannas S., Marongiu M.F., Porcu           Velasquez, J. and Bessudo, S.
C. and Cau A.
                                                     Des Requins et des Hommes (DRDH)
Dipartimento di Scienze della            Vita   e
dell’Ambiente - Università di Cagliari               The Pelagic Thresher Shark Alopias pelagicus
                                                     is one of the largest and most abundant open
The influence of maturity stage and age on the       ocean predators in the Eastern Tropical Pacific
bathymetric distribution of Longnosed Skate          (ETP), and one of the most exploited shark in
Dipturus oxyrinchus (Linnaeus, 1758) in the          the sub-region. A. pelagicus has been
Sardinian seas was investigated. Since 2005          classified as Vulnerable on the IUCN Red List
to 2012, a total of 494 (266 females and 228         since 2004.
males) individuals, from 15.7 and 115.5 cm TL,
were caught during experimental and                  Since 1994, there have been a progressive
commercial trawl surveys at depths between           reduction of the landed volumes and the
129 and 650m. Each individual was measured           average size of captures. This information is a
and weighted. Maturity stages were attributed        serious concern; given the number of people
following the MEDITS scales for the                  who depend on fishing in this area and the
Elasmobranchs. The age was evaluated                 ecological repercussions linked to top
through the count of vertebral centra’s annuli       elasmobranchs decrease.
from a subsample of 75 females and 53 males.         Nonetheless, little is known about the biology
The VBGF parameters were determined (L∞ =            and ecology of this species and the pelagic
149.2, s.e.= 15.72; k = 0.08, s.e. = 0.02; t0 = -    thresher shark is consequently recognized has
0.8, s.e. = 0.29 and L∞ = 118.97, s.e. = 10.82;      the highest priority species for management in
k = 0.11, s.e. = 0.02; t0 = -1.08, s.e. = 0.32 for   the Colombian (Shark NPOA) which various
females and males, respectively). ANOSIM             time series research activities for the study of
showed differences (global R = 0.136,                its biology and ecology. Short-term research
p<0.001) among the six considered strata (A          activities include the study of the migrations
to F with intervals of 100m). Upper than 300m        and movement patterns along the Pacific
(A and B strata) were mostly found immature          Coast while population genetics are identified
individuals from 3+ to 6+ and specimens ≥12+         as long-term activities both selected
at maturity stage 2 and 3 for females and
males, respectively. Between 300-500m (C-D           DRDH with the Foundation Malpelo and the
strata), the population was composed almost          Ministry of Fisheries of Colombia (AUNAP),
exclusively by immature skates <5+. Over             created in 2012 the COLSHARK program to
500m (E-F) younger immatures (<3+) of both           study this specie. One of the objectives was to
sexes and older females (>12+, stage 3 and 4)        organize for the first time in the ETP, a
were mainly present. D. oxyrinchus seems to          scientific fishery expedition to tag Pelagic
mate in shallower waters. After that, females        Thresher Sharks off Pacific Colombian coasts.
migrate to deeper strata to spawn, while             The 10 days expedition took place in March
younger individuals carry out a reverse              2013 in Baya Solano (El Choco area) 11
migration during growth.                             satellite mini PAT tags and 20 visual tags were
Dipturus       oxyrinchus,       bathymetric         successfully deployed. After 6 months, 10
distribution, sexual maturity, age.                  satellite tags have been released and DRDH is
                                                     able to present some preliminary results on
                                                     Alopias pelagicus movement patterns in ETP.
                                                     Alopias pelagicus, ETP, thresher shark,
                                                     Colombia, tagging.


European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                               68



Seaquest Southwest Basking Shark                  How many Basking Sharks are there?
Project.                                          Using photo-identification to assess
Niki Clear, Crosby, A. and Williams, R.
                                                  population abundance.

Cornwall Wildlife Trust                           Gore, M.A., Allan, H., Berrow, S., Vittoria
                                                  Correale, Dick, C., Frey, P.H., Gilkes, G.,
The Seaquest Basking Shark Project is an
                                                  Ormond, R.F. and Speedie, C.
effort-based annual survey of basking shark
sightings carried out in Cornwall by a large      Marine Conservational International, Heriot-
team of volunteers. The sightings scheme          Watt University, Edinburgh.
aims to;
                                                  Basking Sharks are considered Endangered in
   Maintain a database with information on       the Northeast Atlantic, but the size of this
    the number of sightings recorded at Hella     population is uncertain. We used photo-
    Point each year                               identification to investigate their abundance
                                                  both in a focal study area (the islands of Mull,
   Collect and analyse sightings data to
                                                  Coll and Tiree on Scotland’s west coast), and
    improve knowledge of basking shark
                                                  over the larger region probably incorporating
    distribution, behaviour and threats around
                                                  the whole western British Isles. In our focal
    the coast of Cornwall
                                                  area, from a total of 793 photographed
   Raise public awareness about basking          encounters, 615 sharks were found to have
    sharks and the threats they face.             distinguishing features, but, of these, only 35
                                                  individuals were re-sighted. Most were re-
The Seaquest Basking Shark Project was
                                                  sighted within 1-3 days but only a few between
launched by Cornwall Wildlife Trust in 2008
                                                  years.
and ran until 2012, collecting over 3270 hours
of effort data.                                   We did obtain sufficient re-sightings to
                                                  generate reliable estimates for our small focal
                                                  study area for two short periods, but the very
SHARKLIFE and tag & release                       low recapture rate between years precluded
                                                  precise abundance estimates for the wider
Simona Clò and Terlizzi, A.                       British Isles region.      This low rate does
MedSharks                                         however indicate a much larger regional
                                                  population (up to 10,000 or more) than
SHARKLIFE,       supported   by    European
                                                  previously anticipated. To investigate these
Commission within Life plus programme, is a
                                                  low recapture rates further, most recently we
project aimed at performing concrete actions
                                                  have repeated (in 2013) photo-identification of
to the conservation and safeguards of sharks
                                                  sharks in our focal area, and have also
in the Mediterranean sea.
                                                  compared our pictures with those submitted to
One important project’s goal is the 100%          the Shark Trust photo-identification database
reduction of elasmobranch captures during         by colleagues in England and Ireland. In all
national sport fishing competitions. The aim of   cases the proportion of re-sightings between
this action is to modify the regulations of       different years and between different locations
surface sport fishing tournaments forbidding      has proved to be only a few percent, indicating
landings of elasmobranchs and implementing        a regional (British Isles) population in the low
a tag&release policy.                             tens of thousands. These data suggest that
                                                  there may have been a significant recovery of
Since 2012 more than 18000 fishermen have
                                                  the regional Basking Shark population since
been involved in 432 competitions and in the
                                                  the 1980s when their exploitation ceased.
conservation of these animals and 50 sharks
tagged.                                           Basking Shark, photo-identification, mark-
                                                  recapture, population estimation, Scottish
Tag & release, Mediterranean.
                                                  west coast, British Isles.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                   69



Mapping to manage: Irish Sea rays                   Status, exploitation and management
Simon Dedman
                                                    of Starry Smoothhound Mustelus
                                                    asterias in the Northeast Atlantic.
Marine and Freshwater Research Centre,
Galway-Mayo Institute of Technology.                Manuel Dureuil

Poor or patchy data hamper better                   Helmholtz Centre for Ocean             Research
management of the Irish Sea assemblage of           (GEOMAR), Kiel, Germany
Cuckoo Ray Leucoraja naevus, Thornback              The Starry Smoothhound Mustelus asterias is
Ray Raja clavata, Blonde Ray Raja brachyura,        classified as Least Concern on the IUCN Red
and Spotted Ray Raja montagui. Pursuing             List. However catch rates have increased in
traditional stock assessments for these             recent years and therefore appropriate
species is not possible: species-specific           management is needed. Here the Northeast
landings data are unavailable. Species              Atlantic stock was examined on the basis of
misidentification, use of inappropriate survey      ICES survey data, with respect to exploitation
gear, and variable availability of tagging,         and abundance trends. Information on biology
fecundity, and age data also preclude typical       and life history was summarised from the
single-species assessment and management            literature, as well as partly recalculated by this
of these stocks.                                    study. The median of empirical equations
The most recent ICES advice recommends              drawing on growth parameters and age at
that a suite of species and fishery-specific        maturity served as estimate of natural
measures be developed to address these              mortality. Total mortality was obtained from
problems, and to achieve recovery of the            pooled catch-at-age data for two different time
depleted species.                                   periods. Total mortality minus natural mortality
                                                    was used as a proxy for fishing mortality.
The aim of this study is to synthesise
numerous disparate datasets to describe the         The results were compared with the fishing
southern Irish Sea ray fishery, and highlight       mortality that would produce maximum
key areas that warrant protection as part of a      sustainable yield, defined as half the intrinsic
future spatial management plan for the species      rate of population increase. Recent and
assemblage.                                         historical trends in CPUE were derived from
                                                    abundance data (years 1992 to 2012).
The datasets available include environmental        Relative exploitation levels from survey and
(e.g.    temperature,      salinity,   substrate,   catch data were examined from 1997 to 2011
bathymetry, currents, etc.), biological (ICES       and compared to a 1:1 replacement ratio. It is
surveys, existing scientifically derived species    hoped that these results will help in
parameters), and fisheries data (landings,          sustainable management of this species.
effort, discard, observer and eggcase data,
economic and social assessment of the               Starry Smoothhound, Northeast Atlantic,
fishery). Appropriate data assimilation tools       management,    exploitation, mortality,
may include the MPA zoning software                 abundance.
‘MARXAN’, species distribution modelling
‘MaxEnt’, or the fish stock simulator ‘GislaSim’.
Data deficiencies may also be filled by
borrowing knowledge from similar, more data-
rich stocks (the ‘Robin Hood’ approach).
The research outputs are intended to improve
spatial management by identifying areas of
highest value as nurseries, or refugia
containing high diversity.
Rays, Irish Sea, mapping, MPA, nursery.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                    70



Status, exploitation and management                 Crossing paths: Marine Protected
of Tope Galeorhinus galeus in the                   Areas and migratory sharks.
Northeast Atlantic.                                 Sara Eckert, Llewellyn, F., Yesson, C. and
Manuel Dureuil                                      Gollock, M.

Helmholtz Centre for Ocean            Research      Zoological Society of London
(GEOMAR), Kiel, Germany                             The value of marine protected areas (MPAs)
Tope Galeorhinus galeus is classified as Data       for the protection of marine species has been
Deficient on the IUCN Red List for the              extensively cited. However, recent work on the
Northeast Atlantic, but its status is Vulnerable    protection of migratory species has called into
worldwide. Here, the Northeast Atlantic stock       question the effectiveness of the current MPA
was examined with respect to exploitation and       network in safeguarding these often critically
abundance trends. The study was based on            endangered species. Highly migratory pelagic
ICES survey data. Information on biology and        species, such as sharks, whales, and tuna,
life history traits was summarised from the         tend to have high aesthetic and/or commercial
literature, as well as partly reanalysed by this    value, putting their protection at the forefront of
study. A newly developed approach was               conservation activity. While properly placed
applied to determine von Bertalanffy growth         MPAs can contribute to the protection of
parameters from tagging data. The median of         migratory species, it is unclear how existing
empirical equations drawing on growth               MPA networks overlap with migratory patterns
parameters and age at maturity served as            of endangered species.
estimate of natural mortality. Total mortality      A subset of sharks listed by the Convention on
was obtained from pooled catch-at-age data of       Migratory Species (CMS) and the Convention
a representative area. Total mortality minus        on International Trade in Endangered Species
natural mortality was used as a proxy for           of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) was selected
fishing mortality.                                  to determine how the distribution and presence
The results were compared with the fishing          of these species overlaps with global MPA
mortality that would produce maximum                coverage. The selection of these two
sustainable yield, defined as half the intrinsic    conventions for this analysis is highly topical:
                                                                                                  th
rate of population increase.        Recent and      CITES CoP16 occurred in March and the 11
historical trends in CPUE were derived from         CMS CoP will take place in 2014.
abundance data (years 1992 to 2012).                Using the World Database on Protected Areas
Relative exploitation levels from survey and        (WDPA) and shark range data, this study
catch data were calculated for the time period      presents the overlap between distributions of
1997 to 2011 and compared to a 1:1                  endangered sharks with both general and ‘no-
replacement ratio. Furthermore, the study           take’ MPAs. The data derived contribute to the
shows that even with presumably sustainable         understanding of the effectiveness of the
fishing pressure, shark stocks can be severely      current MPA network for migratory sharks in
overfished if fishing starts at early ages. It is   terms of locality and connectivity. Critical
hoped that this results will help in the            analysis of international progress towards
sustainable management of this species.             marine protection targets will provide guidance
Tope, Northeast Atlantic, management,               for future MPA development, and identify
exploitation, mortality, abundance.                 possibilities for international cooperation in the
                                                    conservation of migratory species.
                                                    Species distribution, marine protected
                                                    areas, conservation prioritisation, MPA
                                                    network.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                  71



Fishery of Alopias vulpinus in the                  Fishery and reproductive biology of
northern Adriatic Sea.                              Scyliorhinus canicula in the northern
Licia Finotto, Barausse, A., Correale, V.,
                                                    Adriatic.
Curkovic, A., Riginella, E., Visentin, E. and       Licia Finotto, Correale V., Riginella E. And
Mazzoldi, C.                                        Mazzoldi C.
University of Padova                                University of Padova
The Thresher Shark Alopias vulpinus is a large      Scyliorhinus canicula is a small, benthic,
top-predator showing a marked decline in the        oviparous species, inhabiting the Northeast
Mediterranean Sea. This species is considered       Atlantic and the Mediterranean Sea. This study
critically endangered in Italian waters. This       focuses on the fishery and reproductive
study focused on the occurrence and fishery of      biology of this species in the northern Adriatic
this species in the northern Adriatic Sea.          Sea. Analysis of historical landings data from
Despite being not continuous, annual fishery        the fish market of Chioggia (the major market
data (1945-2012) from the fish market of            for the northern Adriatic) revealed a 89.4%
Chioggia, (home to the major fishing fleet of       decline in the capture of catsharks between
the study area) highlighted a positive              the 1940s and 2012.
correlation between catches of Thresher and
                                                    This species is mainly captured as bycatch in
sardine (rS= + 0.47, p = 0.023, N = 31), while
                                                    beam trawls, especially from October to April.
no correlation was found with anchovy (rS= +
                                                    Data obtained from 188 surveys at the fish
0.18, p = 0.51, N = 31) or sea water
                                                    market (from January 2011 to June 2013)
temperature (rS= + 0.05, p = 0.81, N = 31).
                                                    showed a sex-ratio biased towards female
The correlation between Thresher and sardine        (male:female = 1:3.85). The catch was
suggests migrations of Threshers in the             composed mainly of mature individuals (96%
northern Adriatic according to prey availability.   ±2 female; 97% ±3 male), ranging in size
The estimated annual number of Threshers            between 360 and 530mm (N = 1731).
landed at the fish market (1997-2012) is 14 ±6,     Females carrying egg capsules completely or
mainly caught in mid-water trawls from April to     partially formed were found throughout the
October. More than 30% of landed Threshers          year, suggesting a prolonged laying period.
were below 10kg in eviscerated weight, with         Length at first maturity was 370mm for males
some specimens weighting less than 3kg,             and 390mm for females. Estimates of
indicating a high proportion of catch composed      fecundity (number of oocytes larger than
by small young and newborn individuals.             1.6mm) ranged from 32 to 124 and were
Surveys at the fish market highlighted the          positively correlated to female size (r = 0.40, p
occurrence of both males and females.               < 0.01; N = 98; female size: 390 – 48 mm total
                                                    length). The decline in catch highlighted that
                                                    even a small early maturing species can be
                                                    severely depleted by fishery and/or other
                                                    pressures and calls for management actions.
                                                    Scyliorhinus canicula, Adriatic Sea, fishery,
                                                    reproductive biology.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                  72



Does sperm competition influence                    Public perceptions of sharks:
sperm and genital evolution in sharks?              investigating support for shark
John Fitzpatrick
                                                    conservation.

University of Manchester                            Laura A. Friedrich, Jefferson, R. and Glegg,
                                                    G.
Sperm competition, the contest among sperm
from rival males to fertilize a female’s eggs, is   Centre for Marine and Coastal Policy, Marine
a powerful selective force shaping the              Institute, Plymouth University
evolution of sperm traits and genital               Sharks play an integral role in securing the
morphology in many taxa. Yet very little is         health and productivity of the ocean. At the
known about how sperm competition                   same time, they are very vulnerable to the
influences sperm and genital morphology in          pressures that we are exerting on the marine
sharks. However, recent research reveals that       environment. With increasing evidence of the
female multiple mating is common in sharks,         destructive impacts of human activities on
which sets the stage for sperm competition,         marine ecosystems and key species groups
and that sharks exhibit tremendous diversity        such as sharks there is a growing call for
among species in sperm and genital                  stronger public engagement in marine
morphology, a hallmark of the effects of sperm      governance. Knowledge and understanding of
competition on the evolution of reproductive        the issues as well as pro-environmental values
traits. Here I provide a preliminary assessment     are key elements that influence an individual’s
of the relevance of sperm competition as a          behaviour and motivation to engage in
selective force shaping sperm and genital           conservation. This poster presents a study on
evolution in sharks.                                public perceptions of sharks and shark
Sexual selection, reproductive         biology,     conservation in the UK. The study investigated
claspers, sperm design.                             knowledge of and attitudes towards sharks of
                                                    a group of individuals with a clear interest in
                                                    the marine environment, as well as possible
                                                    factors that might influence their perceptions of
                                                    sharks, in order to make recommendations on
                                                    how to foster shark conservation engagement.
                                                    The key finding was that important
                                                    prerequisites for engagement in shark
                                                    conservation exist among parts of the UK
                                                    public. The majority of respondents had good
                                                    knowledge about sharks and positive, pro-
                                                    conservation attitudes. However, this does not
                                                    seem to be enough to motivate actual
                                                    engagement. The study discusses a number of
                                                    specific challenges with regard to sharks which
                                                    might be influencing the way in which society
                                                    connects to shark related issues.
                                                    Shark conservation, public engagement,
                                                    public perceptions.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                    73



Citizen science in shark conservation.             Basking Shark Photo-ID Community
Cat Gordon
                                                   Database.

The Shark Trust, UK                                Cat Gordon

Citizen science – the involvement of               The Shark Trust, UK
volunteers in science - can be a useful tool in    Basking Sharks are seasonal visitors to the UK
terms of engaging members of the public,           coastline, feeding on zooplankton at the sea
raising awareness and aiding scientific data       surface during spring and summer months.
and information collection. To create effective    These encounters provide researchers and
protected areas and to better manage fisheries     enthusiastic amateurs with the perfect
we need to know as much as possible about          opportunity to photograph this normally elusive
shark populations and movements. The Trust         species.
has a number of citizen science projects which
                                                   Photo-identification is a powerful, non-invasive
contribute to this, including:
                                                   field technique used for studying sharks in
   The Great Eggcase Hunt was conceived           their natural environment. Many sharks display
    as a way to raise public awareness of the      significant and recognisable markings on their
    presence and diversity of sharks, skates       fins, which can be natural (pigmentation) or
    and rays in British waters, whilst also        acquired (injuries). These are used to identify
    securing knowledge on the distribution of      individual sharks, allowing researchers to re-
    these species.                                 identify them between seasons.
   The Angler Recording Project asks for
                                                   The Basking Shark Photo-ID project focuses
    elasmobranch catches to be recorded.
                                                   on the development, population, maintenance
    Information collected for this project
                                                   and expansion of an online centralised
    increases our understanding of inshore
                                                   community database, created in collaboration
    populations in the Southwest of England
                                                   between The Shark Trust, Manx Basking Shark
    and will feed into more effective fisheries
                                                   Watch, Marine Conservation International and the
    management and marine protected areas.
                                                   Irish Basking Shark Study Group.
   The Basking Shark Project: Sightings and
    Photo-ID Databases store valuable              This community database (constructed by the
    information about this charismatic species,    Data Archive for Seabed Species (DASSH) team
    helping to map shark movements.                at the Marine Biological Association) is being used
                                                   as a functional safe repository to store photo-
Whilst providing easily accessible information,
                                                   identification data and images. Users can browse
it must be recognised that citizen science does
                                                   through uploaded images and search the
not provide a fully comprehensive dataset, as
                                                   catalogue       by   various    fields    (including
it relies on occasional finds/submissions rather
                                                   characterising features, location, photographer
than being survey-based. However once
                                                   etc.) to find individual sharks. Members of the
verified, information can become data and by
                                                   public only have access to a limited view of the
harnessing modern technology and public
                                                   database, however partner organisations can
enthusiasm for science, can increase the
                                                   register in order to gain access to additional
datasets available to the Trust for use in
                                                   information held on the full database.
tangible conservation benefits.
                                                   Unfortunately the project has suffered from a
Citizen    science,   data     collection,         number of delays which have postponed the
stakeholders, engagement, awareness.               launch, however once these have been resolved
                                                   the database will go live, allowing partners to
                                                   browse, search and batch upload data.
                                                   Basking Shark, photo-ID,             community,
                                                   collaborative, database.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                  74



Morphometric ontogenetic changes in                 Bottom trawling bycatch on the deep-
the Little Gulper Shark Centrophorus                sea shark Etmopterus spinax
granulosus Squaliformes,                            Squaliformes, Etmopteridae in the Gulf
Centrophoridae from the Mediterranean               of Valencia (Western Mediterranean):
Sea: a critical review of anatomic                  does it affect population density? A
characters used for species                         comparison of data in a 24 years
discrimination within the genus.                    interval.
Javier Guallart,    Garcia-Salinas,      P.   and   Javier Guallart, Martín-Lázaro,       A.,   Bas-
Catalán, A.                                         Silvestre and Gimeno-Giménez, L.
Laboratorio de Biología Marina, Universitat de      Laboratorio de Biología Marina, Universitat de
València                                            València
The deep-sea shark genus Centrophorus is            The Velvet Belly Lanternshark Etmopterus
among the most confused taxa within                 spinax is a common deep-sea squaloid
Squaliformes. Historically, part of this            species distributed in the Eastern Atlantic and
confusion is attributable to ontogenetic            Mediterranean Sea. In the Gulf of Valencia it is
changes that occur in its body shape                commonly caught as bycatch by bottom
throughout their life.                              trawling fishing vessels targeting for bathyal
                                                    crustaceans. The species is classified as
Recent authors agree that only one species of
                                                    “Least concern” in the IUCN Red List.
Centrophorus inhabits the Mediterranean Sea.
We describe here morphoanatomical changes           We compare here catches of E. spinax
in this species from specimens caught in the        resulting from a studied series of fishing
Balearic Sea. Indisputable evidence of              journeys carried out by bottom trawlers in the
existence of these changes arises from              Gulf of Valencia (depth range = 430-790 m) in
marked differences observed between pairs of        1989 (n = 12) and in 2013 (n = 17). The
specimens necessarily conspecific: full-term        purpose is to evaluate if relevant changes in
embryos and females that carry them. Thus           the abundance or structure of the population
we have tried fitting models to describe            have occurred, which could be related to
changes from full-term embryos/newborns             fishing activity.
(FTE&NB) to adults.
                                                    Results show a moderate decrease in this time
Of 63 measurements analysed, 14,3% showed           lapse both in frequency of occurrence (FO)
isometry, 36,5% positive allometry and 49,2%        and in mean number of specimens (MNS)
negative allometry. Negative allometry was          caught per journey: FO 85,71% of journeys in
found in most measurement related with head         1989 and 76,47% of journeys in 2013; MNS:
and tail. Positive allometry was generalised in     4,93 ± 4,60 specimens/journey in 1989 and
measurements from pectoral and pelvic fins.         3,88 ± 4,47 specimens/journey in 2013.
Isometric or nearly isometric measurements          However differences cannot be considered
were related with dorsal fins.                      significant.
Dermic denticles show marked changes in             In both years size frequency distribution of
shape and size. FTE&NB have pointed acute           specimens was similar, including from
denticles whereas adults show sessile               newborns to adult specimens. Many of adult
blocklike denticles.                                females caught were pregnant, mainly carrying
                                                    from mid-term to full-term embryos.
General colour of body changes from gray in
FTE&NB to brown in adults. Juveniles wear           Several authors have pointed out for other
conspicuous withe margins in fins that              geographic areas a marked decrease of
disappear in adults.                                abundance of E. spinax during last decades,
                                                    attributing it to fishing pressure or
Major changes in dentition refer to number of
                                                    environmental changes. Apparently this does
asymmetric teeth in upper series. It increases
                                                    not occur in the Gulf of Valencia but future
from very few in FTE&NB to >10 in adults.
                                                    monitoring studies are advisable.
Relevance of these changes for taxonomic
                                                    Key words      (above):    elasmobranchii,
purposes is discussed and some examples
                                                    bycatch, deep-sea fishing.
presented. Similar pattern of changes are
expected to exist in other species of               Key    words     (left):      elasmobranchii,
Centrophorus and should be considered for its       taxonomy, gulper sharks.
morphoanatomical taxonomic characterisation.


European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                75



New data on the uncommon deep-sea                 An Angular Roughshark Oxynotus
shark Somniosus rostratus                         centrina (Squaliaformes, Oxynotidae) in
(Squaliformes, Somniosidae) in the                captivity feeding exclusively on
Balearic Sea (Western Mediterranean).             elasmobranch eggs: an overlooked
Javier Guallart, Vicent, J.J., Catalán, A. and
                                                  adaptation of the species or an isolated
García-Salinas, P.                                case on “food tastes”?
Laboratorio de Biología Marina, Universitat de    Roche, M., Javier Guallart, Catalán, A.
València                                          Gomez-Heredia, A,. García-Salinas, P. and
                                                  Ahuir-Baraja, A.E.
Eight adult females of the rare Little Sleeper
Shark Somniosus rostratus caught by bottom        L’Oceanografic, Ciudad de las Artes y las
trawling fishing boats in the Balearic Sea were   Ciencias de Valencia
studied (550 - 670 m depth; size range 874 -      The Angular Roughshark Oxynotus centrina is
1042 mm TL). This species is classified as        a poorly known demersal species that
“Data deficient” in the IUCN Red List.            distributes   in    Eastern    Atlantic    and
All these females were pregnant. Three of         Mediterranean Sea. It is included in the IUCN
them had uterine ova without macroscopic          Red List as Vulnerable at global scale but as
embryo and 5 had from small to medium-            Critically Endangered for the Mediterranean,
developed embryos. Uterine fecundity ranged       although actually little is known about its
5 - 17 ova/embryos (mean = 11,1 ± 4,0). None      biology, abundance or population dynamics.
of the females, even those carrying mid-term      Direct observations of specimens in their
embryos, had noticeable vitellogenetic oocytes    habitat or cases of maintenance in aquaria are
in their ovaries, which suggests that             very scarce.
vitellogenesis is not       simultaneous to
                                                  We present here observations about feeding
embryonic development.
                                                  habits of a male specimen of O. centrina 40
Five specimens had recognizable remains in        cm TL caught in March 2013 at 150-200 depth
its stomach contents, which corresponded in       in   the     Gulf   of Valencia    (Western
all cases to cephalopod beaks of mesopelagic      Mediterranean) and kept in controlled
squids Histioteuthis spp. This suggests that S.   conditions in aquaria.
rostratus feeds mainly in the water column.
                                                  After    unsuccessfully    feeding    attempts
From March to August 2013 a complete survey       providing prey-items commonly found in field
of catches at the Ibiza Channel (550-800 m        specimens stomachs according to bibliography
                                             -
depth) showed a mean catch rate of 5,81 * 10      (polychaete, molluscs, crustaceans), it was
2                                          -2
   specimens/journey (about 6,97 * 10             remarkable the predation on a ray egg when it
              2
specimens/km ). Although these values of          was provided. Since then, feeding of this shark
density are low, do not correspond to a           specimen has been managed successfully and
species considered as rare as described.          regularly   using     eggs     from     several
The apparent rarity of this species could be      elasmobranch species.
due to a natural low-density population.
Otherwise, their feeding habits suggest that      The procedure used to ingest the yolky-rich
they actively move throughout the water           contents inside eggs cases by previously
column, which could explain the scarcity of       drilling their capsules was very similar in all
captures in these bathyal demersal fisheries.     cases, what suggests that it is not an
However the reason why only a particular part     incidental use of an prey item but a probable
of the population (pregnant females) is usually   specialized behaviour.
caught near the bottom remains unknown.
                                                  We hypothesize that feeding on elasmobranch
Key     word   (above):  elasmobranchii,          eggs by O. centrina may have been partially
reproduction, trophic ecology, deep-sea           overlooked due to the difficulty of identify yolk
fishing.                                          remains in stomach contents studies from field
Key words (right): elasmobranchii, feeding        specimens.
habits, elasmobranch egg cases.                   If this hypothesis is correct, relative abundance
                                                  of oviparous elasmobranch species and their
                                                  eggs could locally influence the trophic
                                                  resources for this apparently threatened
                                                  species.


European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                   76



Population genetics & phylogeography               Novel insights on the origin of
of the Smallspotted Catshark,                      Mediterranean Great White Shark
Scyliorhinus canicula (Linnaeus 1758).             population from ancient mtDNA gene
Vasiliki Kousteni, Kasapidis, P., Kotoulas, G.,
                                                   variation.
and Megalofonou, P.                                Agostino Leone, Puncher, G.N., Cariani, A.,
Department of Biology, Section of Zoology-         Sperone, E., Tripepi, S., Micarelli, P.,
Marine Biology, University of Athens               Gambarelli, A., Sarà, M., Arculeo, M., Doria**,
                                                   Garibaldi, G.F., Dall’Asta, A., Minelli, D., Cilli,
The Smallspotted Catshark is one of the most       E., Vanni, S., Serena, F. and Tinti, F.
abundant elasmobranchs in the Mediterranean
Sea and the northeastern Atlantic. However, it     Genetics & Genomics of Marine Resources
is not known whether the species is                and Environment Laboratory (GenoDREAM),
represented by a single panmictic population       Italy
or by different reproductively isolated            The origin of a population of Great White
populations. In the present study, a 590bp         Sharks (GWS), Carcharodon carcharias,
fragment of the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)          L.1758, residing in the Mediterranean Sea has
COI gene region and 12 microsatellite loci         remained a mystery despite repeated scientific
were analyzed for 431 and 834 individuals          endeavours to retrace their history. Here we
respectively, in order to assess the genetic       analyze 18 historical specimens (30-180 years
structure of the species. Samples originated       old) collected from several museums, research
from the eastern Mediterranean, the western        institutes and private collections in Italy,
Mediterranean and the Atlantic. Samples from       creating the largest dataset of Mediterranean
the Atlantic and Egypt were included only in       GWS mitochondrial DNA gene sequences (i.e.
mtDNA analysis. The mtDNA median-joining           D-loop and COI). Comparative phylogenetic
network had a star-like shape and consisted of     analyses of the Mediterranean GWS with
a central haplotype that was present in all        populations from global range suggested a
regions, while the rest of the haplotypes had a    closer evolutionary relationship with sharks in
clear geographical distribution and were found     Australia-New Zealand, Japan and the Pacific
either in Atlantic and western Mediterranean or    US rather than to the South-African population.
in eastern Mediterranean. Egypt was an             Estimates of the most recent common
exception as it contained haplotypes from both     ancestor carried out using internal calibration
the aforementioned areas. Microsatellite as        with fossil and paleo-geographical data
well as mtDNA analysis revealed a strong           revealed that Mediterranean GWS population
genetic differentiation and supported mainly       originated in the early Pliocene at the end of
the presence of two genetically distinct groups,   the Messinian Salinity Crisis (ca. 5.3 MYA).
one in the Eastern Mediterranean and another       This dating supports a GWS historical long-
in the Western Mediterranean-Atlantic. There       dispersal and paleo-colonization of the
was also strong evidence for Isolation by          Mediterranean via a route of migration through
Distance.      The     strong      genetic  and    Central America, before the formation of the
phylogeographic pattern found can be               Isthmus of Panama in contrast with a ad hoc
attributed to the low dispersal ability and the    previous      hypothesis    which    suggested
exclusively     demersal     lifestyle   of  the   colonization via South Africa due to
Smallspotted Catshark, which is mainly found       navigational errors during past climatic
in depths less than 500 m. It seems that the       oscillations.
deep marine habitats are a strong barrier for
                                                   White Shark, Mediterranean, ancient DNA,
the dispersal of this species.
                                                   mitochondrial  DNA,      phylogeography,
Scyliorhinus      canicula,      population        migration.
structure, mtDNA, microsatellites.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                  77



How a local ecotour operator can                     On the development of the oviducal
provide a coastal study of sharks.                   gland in the Raijd Brown Ray, Raja
Annabelle Lowe and Lowe, C.
                                                     miraletus Linnaeus, 1758

Atlantic Diving                                      Martina F. Marongiu, Porcu, C., Follesa,
                                                     M.C., Bellodi, A., Cannas, R., Mulas, A. and
Atlantic Diving works towards increasing the         Cau, A.
knowledge of Coastal Sharks and improve
Public perception in three ways:                     Department of Life Science and Environment –
                                                     University of Cagliari.
1. Public Outreach….through “in the field”
public wildlife experience during Blue Shark         The oviducal gland, in oviparous cartilaginous
Cage Diving, Snorkelling with Basking Sharks         fishes, plays the important role to produce the
and Sea Safaris which aim to demystify the
                                                     egg capsules containing fertilized eggs and to
perception of Sharks and bringing passengers
/students/tourists closer to wildlife. These are     storage sperms in some species. To better
species which are often vilified, particuarly in a   understand the reproductive strategies of
surfing and tourist area and whose functions in      these animals, in this work we reported the
the local ecosystems are so poorly understood        first investigation on the macroscopical and
when evidence from further afield suggests           microscopical structure of Raja miraletus’
their presence is pivotal to supporting the          oviducal gland from Sardinian waters (central
healthy seas ,the visitors to Newquay so enjoy.
                                                     western       Mediterranean).     Macroscopical
Also educating about the reasons for shark           analysis showed that the size of the oviducal
decline in modern day time and how                   gland increased with maturity reaching the
passengers can make a difference.
                                                     largest width at the extruding stage, and
2. Provide Data..                                    having a consequent decline in regressing and
a) from extensive time at sea including effort       regenerating      ones.   Histological     study
based surveys.                                       displayed that its development started at the
                                                     maturing stage and completed at mature one.
b) encouraging passengers to send in “Citizen
Knowledge” through recording their sightings         The previous analysis also permitted to
once they have left us.                              discern the four zones composing the gland:
                                                     club, papillary, baffle and terminal. Periodic
c) Collaborating with other excelling Wildlife
Boat Operators within Cornwall as one of 5           acid-Schiff (PAS) and alcian blue (AB)
“Founder Members” of “Cornwall Marinelife            histochemical staining highlighted that the club
Boat Operators” launched this year, to share         zone stained AB+, PAS+ and AB+/PAS+;
data for use within the Academic Population.         papillary showed a mixture of PAS+ and AB+;
d) Master Wise (Wildlife Safe) accredited crew,      baffle seemed not react to this staining
gather data during eco wildlife trips without        technique and the terminal zone was positive
causing disturbance.                                 to AB and PAS near to the lumen.
3. Supporting Scientific Studies such as those       Furthermore, not aggregated sperms were
being conducted by local Universities by a           observed in the secretory ducts of the baffle
collaboration of boat operator’s local and           zone, near to the lamellae and the terminal
practical knowledge together with Scientist’s        zone. The histological measurements allowed,
expertise on wildlife population tracking/           also, to observe an increase in size of the
population size estimation.                          glandular area of each zone with maturity.
Ecotour boat operator, coastal shark study,          Baffle zone, which has the task to form the egg
public   outreach,      citizen   knowledge,         capsule, represented the largest glandular
Cornwall     Marinelife      Boat   Operator,        zone in each stage reaching about 70% of the
population tracking/size estimation.                 total area in mature females.
                                                     Raja     miraletus,       oviducal      gland,
                                                     microstructure,         central        western
                                                     Mediterranean.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                 78



Preliminary data on the Mediterranean               Mortality estimates of the Brazilian
Starry Ray biology and demography in                Sharpnose Shark Rhizoprionodon
the Aegean Sea.                                     lalandii in a nursery area from south-
Persefoni Megalofonou, Renieri, E, and
                                                    eastern Brazil.
Leondari, C.                                        Motta, F.S., Caltabellotta, F.P. and Gadig,
Department of Zoology-Marine             Biology,   O.B.F.
University of Athens                                Universidade Estadual Paulista,        Campus
The Mediterranean Starry Ray, Raja asterias         Experimental do Litoral Paulista
Delaroche, 1809, is a benthic skate (family         The       Brazilian      Sharpnose      Shark
Rajidae) that inhabits inshore waters, on sandy     Rhizoprionodon lalandii is a small coastal
bottoms. It has been considered as one of the       species (maximum length 80cm) widely
endemic species of the Mediterranean Sea;           distributed in the Western Atlantic from
however its presence in the Atlantic Ocean          Panama to Uruguay. In Brazilian waters it is
has to be confirmed. In this study the              an important resource for artisanal fisheries,
demography and aspects of the reproductive          especially in south-east areas, representing
biology of the Starry Ray were examined in the      60% of the total shark landings. Nevertheless,
Central and South Aegean Sea, in the eastern        the lack of ecological data on this species
Mediterranean Sea. The samplings were made          remains a critical issue to delineate
by commercial trawlers at depths ranging from       management and conservation actions.
90 to 350 meters, from December 2009 until
                                                    Mortality rates were estimated using indirect
April 2011. A total of 152 specimens ranging
                                                    methods based on life history parameters and
from 148 to 700 mm in length were gathered.
                                                    direct methods (length-converted catch
The overall sex ratio was almost 1:1.
                                                    curves) based on length frequency of sharks
Frequency distributions of total length and total
                                                    caught by small-scale fisheries that operate
weight were calculated for males and females
                                                    along the south-central coast of São Paulo
separately. Females were generally larger and
                                                    State, south-eastern Brazil, between 1997 and
weighed more than males. Regression
                                                    2003. The total mortality (Z) values from
analysis of the length-weight relationship
                                                    indirect methods were 0.60 to 0.904, whereas
indicated the existence of a positive allometry
                                                    catch curves produced values of 1.72 for
(b > 3). All specimens were classified into
                                                    females and 3.05 for males. Natural mortality
stages of sexual maturation, while their
                                                    (M) varied from 0.78 to 0.815 based on age-
gonadosomatic and hepatosomatic indexes
                                                    independent methods and from 1.24 (0 age) to
were estimated. It was observed that males
                                                    0.52 (7 years) based on age-dependent
reached sexual maturity at smaller size than
                                                    methods.
females.
                                                    Despite the range of estimates observed, the
Raja asterias, distribution, length-weight
                                                    results reflect a high fishing pressure on a
relationship, sexual maturity, Aegean sea.
                                                    population that presents a high natural
                                                    mortality. The fishing operation in a nursery
                                                    ground for this species, using gill nets with
                                                    small mesh sizes, has resulted in the capture
                                                    of neonates right after birth. This scenario of
                                                    overexploitation has been reported to
                                                    governmental authorities as a means of
                                                    contributing to the implementation of a regional
                                                    marine protected area (corresponding to IUCN
                                                    category V) management plan.
                                                    Small-scale fisheries, coastal sharks,
                                                    population dynamics, conservation.



European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                      79



Population size and injury prevalence                Shark and other fish eye lenses – a
among Basking Sharks in Manx waters.                 window to cryptic life history
Natasha Phillips, Stone, E. and Hall, J.
                                                     behaviours.

The Manx Wildlife Trust                              Quaeck, K., Trueman, C., MacKenzie, K. and
                                                     Bendall, V.
The use of photo identification (ID) has the
potential to revolutionise elasmobranch              University of Southampton
research, enabling individual animals to be          Traditionally,    tagging   studies    provide
recognised and tracked over significant time         information relating to the distribution and
periods. The Manx Basking Shark Watch has            movement patterns of pelagic sharks.
catalogued a minimum of 126 individual sharks        Electronic tags, however, are expensive, may
from >5 years of photographic data collection.       have low return rates and cannot be attached
The differing injuries sustained by the dorsal       to small juveniles. Incrementally grown tissues
fin, as used for individual identification, have     offer an alternative biochemical method to
been categorised and assessed. This dataset          study ecology retrospectively.
also provides new evidence for stock
                                                     Otoliths, for example, contain a wealth of
assessment, enabling the first estimate of
                                                     information pertaining to the age, growth and
Basking Shark population size in Manx waters.
                                                     whole life, including juvenile, ecology of a
However, the discovery curve suggests this is
                                                     species. The crystalline lens in the vertebrate
a conservative estimate as the entire
                                                     eye also grows incrementally, but this structure
population has yet to be sampled.
                                                     has received relatively little analytical attention.
Within the catalogue, 71% of sharks display at       Unlike otoliths, lenses are proteinaceous
least one type of human-inflicted injury, with       structures formed by fibre cell addition and
the highest proportion of injuries (46%) caused      subsequent progressive dehydration towards
by fishing nets. The data suggest that fin injury    the core. They are acellular, and are not
type is not significantly related to shark gender    remodelled or replaced. Consequently, lenses
(Chi=8.73, CV=11.07, P<0.05), but is                 have the potential to serve as a chronological
significantly related to shark size (Chi=66.6,       record of biochemical information allowing
CV=18.31, P<0.05).                                   examination     of    ontogenetic       movement
The photo-ID catalogue presents a non-               patterns, migration and juvenile ecology in a
intrusive form of mark/recapture data. Applying      wide range of functional groups, including
Schnabel's Index to our ‘well-marked’                elasmobranchs.
catalogue (sharks with very distinct scars,          Here we report pilot data examining the dietary
notches etc.), estimates a population of 75          ecology and movement/migration of the
‘well-marked’ sharks in Manx waters. These           Porbeagle Shark Lamna nasus using stable
constitute 40.5% of our total catalogue, which       isotope analyses from sequential samples of
equates to an estimated total population of 185      eye lens tissue. We explore the potential for
sharks.                                              eye lenses as a log of life-long diet and spatial
Given the small population size and wide             ecology, and compare their role as
prevalence of injuries, it is important that these   biochemical host tissues with vertebrae. We
data are considered in future management             use the recovered diet and migration data to
decisions. Suggested actions include speed           reconstruct feeding and movement ecology in
limits in shark hotspots, further investigation      juvenile Porbeagle Sharks and compare
into interactions with fishing gear and wide-        inferences from stable isotope data with those
scale collaborations to promote shark                from physical tagging.
awareness.                                           Porbeagle, lens, life history, ecology, stable
Basking       Shark,    injuries,          photo     isotope.
identification, abundance.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                   80



The European Studbook for                           Histophysiological aspects of the
Carcharhinus melanopterus, the                      uterine wall of the Nurse Shark
Blacktip Reef Shark – An update in its              Ginglymostoma cirratum (Bonaterre,
initial stages.                                     1778).
Emma Rees                                           Mariana G. Rêgo, Araujo, M.L., Silveira, L.M.,
                                                    Oliveira, P.G.V., Hazin, F. V. H. And Evêncio-
SEA LIFE, UK
                                                    Neto, J.
This poster will form a short pictorial and
                                                    University Federal Rural de Pernambuco.
graphical update on the first stage of the
European    Studbook       for   Carcharhinus       Although the Nurse Shark, Ginglymostoma
melanopterus, the Blacktip Reef Shark.              cirratum, is listed as endangered in Brazil
                                                    (IN05-2004), it is commonly caught by
The European Studbook is a species
                                                    artisanal fishing in Brazilian northeast coast. In
management programme run by EAZA
                                                    the present study, uterine samples of ten
(European Association of Zoo’s and Aquaria).
                                                    females were collected from nurse sharks
The studbook keeper is the person responsible
                                                    landed in Mucuripe beach, at Ceara State
for collection all the data on births, deaths and
                                                    (Latitude e longitude), being then processed to
transfers from all the EAZA zoos and
                                                    routine histology with HE, PAS and Alcian Blue
aquariums that hold the chosen species.
                                                    2.5% staining. The morphometry of the body
Approval for this was awarded at the Shark          and reproductive tract was conducted to the
Symposium at The Zoological Society of              nearest centimeter. The macroscopic maturity
London in April this year.                          stage was defined, according to literature. All
As part of the Studbook we will also be             females were immature. The uteri of the nurse
producing a husbandry guide that will use the       sharks examined contained three (03) layers:
information gained from the inventories that        mucous, muscular and serous. The uterine
were sent out across the globe. A second            mucosae were internally lined by a simple
questionnaire will soon be distributed that will    columnar epithelium. An undeveloped lamina
delve into more detail surrounding nutrition        propria line was present just below the
within this species and aim to link that with the   epithelium, and it consisted of loose
success of breeding.                                connective tissue with blood and lymph
                                                    vessels. Uterine glands were not observed. In
The 5 aims of the studbook are as follows:          the middle portion of the uterus, a stratified
1. Carry out a questionnaire of all European        epithelium with papiliform projections and
   sites to understand breeding experiences         alcian blue positive were present. The muscle
   and the parameters in which this species         and serosa layers were similar to those of
   is held.                                         other elasmobranch species. The presence of
2. Identify  and   document    from the             vascularized epithelium, mucous cells, and an
   questionnaires and other research,               acellular collagen PAS positive layer under the
   guidelines to help with the breeding             epithelium      line   are     uterine    mucosa
   management of this species.                      specializations which allow the uterus to
3. Make an inventory of this species in             provide a stable physiological environment to
   Europe and include individual histories.         G. cirratum embryos, after they have broken
4. Identify the main conservation issues for        out of the egg case. These histological findings
   this species in the wild and explore if the      indicate that despite the lecithothrophic
   aquarium community can become involved           viviparity of the species, the uterus wall has an
   to help reduce some of these threats.            important role in embryo survivorship.
5. Create a self-sustaining, healthy captive        Shark, reproductive, morphology.
   population of animals that is well-
   managed, thereby negating the need for
   wild animals to be sourced and held in
   public aquariums.



European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                81



Supporting sustainable shark, skate                Results from the Shark Trust’s Angler
and ray fisheries in Northern English              Recording Project.
waters.                                            John Richardson
John Richardson                                    The Shark Trust, UK
The Shark Trust, UK                                Distribution and abundance data are
In recent decades landings of elasmobranchs        fundamental in establishing sustainable
by the Northern English fleet have reduced         elasmobranch fisheries in the Northeast
considerably in volume and are now largely         Atlantic. As well as scientific sources, useful
taken     as     bycatch.         Nevertheless     data can also come from ‘citizen science’
elasmobranchs continue to represent a              projects. In 2010 the Shark Trust initiated the
commercially valuable component within             Angler Recording Project, encouraging sea-
mixed fisheries. In 2012, with funding from the    anglers in the Southwest of England to record
Co-operative Foundation Environment Fund,          and share details of their elasmobranch
the Shark Trust commenced a project                catches.
engaging with the commercial fishing industry      To-date, over 1500 catch records have been
in Northern England. The aim of the project is     submitted by sea-anglers. These range from
to support the industry in maintaining and         the pelagic Porbeagle Shark Lamna nasus to
profiting from well-managed, sustainable           the     demersal     Smallspotted    Catshark
elasmobranch fisheries.                            Scyliorhinus canicula; and from the larger-
The Shark Trust has a solid track record in        bodied Blonde Ray Raja brachyura to the
working with the commercial fishing industry       smaller, faster growing Spotted Ray R.
towards sustainable fisheries; however this        montagui. For all species, fishing effort – as
has largely centred on the Southwest of            opposed to natural abundance and/or
England, home to the major UK elasmobranch         population trends – must be considered the
landing ports. This project shifts the focus to    key driver of results at present. Half of all
Northern England, a region with a long shark       records submitted have come from Cornish
fishing heritage.                                  waters; although falling outside the project
                                                   boundary, South Wales also features
Key project objectives include developing a
                                                   prominently, ining records for a significant
positive relationship with the industry,
                                                   number of pelagic sharks known to move
supporting     accuracy      in   elasmobranch
                                                   throughout the Bristol Channel and Celtic Sea
identification and aiding compliance with
                                                   marine areas. Commercial charter vessels
regulations applicable to a growing number of
                                                   and sea-angling clubs accounted for more
species. As catch and landings data continue
                                                   than 80% of catch records submitted, a bias
to improve, those stocks able to support
                                                   reflected in the project’s overall catch
sustainable fisheries can be more effectively
                                                   composition, with the Blue Shark Prionace
managed, while those showing greatest
                                                   glauca the most frequently recorded
declines can benefit from more bespoke
                                                   elasmobranch – and also the primary target for
protective measures and might again, in time,
                                                   most charter operations. The Blonde Ray is
support well-managed fisheries. The Shark
                                                   the most commonly recorded batoid.
Trust has liaised widely with all sectors of the
Northern English fishing industry to assess        Key challenges arising include maintaining
interest in the project and ensure relevance       interest in the project and the flow of data.
and practicality of supporting materials.          Similarly, the project has experienced
                                                   difficulties in engaging unaffiliated (to a sea-
Commercial fisheries, Northern England,
                                                   angling club or similar organisation) anglers
elasmobranch, engagement.
                                                   who make up approximately 75% of all sea-
                                                   anglers.
                                                   Sea-angling, Southwest, elasmobranch,
                                                   citizen science.


European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                               82



A seasonal hotspot for Cetorhinus                   A major breeding site for the
maximus in Apulia, southern Italy,                  Nursehound Scyliorhinus stellaris
Mediterranean Sea.                                  identified in Italian waters through a
                          1
Eleonora de Sabata , E., Bello , G.,
                                         2          citizen science project.
         3             4            4
Cataldini , G., Mancusi , C., Serena , F. and       Eleonora de Sabata and Clò, S.
   1,5
Clò S.
                                                    MedSharks, Italy
MedSharks, Italy
                                                    A major and regular breeding ground for the
A review of available scientific and reliable       Nursehound Shark, Scyliorhinus stellaris
grey literature, targeted interviews with local     (Linnaeus, 1758), was identified on the Santa
operators and collection of photos and videos       Croce Bank, a marine specially protected zone
carried out within Operazione Squalo Elefante       within the Gulf of Naples, Italy.
and the Mediterranean Large Elasmobranchs
                                                    A preliminary survey of this hotspot – first
Monitoring project - both long-standing
                                                    identified by SCUBA divers taking part in “The
projects on Cetorhinus maximus in the
                                                    Mermaid’s purse” citizen-science project -
Mediterranean Sea - identified the coastal
                                                    confirmed the presence of large numbers
waters of the south-eastern Italian region of
                                                    (100+) of egg-cases, containing embryos at all
Apulia as a seasonal hotspot for Basking
                                                    stages of development. Live specimen are
Sharks.
                                                    also regularly seen on the same dive site,
Over 40 records of landings, strandings and         mostly resting in crevices.
sightings were collected between 1977 and
                                                    Future investigations are planned to provide
2013, mostly occurring from January to April.
                                                    an estimate of the numbers of egg-cases and
Peak years were recorded in 2001, 2011 and
                                                    follow their development in-situ. A community
2013.
                                                    photo-ID project is also being developed to
The sharp increase in numbers since 2001,           identify live specimen and monitor their site
amounting to half of the total sightings, is most   fidelity.
likely due to greater public awareness than
                                                    Scyliorhinus   stellaris,   Nursehound,
actual growth in the population of this shark,
                                                    breeding grounds, Mediterranean, Gulf of
which is listed as Vulnerable in the
                                                    Naples.
Mediterranean basin by the IUCN.
These reports are of a causal nature and not
the result of a properly-structured effort;
however they provide general information on
the distribution and relative abundance of
Basking Sharks in the Mediterranean area.

Basking Shark, Mediterranean Sea, Italy,
Apulia, seasonal hotspot.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                     83



RECOAM: a French project for a better                 Philopatric behaviour in Northeast
knowledge of five skate species.                      Atlantic Spurdog Squalus acanthias, a
Project progress and preliminary                      Critically Endangered elasmobranch.
results on Undulate Ray Raja undulata.                James Thorburn, Neat, F., Bailey, D., Noble,
Eric Stephan, Hennache, C., Delamare, A.              L.R and Jones, C.S.
and LeBlanc, N.                                       Aberdeen University
Association pour l’Etude et la Conservation           Philopatric     behaviour     is    increasingly
des Sélaciens (APECS)                                 recognised as a common feature of several
In the Celtic seas and the Biscay/Iberian             elasmobranch          populations        globally;
ecoregions, most of skate species are little          identification and incorporation of this
known.                                                behaviour into conservation plans has the
                                                      potential to substantially increase the
It’s particularly the case for species that seems
                                                      effectiveness of localised static management
to have patchy coastal distribution which are
                                                      for highly mobile species. Spurdog Squalus
not well sampled by the scientific fishery-
                                                      acanthias, a small, critically endangered
independent surveys. Information on the
                                                      elasmobranch, has been shown to display
mixing between skates of different areas and
                                                      philopatric behaviour in other parts of its global
the populations structures but also on biology
                                                      distribution, but not within the NE Atlantic.
and possible movements between ecologically
                                                      Here we report findings from a multiannual
important       grounds     are     needed     for
                                                      mark/recapture study along with results
management purposes.
                                                      collected over a year from a static acoustic
The French RECOAM project was set up in               curtain and archival tag research programme
2012 to contribute to a better knowledge of five      within Loch Etive on the west coast of
skate species, Undulate Ray Raja undulata,            Scotland. Mark/recapture data suggests
Blonde Ray Raja brachyura, Smalleyed Ray              spurdog of both sexes are present in the loch
Raja microocellata, Thornback Ray Raja                throughout the year, potentially indicating a
clavata and Spotted Ray Raja montagui,                resident       component       within       Etive.
working in two areas of the French waters of          Observational data also support the presence
particular interest, one in the western English       of breeding and neonatal Spurdog within the
Channel and one in the Bay of Biscay.                 loch at different times of the year. Building on
                                                      this, the data storage tags and acoustic curtain
The aims of the project are to investigate the
                                                      revealed mature female Spurdog move out of
populations’ structures, to enhance the
                                                      the loch over winter, returning to the loch in
understanding of skates’ movements which
                                                      spring time; behaviour previously unrecorded
could contribute to identify important grounds
                                                      in NE Atlantic Spurdog. This philopatric
in their life cycles, and to evaluate the length at
                                                      behaviour suggests that spatial management
maturity for each species, a fundamental
                                                      of Loch Etive would effectively aid
parameter given its importance in the
                                                      conservation of different age and sex classes
assessment models.
                                                      of Spurdog.
We present here the project progress and
                                                      Squalus acanthias, philopatry,            spatial
some      preliminary    results,    particularly
                                                      management, tagging.
concerning the Undulate Ray Raya undulata
tagging results and length at maturity.
Raja    undulata, North-East  Atlantic,
population structure, tagging, sexual
maturity.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                  84



Implementation of the European Plan of
Action for the Conservation and
Management of Sharks.
Planthof, L. and Monique van de Water
Dutch Elasmobranch Association
In 2009 the European Commission has issued
a European Community Plan of Action for the
Conservation and Management of sharks (the
CPOA). In addition to mandatory actions for
Regional         Fisheries        Management
Organizations and Member States as part of
the European Community, this policy plan
contains recommendations for voluntary
national measures Member States can
implement to address the data gaps for
elasmobranch species and their role in the
ecosystem, to improve the knowledge about
their fisheries, To ensure more sustainable
fisheries and regulation of bycatch, and to
ensure a coherent approach in policy. In this
study it was assessed to what extent the
CPOA has been implemented by the North
Sea countries and what should still be
undertaken to restore and protect the North
Sea elasmobranch species. After reviewing
the current protection status of species in the
area, the gaps in biological knowledge
necessary for proper management and
conservation are addressed for each species.
Subsequently, the implementation of possible
voluntary measures are assessed, leading up
to recommendations on necessary action.
North    Sea,    policy,    conservation,
knowledge gaps, sharks, skates.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                 85




                                         DELEGATE
                                              List




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                        86



EEA 2013
Delegates
Adi Barash               Haifa University                  adibarash@hotmail.com

Agostino Leone           University of Bologna             agostino.leone@stusio.unibo.it

Al Reeve                 St Andrews University             al.reeve01@gmail.com
                                                                                Iraq bull sharks. Knows Ed
Alec Moore               RSK Environment                   amoore@rsk.co.uk

Alexander Hansell        Northeastern University           hansell.a@husky.neu.edu

Ali Hood                 Shark Trust                       ali@sharktrust.org

Ana Verissimo            CIBIO-ICETA                       verissimoac@gmail.com

Andrea Bellodi           University of Cagliari            abellodi@unica.it

Andrew Griffiths         Salford University                andiff100@googlemail.com

Annabelle Lowe           Atlantic Diving                   sharktoursnewquay@gmail.com
                                                                                        Arctic skate nursery
Arve Lynghammar          University of Norway              arve.lynghammar@uit.no

Ben Pedrick                                                benjamin.pedrick@live.cornwall.ac.uk

Bonnie Pickard

Brian Eatough                                              brian.eatough@googlemail.com

Cat Gordon               Shark Trust                       cat@sharktrust.org

Catherine Jones          University of Aberdeen            c.s.jones@abdn.ac.uk

Cecile Brigaudeau        Des Requins et des Hommes         cecile@desrequinsetdeshommes.org

Celene Pickard
                         National Oceanographic
Chris Bird               Centre
                                                           cg1g13@soton.ac.uk

Chris Lowe               Atlantic Diving                   chris@atlanticdiver.co.uk
Christopher                                                                                 young scottish guy
                                                           chrismc53@hotmail.co.uk
McCabe
Chrysoula Gubili         University of Salford             c.gubili@salford.ac.uk
                         Marine Megafauna
Clare Prebble            Foundation
                                                           clare@marinemegafauna.org

Clare Sorensen                                             clare_sorensen@live.co.uk

Clement Chazot           Bimini Biological Field Station   clementchazot@wanadoo.fr

Clinton Duffy            University of Auckland            clinton.duffy@actrix.co.nz
Cristina Rodriguez-      Spanish Institute of
                                                           c.cabello@st.ieo.es
Cabello Rodenas          Oceanography



European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                      87



Daniel Fernando          Linnaeus University               daniel@mantatrust.org
Dianne Van Der
                         NEV                               diannevandercraats@hotmail.com
Craats
Dominic Swift                                              ds108@ic.ac.uk
                         Marine Fish Information                                                emailed him poster
Douglas Herdson          Services
                                                           douglas.herdson@btinternet.com

Edward Wright                                              eddwright@gmail.com

Eleanor Stone            Manx Wildlife Trust               eleanor@manxwt.org.uk

Eleonora de Sabata       Medsharks                         ele@medsharks.org

Elizabeth Ross           Devon & Severn IFCA               office@devonandsevernifca.gov.uk

Emily Humble             Imperial College London           e.humble12@imperial.ac.uk

Emma Rees                Sealife                           emma.rees@merlinentertainments.biz

Emma Shipsides                                             eshipsides@gmail.com

Emmett Johnston          Queen University Belfast          emmett.johnston@baskingshark.ie

Eric Stephan             APECS                             eric.stephan@asso-apecs.org
                         Universidade Estadual
Fabio Motta              Paulista
                                                           limbatus@gmail.com

Frances Humber           Blue Ventures                     fran@blueventures.org
                                                                                   mexican meal in stanford
Francesco Ferretti       Stanford University               ferretti@stanford.edu

George Davies            Bimini Biological Field Station   georgedavis24@hotmail.co.uk

Georgina Pendell         University of Portsmouth          georgina.pendell@port.ac.uk

Georgina Wiersma         Dutch Shark Society               georgina@dutchsharksociety.org

Glenys Heafield          Shark Trust                       glenys@sharktrust.org

Grace Jones                                                graciecherries@yaho.co.uk
                                                                                             met? hotel
Graham Hall              Manx Basking Shark Watch          inter.tech@btinternet.com
                                                                                         met? in hotel!
Haley Dolton             Manx Wildlife Trust               haleydolton@gmail.com
                                                                                       met
Hannah Tarrant           Shark Trust                       hannah@sharktrust.org

Heike Zidowitz           DEG                               heike.zidowitz@elasmo.de

Helene Gadenne           APECS                             helene.gadenne@asso-apecs.org

Irene Kingma             NEV                               kingma.irene@gmail.com

Jackie Hall              Manx Basking Shark Watch          inter.tech@btinternet.com

James Lea                Plymouth University               james.lea@plymouth.ac.uk



European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                    88



James Thorburn           University of Aberdeen            j.thorburn@abdn.ac.uk

Jamie Rendall            DEFRA                             jamie.rendell@defra.gsi.gov.uk

Javier Guallart          L'Elasmogrup                      javier.guallart@uv.es

Jean Luc Solandt         Marine Conservation Society       jls@mcsuk.org

Jean-Denis Hibbit        Sealife                           jean-denis.hibbit@merlinentertainments.biz

Jim Ellis                CEFAS                             jim.ellis@cefas.co.uk

Joanna Barker            Zoological Society London         joanna.barker@zsl.org

Joanna Stead                                               jojostead@hotmail.com

John Fitzpatrick         University of Manchester          john.fitzpatrick@manchester.ac.uk

Jonathan Mitchell                                          jono33@fsmail.net

Katalin Magnenat                                           k_magnenat@hotmail.com

Kate Massaralla          Leeds University                  kate.massarella@gmail.com

Katie Lee-Brooks         Manta Trust                       katie@mantatrust.org

Katie Quaeck             University of Southampton         k.quaeck@noc.soton.ac.uk

Kerstin Glaus            University of Basel               kerstin.glaus@stud.unibas.ch

Kylie Scales             Plymouth Marine Laboratory        kysc@pml.ac.uk

Laura Friedrich          University of Plymouth            laura.friedrich@plymouth.ac.uk

Laura McLennan           University of Leicester           lm275@le.ac.uk

Lauran Brewster          Bimini Biological Field Station   lauran.brewster@gmail.com

Lauren Fear                                                lnfear@hotmail.co.uk Dee? Dierdre's friend in Namibia

Les Noble                University of Aberdeen            l.r.noble@abdn.ac.uk

Licia Finotto            University of Padova              lippia_89@hotmail.it

Lilian Lieber            University of Aberdeen            l.lieber@abdn.ac.uk

Luigi Fusi               Shark Academy                     luigi.fusi@gmail.com

Lydie Couturier          University of Queensland          l.couturier@uq.edu.au

Manuel Dureuil           GEOMAR                            mdureuil@geomar.de

Marc Smith               Dorset Wildlife Trust             msmith@dorsetwildlifetrust.org.uk

Maria Lucia Araujo       DIMAR/UFRPE                       mlpotamotrygon@gmail.com

Mariana Rego             University of Pernambuco          mari_rego03@hotmail.com

Mark Trigg                                                 mark.trigg447@live.cornwall.ac.uk

European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                       89



Martina Marongiu         University of Cagliari           mfmarongiu@unica.it
Massimiliano
                         ISPRA                            massimiliano.bottaro@isprambiente.it
Bottaro
Matthew Gollock          Zoological Society London        matthew.gollock@zsl.org

Matthew Witt             University Of Exeter             m.j.witt@exeter.ac.uk

Megan McCubbin           University of Liverpool          cybermegs2020@hotmail.com

Michael Scholl           Save our Seas Foundation         michael@SaveOurSeas.com

Michaela Moran           Student                          michaela_moran@hotmail.co.uk
                         Dyer Island Conservation
Michelle Wcisel          Trust
                                                          michellewcisel@gmail.com

Moira Mann               Axoloti Films Ltd                moira.mann@tiscali.co.uk
Monique Van de
                         NEV                              vdwater@elasmobranch.nl
Water
Nadia Bruyndonckx        Save our Seas Foundation         nadia@SaveOurSeas.com
                                                                                            in hotel
Natasha Phillips         Manx Wildlife Trust              natashaphillipsemail@gmail.com

Nichola Clear            Cornwall Wildlife Trust          niki.clear@cornwallwildlifetrust.org.uk

Nicholas Dulvy           IUCN SSG                         ndulvy@gmail.com

Nicola Clarke            DEFRA                            nicola.clarke@defra.gsi.gov.uk

Niels Breve              Sportvisserji Nederland          breve@sportvisserijnederland.nl

Niki Koltai              Project Aware Foundation         niki.koltai@projectaware.org.uk

Nuno Queiroz             CIBIO/UP                         nuno.queiroz@gmail.com
                         Dyer Island Conservation
Oliver Jewell            Trust
                                                          oliverjewell@gmail.com

Ornella Weideli                                           ornella.weideli@gmail.com
                         Van Hall University of Applied
Paddy Walker             Science/NEV
                                                          paddy.walker@wur.nl emailed phd thesis
Persefoni
                         University of Athens             pmegalo@biol.uoa.gr
Megalofonou
Peter Verhoog            Dutch Shark Society              peter@dutchsharksociety.org

Philip Doherty           University Of Exeter             p.doherty@exeter.ac.uk

Piers Langhelt                                            planghelt@talktalk.net
                                                                                phenotype mapping w BGS
Rachel Ball              University of Aberdeen           r.e.ball@abdn.ac.uk

Rebecca Allen            Cornwall College                 rebecca.allen@cornwall.ac.uk      send poster


Rebecca Bates                                             toadybates@gmail.com

Rebecca Lunnon                                            reb.lunnon@btinternet.com



European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                    90



Riccardo Avogadri        Shark Academy                   info@sharkacademy.com

Rolf Williams            RSPB                            rolf.williams@talktalk.net

Rowland Sharp            Natural Resources Wales                                          went to his conference
                                                         rowland.sharp@cyfoethnaturiolcymru.gov.uk

Ruth Harries             University of Swansea           rutheharries@ymail.com
                         Benguela Research &
Ruth Leeney              Training
                                                         ruth.leeney@gmail.com

Sally Snow               Physalus                        sallyj.snow@gmail.com

Sarah Fowler             Save our Seas Foundation        fowler.sarah.123@gmail.com

Sarah Magozzi            University of Southampton       sarah.magozzi@noc.soton.ac.uk
                                                                                      Sat with @ dinner, knows adrian
Serena Wright            CEFAS                           serena.wright@cefas.co.uk etc?

Sian Egerton             Cumbria Wildlife Trust          rebeccal@cumbriawildlifetrust.org.uk

Simon Dedman             GMIT                            simondedman@gmail.com

Simone Rizzuto           University of Siena             rsimone1986@libero.it

Simona Clo               CTS                             sharklife@cts.it

Sonja Fordham            Shark Advocates International   sonjaviveka@gmail.com

Sophy McCully            CEFAS                           sophy.mccully@cefas.co.uk

Stuart Hetherington      CEFAS                           stuart.hetherington@cefas.co.uk
                         Marine Megafauna
Thomas Horton            Foundation
                                                         tom@marinemegafauna.org

Ulrich Bosing            Biosci.info                     u.bosing@biosci.info

Vasiliki Kousteni        University of Athens            bkousten@hotmail.com

Victoria Bendell         CEFAS                           victoria.bendall@cefas.co.uk
                         Marine Conservation
Vittoria Correale        International
                                                         vicky3@inwind.it




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
