   Book of Abstracts




European Elasmobranch Association
22nd annual conference
12 – 14 October, Peniche – Portugal

POLICY AND CONSERVATION FOR A BRIGHTER BLUE FUTURE
European Elasmobranch Association
22nd annual conference
12 – 14 October, Peniche – Portugal



Organized by
Associação Portuguesa para o Estudo e Conservação de
Elasmobrânquios & Escola Superior de Turismo e
Tecnologia do Mar do Instituto Politécnico de Leiria.
Welcome to the EEA 2018 and welcome to Peniche!



     The Portuguese Association for the Study and Conservation of

Elasmobranchs (APECE) and the Polytechnic of Leiria are delighted to

host the 22nd Annual European Elasmobranch Association Meeting from

12-14 October held at the Escola Superior de Turismo e Tecnologia do Mar

in Peniche, Portugal.

     Given the threats faced by cartilaginous fishes all over the World,

and in accordance with the EEA’s ethos of bridging scientific evidence

and conservation policies, the theme for this year’s meeting is “Policy and

conservation for a brighter blue future”. We hope this will be an

inspiring conference where the best in elasmobranch research is

presented and discussed, enhancing knowledge, creating networks, and

contributing with the best for our oceans!


                                                       The meeting chairs

                                                                Luís Alves

                                                            Marco Lemos

                                                              Sara Novais
Program
Day 1 – 12th of October

[09h00]- Registration desk opens
[09h15]- EEA Board Meeting (EEA Board members only)
[12h30]- Lunch break

[14h00]- Welcome address
      Alex Bartolí (EEA president) &
      Luís Alves (APECE president & EEA2018 Chair)

[12h15] - Round table discussion: Policy and conservation for a brighter blue future.
      Alex Bartolí, Ali Hood, Rui Coelho & Sarah Fowler

Session: Conservation and fisheries management I
Session chairs: Alex Bartoli & Rui Coelho

 [15h15] - I. Nuez – “Narrowing the gap between reality and knowledge: an update
on the current state of medium-sized and large shark populations in the Catalan coast
(NW Mediterranean).”
[15h30] - S. Fowler – “Trends in Sabah’s shark and ray landings, 1996-2018.”
[15h45] - C. Rodríguez-Cabello – “Synopsis of chondrichthyans in Spanish waters: a
review.”

[16h00] – Coffee break

Session: Conservation and fisheries management II
Session chairs: Alex Bartoli & Miguel Pais

[16h30] - J. Richardson – “Species-specific reporting in Falkland Island skate
fisheries.”
[16h45] - C. Junge – “Sharks and fisheries in Norway – now and then.”
[17h00] – I. Zanella – “Scalloped hammerhead shark sanctuary Golfo Dulce:
community and science generating an effective management.”
[17h15] – A. Barash – “The MECO project (Mediterranean Elasmobranch Citizen
Observations): using social media to create a regional database of elasmobranch
observations.”
[17h30] – A. Hood – “Progress and priorities: elasmobranch conservation through
RFMOs.”
[17h45] – P. García-Salinas – “Bycatch recovery in public aquaria: use in ex situ
conservation of oviparous elasmobranchs.”
[18h00] – M. Laterveer – “Reintroduction of critically endangered sharks and rays
through breeding: feasible or not? A pilot programme.”

[18h15] – EEA Annual General Meeting (EEA members only)

[19h15] – Typical Portuguese “Ice Breaker” (Must attend! Bring your badge and
APECE cup)

Day 2 – 13th of October

Session: Evolution
Session chairs: Claudia Junge & Gavin Naylor


[09h00] – Gavin Naylor (Keynote speaker) – “The Chondrichthyan Tree of Life – 400
million years of independent evolution.”

[10h00] – Julia Türtscher – “The evolutionary history of the tiger shark, Galeocerdo
cuvier.”
[10h15] – Patrick Jambura – “The potential fate of the thresher shark - a fossil tale of
an alopiid-like shark.”
[10h30] – Lisa Locatello – “Sexual selection drives divergent patterns of selection on
sperm flagellum length in sharks and rays.”

[10h45] – Coffee break

Session: Environmental effects and stress assessment
Session chairs: Claudia Junge & Gavin Naylor

[11h15] – Ana Colmenero – “Is the increase of the pelagic stingray Pteroplatytrygon
violacea on the beaches of the northwestern Mediterranean Sea due to climate change?”
[11h30] – Maria Rita Pegado – “Physiological responses of whitespotted bamboo
shark juveniles exposed to ocean acidification.”
[11h45] – Marisa Vedor – “Physiological constraints of vertical behaviour of two
oceanic top predators in the oxygen minimum zone.”
[12h00] – Tania Pelamatti – “Are oceanic manta rays exposed to the threat of plastic
pollution?”
[12h15] – Francesca Reinero – “Trace elements concentration in vertebrae of lesser
spotted dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula) from central Mediterranean sea (Italy).”
[12h30] – Paulo Torres – “Mid-Atlantic elasmobranchs: Suitable metal scouts?”
[12h45] – Alba Martín-Lázaro – “Unknown combinations: pollutants, parasites and
elasmobranchs.”

[13h00] – Lunch break

Session: Elasmobranch Biology and Ecology I
Session chairs: Alexandre Marques & Luís Alves

[14h00] – Nicolas Pinte – “Aerobic and anaerobic metabolism could be related to
swimming capabilities of deep-sea sharks?”
[14h15] – James Thorburn – “Short term gender and seasonal variation in depth
habitats and diving patterns of a ‘coastal’ shark species.”
[14h30] – Jenny Bortoluzzi – “Changing tides: contrasting spatial dynamics of two
sympatric shark species at a remote coral atoll.”
[14h45] – Ivo da Costa – “Thermocline influence on vertical behaviour of marine
predators.”
[15h00] – Haley Dolton – “Assessing the significance of Isle of Man waters for the
migratory basking shark (Cetorhinus maximus).”
[15h15] – Manuel Dureuil – “Important habitats of threatened and data deficient
elasmobranchs in Cabo Verde, West Africa.”

[15h30] – Coffee break

[16h00] – Poster corner

Session: Elasmobranch Biology and Ecology II
Session chairs: Alexandre Marques & Luís Alves

[16h30] – Saoirse Pottie – “Site fidelity and distribution of zebra shark, Stegostoma
fasciatum, in the Mozambican Channel.”
[16h45] – Andres López – “Fidelity of the whitetip shark (Triaenodon obesus) in
Chatham and Wafer bays, Isla del Coco National Park, Costa Rica.”
[17h00] – Kristina Loosen – “Predictors of white shark Carcharodon carcharias presence
at two recreational beaches in a major metropole.”
[17h15] – Valentina Scarponi – “Predator personalities: the relationship between
personality and spatial use of the foraging landscape in an apex predator.”
[17h30] – Jaime Penadés-Suay – “New evidence on deadly interactions between
juvenile swordfish and blue sharks (Prionace glauca).”
[17h45] – Stephanie Spinks – “Trophic ecology of the elasmobranchs Galeus
melastomus (Rafinesque, 1810) and Galeus atlanticus (Vaillant, 1888) (Chondrichthyes)
in the Mediterranean Sea.”
[18h00] – Edgar Becerril-García – “General observations from a deceased whale
shark: Defining protocols during stranding events.”

[20h00] – Gala dinner & Traditional EEA auction

Day 3 – 14th of October

Session: Elasmobranch Biology and Ecology III
Session chairs: Nuno Queirós & Nuno Vasco Rodrigues
[09h00] – Ethan Coll-Calvo – “Feeding habits and trophic position of the endemic
speckled ray (Raja polystigma) in the western Mediterranean Sea.”
[09h15] – David Ruiz-García – “Daily movement patterns undertaken by stingrays
determined through aerial video-surveillance in SE Australia: applications in ecology
& conservation.”
[09h30] – Nathalie Porsiel – “An approach to explain weird behaviour of juvenile
Munk’s devil ray (Mobula munkiana) along the coastal areas of Gulf of Santa Elena and
Punta Descartes, Costa Rica.”
[09h45] – David Jiménez-Alvarado – “Rays of paradise: Ecology and distribution of
the Spiny Butterfly Ray in Gran Canaria, Canary Islands.”
[10h00] – Pauline Lapostolle – “Rays in Malta- where and when to find them and
what we need to consider for management.”
[10h15] – Ana Sobral – “Photo-identification as a tool for the study of mobulid ray
populations in the Azores.”

[10h30] – Coffee break

Session: Elasmobranch Biology and Ecology IV
Session chairs: Nuno Queirós & Nuno Vasco Rodrigues

[11h00] – Barak Azrieli – “Describing biological parameter, habitat use and growth
rates of the Blackchin guitarfish (Glaucostegus cemiculus) while in a nursery ground.”
[11h15] – Joanna Barker – “Development of a new acoustic tagging methodology to
track Critically Endangered Angelsharks.”
[11h30] – Jessica Rudd – “Using multi-channel electronic biologging to describe the
spatio-temporal occurrence and energetics of breaching behaviour in basking sharks.”
[11h45] – Jorge Fontes – “New non-invasive attachment and multisensor towed tags
for short-term high resolution tagging of deep-diving pelagic sharks and rays.”
[12h00] – Clemency White – “25 years of tracking: Using long term datasets to infer
ontogenetic shift in the lemon shark, Negaprion brevirostris, and conservation
implications.”
[12h15] – Laurent Duchatelet – “A microsatellite marker approach of the reproductive
strategy in two lanternshark species, Etmopterus spinax and Etmopterus molleri.”
[12h30] – Fenella Wood – “Environmental DNA (eDNA) as an ecological tool for
locating Angelshark (Squatina squatina) nursery sites.”

[12h45] – Best presentation awards

[13h15] – Closing remarks
      Alex Bartolí (EEA president) &
      Luís Alves (APECE president & EEA2018 Chair)
KEYNOTE

The Chondrichtyan tree of life
– 400 million years of independent evolution
by

Dr. Gavin J. P. Naylor
Director Florida Program for Shark Research, University of Florida, USA



Dr. Naylor’s research interests encompass exploration of the biodiversity

chondrichthyan fishes, phylogenetic inference, protein folding, molecular evolution

and the origin of architectural novelty. While seemingly diverse, these topics reflect

different facets of an abiding interest in a single issue: understanding how changes in

the genome give rise to new features over the course of evolution. If we are to

understand how changes in the genome gives rise to new traits, we ideally need to

look at the architectural blue-prints immediately before and after the change took

place to identify the genomic elements responsible for the novelty. This is hard to do

in biology as we rarely have the opportunity to catch trait evolution in action.

However, arranging the organisms according to their phylogenetic relationships can

tell us the likely ordering of the evolution of traits, and comparing the genomes of a

range of organisms in a phylogenetic context, can give us insights into the

modifications associated with the origin of new features. Clearly, accurate estimates

of phylogenetic relationships are a fundamental prerequisite for understanding the

genomic patterns and associated process responsible for the evolutionary origin of

new traits.
         Oral
presentations
                Session 1.

Conservation and fisheries
             management
    Narrowing the gap between reality and knowledge: an
    update non the current state of medium-sized and large
       sharks in the catalan coast (NW Mediterranean)

                       Ignasi Nuez1,2, Manel Gazo1,2, Lluís Cardona1

    1Department of Evolutionary Biology, Ecology & Environmental Sciences - Universitat de Barcelona,

                                Avinguda Diagonal 643, 08028 Barcelona.
    2SUBMON – Awareness, Study and Conservation of Marine Environment, C/ Rabassa 49-51, 08024

                                               Barcelona.
                                     Email: ignasinuez@submon.org




       In order to gather information on the current state of the still existing shark
populations and the impact fisheries have had on them, a survey of over 30% of the
fishing fleet operating in the Costa Brava (NE Catalonia) was conducted between
October 2016 and November 2017. A total of 44 interviews were carried out on
trawlers (72,1%), surface longliners (4,7%) and bottom longliners (14%). Skippers and
fishermen were asked about identification of 8 shark species - Alopias vulpinus,
Prionace glauca, Hexanchus griseus, Isurus oxyrinchus, Cetorhinus maximus, Squalus
acanthias, Mustelus mustelus and Galeorhinus galeus, their frequency, seasonality and
factors influencing captures, perception on shark population evolution as
“increasing”, “stable” or “decreasing” and drivers of population declines. Results
showed that late spring and summer encompassed most of the shark captures- 58%,
49% and 40% in trawlers, bottom longliners and surface longliners respectively. When
combining all shark species and fishing gears, most fishermen thought populations
were “decreasing” (47.5%) or “stable” (43.2%). A.vulpinus, I.oxyrinchus, C.maximus,
S.acanthias and G.galeus were found to be in decline, whereas P.glauca and H.griseus
were mostly considered to have stable populations. The frequency to which fishermen
captured 0 individuals of any of the 8 species was 73,5% last year. Spatial
overlap (47,5%) and attraction to fishing activity (31,4%) were the two factors that best
featured the decline in non-protected shark populations, whereas overfishing (27,5%)
represented the main cause of decline in protected species (A.vulpinus, I.oxyrinchus,
C.maximus, S.acanthias, G.galeus). Results of this study suggest a reduction in the
abundance of all species except for P.glauca and H.griseus, stresses the fact that
S.acanthias, M.mustelus and C.maximus are barely caught anymore and calls for the
implementation of up-to-date management measures to revert this trend in agreement
with local fisheries, as fishing proves to highly affect the viability of shark populations.
       Trends in Sabah’s shark and ray landings, 1996-2018

                         Mabel Manjaji Matsumoto1, Sarah Fowler 2

1 Senior Lecturer & Head of the Endangered Marine Species Research Unit (UEMS), Borneo Marine Research

                          Institute, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Sabah, Malaysia
 2 Scientific Advisor, Save Our Seas Foundation, Rue Philippe Plantamour 20, CH-1201 Genève, Switzerland

                                     Email: sarah@saveourseas.com




       A fish market survey carried out in Sabah, North Borneo, during 1996-97
produced the first baseline for sharks and rays landed in this east Malaysian state.
Twenty years later, the Save Our Seas Foundation funded a follow up study to assess
changes in species composition and abundance in markets, and contribute to the
development of state and federal conservation and fisheries management policies for
sharks and rays. Rapid Fisheries Assessment by Market Survey (RFAMS) protocols
and log abundance data analyses were applied to compare baseline and current
records. Following significant taxonomic changes, 95 species are recorded from Sabah.
The majority of elasmobranchs recorded in both surveys were captured in ‘take-all’
trawl fisheries. We will present the major changes in species composition observed at
landings sites and fish markets. Large bodied species of sharks and rays were
dominant during the original survey, but are rare today. Small-bodied species, some
of which may have been discarded at sea during the 1990s, are now common.
   Synopsis of chondrichthyans in Spanish waters: a review

 Cristina Rodríguez-Cabello1, Francisco Sánchez1, José Carlos Báez2, Rafael Bañón3,
Alberto Brito4, Jesús M. Falcón4, Toño Maño5, Jorge Baro6, David Macías6, María José
   Melendez6, Antonio Camiñas6, Alberto Arias-García7, Juan Gil8, Carlos Farias8

1 Centro Oceanografico de Santander. Spanish Institute of Oceanography (IEO). Promontorio San Martín s/n.

                                          39004 Santander. Spain.
2 Centro Oceanográfico de Canarias (IEO), Dársena pesquera, 8, E-38180 San Andrés, Santa Cruz de Tenerife.

                                                   Spain.
3 Instituto de Investigaciones Marinas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, IIM-CSIC, c/ Eduardo

                                 Cabello 6, 36208 Vigo, Pontevedra, Spain.
 4 Grupo de Investigación BIOECOMAC, Unidad Departamental de Ciencias Marinas, Facultad de Ciencias,

     Universidad de La Laguna, Avda. Astrofísico Francisco Sánchez s/n, 38206 La Laguna, Tenerife; Islas
                                                Canarias. Spain
   5 Grupo de Estudo do Medio Mariño (GEMM). Edif. Club Náutico, Bajo. 15960 Ribeira (Coruña). Spain.
       6 Centro Oceanográfico de Málaga (IEO). Puerto Pesquero, s/n. 29640 Fuengirola (Málaga). Spain.
7 Instituto de Ciencias Marinas de Andalucia, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, ICMAN-CSIC,

                 Campus Universitario Río San Pedro s/n. Río San Pedro 11519. Cádiz. Spain.
        8 Centro Oceanográfico de Cádiz (IEO) Muelle de Levante (Puerto Pesquero). 11006 Cádiz. Spain.

                                          Email: cristina.cabello@ieo.es




       In 2015 a request of the Spanish Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, Food and
Environment joined a group of fish experts to provide a reference list of marine fish
species according to five regions (marine demarcations) established in the Spanish
Law 41/2010 on the protection of the marine environment. Data were compiled from
different sources: primarily based on lists of species observed in the scientific research
surveys carried out annually by the Spanish Institute of Oceanography (IEO) in
different geographical areas. Also from surveys performed in other specific projects
such as INDEMARES project (www.indemares.es). Furthermore, an active search of
updated citations from the last years was performed. In this study we provide the list
of chondrichthyan species reported in Spanish jurisdictional waters and compare this
checklist among bio-geographical areas. A total of 131 chondrichthyans have been
reported from Spanish waters, which comprise the 12.2 % of total marine fish (1066
species).
The marine demarcation with highest number of species is the North with 98 species,
including those confirmed, (89) and not confirmed (9), and the lowest the LEBA
demarcation (Mediterranean Sea) with 70 species. Nevertheless, the marine areas with
highest number of species per area are Spanish coast of the Gulf of Cádiz and the Strait
of Gibraltar - Alboran Sea. (ESAL). The similarity index indicates that the Canary
Islands demarcation (CAN) is by far the most different one in terms of species,
whereas the two Mediterranean demarcations ESAL and LEBA are those which show
higher similarity. The orders with more fish species distributed in all demarcations
are the Rajiformes, Carcharhiniformes and Squaliformes however some variations
exist among areas. A total of 37 species are shared by the five demarcations.
Species-specific reporting in Falkland Island skate fisheries

                             Thomas Farrugia1, John Richardson2

         1Falkland Islands Fisheries Department, Bypass Rd, PO Box 598, Stanley, Falkland Islands, FIQQ

                                        1ZZ, TFarrugia@fisheries.gov.fk.
                 2Shark Trust 4 Creykes Court, The Millfields, Plymouth, PL1 3JB, UK.

                                      Email: john@sharktrust.org




       The Patagonian shelf and slope waters surrounding the Falkland Islands are a
global hotspot for skates, supporting high biodiversity and abundance. Falkland
waters also host one of the few commercial target fisheries for skates in the world. A
‘foreign fleet’ fishing industry model is utilised, with management of the skate fishery
requiring close collaboration between the Falkland Islands Fisheries Department (FIFD)
and local and overseas industry partners. The fishery is currently managed as a single
multispecies assemblage; skate are winged and skinned at sea, and recorded under
RAY/SRX/Rajidae/Skates and rays.
Accurate species-specific reporting is central to the sustainability of skate fisheries. As
well as generating baseline data on species abundance and distribution, it enables
detection of changes in large, often complex skate assemblages. In 2016 the Shark
Trust began working with the FIFD to develop species-specific ID materials for skate
encountered in Falkland waters. The initial pilot project focuses on skates caught in
the longline fishery for Patagonian Toothfish Dissostichius eleginoides.
The Shark Trust has long championed species-specific knowledge as the platform for
effective management. The Trust has extensive experience working with a broad
range of stakeholders in the research and development of identification materials. In
2006 the Trust developed the first industry-focused species-specific skate ID Guides.
In 2008, following lobbying by the Shark Trust, the UK government implemented
mandatory species-specific reporting of skate and ray landings – a move echoed by
the European Commission in 2009. By working closely with the FIFD in the
development of practical, multilingual ID materials, it is hoped that species-specific
reporting can be implemented for skate bycatch in the Patagonian Toothfish fishery,
with the potential to expand into other fisheries.
         Sharks and Fisheries in Norway – now and then

                Claudia Junge1, Marlén Knutsen1, Ole Thomas Albert1

           1Havforskningsinstituttet (Institute of Marine Research, IMR), Tromsø, Norway.

                                    Email: claudia.junge@hi.no




        Fishery has a long tradition in Norway and plays an important role not only in
the country’s economy but also in its culture. To date, there is no targeted commercial
fisheries for cartilaginous fishes in Norway, however several species are being caught
as bycatch in other fisheries, some once targeted themselves. Among those, the
spurdog (Squalus acanthias) and the porbeagle shark (Lamna nasus) are of particular
interest for fisheries, and have both been commercially caught in Norwegian waters
in the past. Historically, basking sharks (Cetorhinus maximus) have been targeted for
the their livers to produce oil, and their current population status in Norway is
unknown. This talk will give a short overview of the fisheries for those three species
in the past and the status today, and then focus on one of the species in more detail,
the spurdog. Spurdogs underwent population collapses in the recent past throughout
large parts of the Atlantic due to overfishing. Our very comprehensive study
including over 4,000 spurdogs from Norwegian waters investigated various life
history traits, which are crucial for effective species management, and found among
other things a much shorter generation time today than previously has been reported,
i.e. pre-collapse. This signal is consistent with such events and we also found evidence
for a recovering population based on fisheries and survey data. We are using a multi-
disciplinary approach to investigate the spurdog as well as other cartilaginous species
in Norwegian waters to provide sound data for research-based sustainable
management.
     Scalloped Hammerhead Shark Sanctuary Golfo Dulce:
        Community and Science Generating an Effective
                       Management

                                Ilena Zanella1, Andrés López2

               1Asociación Conservacionista Misión Tiburón, Playa del Coco, Costa Rica.

                    Email: izanella@misiontiburon.org, alopez@misiontiburon.org




        The scalloped hammerhead, Sphyrna lewini, is specifically threatened by human
activities, including targeted fishing. The abundance of S. lewini in Isla del Coco
National Park, Costa Rica, has decreased by approximately 45% in 21 years. In 2008
the IUCN Red List classified S. lewini as Endangered, and in 2013 it was included on
the CITES Appendix II list. In the Eastern Tropical Pacific, S. lewini is protected in
oceanic islands, but a lack of conservation effort in coastal and nursery areas exists,
leaving the future population source vulnerable. The aim of this project is to identify
and protect coastal critical habitats (such as nursery areas) in Golfo Dulce, Costa Rica.
The project started in 2010 and had the following phases: 1) 2010. Collection of
Ecological traditional knowledge; 2) 2010-12. Identification of critical habitats in Golfo
Dulce; 3) 2012-2016. Study of the residence and fidelity of S.lewini in critical habitats
identified; 4) 2017. Elaboration of a proposal for the protection of S. lewini in Golfo
Dulce. Thanks to the collection of fisheries-dependent biological data and acoustic
telemetry, we identified critical habitats for newborns and juveniles of the specie in
Golfo Dulce. We estimated the spatio-temporal distribution of S.lewini in the Gulf and
the residence on each habitat (using the Residence and Attendance Index). Based on
these results, we started a process with the local fishermen of Golfo Dulce and the
support of the Ministry of Environment and National Institutions of Fisheries, to
elaborate strategies for the protection of S. lewini. In May 2018 the Government of
Costa Rica declared the Wetlands of Golfo Dulce as the Scalloped Hammerhead Shark
Sanctuary, the first shark sanctuary of Costa Rica. Now, we work with the
Government and communities to promote education, trainings and alternatives base
on a “blue economy.”
   The MECO project (Mediterranean Elasmobranch Citizen
     Observations): using social media to create a regional
           database of elasmobranch observations

  Adi Barash1,2, Shira Salingre2,3, Ya’ara Grosmark2, Shevy Rothman3,4, Vasileios-
  Orestis Stoilas5, Mary Maximiadi5, Sezginer Tuncer6, Matthieu Lapinski7, Ignasi
           Nuez8, Rigers Bakiu9,10,11, Periklis Kleitou5,12,13, Ioannis Giovos5

                            1Department of marine biology, University of Haifa, Israel.
            2Sharks in Israel, Environmental Organization for the protection of sharks and rays, Israel.
                                 3School of Zoology, Tel Aviv University, Israel.
                          4The Steinhardt Museum of Natural History, Tel Aviv, Israel.
            5iSea, Environmental Organization for the Preservation of the Aquatic Ecosystems, Greece.
           6Marine Science and Limnology Department, Çanakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Turkey.
                           7AILERONS Association, University of Montpellier, France.
              8SUBMON® – Awareness, study and conservation of the marine environment, Spain.
             9Department of Aquaculture and Fisheries, Agricultural University of Tirana, Albania.
             10Albanian Center for Environmental Protection and Sustainable Development, Albania.
                      11Albanian Academy of Sciences, Albanian Young Academy, Albania.
                    12Marine and Environmental Research (MER) Lab Ltd, Limassol, Cyprus.
               13School of Marine Science and Engineering, Plymouth University, Plymouth, UK.

                                     Email: adibarash@hotmail.com




        The alarming state of sharks and rays in the world and specifically in the
Mediterranean Sea Is well known. In order to create effective conservation plans, basic
ecological data such as distribution, and abundance are needed. For elasmobranchs, a
large gap currently exists between the risk assessments and the basic ecological
knowledge, though crucial in identifying important areas of high diversity, and
keystone or endangered species.
The MECO project aims to diminish this gap, by utilizing social media. Local scientists
are searching the media, contacting the public and creating a large, verified database
of elasmobranchs observations.
Initial results from Israel and Greece revels differences in species composition and
seasonality. Data collected from underwater observations yield species richness of 11
in Israel (1024 records) and 19 in Greece (80 records). While in Israel the species
richness has remained constant for the last four years, in Greece it is still rising as the
project runs for less than 2 years. The most common taxa in Israel were Dasyatis spp.
(30%), Taenurops grabatus (25%) And Himantura spp. (16%). In Greece Dasyatis spp.
comprised most observations (55%) followed by Gymnura altavela and Torpedo
marmorata (7% each).
The most observed species Dasyatis spp. showed a peak in observations in Israel
around May-June followed by a smaller peak in October while In Greece the main
season was June to August.
Observations from fishermen and ports included additional deeper species, adding 9
species in Israel (128 records) and 20 in Greece (336 records). Hexanchus griseus was
the most reported species in Greece and was observed throughout the year.
The initiative is spreading around the Mediterranean, with scientists from several
countries, including Turkey, Spain, France, and Albania recently joining the MECO
project. We hope our initiative to further grow, shedding light on the status of the
Mediterranean elasmobranchs.
Progress and Priorities: Elasmobranch Conservation through
      Regional Fisheries Management Organisations

                                       Ali Hood1

                                   1The Shark Trust, UK.




       For the many sharks and rays that are fished by multiple countries, the
international actions by Regional Fisheries Management Organizations (RFMOs) have
the potential to swiftly safeguard species throughout their ranges. The sharks and rays
of the Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea are particularly beleaguered.
International and domestic fisheries management improvements are urgently needed
to protect these vulnerable species from overfishing and finning.
Working as a partner of the Shark League for the Atlantic and Mediterranean (a
collaboration of Shark Advocates International, Ecology Action Centre, Project
AWARE and the Shark Trust) the Trust has been working to deliver shark and ray
catch limits that align with scientific advice; strict protections for endangered species;
and strong, enforceable bans on shark finning.
This presentation will consider the progress and current priorities for Atlantic and
Mediterranean RFMOs – addressing issues that influence the future of some of the
most threatened elasmobranch such as the angel sharks and guitarfishes; the most
heavily fished species such as Blue Sharks; and the oldest vertebrate on the planet –
the Greenland Shark. We will consider where there is potential for sustainable
management, the science behind advice for strict prohibitions, and the need for
development of bycatch mitigation measures. The challenges posed by aggregated
landings data which represents over 80% of the landings (2012-2016) from
Mediterranean fisheries will also be explored. Finally we will look at the
complementary role that can be played by Multilateral Environmental Agreements
such as Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and
Flora and the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals.
           Bycatch recovery in public aquaria: use in ex situ
              conservation of oviparous elasmobranchs

                        Pablo García-Salinas1,2, Francisco Javier Aznar3

    1 Associació LAMNA per a l’estudi dels elasmobranquis a la Comunitat Valenciana, València, Spain.
                                 2Fundación Oceanogràfic, València. Spain.
3 Marine Zoology Unit, Cavanilles institute of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biology, Universitat de València,

                                              València, Spain.
                                  Email: pablo.garcia@associaciolamna.org




       Public aquaria may have a crucial role in ex situ conservation through the use
of their resources and facilities as part of its commitment to biosphere preservation.
The effectiveness of an ex situ conservation strategy is evaluated in the present study
using bycatched elasmobranch eggs belonging to two ubiquitous model species,
Galeus melastomus and Scyliorhinus canicula obtained from bottom trawlers. The eggs
were obtained following six different experimental treatments that accurately imitate
future putative situations in which the fishermen might be involved: 1) eggs removed
from dead females onboard, 2) eggs removed from viscera kept in water until its
extraction on land, 3) eggs removed from viscera kept on the deck until its extraction
on land, 4) eggs removed on land from dead females kept in water, 5) eggs extracted
on land from dead females kept on deck, 6) eggs recovered from the fishing gear and
other substrates.
The eggs were transported to “Oceanogràfic” where effectiveness of each
experimental treatment was determined by studying: egg viability, embryo survival
and development, and growth curves.
A total of 396 eggs were studied. An average of 62,1% from both species, had a positive
development. The survival rate during the experiment was 61,1% in G. melastomus and
81,8% in S. canicula, being the survival rate independent of the different procedures to
which the eggs were treated. The embryo development was normal, with growth
curves similar to those obtained from previous reports.
The data obtained proves that egg recovery from bycatches is a feasible procedure for
eggs extracted from dead females and for those obtained from the fishing gear. The
use of a public aquarium to conduct ex situ conservation would ensure the availability
of technical and human resources to reduce costs while maximizing the extent of the
conservation message to the visitor.
       Reintroduction of critically endangered sharks and rays
     through breeding: feasible or not? A pilot programme

   Monique van de Water1, Niels Brevé2, Michael Laterveer3, Georgina Wiersma4

                    1Worldwide Fund for Nature Netherlands, Zeist, Nederland.
                              2Sportvisserij Nederland, Driebergen.
                                          3Blue Linked.
                                      4Dutch Shark Society.

                                     Email: mwater@wwf.nl




       Worldwide, 25% of all sharks and rays are threatened with extinction (IUCN
2016, Red List of Threatened Species). In European waters, more than 30% of species
are endangered. At the beginning of the 20th century, elasmobranchs were frequently
found in the Dutch North Sea. Ten out of the twenty shark and ray species that still
occur in the North Sea are on the IUCN Red List of threatened species and their
habitats are not protected. The angel shark (Squatina squatina) and the shagreen skate
(Leucoraja fullonica) are probably extinct in the Dutch North Sea.
Some populations have disappeared or decreased to such an extent that natural
recovery does not seem feasible. Reintroducing sharks and rays which are (locally)
extirpated in the North Sea such as the angel shark and the common skate (Dipturus
batis complex) could possibly be the only way to reinstate these species in Dutch
waters.
In 2015, WWF Netherlands and 4 other NGO’s started an innovative unique project
investigating possibilities for a reintroduction program of endangered eligible North
Sea sharks and rays. Pilot species is the thornback ray (Raja clavata), still quite rare in
Dutch waters.
So far, 300 thornback ray eggs have successfully been reared at the breeding center
Blue Linked, which is equipped to breed sharks and rays just for conservation
purposes, 300 more will follow until 2019. Both the breeding and the reintroduction
programme are set up in accordance with the IUCN Guidelines for Reintroductions
and made visible to the public.
The first 30 thornbacks (around 9 months old) were released in October 2017. In order
to individually follow released animals, thirty rays did get acoustics tags (VEMCO)
in 2018.
The next step will be to breed more endangered shark and ray species such as the
common skate and the angelshark. International cooperation is currently being set up
and regarded vital for a successful program.
Other pillars of this programme are education, bycatch mitigation, and supporting the
establishment of marine reserves in collaboration with all Dutch stakeholders.
Session 2.

Evolution
             The evolutionary history of the tiger shark,
                         Galeocerdo cuvier

Julia Türtscher1, Patrick L. Jambura1, Giuseppe Marramà1, René Kindlimann2, Jürgen
                                        Kriwet1

                1University of Vienna, Department of Palaeontology, Vienna, Austria.
                    2Zürichstrasse 58, 8607 Aathal-Seegräben/ZH, Switzerland.

                                 Email: tuertscher.julia@gmail.com




        The tiger shark Galeocerdo cuvier, one of the largest predatory sharks in
today’s oceans, has distinctively notched and serrated teeth, which allow it to cut out
pieces of its prey and even crack open shells of sea turtles. It is the only extant species
of this genus and has a fossil record extending back at least into the late Miocene (~5
Ma). The fossil record of the genus, however, reaches back even further into the early
Eocene (~56 Ma). During the last 200 years, more than sixty fossil species were
described based on isolated teeth, with some species even based upon a single tooth.
About twenty of these species are still considered valid, among them the well-known
Miocene tiger shark Galeocerdo aduncus.
Theories about the origin of the living tiger shark, Galeocerdo cuvier, his direct
ancestors and closest extinct relatives were frequently discussed in the past years, but
the history of this exceptional shark still remains obscure.
We compared nearly five hundred teeth of several tiger shark species using geometric
morphometrics to investigate significant morphological variations and to verify the
validity of the examined species. The clustering of the specimens on the morphospace
clearly demonstrated the presence of different species, as well as an ontogenetic shift
of tooth morphology in extant juvenile and adult tiger sharks. Our results provide
new information about the ambiguous evolutionary history of the tiger shark and
suggest that the origin of the extant species Galeocerdo cuvier lies back more than
twice as long as previously thought.
These data greatly augment our understanding of the complex evolutionary history
of this iconic shark lineage, which has been very successful for the last 56 million years
but is facing many threats today due to human activities and therefore should be a
priority target for future conservation efforts.
  The potential fate of the thresher shark - a fossil tale of an
                      alopiid-like shark

   Patrick L. Jambura1, Faviel A. López Romero1, Burkhard Pohl2, Jürgen Kriwet1

             1University of Vienna, Department of Palaeontology, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
                          2Wyoming Dinosaur Center, WY 82443, USA.

                                Email: patrick.jambura@gmail.com




       Extant sharks of the order Lamniformes show a relatively low taxonomic
diversity (15 species) but display a remarkably varied and specialised set of
morphological and ecological traits (high ecomorphological disparity). This reflects
the evolutionary history of this group, which diversified and flourished through the
Cretaceous and Paleogene (145 mya to 23 mya), bringing forth a high diversity of
species, which later declined during the Neogene (23 mya to 2.5 mya).
†Haimirichia amonensis, a lamniform shark from the Cretaceous period, was recently
only known from teeth and a partially articulated skull. A high cranium
width/cranium length (CW/CL) ratio and the occurrence of specialized dermal
denticles embedding electrosensory ampullary organs led the authors to the
conclusion that †H. amonensis developed a novel ecomorphological specialization
within the Lamniformes, allowing it a lifestyle similar to the whitetip reef shark
(Triaenodon obesus) today.
This hypothesis is challenged by a new find of an extraordinary preserved articulated
specimen, which’s caudal fin resembles the iconic morphology of today’s thresher
sharks (Alopiidae). For our study, we compared the caudal fin shapes of nine selected
carcharhiniform and ten lamniform sharks (including the whitetip reef shark and all
three thresher sharks) with †H. amonensis, using geometric morphometrics. Although
the position within the morphospace, as generated by the PCA (prinicpal component
analysis), confirm an alopiid like caudal fin, the pre-caudal length:caudal fin ratio
does not support this. Therefore, our results enforce the idea of a unique
ecomorphological specialization for this species. By reconstructing its palaeoecology
and comparing past abioitc and biotic factors with todays environment, we are giving
a potential outlook for today’s sharks (in- and excluding human activity) and their
future conservation.
   Sexual selection drives divergent patterns of selection on
          sperm flagellum length in sharks and rays

  Amy Rowley1,2, Lisa Locatello3, Ariel Kahrl2, Mariana Rego4, Annika Boussard2,
Eduardo Garza-Gisholt5,6, Ryan M. Kempster5,6, Shaun P. Collin5,6, Eva Giacomello7,
   Maria C. Follesa8, Cristina Porcu8, Jonathan P. Evans9, Fabio Hazin4, Francisco
  Garcia-Gonzalez9,10, Toby Daly-Engel11, Carlotta Mazzoldi3, John L. Fitzpatrick2

                 1 Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, UK.
                    2 Department of Zoology, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
                       3 Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
 4 Laboratório de Histologia Animal, Departamento de Morfologia e Fisiologia Animal, Universidade Federal

                                    Rural de Pernambuco, Recife, Brazil.
      5 Oceans Graduate School, The University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA 6009, Australia.
     6 The UWA Oceans Institute, The University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA 6009, Australia.
  7 MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, IMAR- Institute of the Sea, OKEANOS Centre-

                                 University of the Azores, Horta, Portugal.
          8 Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
 9 Centre for Evolutionary Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Western Australia, Crawley,

                                            WA 6009, Australia.
                           10 Estacion Biologica de Doñana-CSIC, Sevilla, Spain.
 11 Department of Ocean Engineering and Marine Sciences, Florida Institute of Technology, Melbourne, FL,

                                                    USA.
                                       Email: lisa.locatello@unipd.it




        Postcopulatory sexual selection is a powerful selective force commonly
credited with driving the extraordinary diversification of sperm morphology
observed among species. In particular, sperm from multiple males often compete for
fertilizations (i.e. sperm competition), which is hypothesized to generate selection on
sperm morphology, sperm production efficiency, and increased rates of evolutionary
diversification in sperm form. However, contradictory empirical results and limited
taxonomic scope has led to vigorous debate about how sperm competition influences
the evolution of sperm morphology. Here, we use phylogenetically controlled
analyses to explore the evolutionary diversification and variance in sperm
morphology traits in two basal vertebrate groups, the sharks and rays. Our analyses
reveal divergent patterns of selection on sperm flagellum length in both groups. In
sharks, species experiencing greater levels of sperm competition produce sperm with
longer and less variable flagella, while in rays, sperm flagellum length decreased and
head and midpiece variance increased with the level of sperm competition.
Across elasmobranchs, sperm flagellum length exhibited elevated rates of
evolutionary diversification compared to sperm head and midpiece length. Our
findings demonstrate that the flagellum is an important target of sexual selection in
elasmobranchs and provide insight into patterns of selection on the ejaculate in basal
vertebrate lineages. More broadly, these results may contribute to expand our
knowledge on elasmobranch reproductive strategies, a key step to develop effective
programs for the conservation and management of this threatened group of fishes.
           Session 3.

Environmental effects
and stress assessment
   Is the increase of the Pelagic Stingray Pteroplatytrygon
 violacea on the beaches of the northwestern Mediterranean
                  Sea due to climate change?

  Ana I. Colmenero1, María Vigo1, David Macías2, Matxalen Pauly2, Joan Navarro1,
                        Nixon Bahamon1, Claudio Barría1

1 Institut de Ciències del Mar (ICM-CSIC), Passeig Marítim de la Barceloneta 37-49, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.
2 Instituto Español de Oceanografía, Centro Oceanográfico de Málaga, Puerto pesquero s/n, 29640 Fuengirola,

                                                  Spain.
                                       Email: colmenero@icm.csic.es




       The Pelagic Stingray (Pteroplatytrygon violacea) belongs to the family
Dasyatidae. It has a circumglobal distribution and occurs in pelagic oceanic waters.
According to the literature, this species mate in spring and females move inshore
during summer to have their offspring. Their diet is based on small fish and
cephalopods.
During summer of 2018 many of these rays have been observed on different beaches
of the northwestern Mediterranean Sea. Although in previous years some specimens
were reported, this year the presence of these rays on the beaches has been massive.
During spring, a reproductive and feeding study of this species was carried out and
during summer, given the increase in sightings, their presence on the beaches was
monitored and the water temperature of the study area was recorded.
The results showed that in the spring the gonads were not yet fully developed for
mating and their diet was based mainly on gelatinous plankton and crustaceans
associated with salps, something unusual according to the available literature.
During the monitoring period, between July and August, more than 150 specimens
were recorded on different beaches of the northwestern Mediterranean Sea. Although
most of the observations were of females, males were also recorded and in some cases
males and females were seen mating. These sightings confirm the delay in the
reproductive period observed in spring. This phenomenon is probably related to the
thermal anomalies found in the study area, where an extend of the winter period was
observed; with lower temperatures than normal in spring, and a consequent delay of
the spring.
Although the pelagic stingray is currently assessed by the IUCN as Least Concern in
the Mediterranean Sea, it is recommended to monitor this species since according to
our results it can be strongly affected by changes in oceanographic conditions.
    Physiological responses of whitespotted bamboo shark
           juveniles exposed to ocean acidification

    Maria Rita Pegado1, Catarina Santos1, Ana Couto1, Eduarda Pinto1, Rui Rosa1

                 1MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Laboratório

                Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa,
                 Avenida Nossa Senhora do Cabo 939, 2750-374 Cascais, Portugal
                                    Email: mrpegado@fc.ul.pt




        Ocean acidification is expected to change the ocean’s chemistry for future
generations and has been concerning the scientific community. Among other effects,
it may cause physiological disturbances in the organisms and threaten marine
ecosystems as we know them. Thus, it is essential to understand which species might
be tolerant and which might be susceptible to these changes. As top predators, sharks
are extremely important for the oceans, their top-down control helps maintain their
environment’s structure. In addition to the already occurring changes in the food-web
and anthropogenic pressure from fishing, sharks may also have to deal with the direct
effects of ocean acidification. Hence, the purpose of this study was to investigate the
potential impacts of ocean acidification on the physiology of juvenile whitespotted
bamboo sharks (Chiloscyllium plagiosum). After 45 days of acclimation, that began
immediately after hatching, sharks were randomly assigned to one of two treatments:
control (pH = 8.0) or acidification (pH = 7.7), according to the pH levels expected by
the end of the century (pCO2 ~ 900 μatm). Several ecologically important traits were
tested, namely the growth rate, weight rate, ventilation rate, swimming time, Uburst,
the fulton index and hepatosomatic index. According to our results their physiology
remained mainly unchanged by the exposure to a lower pH. Over the past 400 million
years, these cartilogenous fish have been coping with oscilations in the seawater
chemistry and thus appear to be resilient to ocean acidification. Nonetheless, these are
preliminary results based on a short-term acclimation period and further investigation
is needed to determine the potential correlating effects of warming and ocean
acidification expected to occur in the future.
Physiological constraints of vertical behaviour of two oceanic
        top predators in the oxygen minimum zone

  Marisa Vedor1,2, Ana Rita Lopes2, Mário Dinis3, Rui Rosa2, Gonzalo Mucientes1,
                       David W. Sims4,5,6, Nuno Queiroz1,4

   1Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos/Research Network in Biodiversity and

   Evolutionary Biology, Campus Agrário de Vairão, Universidade do Porto, 4485-668 Vairão, Portugal.
2MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Laboratório Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências

         da Universidade de Lisboa, Av. Nossa Senhora do Cabo, 939, 2750-374 Cascais, Portugal.
  3IMAR-Instituto do Mar, Departamento de Ciências e Engenharia do Ambiente, Faculdade de Ciências e

                Tecnologia da Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.
  4Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, The Laboratory, Citadel Hill, Plymouth PL1 2PB,

                                            United Kingdom.
 5Ocean and Earth Science, National Oceanography Centre Southampton, Waterfront Campus, University of

                        Southampton, Southampton SO14 3ZH, United Kingdom.
  6Centre for Biological Sciences, Highfield Campus, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ,

                                            United Kingdom.
                                     Email: marisavedor@cibio.up.pt




       Oxygen Minimum Zones (OMZs) are hypoxic layers delimited vertically by
sharp oxyclines present in several regions of the World’s oceans. Off Cape Verde, in
the eastern tropical Atlantic (ETA), a resident OMZ is found between 200 and 700 m
depth, reaching minimum core oxygen levels of 40 µmolO2/l. However, below 90
µmolO2/l many aerobic processes are compromised and with less than 70 µmolO2/l of
dissolved oxygen in the water only few marine organisms are able to survive like
cephalopods, for instance.
Oceanic top predators, such as blue and mako sharks are active swimmers with high
oxygen demands. In the ETA OMZ, we observed a large vertical habitat constriction,
with blue sharks doing occasional dives deeper than 600 m, while the maximum depth
of mako sharks is generally lower than 500 m. Differences in behaviour may have an
effect on the physiology of the organisms. We have observed a significantly higher
expression of 8-Hydroxyguanosine in blue sharks than in mako sharks, suggesting a
higher DNA damage in the first species. Additionally, increased activity of GPx, TAC
and 8-Hydroxyguanosine was measured in blue sharks caught in the OMZ in relation
to the ones caught in normoxia.
Blue and mako sharks are one of the most caught species by pelagic longline fisheries
and whose population has been declining on the past decades. This study suggests
sharks have an increased vulnerability in the ETA OMZ, thus effective conservation
action plans are in urgent need for these species.
      Are oceanic manta rays exposed to the threat of plastic
                           pollution?

 Tania Pelamatti1,2, Edgar M. Hoyos Padilla2, Iliana A. Fonseca Ponce1,3, Lorena M.
  Rios Mendoza4, Rogelio Gonzalez Armas1, Irma Gavilán García5, José J. Olmos
Espejel6, David Olguin Luna6, Ana J. Marmolejo Rodriguez1, Felipe Galván Magaña1

1CICIMAR-IPN, Av. Instituto Politécnico Nacional s/n Col. Playa Palo de Santa Rita C.P. 23096 La Paz, BCS.

                                                 México.
               2Pelagios Kakunjá, Sinaloa 1540, Col. Las Garzas La Paz, BCS, México 23070.
                                   3Proyecto Manta Pacifico Mexicano.
                4University of Wisconsin-Superior, Belknap and Catlin, Superior, WI 54880.
 5Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Av. Universidad 3000, Coyoacán 04510, Ciudad de

                                             México, México.
6Facultad de Estudios Superiores Cuautitlán, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Av. 1º de Mayo S/N

                                  54740 Cuautitlán Izcalli, Edo. de Méx.
                                      Email: tpelamatti@gmail.com




       The oceanic manta rays, Mobula birostris, filter big volumes of water while
feeding on zooplankton. Thus, they are potentially exposed to the growing threat of
plastic pollution. Ingested plastics can leach adsorbed toxic pollutants and plastic
additives (e.g. phthalates, used as indicators of plastic contamination in animal
tissues) that are recognized as endocrine disruptors and toxic for many species. The
oceanic manta ray populations of the Gulf of California have been drastically reduced
in recent decades, making the Revillagigedo Archipelago and Banderas Bay its last
refuge and aggregation areas in the Mexican Pacific Ocean. Samples have been
collected from the sea surface using a manta net: floating plastics were found in both
areas and we determined the abundance, size and polymer composition of the plastic
debris through Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR). Tissue samples (skin
and muscle biopsies) of manta rays have been collected during scuba and freediving
using a spear pole and underwent chemical extraction and subsequent analysis to
measure the concentration of phthalates, organochlorine compounds and polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons. The same compounds were also analyzed in plastics found in
both areas to quantify the pollutants adsorbed on the surface of plastic debris.
Measuring phthalates in manta ray biopsies is a valid non-lethal method to investigate
possible plastic ingestion occurrence in this species, that is considered vulnerable to
extinction by IUCN and is protected in Mexico. This research is a baseline study for
plastic debris contamination in the area and for possible ingestion by oceanic manta
rays.
 Trace elements concentration in vertebrae of Lesser Spotted
 Dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula) from central Mediterranean
                         Sea (Italy)

   Francesca Romana Reinero1, Emilio Sperone1, Primo Micarelli2, Gianni Giglio1,
   Cristian Marchio1, Sandro Tripepi1, Giuseppe Rijllo1, Edgar Eduardo Becerril-
                            Garcia3,4, Donatella Barca1

        1 Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende, Italy.
                              2 Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima, Italy.
      3 Instituto Politecnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, Mexico.
                                 4 Pelagios Kakunja A.C., La Paz, Mexico.




        In addition to representing a direct threat to sharks, humans exert strong
pressure on these animals, due to the continuous release of polluting elements in the
water and the atmosphere. Sharks, as predators at the top of marine food chain, act as
final receptors for a series of polluting elements that are regularly discharged into the
sea.
The goal of this research was to delineate the heavy metals and other trace elements
concentration rates in vertebrae of lesser spotted dogfish Scyliorhinus canicula from
Central Mediterranean. A total of 75 vertebrae from 75 different spotted dogfish
sharks have been collected in front of the coast of Rocchette Punta Ala (Tuscany, Italy).
Trace elements concentration has been, then, analyzed with LA-ICP-MS.
Forty-six different heavy metals and trace elements were found in vertebrae. Lead,
cadmium, nichel, iron, zinc, manganese, copper and arsenic were the most abundant.
The concentration of trace elements and heavy metals was correlated with the sex,
length and growth of the sharks. The relationship between trace elements
concentration and sex was significant for lead: females accumulated more lead than
males and the accumulation probably occurs through the skin and diet. As regards
the correlation with the length, arsenic has been significant, increasing its
concentration with the increasing of length of sharks. Probably, its accumulation
occurs through respiration and diet. Finally, the correlation with the growth rate was
extremely significant for zinc and manganese: both metal concentrations increase
during the growth of the sharks but the accumulation of zinc occurs probably through
diet and skin, while that of manganese only through diet.
As future aims, the effects of the concentration of trace elements on the immune
system (in particular on white blood cells) and on some reproductive hormones of
these sharks will be analyzed.
        Mid-Atlantic elasmobranchs: Suitable metal scouts?

   Paulo Torres 1,3, Regina Tristão da Cunha 1,3, Armindo dos Santos Rodrigues 2,3

1CIBIO, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, InBIO Laboratório Associado, Pólo dos

Açores - Departamento de Biologia, Universidade dos Açores. Rua Mãe de Deus, 58, 9500-801 Ponta Delgada,
                                             Açores, Portugal
2IVAR, Instituto de Investigação em Vulcanologia e Avaliação de Riscos, Universidade dos Açores, 9501-801

                                      Ponta Delgada, Açores, Portugal
  3Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade dos Açores, 9501-801 Ponta Delgada, Açores, Portugal




        Metals, especially As, Cd, Hg and Pb, are a source of growing concern given
their potential hazards to marine fauna and human health. In this context,
elasmobranchs are logical sentinels of these contaminants considering their specific
life traits and high trophic levels. The goal of this study was to assess stable isotopes
and metal content in Prionace glauca and Isurus oxyrinchus muscle tissue, according to
sex and size, and to analyse these results within and among other species and across
regions and geographical areas. Also, it was intended to discuss and evaluate their
suitability, together with thornback ray Raja clavata and tope shark Galeorhinus galeus,
previously studied for the same area, as marine bioindicators. Prionace glauca and I.
oxyrinchus shared the same trophic level in a pelagic-based food web and did not
present relevant significant differences between genders or metals, except for As. Both
species accumulated As and Hg while Cd and Pb were not detected. Generally, metal
content was in the same order of magnitude as previous studies, or lower when
compared to other less pristine areas. Although the individuals sampled of P. glauca
and I. oxyrinchus were still juveniles, one individual of I. oxyrinchus already presented
Hg values above regulatory limits. The four studied elasmobranch species
demonstrated great potential to be used as environmental sentinels, each presenting
different characteristics regarding the key features that defines a good marine
bioindicator, allowing long-term monitoring at different temporal and spatial scales.
Considering the volcanic nature of the area, the future prospective mining activities
and the possible establishment of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership
(TTIP) between Europe and the USA, it is of the foremost importance to continuously
monitor this Atlantic region together with its valuable marine resources.
        Unknown combinations: pollutants, parasites and
                     Elasmobranchs

Alba Martín-Lázaro1, Claudia Junge2, Wolf Isbert1, Francisco Montero Royo1, Beatriz
                                    Guijarro3

          1Marine Zoology Unit - Cavanilles Institute of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biolgy,

                                     University of Valencia, Spain.
                   2Dyphavsarter og bruskfik, Institute of Marine Research, Norway.
             3Centre Oceanogràfic de les Balears, Instituto Español de Oceanografía, Spain

                   almarla2@alumni.uv.es, Claudia.Junge@hi.no, wisbert@gmx.net,
                      Email: francisco.e.montero@uv.es, beatriz.guijarro@ieo.es



         Not much emphasis has been on the effects of parasites in conjunction with
pollutants in elasmobranch species. Therefore, there is an extensive need to synthesize
the little existing literature, and to identify knowledge gaps and the way forward.
Owing to various anthropogenic activities affecting the marine environment,
persistent organic pollutants (POPs) and heavy metals are found increasingly
indifferent areas. Despite some pollutants’ effects being well documented, few studies
have focused on their impact on elasmobranchs. No exception to most other species
on the planet, elasmobranchs interact with their immediate environment, for example
the parasites that inhabit them. Regarding their diversity in elasmobranchs, the
number of cestode species exceeds all of the other metazoan taxa parasitizing
elasmobranchs combined. Nevertheless, hundreds of species of elasmobranchs and
their complete parasite communities have yet to be examined. However, what
happens when parasites and pollutants are combined? In theory, if two potentially
damaging elements act together, their effect on the individual is expected to be larger.
Combined experiments however have shown different results. Parasites can provoke
that an almost neutral factor becomes negative. On the contrary, parasitic worms
including cestodes, can bioaccumulate heavy metals from their host body, hence
reducing the host’s pollution levels. It has been shown in other species that parasites
and pollutants might interact indifferent ways: synergistic, antagonistic or additive. It
is still vaguely known what effects parasites together with pollutants have on a given
species apart from parasites becoming more important in polluted environments.
However, little information is available and even less in elasmobranchs. Moreover,
these few studies focus mainly on POPs and heavy metals. What would happen to
parasitized elasmobranchs in an environment surrounded by these pollutants?
Elasmobranchs in polluted environments could be more at risk than it was thought.
Studies including all these factors should be central because their combined effect is
yet to know.
         Session 4.

      Elasmobranch
biology and ecology
 Are muscular aerobic and anaerobic metabolisms related to
        swimming capabilities in deep-sea sharks?

   Nicolas Pinte1, Constance Coubris1, Emma Jones2, Laurent Duchatelet1, Jérôme
                                     Mallefet1

1 Marine biology laboratory, Earth and Life Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, 3 place Croix du Sud

                        building Kellner D-107, 1348 Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium.
   2 National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research, 41 Market Pl, Auckland, 1010, New-Zealand.

                                     Email: Nicolas.pinte@uclouvain.be




        Currently, the deep-sea sharks' ecology is still poorly known. However, a
recent study has measured the swimming capabilities of several deep-sea sharks from
New-Zealand giving an interesting ecological feature on these hardly reachable
species. In this previous study, luminous deep-sea sharks from Etmopteridae family
have a higher cruise swimming speed that non-luminous counterparts and Dalatias
licha (luminous shark from the second family, Dalatidae). Before this result, the
swimming capabilities of deep-sea sharks were only suggested by the indirect
measurement of muscles metabolism showing a lower metabolism for deep-sea
sharks than shallow-water counterparts. Here we investigate the aerobic and
anaerobic muscles metabolism of deep-sea sharks from New-Zealand to confirm if it
can really be related with the cruise swimming speed measurement obtained in the
previous study. The results could also allow to find physiological adaptations for the
high cruise swimming speed of Etmopteridae sharks. For that, the activities of three
key enzymes (citrate synthase, malate dehydrogenase, and lactate dehydrogenase)
were measured using the absorbance of their cofactors in a spectrophotometer. Results
show that aerobic activities in red muscles of sharks can be related to their cruise
swimming capabilities. The results are less obvious for the anaerobic metabolism in
red muscles where no real significant difference appears. In white muscles, it could
suggest better burst activities for the bigger sharks such as Dalatias licha. Finally, other
metabolic pathways could participate in the swimming capabilities of shark and
should be studied in future works.
  Short term gender and seasonal variation in depth habitats
        and diving patterns of a ‘coastal’ shark species

             James Thorburn1, F. Neat2, D.M. Bailey3, L.R. Noble4, C.S. Jones5

               1Scottish Oceans Institute, University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews KY16 8LB
           2Marine Stewardship Council, London(previously Marine Scotland Science, Aberdeen)
 3Institute of Biodiversity Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12

                                                    8QQ
                     4Faculty of Biosciences and Aquaculture, Nord University, Norway
 5 School of Biological Sciences, College of Life Sciences & Medicine, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB24

                                                    2TZ
                                       Email: jat21@st-andrews.ac.uk




       Elasmobranchs are, generally speaking, highly mobile with some species
performing trans-ocean movements. As well as these wide-ranging geographic
movements, many species of shark occupy a wide range of depths. These vertical
movements are often in the form of daily vertical movements which are associated
with feeding activities, mostly in the form of movement from shallow water at dusk,
returning to deeper water at dawn. There are reported examples of ‘reverse diel
migrations’ being reported, where deeper water is occupied at over the hours of
darkness. As well as feeding, it has been suggested these diurnal cycles may also allow
elasmobranchs to thermoregulate with an animal moving along a temperature
gradient in order to regulate or adjust body temperature. Seasonal variation in depth
has also been reported, with many species demonstrating a move to deeper waters
during colder months, returning to shallower waters when it warms up. The drivers
behind seasonal movement have been attributed to the reproductive cycle,
temperature requirements or in response to dietary needs. An individual’s habitat,
including depth preference, is often governed by its sex and life history stage, leading
to populations segregating by size and sex, even within local geographic areas, and
may be driven by gender requirements for habitat, including temperature, and diet
with some seasonal variation.
Tope (Galeorhinus galeus) are generally considered a benthopelagic species
predominantly found in shelf waters but have been shown to display movements off
the continental shelf into deeper water. Here we present findings from archival tags
deployed on tope in South Scotland. A difference in diurnal migrations between the
sexes was observed in some individuals over a short period of time. Diving behaviour
and water column use also appeared to be different between the genders during a
seasonal move to deeper water.
      Changing tides: contrasting spatial dynamics of two
        sympatric shark species at a remote coral atoll

Jenny Bortoluzzi1,4, James S.E. Lea2, 3, 4, Nicolas E. Humphries4, Christopher Clarke2,
                                  David W. Sims4, 5

             1University of Plymouth, Drake Circus, Plymouth, PL4 8AA, United Kingdom.
                  2Marine Research Facility, POB 10646, Jeddah 21443, Saudi Arabia.
               3 SOSF DRC, Rue Philippe Plantamour 20, CH-1201 Geneva, Switzerland
       4Marine Biological Association of the UK, The Laboratory, Citadel Hill, Plymouth PL1 2PB
   5Ocean and Earth Science, National Oceanography Centre Southampton, University of Southampton,

                  Waterfront Campus, European Way, Southampton SO14 3ZH, UK
                                     Email: jenbor@mba.ac.uk




       Understanding how animals move around their environment is essential to
manage and protect species and ecosystems effectively. Movements in time and space
can be triggered by various physical, biological and environmental factors so animal-
borne tags are increasingly used by scientists to collect data to track movements and
establish where, and for how long, animals spend their time. Network analysis using
acoustic telemetry data provides a way to study long-term, fine-scale spatial dynamics
of multiple reef shark species. In D’Arros and St Joseph Atoll in the Amirantes
(Seychelles), sicklefin lemon sharks (Negaprion acutidens) share their activity space
with the smaller blacktip reef sharks (Carcharhinus melanopterus). Our study aims to
determine how these two species co-occur at this location without apparently
outcompeting each other. With these objectives in mind, 83 sharks were tracked
between 2012 and 2017 using passive acoustic tags and an array of 23 acoustic
receivers. The analysis considered factors such as tidal height and sex. We present
findings of overlap between the two species and evidence of the tidal cycle as a driver
of overlap in activity space use within the atoll. The Indian Ocean is currently data
deficient in many areas of elasmobranch research and the work carried out here
contributes to filling such gaps about shark space use and potential movement driver.
While the studied atoll is being considered for a Marine Protected Area, this new
understanding of reef shark movement ecology identified here provides us with a
model that may, in turn, be applicable to similar locations in the Indian Ocean and
tropical reef ecosystems globally.
    Thermocline influence on vertical behaviour of marine
                         predators

                        Ivo da Costa1, Ana Couto1, Nuno Quieroz1

      1CIBIO-InBIO, Campus Agrário de Vairão, Universidade do Porto, 4485-668 Vairão, Portugal

                                   Email: Ivodacosta11@gmail.com




       Oceanographic features have been shown to influence the distribution and
movements of pelagic predators, such us sharks and tunas. In particular, thermal
fronts and the thermocline, are characterized by convergence processes with high
levels of primary production which are able to sustain secondary producers and
therefore attract large aggregations of marine predators. Pelagic predators are also
expected to move through the environment in a manner that maximises encounter
rates with prey patches. Lévy flights are a special class of random walk that may
represent an optimal solution to the biological search problem in complex landscapes
where preys are sparsely and randomly distributed. Nevertheless, the adaptive
significance of this strategy in response to specific environmental features in the ocean
is unclear. The main objective of this study was to clarify how changes in thermocline
gradients (intensity, location) affect the movements and, particularly, the foraging
behavior of these marine predators. Results showed that Lévy-like movements are
prevalent in pelagic predators and that increases in the Levy exponent were associated
with increases in thermocline strength. Furthermore, the turning points movements
appeared associated with thermocline location where its distance to the thermocline
also decreased with increasing thermocline intensity. Results suggest the thermocline
is an important foraging area of increased prey availability where pelagic predators
appeared to exhibit central place foraging-like behavior.
    Assessing the significance of Isle of Man waters for the
        migratory basking shark (Cetorhinus maximus)

  Haley Dolton1, Jackie Hall2, Graham Hall2, Fiona Gell3, Lucy Hawkes1, Matthew
                                      Witt1

                     1University of Exeter - Penryn Campus, Penryn TR10 9FE, U.K.
               2Manx Basking Shark Watch, Glenchass Farmhouse, Port St. Mary, IM9 5PJ,

                                              Isle of Man
3Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture, Thie Slieau Whallian, Foxdale Road, St John's IM4 3AS,

                                              Isle of Man
                                      Email: hrd207@exeter.ac.uk




        Satellite tagging of mobile species can support the development of conservation
strategies by revealing movement patterns, centers of residency and intra- and inter-
annual site fidelity. The basking shark is considered endangered in the northeast
Atlantic due to historic over-exploitation, and several key hotspots for it’s occurrence
have been described. Satellite tracking has revealed that basking sharks exhibit inter-
annual site fidelity to the western isles of Scotland in summer, but a similar assessment
for the Isle of Man, thought to be another key hotspot, is currently lacking. Eleven
satellite tags were deployed on basking sharks (Cetorhinus maximus) during the
summers of 2013, 2015, 2016 and 2017 off the coast of the Isle of Man (IoM), in the
British Isles. One individual was bycaught after 133 days of tracking and was
subsequently removed from analysis. Ten sharks were tracked for 373 days (median
duration), moving 725 km from the deployment site (median straight-line distance).
During the summer, nearly half of shark core home ranges (50% kernel density)
overlapped with proposed conservation zones in IoM waters (n = 5 that provided
sufficient data for analysis). Further, analysis of 3,902 public sighting records between
2005 and 2017 revealed a similar pattern, suggesting that protective measures in IoM
coastal waters could aid the conservation of basking sharks at the local, regional and
international scale. Following residency in the Irish Sea, four sharks moved to
Scotland until late summer/early winter and two sharks made long distance
movements to Morocco and Norway respectively (the first such record). Sharks
exhibited inter-annual site fidelity to the Irish Sea (n = 3), one shark to proposed
conservation zones within IoM waters and one to the Moroccan Exclusive Economic
Zone (winters of 2016 and 2017). We also detail the longest basking shark track to date
(2 years 2 months; 798 days).
        Important habitats of threatened and data deficient
           elasmobranchs in Cabo Verde, West Africa

                               Manuel Dureuil1,2, Boris Worm1

  1Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, 1355 Oxford St., PO BOX 15000, Halifax, NS, B3H 4R2,

                                                Canada
         2Sharks of the Atlantic Research and Conservation Centre, Halifax, NS, B3L 2Y5, Canada

                                    Email: Manuel.Dureuil@Dal.Ca




       Cabo Verde is an island nation approximately 570 km off the west African
continetal coast. The area is a potential hotspots for several highly threatnened, data
deficient and endemic elasmobranchs (sharks, skates and rays) in the North Atlantic
Ocean. However, there is an increasing exploitation pressure on these species and
adequate management structures to prevent further depletion or regional extinction
are largely absent. Moreover, concentrated elasmobranch research around the islands
has just begun in recent years. Here we present first results of the Cabo Verde
Elasmobranch Research and Conservation Project initiated in 2015. One major aim of
this project is to determine important habitats, in particular by the use of passive and
acoustic tags. For the first time, we present movement activities of the Atlantic weasel
shark (Paragaleus pectoralis), a species endemic to West Africa, and discuss the
importance of their core habitat with regards to other species records confirmed
during this project, such as the blackchin guitarfish (Glaucostegus cemiculus).
Acoustic tagging also revelaed long-distance migrations from nurse sharks
(Ginglymostoma cirratum) between islands resulting in new implications for the
species’ protection. Santa Luzia and Maio have both been identified as multi-species
nursery areas with inidcation of scalloped and smooth hammerheads utilizing the
same bay. The presented results give new insights into species’ ecology and can aid
future conservation strategies.
    Site fidelity and distribution of zebra shark, Stegostoma
             fasciatum, in the Mozambican Channel

  Saoirse Pottie1, James Bull1, Luca Borger1 Nelson Miranda2, Jorge Sitoe23 Cicilda
                          Chivindze 2 Katie Arnold-Reeves3

                1Swansea University -. Singleton Park, Sketty, Swansea, UK, SA2 8PP
                    2Marine Megafauna Foundation, Praia de Tofo, Mozambique.
                            3All out Africa, Praia de Tofo, Mozambique.

                            Email: Saoirse.pottie@marinemegafauna.org




        Fisheries bycatch poses a serious threat to megafauna species, including many
elasmobranchs believed to be important for marine eco-tourism. To assess the threats
of bycatch and establish appropriate conservation regimes, it is critical to first quantify
the distribution and habitat use of these species. Zebra shark, Stegostoma fasciatum, are
an endangered species of shark found in shallow waters in the Indo-west Pacific. Their
large, charasmatic appearance and docile behaviour make them a popular sighting for
scuba divers. Bycatch is believed to be a primary cause of the rapid population
declines and local extinctions reported in Asia and Indondesia. This study is the first
to analyse the spatio‐temporal occurrence patterns, site fidelity and distribution of the
zebra shark in Africa - prompted by the urgent need for spatial, trend and abundance
information on zebra shark both nationally and globally. The study involved a
combination of dedicated dive surveys, voluntary collection of information through a
citizen science program and interviews with artisanal fishermen. The results of the
study demonstrated that zebra sharks show long and short term site fidelity to
particular reefs, yet are broadly distributed along coastal shallow areas from Pomene
to Sodwana Bay. Interviews with fishermen proved an effective alternative to study
the distribution of a rare, non- commercial species and helped overcome the spatial
limitations of dive based surveys. This project comes at a crucial time when the
national plan of action for shark and ray conservation in Mozambique is under
development. The results highlight the importance of developing a more
comprehensive NPOA for shark and ray protection that also protects threatened non-
CITES listed sharks and rays.
   Fidelity of the whitetip shark (Triaenodon obesus) in
Chatham and Wafer bays, Isla del Coco National Park, Costa
                            Rica

   Andrés López1, Ilena Zanella1, Frank Martínez1, Geiner Golfín-Duarte2, Keylor
                                     Morales2

                1Asociación Conservacionista Misión Tiburón, Playa del Coco, Costa Rica
         2Parque Nacional Isla del Coco, Sistema Nacional de Áreas de Conservación, Costa Rica;

       Email: izanella@misiontiburon.org; alopez@misiontiburon.org; fmartinezl123@hotmail.com;
                         geiner.golfin@sinac.go.cr; keylor.morales@sinac.go.cr




        At least fourteen species of sharks live in the Marine Protected Area of Isla del
Coco National Park (ICNP), some are resident species such as the whitetip reef shark
(Triaenodon obesus); others are migratory and visit the National Park throughout the
year, e.g. the scalloped hammerhead shark (Sphyrna lewini) and the whale shark
(Rhincodon typus). Between 2014 and 2016 the team of Mision Tiburon with the support
of the rangers of ICNP tagged eighteen sharks with acoustic transmitters (VEMCO
V16). During this period the two receivers installed in Chatham and Wafer bays had
recorded approximately 250.000 detections. The data showed a very strong fidelity of
the T. obesus to the Chatham and Wafer bays: only one shark crossed the bay, from
Wafer to Chatham; some sharks demonstrated very high index of fidelity to the site
(IR=0.9). The number of detections was different between sharks: for example the
male “23525” transmitted near than 69,000 detections in Chatham Bay; on the other
hand, another male the “23529” have transmitted 4126 detections and stay in the
Wafer bay less period. We described a tendency of more detection during daylight
hours in the bays (more than 70% of detections); probably related to feed aspects, since
it is common to see females and males moving for hunting and feeding at night.
Predictors of white shark Carcharodon carcharias presence at
       two recreational beaches in a major metropole

        Kristina Loosen1, M. Justin O’Riain2, Alison Kock2,3,4, Henning Winker5,6

1 Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cape Town, Private Bag X3, Rondebosch 7701, South Africa
  2 Institute for Communities and Wildlife in Africa, Private Bag X3, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch,
                                                       7701
             3 Cape Research Centre, South African National Parks, P.O. Box 216, Steenberg, 7947
   4 South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity (SAIAB), Private Bag 1015, Grahamstown 6140, South
                                                      Africa
               5 Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Foretrust Building, 3 Martin
                                    Hammerschlag Way, Foreshore, Cape Town
 6 Centre for Statistics in Ecology, Environment and Conservation (SEEC), Department of Statistical Sciences,
                      University of Cape Town, Rondebosch, Cape Town 7701, South Africa
                                          Email: loosen.kristina@gmx.de




       The occurrence of white sharks Carcharodon carcharias in the False Bay, South
Africa follows a clear seasonal cycle. In the austral winter months, white sharks
aggregate around Seal Island, but move to inshore areas in summer. However, the
drivers of this inshore movement remain a subject of debate. Previous research
identified that inshore shark sightings were higher when the water was warmer and
during new moon, which led to the prediction that these conditions favour prey
availability. In this study, we expand on previous research and investigate a number
of environmental and biological variables, including prey availability on shark
sightings at two recreational beaches in Cape Town, South Africa. A total of 1209
white shark sightings were recorded from 1 January 2006 – 31 December 2015 at the
beaches of Muizenberg and Fish Hoek. We confirmed that shark sightings were
clearly seasonal and sightings peaked between 17.49 - 18.57°C sea surface
temperature. Fish presence revealed a similar peak at 17.94°C. Randomization tests
indicate shark sightings were 66% (p < 0.001) more likely when prey fish were present,
which supports the prediction of a prey mediated cue. Shark sightings were also
influenced by ENSO with more sightings during weak negative ENSO values. These
reflect weak La Niña events, which supports previous findings. In addition to
providing a better understanding of the ecology of white sharks in False Bay, our
results can also be used in shark safety and education programs to reduce shark-
human conflicts.
Predator personalities: the relationship between personality
and spatial use of the foraging landscape in an apex predator

               Valentina Scarponi1, Enrico Gennari2, William Hughes1

              1School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton United Kingdom.
                            2Oceans Research, Mossel Bay South Africa.

                             Email: valentinascarponi2013@gmail.com




       Individual differences in behaviour that are consistent across time or context
(personalities) are ubiquitous among the animal kingdom and can have significant
effects on the ecology and evolution of species. Although recent evidence suggests
that elasmobranchs may display individual behavioural differences, only a few
studies have investigated the occurrence of personalities in sharks in a robust and
quantifiable way, leaving an important gap in our current understanding of these
keystone species. White sharks are an excellent study system for investigating the
occurrence of animal personalities in elasmobranchs. This threatened apex predator
shows seasonal residency at pinniped haul-out sites and pupping areas like seal island
in Mossel Bay (SA), therefore increasing the chance of multiple sightings of the same
individuals within and between seasons. Here we assessed whether white sharks
show individual differences in their foraging strategies and evaluated the relationship
between their behavioural variability and spatial ecology. By comparing (i) several
measures of the behavioural response of 12 white sharks to controlled, food-
mimicking stimuli (tuna head and seal decoy) presented to them from a research boat
and (ii) acoustic data on their residency profiles and movement patterns within the
bay, we provide novel results showing that white sharks do display significant
individual differences in foraging behaviour and in their spatial use of the foraging
habitat. An important implication of our results is that white sharks, as individuals,
will vary in their exposure to anthropogenic hazards and in their risk for human-
animal conflict. This has the potential to contribute significantly to changing public
perception of the species and to the development of better human protection and
shark conservation strategies.
     New evidence on deadly interactions between juvenile
         swordfish and blue sharks (Prionace glauca)

Jaime Penadés-Suay1,2, Pablo García-Salinas2,3, Jesús Tomás1, Francisco Javier Aznar1

1Marine Zoology Unit, Cavanilles Institute of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biology, Universitat de València,

                                              València, Spain
             2Associació LAMNA per a l’estudi dels elasmobranquis a la Comunitat Valenciana
                                          3Fundación Oceanogràfic

                                        Email: jaime.penades@uv.es




       Since the first report on a deathly interaction between a juvenile swordfish
(Xiphias gladius) and an adult blue shark (Prionace glauca) by Penadés-Suay et al. 2017,
four other similar cases have been detected. This paper describes these four new
events and compares them with the available information to discuss the nature of this
interaction between juvenile swordfish and adult blue sharks. On the 17th of February
2017, an adult male blue shark (TL: 236 cm) appeared stranded in the coast of
Garrucha (Spain) with a swordfish rostrum inserted in its cranium. The remaining
part of the rostrum measured 180mm in length and 20mm in width at the proximal
end. On the 8th of March 2017 an adult female blue shark (TL: 260 cm), with an
ongoing pregnancy, was stranded alive in the coast on Ostia (Italy) but died shortly
afterwards. An injury posterior to the right eye revealed part of a swordfish rostrum
(250mm/30mm) allocated between the eye and the cranium. On the 28th of February
of 2018, an adult female blue shark (TL: 260cm) appeared stranded in the coast of Vera
(Spain), with an injury anterior to the right eye. The investigators took the specimen
to make some tests and found and older injury in the right nostril, keeping a piece of
a swordfish rostrum embedded in its tissue. The remaining rostrum bit measured
53mm/12mm. On the 2nd of August 2018, an adult male blue shark was stranded in
Manacor (Spain) with a 74mm/16mm swordfish’ tip inserted in the snout. Swordfish
had previously been reported driving their rostrum into pelagic sharks, allegedly as a
defensive strategy. The cases presented in this conference suggests that it is a more
frecuent interaction than what the lack of evidence in the past suggested.
   Trophic ecology of the elasmobranchs Galeus melastomus
   (Rafinesque, 1810) and Galeus atlanticus (Vaillant, 1888)
         (Chondrichthyes) in the Mediterranean Sea

 Stephanie Miquel Spinks1, Francisco Montero Royo 1, Alba Martín-Lázaro1, Beatriz
                Guijarro2, Cristina García3, Eduardo López Díaz4

1Unitat de Zoología Marina – Institut Cavanilles de Biodiversitat i Biologia Evolutiva, Universitat de València,

                                                     Spain
                2Centre Oceanogràfic de les Balears, Instituto Español de Oceanografía, Spain
                 3Centro Oceanográfico de Málaga, Instituto Español de Oceanografía, Spain
                   4Centro Oceanográfico de Vigo, Instituo Español de Oceanografía, Spain

   Email: smis@alumni.uv.es, francisco.e.montero@uv.es, almarla2@alumni.uv.es, beatriz.guijarro@ieo.es,
                                cristina.garcia@ieo.es, eduardo.lopez@ieo.es




        Galeus melastomus (Rafinesque, 1810) and Galeus atlanticus (Vaillant, 1888) are
demersal catsharks species that inhabit continental shelves and upper slopes. G.
atlanticus distribution is limited, only being found in the Alboran Sea (western
Mediterranean) and in waters near the Gulf of Cadiz (Atlantic Ocean). G. melastomus
distribution is wider, covering the eastern Atlantic Ocean from Norway to Senegal
and the Mediterranean Sea. The aim of this work is to study the trophic ecology of G.
melastomus and G. atlanticus in the western Mediterranean Sea. A total of 35 specimens
of G. melastomus and 7 of G. atlanticus were sampled during the international MEDITS,
bottom trawl survey during the spring of 2017. Additionally, 20 individuals of G.
melastomus fished by commercial bottom trawlers in Valencia (western Mediterranean
Sea) during the winter of 2018 were sampled. Stomach content was quantified and
classified to the lowest possible taxonomic level. Numerical abundance of prey (% N),
percentage of occurrence frequency (% O) and diversity index of Shannon-Wiener and
Simpson were analysed. The results showed that G. melastomus and G. atlanticus diets
were composed mainly of three categories, cephalopods, decapod crustaceans and
teleost fish. For G. melastomus, crustaceans dominated in number followed by
cephalopods and teleost fish all, between 30-36%. The same pattern was followed for
the frequency of occurrence, with a 54-58% of presence. Diet varied with the size of
the individual and seasonality. For G. atlanticus, crustaceans dominated in number
with a 67.6%, and in frequency of occurrence the three groups presented the same
presence with a 57.1% each. A possible overlap in the niche of both species is possible,
since the biological characteristics of both are very similar. Despite this, further studies
are needed. Diversity indices showed greater diversity in the diet of G. melastomus
although limited G. atlanticus sample size should take into account.
General observations from a deceased whale shark: Defining
            protocols during stranding events

   Edgar E. Becerril-García1,2, Darren A. Whitehead1, Katherin Soto-López1, Diego
     Juaristi-Videgaray1, Fabián Cervantes-Guitérrez1, Felipe Galván-Magaña1

      1 Instituto Politécnico Nacional. Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, Mexico.
                                 2Pelagios Kakunjá A.C., La Paz, Mexico.

                                        Email: bg.ragde@gmail.com




       The whale shark Rhincodon typus (Smith 1829) is an internationally protected
species highly susceptible to the fisheries that could exist in coastal aggregation areas.
In the Gulf of California, the seasonal presence of whale sharks is predictable and well
studied. However, there is no published information regarding strandings,
anatomical observations, or age estimations for this region. The present study aims to
provide general data from the necropsy of a dead juvenile whale shark from the
Eastern Tropical Pacific, with comments on its anatomy, age estimation, performed
studies, and the protocol used for the rescue of scientific samples from a 6 m long
shark carcass in mexican waters. The shark was found deceased in shallow waters in
La Paz, México (24.162708 N -110.401079 W) on the 16th of February 2018. The carcass
was transported to the Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas (CICIMAR-IPN)
by local environmental authorities and scientists. When found, the shark presented
several marks on its head that could potentially been caused by fishing gear. On land,
pictures were taken and morphometry was performed prior to the necropsy. Probable
cause of death was asphyxia provoked by fatigue. However, a more detailed
investigation of the species from the necropsy work is currently on going. The
importance of the implementation of a protocol for these stranding events is discussed
to make an objective decision regarding the rescue of a whale shark, or to obtain
scientific samples from dead individuals that could improve the study of their
biology.
Feeding habits and trophic position of the endemic speckled
  ray (Raja polystigma) in the western Mediterranean Sea

          Ethan Coll-Calvo1, Claudio Barría1, Laura Recasens1, Joan Navarro1

1Institut de Ciències del Mar (ICM-CSIC), Passeig Marítim de la Barceloneta, 37-49, 08003 Barcelona, Spain

                                 Email: ethan.collcalvo@gmail.com




        Knowing the trophic ecology of marine predators is essential to understanding
their ecological role in ecosystems. Here, by combining analyses of stomach contents
and stable isotope values, we examined the trophic ecology (dietary composition and
trophic position) of the speckled ray (Raja polystigma), a Mediterranean endemic
predator. Specifically, we evaluated the effects of sex and maturity-stage on its feeding
habits. We also compared the trophic niche and trophic level of the speckled ray with
published isotopic data of other sympatric elasmobranchs present in the ecosystem.
Results revealed that the speckled ray, independently of the sex and maturity-state,
mainly consume shrimps and crabs. Adult specimens also consume to a lower extent
fin-fish, cephalopods, polychaetes and, surprisingly, small demersal sharks embryos.
When the trophic position and niche of this ray is compared with other sympatric
predators, we found that the speckled ray show similar trophic position to other
crustacean-consumer elasmobranchs such rays and small demersal sharks. The results
of this study provide new insights into the ecological role of this endemic ray species
in the Mediterranean Sea and are of crucial importance for management and
conservation of this species.
     Daily movement patterns undertaken by stingrays
determined through aerial video-surveillance in SE Australia:
          applications in ecology & conservation

             David Ruiz-García1, Kye Adams1, Heidi Brown2, Andy Davis1

   1School of Biological Sciences, University of Wollongong, Northfields Avenue, Wollongong, NSW 2522,

                                               Australia.
   2GeoQuEST Research Centre, School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Wollongong,

                         Northfields Avenue, Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia.
                                      Email: davidrg496@gmail.com




       Understanding habitat utilization and animal movement patterns is essential
to establish conservation plans. Batoids, the most threatened group of chondrichthyes,
are among the least understood vertebrates. Their movement patterns and habitat
ranges are under-researched, especially in high-energy surf zones (beaches), where
traditional tracking methods are unsuitable.
We provide new insights into stingray behaviour on beaches using aerial video-
surveillance, a novel, non-invasive technique which allows the association of
movement patterns with habitat structure to be examined. Moreover, it provides
information about interactions of the target species with other organisms. The patterns
observed in Kiama Surf Beach (New South Wales, Australia) demonstrate that: (1) the
studied beach is used by animals transiting between subtidal reefs, (2) adult stingrays
show route fidelity and it appears to be along a bathymetric contour, (3) the movement
pattern is stable throughout the day, and (4) the occurrence of stingrays within the
surf zone is higher during the afternoon.
Taken together, our data highlight the importance of beach areas for batoids and
indicates that to avoid habitat fragmentation, it may be necessary to prevent
obstruction or alteration of beaches along which batoids transit. Therefore, in situ
management plans for batoids should consider the preservation of these zones.
Furthermore, these findings indicate that the shark nets employed in New South
Wales to reduce the entrance of sharks into bathing areas, may also affect batoids
indirectly. These nets may limit the access of batoids to surf zones and may alter their
displacement routes.
Ultimately, this study demonstrates the usefulness of aerial video-surveillance to
study movement patterns and provide behavioural information. Aerial video-
surveillance may revolutionize the study of movement patterns of marine megafauna
and promote the use of non-invasive methods to monitor displacement routes and
habitat use.
 An approach to explain weird behaviour of juvenile Munk’s
 devil ray (Mobula munkiana) along the coastal areas of Gulf
        of Santa Elena and Punta Descartes, Costa Rica

           Nathalie Porsiel1, Sebastián Hernández2,3,5, Maike Heidemeyer4,5

      1University of Hamburg, Institute of Hydrobiology und Fisheries Sciences, Elbelabor, Germany
      2Sala de Colecciones Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias del Mar. Universidad Católica del Norte.
        3Molecular Biology Lab, Veritas University, Center for International Programs, Costa Rica
            4Centro de Investigación en Biología Celular y Molecular, Universidad Costa Rica
                                 5Equipo Tora Carey, El Jobo, Costa Rica

                                     Email: nathalie.porsiel@gmx.de




        There are growing concerns about the conservation of mobulids worldwide as
population trends, for which data exists, are decreasing with the increase of targeted
fisheries on the manta and devil rays (Mobulidae). With their gill rakers being of high
commercial value on markets for "traditional"(as this is a new trend) Chinese
medicine (TCM), the former not economically interesting mobulids got now a worth
depleting their populations. For most species of the mobulid family the ecology is
poorly known. Even though they are not supposed to be able to cope with even small
population depletions through their low fecundity (late sexual maturity, small litter
size), is commonly agreed on. This study on juvenile pygmy devil rays, Mobula
munkiana, was conducted to get a clue of the motivation of the juveniles coming every
year to beaches on the northern Pacific coast of Costa Rica in the time of June-
September. Additionally to sea water samples for the planktonic composition and the
observation of the behavior of these young mobulids, some size parameters and tissue
samples were taken for further information on their age/growth, genetics and they
got tagged for investigation on movement patterns if recaptured.
    Rays of paradise: Ecology and distribution of the Spiny
        Butterfly Ray in Gran Canaria, Canary Islands

    David Jiménez-Alvarado1,2, E.K.M. Meyers3, Airam Guerra-Marrero2, Airam
          Sarmiento-Lezcano2, Arminda García-Marrero2, José J. Castro1,2

 1 Grupo en Biodiversidad y Conservación, IU-ECOAQUA, Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Las

                                     Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain.
 2 Facultad de Ciencias del Mar, Departamento de Biología, Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Las

                                     Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain.
                    3 Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig, Bonn, Germany.

                                 Email: david.jimenezalvarado@gmail.com




       The Vulnerable (IUCN Red List) Spiny Butterfly Ray (Gymnura altavela) has
suffered and important depletion from professional and recreational fishing pressure,
taken as by-catch in both fisheries across the entire Atlantic waters including the
Canary Islands. Particularly, in Gran Canaria we have an important reproduction
hotspot where Spiny Butterfly Rays can be regularly encountered.
However, information on the spatial distribution patterns, population structure and
abundance of these rays are almost unknown in the Archipelago. In 2017 we launched
the project Rays of Paradise to expand the existing knowledge of this species in the
Canary Islands, particularly on the island of Gran Canaria. Our aim is to get a better
understanding of the seasonal patterns of distribution and abundance along the
nearshore areas of the island. We used established citizen science programmes with
online databases, coupled with underwater visual surveys, to provide basic insights
into the ecology of these rays in Gran Canaria.
Our results show that Gran Canaria is an important aggregation hotspot for this
species during the summer season, between May and October, however, the rays are
present throughout the year. The Spiny Butterfly Ray form larger aggregations in
shallow coastal areas compared to deeper areas, where they are also found.
Furthermore, the density of females is higher than males as well as the size of females,
which tend to be larger than males. Some areas are only visited by large females.
The information gathered in this study will allow us to better manage the habitat of
this species in Gran Canaria and improve its vulnerable conservation status.
   Area preferences and impact of selected factors on the
 occurrence of two ray species in Malta and implications for
                        management

                    Pauline Lapostolle1, Lydia Koehler1, Greg Nowell1

    1Sharklab- Malta, 27 “Chris”, Triq Il-Kappella, Tal-Lunzjata, In-Naxxar, Salina, NXR 6031, Malta.

                                   Email: pauline.lapostolle@outlook.fr




       The Common stingray (Dasyatis pastinaca) and the Bullray (Aetomylaeus bovinus)
are commonly observed in coastal waters around Malta. Increasing human impact
through tourism, coastal development, fishing and pollution require management
and conservation measures for these two threatened species. For such to be effective,
data on the distribution and use of habitat are crucial. Snorkel surveys conducted by
Sharklab-Malta since 2011 showed temporal occurrence patterns with A. bovinus being
spotted from May to August, which might indicate migration behaviour during
winter months; compared to D. pastinaca, which can be observed from April to
November.
A systematic studied on the occurrence within selected bays in Malta identified
Golden Bay as “hotspot” for the two species, especially juveniles, indicating the use
as nursery area. Correlation analysis of environmental factors showed that sighting
probability of D. pastinaca decreases with depth and human activity, while the
occurrence of A. bovinus appears to be positively influenced by increased water
temperatures and wave height.
While these tendencies are likely to be driven by niche overlap and resources
partitioning through different feeding strategies; they can certainly guide
management measures for the conservation of these species by reducing human
induced pressures.
  Photo-identification as a tool for the study of mobulid ray
                  populations in the Azores

                   Ana Sobral1, Johannes Mueller2, Pedro Afonso1

                    1 Okeanos R&D Centre, University of the Azores, Portugal
                              2 University of the Algarve, Portugal

                                  Email: aflsobral@gmail.com




        Despite their charismatic megafauna status, and importance to tourism
economy, our understanding of the mobulid rays found in the Azores and the Eastern
Atlantic is very limited. Considering their highly migratory nature and current
vulnerability, understanding their ecology and behaviour is necessary to support
sound management and conservation actions. The Azores archipelago is one of the
few places in the world where large schools of Mobula tarapacana form predictable
aggregations which provide unique opportunities to study these animals using new
and non-invasive techniques. Long-term photo-identification databases have proved
to be a vital tool for studying and monitoring regional and global manta ray
populations. M. tarapacana individuals have unique ventral markings, similarly to
manta rays, which lead the project to establish the world’s first photo-ID database for
this species. This long-term photo-ID catalog, established in 2012, consisting of photos
submitted by divers, has ~150 M. tarapacana and ~30 Mobula birostris identified
individuals in the region and has provided a valuable insight into population size and
structure as well as aggregation dynamics. This is a clear example of the important
role citizen science can play in collecting long-term data on these species. The aim of
this work is to describe the spatial and temporal patterns of mobulid occurrence in the
region, including their aggregation dynamics, and use these data to discuss the
ecological importance of Azorean seamounts for mobulid rays.
    They grow up so fast: Describing biological parameter,
    habitat use and growth rates of the Blackchin guitarfish
      (Glaucostegus cemiculus) while in a nursery ground

              Barak Azrieli1, Adi Barash1, Aviad Scheinin1, Dan Tchernov1

  1Morris Kahn Marine Research Station, Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa




        Guitarfish are the 6th most threatened family of elasmobranchs in the world.
Two species of guitarfish, Common guitarfish (Rhinobatos rhinobatos) and the
Blackchin guitarfish (Glaucostegus cemiculus), were once common throughout the
Mediterranean shelf. Both species have suffered severe declines and regional
extirpation throughout their range due to their biology (demersal, large body, low
fecundity) and habitat use (aggregation in coastal areas for mating and pupping) and
are currently considered endangered according to the IUCN red list. While Israel is
one of the only countries in the world in which all elasmobranch landings are
prohibited, sharks, and especially guitarfish, are still being fished in the Israeli
territorial waters both illegally as a targeted species as well as bycatch. Along the
Israeli coastline, G. cemiculus neonates can be observed in coastal shallow water from
the end of August until the end of November. Based on an ongoing study, one location
shows especially strong evidence as a nursery ground. Since August 2017, over 400
neonates and juvenile G. cemiculus ranging from 23 cm to 77 cm have been captured
and measured, with over 250 of these specimens being tagged with PIT tags. Based
on umbilical scar presence of captured individuals, the average size at birth is 31.5 cm,
with similar frequencies for males and females. Recaptured individuals experience a
growth rate of 1 cm per month on average, and residence time of over 10 months at
this site. The data gathered thus far supplies much-needed information regarding the
species biology and habitat use and describes the use of this location as a nursery
ground for this species. There is no species-specific conservation planning currently
in place for G. cemiculus and identifying such regions will be an immense contribution
for these species throughout their range.
Development of a new acoustic tagging methodology to track
          Critically Endangered Angelsharks

Joanna Barker1, Eva Meyers2, David Jiménez Alvarado3, Luka Mustafa4, Blaz Bratus4,
     Alasdair Davies5, Matthew Gollock1, Stuart Hetherington6, David Jacoby7

                   1Conservation Programmes, Zoological Society of London, UK
                    2Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig, Germany
                       3Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain
                                 4Institute IRNAS Rače, Slovenia
                                     5Arribada Initiative, UK
                 6Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, UK
                      7Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London, UK

                                   Email: joanna.barker@zsl.org




       Limited understanding of adult Angelshark (Squatina squatina) habitat use and
movement is a major factor preventing effective protection in their last stronghold of
the Canary Islands. Without this detailed ecological data, the efficacy of management
decisions and conservation initiatives cannot be measured in a rigorous scientific
manner. This project was developed to aid this critical knowledge gap through an
acoustic tracking study in Spain’s largest marine reseve, La Graciosa (North of
Lanzarote, Canary Islands).
The Critically Endangered Angelshark is one of the most endangered species in
European waters; they are particularly susceptible to the combined impacts of fishing
and habitat degradation, due to their coastal location and biology (large, flat-bodied
animals with low fecundity). In part due to their threat status, we developed a method
to electronically tag adult Angelsharks underwater in situ, with an ethically approved
external tag attachment methodology.
The Angel Shark Project brought together a collaboration of scientists,
conservationists, engineers and an ethical review board, to identify the best approach
to ensure minimal impact to the Angelshark. Use of a modified cattle tag at the base
of the first dorsal fin was identified as most appropriate. During a meticulous
development phase, stock cattle tags and an applicator were modified to gain the
following key features: usable underwater; a genetic sample automatically taken
during tagging procedure; tag attachment adaptable for differently sized sharks; tag
holder camoflaged; built in weakpoint to ensure the shark cannot be entangled.
In July 2018, the first Angelshark acoustic telemetry project was conducted, through
deployment of seven acoustic hydrophones in La Graciosa Marine Reserve and
successfully fitting acoustic tags onto nine resting adult Angelsharks. A follow-up
expedition is being planned to deploy a further 15 tags and through close working
with Government officials, results will be used to inform management within the
reserve.
  Using multi-channel electronic biologging to describe the
   spatio-temporal occurrence and energetics of breaching
                behaviour in basking sharks

 Jessica Rudd1, Graham Hall3, Jackie Hall3, Lucy A. Hawkes1, Suzanne Henderson2,
                                 Matthew J. Witt1

  1 University of Exeter, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, Hatherly Laboratories, Prince of Wales

                                        Road, Exeter EX4 4PS, UK.
             2Scottish Natural Heritage, Great Glen House, Inverness, Scotland IV3 8NW, UK.
          3Manx Basking Shark Watch, Glen Chass Farmhouse, Port St Mary, Isle of Man IM9 5PJ

                                        Email: m.j.witt@exeter.ac.uk




         Some marine vertebrates, including cetaceans, are known to “breach” – a
spectacular display behaviour lunging above the sea surface. Breaching may have
important roles in communication, mate-guarding, play or parasite dislodgement, but
little is known of breaching behaviour in non-air breathers, such as sharks. Basking
sharks (Cetorhinus maximus), Europe’s largest shark species, is endangered in the
North East Atlantic and anecdotally known to breach. While recent tracking has
explained many facets of their spatial distribution, diving and foraging behaviour,
their courtship and breeding behaviour remains largely unknown. This study uses
state-of-the-art satellite tracking and Daily Dairy movement tags to provide fine-scale
information on the spatio-temporal variation of their breaching behaviour. Three
sharks were tagged in the Hebrides, Scotland, a key regional hotspot for basking
sharks in the north-east Atlantic. Sharks breached throughout the diel cycle with
breaching occurring predominantly during the day. One shark breached 60 times over
32 days with up to 4 consecutive breaches in 47 seconds. Breaching is an energetically
demanding behaviour for sharks compared with surface foraging; requiring over 100-
fold more energy to propel themselves out of the water from up to 57 meters deep at
speeds comparable to ambush breaches made by white sharks. Through
multidimensional spherical representation, the daily behaviour of basking sharks is
represented, highlighting the frequency and extreme energetic requirement of
breaching. Should breaching play a function in courtship display, then knowing the
timing and location of such behaviour may contribute towards providing adequate
protection to areas supporting key life stages of an endangered species.
New non-invasive attachment and multisensor towed tags for
 short-term high resolution tagging of deep-diving pelagic
                      sharks and rays

  J. Fontes1,2,3, Silvio Solleliet-Ferreira1,2,3, Bruno Macena1,8, Betty Laglbauer1,2,3, J.
 Baeyaert1,2, R. Prieto1,2, G. Graça1,2, F. Buyle4 David Brandão5, Tiago Rebelo5, Tiago
               Bartolomeu5, Nikolai Liebsch6, Carl Meyer7, P. Afonso1,2,3

1Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre and Centre of the Institute of Marine Research of the University of

                       the Azores, R. Frederico Machado 4, 9901-862 Horta, Portugal
 2Department of Oceanography and Fisheries, Centre of IMAR of the University of the Azores, Horta, Azores,

                                                  Portugal
              3Okeanos research centre of the University of the Azores, Horta, Azores, Portugal
                                                4Nektos.net
 5CEIIA – Center for Innovation and Creative Engineering, Av. D. Afonso Henriques, 4450-017 Matosinhos,

                                                  Portugal
             6Customised Animal Tracking Solutions (CATS), 7 Marlua Avenue, Moffat Beach,

                                        Queensland 4551, Australia
7Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology, University of Hawaii at Manoa, PO Box 1346, Coconut Island, Kaneohe,

                                            Hawaii 96744, USA
   8Departamento de Pesca e Aquicultura, Universidade Federal Rural de Pernambuco, R. Dom Manoel de

                       Medeiros, s/n, CEP 52171-030, Dois Irmãos, Recife/PE- Brasil.




        Biologging technology has provided scientists with unprecedented tools to
investigate the ecology and behaviour of marine animals, but tag deployment and
attachment methods have lagged behind. Electronic tagging of elasmobranchs still
essentially involves implanting anchors or drilling the fins of restrained animals. On
the other hand, most biologging tools are quite specific and designed to measure and
archive/transmit a narrow and specific set of variables providing a limited view of
the animal’s ecology and behaviour. We propose a new non-invasive approach for
deploying innovative high frequency multisensor towed tags for deep diving animals
that don’t require restraining or manipulation of the animals, neither the attachment
of intramuscular anchors. This new multisensot towed tags combine satellite tracking,
3D high frequency accelerometry, speed and imagery to unveil the behaviour of deep
diving sharks and pelagic rays. The attachment of a modified fin clamp and a harness
systems were tested and are being routinely used to study the fine scale behaviour
and habitat use of blue sharks and chelien devil rays in the Azores, mid-north Atlantic.
Examples of high frequency multisensor data combined with on-board imagery will
be presented. Clamps and harnesses are fitted with galvanic timed releases (GTR) and
deployed manually by a free-diver or from the boat using a harness deployment
frame. The tags retention can be determined according to the GTR used. Focal
observations and biologginged data suggest that both methods produce little or no
adverse behavioural reaction of the animals, offering a valid alternative for short term
tagging of pelagic sharks and mobulid rays.
    25 years of tracking: Using long term datasets to infer
 ontogenetic shift in the lemon shark, Negaprion brevirostris,
                 and conservation implications

   Clemency White1,2, Samuel Gruber2, Maurits van Zinnicq Bergmann2,3, Tristan
                 Guttridge2, Bryan Franks4, Kristine Stump5,6.

                1Environment Department, University of York, Heslington, YO10 5DD, UK.
                          2Bimini Biological Field Station, South Bimini, Bahamas.
3Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University, 11200 SW 8th Street, Miami, FL, 33199,

                                                   USA.
     4Department of Biology and Marine Science, Jacksonville University, 2800 University Boulevard N,

                                       Jacksonville, FL, 32211, USA.
             5Field Lab Consulting, LLC, 1180 8th Ave West #208, Palmetto, FL, 34221, USA.
            6Ransom Everglades School, 3375 Main Highway, Coconut Grove, FL, 33133, USA.

                                    Email: clemencywhite27@gmail.com




       Tracking technologies serve as a tool for elucidating animal movement and
behaviour when out of visual range, which is particularly useful for marine species.
These methods can be used to produce a detailed baseline of space use, identify
ontogenetic shift and inform conservation management. This study compiled active
and passive tracking data on the lemon shark, Negaprion brevirostris, around Bimini,
the Bahamas, between 1992-2018, providing information on space use across a broad
timescale. Differences in space use were compared between sexes, life stages (neonate,
juvenile, adult) and stages of industrial development (before, during, after) using
dynamic Brownian-bridge movement models. Different life stages consistently show
clear partitioning in space use across the past 25 years, with home range expanding
with ensuing life stages. This is particularly important in neonates, who utilise small
activity spaces very close to the island’s fringing mangroves for protection from
predators during key developmental phases. The successive increase in activity space
also suggests that for protection to be effective for N. brevirostris, and for other species
capable of long range migration, more robust temporal and spatial protection
regulations are required. Furthermore, differences in space use before and after
industrial development and mangrove removal suggests anthropogenic impacts are
changing natural activity patterns. In the context of previous research about N.
brevirostris life histories and considering the proposed North Bimini Marine Protected
Area, this study provides a firm baseline for how populations of N. brevirostris use
habitat and specifically how they use Bimini. This provides us with tools to better
protect Bimini’s N. brevirostris populations, as well as a starting point for conservation
on a global scale.
       A microsatellite marker approach of the reproductive
 strategy in two lanternshark species, Etmopterus spinax and
                      Etmopterus molleri

          Laurent Duchatelet1, Nicolas Oury2, Jérôme Mallefet1, Hélène Magalon2

       1Marine Biology Laboratory, Earth and Life Institute, Université catholique de Louvain, 3 Place croix

                               du Sud, 1348 Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium.
       2Université de La Réunion UMR ENTROPIE 9220, CS 92003, 97744 Saint Denis CEDEX 9, France.

                                     Email: Laurent.duchatelet@uclouvain.be




        Genetic tool evolution allows a better understanding of reproductive strategies
in various marine organisms such as sea turtle, marine mammals, fishes or
elasmobranchs. Studies on reproductive strategies in shallow-water sharks using
microsatellite variations become more and more popular. According to recent genetic
studies, multiple paternity seems to be common within elasmobranch. Conversely,
genetic relevant data about deep-sea elasmobranch are poor (i.e. Squalus mitsukurii
and Galeorhinus galeus), mainly due to the difficulty to observed and collected
samples from these elusive animals. Due to the lack of data, plans and long-term
conservation managements are rare for these deep-sea sharks. Among them,
Etmopteridae, are represented by at least 43 species. The velvet belly lanternshark,
Etmopterus spinax is one of the most studied species mainly due to its ability to emit
light (i.e. bioluminescence). Although relatively common, E. spinax biological data
and life style is limited (i.e. lifespan, stomach content, distribution, parasitism).
Comparatively, almost no data is available for the slendertail lanternshark,
Etmopterus molleri. Most of lanternsharks are hightly caught as bycatch by trawling
fisheries and discarded at sea due to no commercial value. Given the relative high
fishing mortality pressure and the lack of reproduction strategies, genetic diversity
and population dynamics information, these lanternsharks may already be facing
severe population collapses.
The aim of this work is to focus on the reproductive strategy in two lanternsharks
species. We detailed the paternity in 42 litters for the velvet belly lanternshark from
Norway and 7 litters for the slendertail lanternshark from Japan using 29 and 20
microsatellite loci newly developed for E. spinax and E. molleri, respectively. This
microsatellite-based reproductive mode study appear to be a promising tool to gain
crucial informations for small deep-sea lanternsharks in order to assess population
dynamics and management strategy.
      Environmental DNA (eDNA) as an ecological tool for
      locating Angelshark (Squatina squatina) nursery sites

  Fenella Wood1,2, Joanna Barker3, Alex Hayward4, David Jiménez-Alvarado5, Eva
                           Meyers6, Michael Cunliffe1,2

 1School of Biological and Marine Sciences, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, UK. 2The Marine Biological

                              Association of the United Kingdom, Plymouth, UK.
                                  3Zoological Society of London, London, UK.
                  4 Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of Exeter, Penryn, UK.
  5Centre for Biodiversity and Environmental Management, IU-EcoAqua, University of Las Palmas de Gran

                                        Canaria, Gran Canaria, Spain.
                       6Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig, Bonn, Germay.

                                      E-mail: fenella.wood@hotmail.co.uk




Angelsharks (Squatina squatina) are benthic sharks that historically ranged
throughout the Northeast Atlantic Ocean, including the Mediterranean and Black
Seas. Intensification of demersal fishing and habitat loss are thought to have caused
dramatic population declines, with Angelsharks currently listed as Critically
Endangered on the IUCN Red List. The Canary Islands (Spain), however, offers a
unique stronghold where Angelsharks are commonly encountered. To effectively
conserve such a threatened species, it is important to identify and manage areas that
are vital to their key life stages, such as nursery sites. To do so, nursery sites need to
be located and confirmed; however, this proves challenging because juvenile
Angelsharks are difficult to observe due to their camouflaged colouration and burying
behaviour under sand. Environmental DNA (eDNA) is increasingly being used in
conservation studies as it can offer an alternative or complementary method to
identify the presence of animals that are challenging to observe. eDNA has not yet
been applied to study Angelsharks or nursery grounds of elasmobranch species; this
study is the first to explore this. This project aimed to test the reliability of eDNA and
apply eDNA to locate potential nursery sites for further targeted research in the
Canary Islands, in collaboration with the Angel Shark Project (ASP). We show that the
developed species-specific eDNA tool is reliable in identifying the presence or absence
of Angelsharks at beaches across the Canary Islands, through comparison with
traditional data collected by the ASP through visual surveys and citizen science.
eDNA is a quick, easy method compared to traditional survey methods and provides
a good basis with which to identify potential nursery sites where further research can
then be concentrated. eDNA will be vital for future surveying throughout the
Angelshark’s historical range, such as the Celtic Sea, to understand where fragmented
populations still occur.
       Poster
presentations
   Transmigration and capture-risk of mako shark in North
                          Atlantic

                  Gonzalo Mucientes1, Marisa Vedor1, Nuno Quieroz1

      1CIBIO-InBIO, Campus Agrário de Vairão, Universidade do Porto, 4485-668 Vairão, Portugal

                                    gonzalomucientes@gmail.com




        The shortfin mako shark Isurus oxyrinchus is one of the fastest sharks, reaching
speeds of up to 70 km/h. Belonging to family Lamnidae it is the second-most common
oceanic shark caught by high seas longlines, mainly because of the high value of
shortfin mako fins and meat. North Atlantic reported catches currently exceed 3300
tons annually and the 2017 ICCAT stock assessment confirmed that the North Atlantic
stock is overfished.
In this work we tagged a total of 41 makos (17PSATs and 24 SPOTs) with devices from
Wildlife Computers and Sirtrack between 2008 and 2017. After generating all tracks
we demonstrated three trans-Atlantic migration for this species (> 3,000km). In order
to know the degree of fishing risk, these paths were analyzed in relation to the CPUEs
calculated from the logbook data of three fishing vessels (data ranging from 1996 to
2018) as a proxy of the "real risk" of capture for mako sharks. In addition we calculated
the AIS positions to determinate longliner distribution in North Atlantic, to assess the
"potential risk" of capturing makos in open ocean by commercial vessels.


      *POSTER CORNER PRESENTATION
Mysterious strandings of a deepwater shark in Norwegian
fjord
          Claudia Junge1, Diana Zaera1, Lasse Eliassen1, Ole Thomas Albert1

            1Havforskningsinstituttet (Institute of Marine Research, IMR), Tromsø, Norway

                                     Email: claudia.junge@hi.no




        Many shark strandings have been reported and investigated across the world,
especially within the last few years. If the rate of those strandings does in fact increase
or if there are merely better monitoring programs in place today, is not clear. What we
do know however is that in the majority of cases we don`t know why a given
stranding occurs where and when it does. In some cases the culpitts causing the death
of stranded sharks could be identified, what is unclear in most cases however is the
question of “why now?”. What might change the resilience of a local shark population
making them locally susceptible to biotic (e.g. parasites, bacteria, fungi) or abiotic (e.g.
salinity, oxygen, temperature) factors? We explored reported cases of shark
strandings across the globe, looking for trends and similarities. In Norway, we
detected that a velvet belly lantern shark, Etmopterus spinax, population exhibits
repeated mass stranding events in a deep fjord system. E. spinax is a small-sized
deepwater shark, which is often captured as by-catch in commercial deep-water
fisheries and discarded due to its low commercial value. Locally, populations can be
large and catches are mostly separated by sex. We sampled 400 E. spinax from a recent
stranding event, and tested various hypotheses based on previously reported cases,
expert consultation as well as local environmental data. This investigation into the
causes and drivers of such strandings is especially timely in light of similar recent
strandings of various species on e.g. the US coast in California. Results and the most
likely scenario are presented, and lively discussions about causes and potential new
hypotheses are strongly encouraged!
      Comments about landings statistics of sharks and rays;
                  Catalonia as a case study

                               Claudio Barría1, Ana I. Colmenero1

1 Institut de Ciències del Mar (ICM-CSIC), Passeig Marítim de la Barceloneta 37-49, 08003 Barcelona, Spain

                                         Email: barria@icm.csic.es




        Fishery statistics are used to see trends in the populations of some species. This
information is not accurate for some groups and may lead to confusion in species that
are similar or not so well known to consumers, as in the case of sharks and rays.
However, the landings statistics could be useful to evaluate the populations of
elasmobranches which have characteristics that make them very susceptible to
overfishing.
In this study we analysed the landings statistics of sharks and rays for the last 17 years
and we evaluated if the species were well identified from the fish markets of
Catalonia.
Results showed that the number of sharks caught is higher than rays, many of them
in danger of extinction. Rays show a constant increase in landings but in the last four
years a decline is observed; an important fact considering that more than half of the
rays are threatened with extinction. The species with the highest landings is Raja
asterias and then it disappears from the landings statistics and becomes Raja sp,
probably due to identification problems of these species in the fish markets. Sharks
keep their catches stable; the species with the highest offload are Galeus melastomus
and Scyliorhinus canicula. However, from a monitoring conducted in the fish market
we observed that many sharks were erroneously labelled.
It is recommended to be very conservative when evaluating the elasmobranchs at the
species level from landings since important bias may exist due to identification
problems; however this information can be very useful to observe trends at a general
level. In addition, a greater effort is needed in the standardization of landings of
sharks and rays in order to be useful when evaluating possible decreases in their
populations.
 Sharks, rays and quimeras of Seine and Unicorn Seamounts
                    (NE Atlantic Ocean)

   Mafalda Freitas1,2, João Delgado2,3, Ricardo Sousa2,3, Ana Luísa Costa1 Antonina
                              Santos4, Manuel Biscoito1,2

1MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Estação de Biologia Marinha do Funchal (EBMF), Cais

  do Carvão, Promenade da Orla Marítima do Funchal, 9000-107 Funchal, Madeira, Portugal and Museu de
                                     História Natural do Funchal (MMF).
    2OOM – Observatório Oceânico da Madeira – ARDITI, Edifício Madeira Tecnopolo, Piso 2, Caminho da

                               Penteada, 9020-105 Funchal, Madeira, Portugal.
  3 Direção de Serviços de Investigação, Direção Regional de Pescas, Estrada da Pontinha, 9004-562 Funchal,

                                              Madeira, Portugal.
 4 IPMA – Instituto Português do Mar e da Atmosfera, Rua Alfredo Magalhães Ramalho, 6, 1495-006 Lisboa,

                                                   Portugal.
                                     Email: mafalda.freitas@cm-funchal.pt




       Seamounts are undersea mountains rising relatively steeply at least several
hundred meters from the surrounding deep sea floor but do not reach the surface.
The Seine and Unicorn Seamounts belong to the Madeira-Tore seamount chain located
between the Portuguese mainland and Madeira Island (NE Atlantic).
A collection of Chondrichthyes from the Seine and Unicorn Seamounts was studied.
The specimens were caught during two research cruises in 2004 and 2017 between the
top of the seamounts and 2500 m of depth.
Sixteen species belonging to 7 families were collected in the two surveyed seamounts.
This work is a contribution to the knowledge increase of seamount-associated fish
fauna and a check-list of sharks rays and quimeras species known to date is given.
     Madeira Island (NE Atlantic) a nursery area for smooth
     hammerhead shark, Sphyrna zygaena (Linnaeus, 1758)?

                            Mafalda Freitas1,2, Manuel Biscoito1,2

1MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Estação de Biologia Marinha do Funchal (EBMF), Cais

 do Carvão, Promenade da Orla Marítima do Funchal, 9000-107 Funchal, Madeira, Portugal and Museu de
                                História Natural do Funchal (MMF).
  2OOM – Observatório Oceânico da Madeira – ARDITI, Edifício Madeira Tecnopolo, Piso 2, Caminho da

                           Penteada, 9020-105 Funchal, Madeira, Portugal.
                                Email: mafalda.freitas@cm-funchal.pt




       The smooth hammerhead shark, Sphyrna zygaena, is a circumtropical species
found worldwide in coastal, pelagic, and semi oceanic waters off and on continental
shelves of the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans.
The IUCN lists the smooth hammerhead as Vulnerable globally, but there is a lack of
regional information on smooth hammerhead life history, movement patterns, and
population dynamics.
Over the last years, 6 smooth hammerhead shark juveniles were caught by fishermen
in Madeira suggesting that this can be a nursery area for this species.
Coastal nursery sites provide critical refuge for young sharks. Knowing how sharks
use these habitats and interact with other species will help us to better understand
their ecological role and implement protection measures.
Suitability of a small MPA for the recovery of an endangered
      elasmobranch: the undulate ray (Raja undulata)

Inês Sousa1, Esben M Olsen2, Even Moland2, Joffrey Baeyaert1, Jorge MS Gonçalves1,
                          Carla Freitas2,3, Karim Erzini1

                  1CCMAR–Centre of Marine Sciences, 8005-139 Faro, Portugal.
                         2Institute of Marine Research, His 4817, Norway.
                  3Observatório Oceânico da Madeira, 9020-105 Funchal, Portugal.

                 E-mail: isousa@ualg.pt; permanent email: inesgcsousa@gmail.com




Rays are presently recognized as a group that raises conservation concerns, given their
low resilience to fishing pressure. Using spatial management for the recovery of rays’
populations is a promising strategy, and information of the effectiveness of this
approach is needed. The undulate ray (Raja undulata) is a coastal species that has
undergone declines in abundance within its geographic range and is currently
classified as endangered by the IUCN. We studied the spatial dynamics of this species
in a small marine protected area located in the north-eastern Atlantic, the Luiz
Saldanha Marine Park (Portugal). Thirteen individuals were tagged (7 males, 6
females) with acoustic transmitters (expected battery life of 20 months). Passive
acoustic telemetry data was collected from May 2014 to June 2017 in the fully
protected area and adjacent partially protected area. Movements of tagged specimens
were predominantly longitudinal along the coast. Some individuals exhibited year-
round residency in the reserve, while others were not solely restricted to the fully
protected area and migrated to the adjacent partially protected areas. Individuals
generally remained at depths shallower than 40m and exhibited a moderate-high site
fidelity within the study area. Results suggest that this species can benefit from small
coastal MPAs. However, the recovery of healthy populations regarding abundance
and genetics will probably require the protection of more extended sections of coastal
areas.
        Elevated trawling inside European protected areas
         undermines potential conservation benefits for
                         elasmobranchs

Kirsti A. Burnett1, Kristina Boerder2, Manuel Dureuil1,2, Rainer Froese3, Boris Worm2

         1Sharks of the Atlantic Research and Conservation Centre, Halifax, NS, B3L 2Y5, Canada
  2Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, 1355 Oxford St., PO BOX 15000, Halifax, NS, B3H 4R2,

                                                Canada
   3GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, Düsternbrooker Weg 20, 24105 Kiel, Germany

                                    Email: burnettkirsti@gmail.com




        Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) are increasingly used as a primary tool to
conserve biodiversity and threatened species in the oceans. This is particularly
relevant in heavily exploited hotspots such as Europe, where sensitive indicator
species such as elasmobranchs (sharks, skates, and rays) are at risk of extirpation.
However, MPAs in Europe do not explicitly target elasmobranchs. Here we ask if
Europe’s current MPA system could be utilized as a potential conservation tool for
sharks, skates and rays. We present commercial trawling and elasmobranch hotspots
across 20 species. We then investigate industrial trawl fishing and elasmobranch
abundance in and around 727 MPAs designated in the European Union. We find that
average trawling intensity inside MPAs is elevated at least 1.4 fold compared to non-
protected areas and elasmobranchs decreased >70% in abundance in heavily trawled
areas. Overall 59% of MPAs are commercially trawled. We conlcude that the
widespread use of MPAs for industrial fishing undermines potential conservation
benefits for many sharks, rays and skates that are vulnerable to commercial trawling
activities.
  Blue shark occurrences in the Gulf of Lion coastal waters
(France) through participatory data collection involving sport
        fishermen and implications for management

   Pauline Lapostolle1, Quentin Delaigle2, Caroline Meric2, Jean Claude Hodeau3,
                                Matthieu Lapinski 4


              1AILERONS association, University of Montpellier 2, 34 090 Montpellier

                               E-mail: pauline.lapostolle@outlook.fr




        Increasing human impact through fisheries, coastal development and pollution
require management and conservation measures for shark Mediterranean
species. Data on the distribution are therefore crucial in order to establish population
statement and ecological functions of habitats (nursery, breeding, migration, feeding)
especially at a regional scale. Assessed as Critically Endangered in the Mediterranean
Sea (IUCN, 2016), the Blue shark (Prionace glauca) is regularly accidentally catched by
sport fishermen in the Gulf of Lion coastal waters (France) during the summer
season. Preliminary results from the “Open Sea” participatory science project leaded
by Ailerons association since 2015 in collaboration with voluntary sport fishermen
showed that the Gulf of Lion can support high densities of blue sharks from April to
September. Interestingly, this area seems i/ to be used as a nursery by Prionace
glauca given that most of the observations concerned juvenile stages including Young-
Of-the-Year (= < 60 cm), and ii/ to be a potential breeding area as reproduction
behaviour evidences (recent body damages on females caused by bites) have been
noticed. Still ongoing, this project has therefore a dual objective: raising sport
fishermen awareness with intensive information campaign on the promotion of no-
kill fishing while collecting ecological and biological data (geographical coordinates,
sea conditions, depth, size, sexe, DNA samples) concerning a threatened species,
which could certainly guide future management measures by reducing human
induced pressures.
 Occurrence of the guitarfish species threatened of extinction
    in the Mediterranean Sea and the northeast Atlantic

                      David Nos1, Ana I. Colmenero1, Claudio Barría1

 1Institute of Marine Sciences (ICM-CSIC). Renewable Marine Resources Department. Passeig Marítim de la

                                  Barceloneta, 37-49. Barcelona (Spain)
                                       Email: dnfqam@cid.csic.es




        Guitarfishes are one of the most endangered elasmobranchs. They have a wide
distribution, but their populations are decreasing fast. Currently there are two species
of guitarfish threatened of extinction inhabiting in the Mediterranean Sea and the
northeast Atlantic Ocean: Rhinobatos rhinobatos and Glaucostegus cemiculus. The aim of
this study is to analize the distribution of both guitafishes as well as to identify their
abundance and breeding or mating areas based on scientific papers and citizen
science. The results show 33 scientific records of R. rhinobatos and G. cemiculus in the
eastern Mediterranean while in the western Mediterranean scientific reports of these
species were almost inexistent. Citizen science allowed to find, for the first time,
records of guitarfishes in the Spanish coast. We highlight the existence of a potential
hotspot of abundance in the Atlantic Ocean and the sighting of a pregnant female of
G. cemiculus in the Mediterranean coast (Murcia) which could indicate a potential
nursery area. In conclusion, we report for the first time the presence of guitarfish
aggregations in the Spanish coast and the detection of a possible nusery area in the
western Mediterranean Sea. Since guitarfishes are in danger of extinction, research
involving users, scientists and authorities is essential for the preservation of these
species and their habitat.
    Application of laser photogrammetry on C. carcharias in
                      natural environment

             Simone Di Crescenzo1,2, Primo Micarelli2, Umberto Scacco1,3

                           1Università degli Studi della Tuscia, Viterbo, Italy
                        2Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima, Grosseto, Italy
            3ISPRA, Istituto Superiore per la Protezione e la Ricerca Ambientale, Rome, Italy

                               Email: simonedicrescenzo123@gmail.com




        Most morphometric methods of investigation used on large marine organisms
are intrusive, as they involve the capture or the killing of the animal. In the last decade
new methods and new technologies have been developed able to supply the same
morphometric data avoiding contact with the animal. The result of these efforts was
the introduction also in the ecological field of laser photogrammetry.
Photogrammetry is a non-invasive remote sensing technique that uses digital
photography or images to measure objects or, in the case of animals, morphometry.
Laser photogrammetry uses two laser beams, parallel to each other, to obtain the real
dimensions of a body starting from a digital image. The objective of the present study
is to provide a contribution to the definition and validation of the method for the study
of white sharks. Data were collected during XIV° Scientific Expedition in South Africa
(2017) managed by Centro Studi Squali and Unical to study the behaviour of
Carcharodon carcharias. We proceeded to create a system suitable for the study of the
white shark, being careful to the problems highlighted in the literature. The realized
instrument was equipped with two filming means, in this way the attention was
focused on two aspects: the real effectiveness of laser photogrammetry and the
efficiency of using a reflex camera compared to an action-cam. The tool made allowed
to obtain valid data. From these, estimates of the total lengths of the samples
encountered were obtained by processing the frames considered valid using an
appropriately defined protocol. The results obtained by the two imaging systems were
compared with each other and with the data derived from the visual estimation
(traditionally used not invasive method). The comparison of results allowed some
indications regarding the effectiveness of the new morphometric measurement
system and its degree of reliability.
 Shark ecotourism in Cabo San Lucas, Mexico: Ethology and
                     economic revenue

    Olimpia Berdeja-Zavala1,2, Edgar E. Becerril-García2,3, Edgar Mauricio Hoyos-
             Padilla2, Emilio Sperone4, Andrés Cisneros-Montemayor5

1 Departamento Académico de Ciencias Marinas y Costeras, Universidad Autónoma de Baja California Sur, La

                                                 Paz, Mexico.
                                   2Pelagios Kakunjá A.C., La Paz, Mexico.
       3 Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, Mexico.
      4 Dipartimento di Biologia, Ecologia e Scienze della terra, Università della Calabria, Rende, Italy.
  5 Institute for the Oceans and Fisheries, AERL, University of British Columbia, British Columbia, Canada.

                                         Email: bg.ragde@gmail.com




       Shark exploitation through ecotourism has risen in the last few decades. It has
been suggested that this activity is useful for shark conservation through
environmental education and personal experiences. It is estimated that shark
ecotourism in Mexico generates around 12,500,000 USD anually. The present study
will be conducted in Cabo San Lucas (CSL), which was the 6th most visited destination
in Mexico during 2017. The average surface temperature in CSL is 18ºC with seasonal
variations of up to 6ºC (16-22ºC). These range of temperature allows the observation
of different shark species throughout the year. During warmer months, it is possible
to observe silky sharks (Carcharhinus falciformis) and smooth hammerhead sharks
(Sphyrna zygaena). In the coolest months, it is possible to register shortfin makos (Isurus
oxyrinchus) and blue sharks (Prionace glauca). The present study will describe shark
ecotourism in CSL using ethological techniques and a first economic valuation of the
resource. The data will be obtained throughout the year with the support of local
service providers. This will result in data regardinf species, sex, total length and
behavior. Etholigical observations will be recorded while the sharks are within 10m
from the tourists. Data will be registered by the observer and later doublechecked with
submarine footage obtained with a GoPro Hero 5 camera. The economic valuation of
this activity will be described with surveys filled out by the tourists. This surveys
include demographic data like age, sex, occupation, nacionality, satisfaction,
transportation, lodging questions as well as the motivation for visiting CSL with their
perception of conservation after the activity. The expected results are the annual
revenue derived from this activity and far-sighted projections based on hypothetic
scenarios, the growth potential, and the actual annual revenue.
  Utilising data sourced from ecotourism to investigate the
  affects of environmental and anthropic variables on great
                    white shark behaviour

                           S. Maycock1, M. Ladley2, C. Tudorache1

     1 Leiden University, Institute of Biology Leiden, Sylviusweg 72, 2333 BE Leiden, The Netherlands.
            2 White Shark Projects, 16 Geelbek St, Van Dyks Bay, Gansbaai, 7220, South Africa

                                  Email: greatwhitemik20@hotmail.com




        Ethical ecotourism companies, in addition to encouraging protection of sharks
through continued economic gain to the local community and education of visiting
tourists, can be used in scientific research, as they accumulate huge amount of contact
time with the animals in the field. White Shark Projects, South Africa volunteered data
collected by their onboard crew during tourist excursions from 2009 through 2011,
constituting over 950 sampling hours and 2,277 individual great white sharks with
behaviour described. Environmental variables related to weather (air temperature,
barometric pressure, cloud cover, wind direction and speed), environment (bottom
depth, lunar phase, seal activity, sea surface temperature, underwater visibility), and
ocean conditions (swell height, tide), and anthropic variables (arrival time, bait type,
chum type, total chumming time, location, observer) will be used in a generalised
linear mixed model (GLMM) in order to assess which variables are related to high
shark abundance, and active and aggressive behavioural states. This study will be the
first to use ecotourism data in scientific research, allowing the assessment of the
validity of ecotourism data for science. Furthermore, this work will take steps for
further understanding great white shark behaviour, using the first model which
considers both the affects of anthropic variables and environmental variables, to
describe how external factors can influence the behaviours which white sharks
exhibit.


       *POSTER CORNER PRESENTATION
 FindRayShark project: testing non-invasive technologies to
                monitor sharks and rays

     Miguel P. Pais1, Ana Veríssimo2,3, Rita Vasconcelos4, Jorge Fontes5,6,7, Sofia
                                    Henriques1

   1MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa,

                                                Portugal.
            2CIBIO - Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos Portugal.
                               3Virginia Institute of Marine Science, USA.
                  4IPMA - Instituto Português do Mar e da Atmosfera, Lisboa, Portugal.
5Institute of Marine Research (IMAR), Department of Oceanography and Fisheries, University of the Azores,

                                            Horta, Portugal
     6MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, University of the Azores, Horta, Portugal
                           7Okeanus, University of the Azores, Horta, Portugal

                                         Email: mppais@fc.ul.pt




       Many species of Elasmobranchs are currently under threat from overfishing,
since their life history traits make them intrinsically vulnerable to population
depletion. Despite decades of research, insufficient knowledge on nearly half the
species of elasmobranchs is still impairing our ability to protect them. Assessing the
presence, abundance and population status of marine elasmobranchs of high
conservation concern is particularly troublesome due to the harmful effects of many
traditional sampling techniques and the logistical difficulty of studying these marine
organisms, given their generally shy nature, high mobility and low abundance. Thus,
a paradigm shift is needed in our approach to acquire knowledge on the distribution
and population status of these species.
Project FindRayShark aims to contribute to the conservation of sharks and rays
worldwide by implementing a technologically innovative and non-invasive approach
to assess their populations, by coupling baited remote underwater video surveys
(mono, stereo and spherical) and environmental DNA metabarcoding to survey the
presence and abundance of elasmobranch populations locally. Tests have been
conducted in a public aquarium and at a pilot study area in Faial Island, Azores, where
elasmobranchs are commonly sighted. On the next phase the methods will be applied
to the Berlengas Marine Protected Area, western Portugal, where knowledge on
elasmobranchs’ biodiversity is scarce but urgent.
The non-invasive methods optimised on this project may be applied to other
understudied sites worldwide, and their results will allow the proposal of
management actions and good practice guidelines adequate for the context of the
study area. We also hope to raise awareness through varied dissemination activities
to different target groups using project outputs, namely local and national
management agencies, tourism operators, and the public at large.
          Whatsapp for What’s up with sawfishes ?
  The use of social media for data collection and community
 awarness in remote areas, case study of Indonesaw program

                         Armelle Jung1, Dharmadi2, George Burgess3

       1DRDH – Des Requins et Des Hommes, BLP-Technopole Brest-Iroise, 15 rue Dumont d’Urville 29280

                                            Plouzane, France.
  2Research Center for Fisheries and Development, Komplek Bina Samudera, Jl Pasir Putih II, Ancol Timur,

                                            Jakarta, Indonesia.
 3Florida Museum of Natural History, Dickinson Hall, PO Box 117800, Gainesville FL 32611-7800, United

                                                States.
                               Email: armelle@desrequinsetdeshommes.org




        Indonesia is a country wide as a supra region, the fourth most populated nation
in the world and one of the top wildlife biodiversity hotspots on Earth. Despite being
the first nation for elasmobranch catches, Indonesia still host four of the five sawfishes
species worldwide that are listed Critically Endangered and Endangered. WhatsApp
is a freeware and cross-platform messaging, the application allows the sending of text
messages, images and other media as well as voice and video calls; it is daily used by
over 1 billion people. The Indonesaw program aims to evaluate the status of sawfishes
in the Indonesian archipelago by developing research surveys on set up of an alert
network. The approach is following IUCN Global Strategy for sawfish conservation
and set up on the achievements of similar successful project created in western Africa.
Indonesian laws protects sawfishes since 1999 and their trade is illegal; nevertheless
bycatch still occurs and illegal business was discovered for rostrum but also meat and
fins (fresh, frozen or dried). By using new social networks as Whatsapp with fishing
communities Indonesaw already succeed in promoting safe-release of 15 live
sawfishes (Anoxypristis cuspidata) at sea and the collection of recent catches and trade
data. This new approach offers a real time method for sensitization but also allows
our team to present a first evaluation of the actual sawfish distribution. The relevance
of social media utilization in emerging countries is discussed in regards to the
importance of conservation challenges in this region of the world.
              Everybody wants to see a shark!
 Developing of shark observation site on the Israeli coastline

                                     Shira Salingré1,2,3

                      1Nature and Parks Authority, Jerusalem 95463, Israel
                              2Sharks in Israel, Michmoret, Israel
                         3Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel

                                 Email: shira.salin@gmail.com




        Requiem sharks are almost non-existent in the Mediterranean Sea, with
dramatic population declines of over 90%. Yet around the Israeli coastline, they seem
to be relatively abundant. For the past 10 years, at least, these species approach the
warm water of coastal power stations in Israel during the winter months. In the
Hadera station, every year an increasing number of visitors arrive to observe them, by
foot and above and below the water, as well as media reporters. While the growing
interest shines a light on the need to protect these species, the same interest creates
pressure on the sharks and increases the risk of conflict or harm for both sides.
A new initiative, with collaborators from NGOs and governmental organisations,
seeks to ease this pressure and to develop a shark observation site which is managed
responsibly while putting the sharks' benefit and conservation in first priority. Last
season, we engaged with the local diving community and set up an information stand
for the visiting public. We have also done a great deal of planning an observation deck,
information boards and underwater markers and buoys for divers and watercrafts.
We are considering options regarding the restriction of fishing activity. Best practice
guide for all users of the site has been prepared and is pending publication. One of
our collaborators, the University of Haifa, is conducting an ecotourism research,
which we trust will give a better understanding in the future of how to best manage
this site.
We are now facing yet another shark season and with our new plan, we hope the
sharks will return safely and that the public will be able to enjoy watching and
learning about them, while not jeopardising them or their return.

      *POSTER CORNER PRESENTATION
The project “Shark Attract”: Sharks and rays conservation by
 enhancing awareness within fishermen communities and
                           society

  Susana França1, Vera Sequeira1, Célia Teixeira1, Luís Alves2, Sara Novais2, Marco
                            Lemos2, Henrique Cabral1

    1 MARE- Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa,

                                                Portugal.
2 MARE- Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, ESTM, Instituto Politécnico de Leiria, Peniche, Portugal




       Sharks and rays are an extremely diverse group of fishes, with more than 1200
species, present in all marine ecosystems. In the last decades, they have been under
increasingly intense fishing pressure, which has been affecting populations
worldwide. Their life-history characteristics, such as low fecundity, late sexual
maturity and reduced number of offspring, make them a fragile resource, highly
vulnerable to overfishing and clearly collide with its fisheries resources dimension.
The Shark Attract project aims at tackling sharks and rays conservation through
increasing awareness and knowledge with tailor-made activities and actions targeted
to different audiences and stakeholders, such as fishermen, students, general public,
managers and public authorities. The work plan comprise the analyses of existing data
on rays and sharks fisheries trends, as well as the collection of new data in the main
fishing harbors along the Portuguese mainland coast, the characterization of the major
problems regarding fisheries affecting sharks and rays through interaction with
fishermen communities and the implementation of knowledge transfer and
awareness actions directed to the different audiences. It is expected that the project
generates a solid scientific knowledge regarding sharks and rays fisheries in Portugal,
identifies ways to reduce shark fishing mortality (reducing bycatches, enhancing
discards or live specimens, changing fishermen practices), and increases the interest,
knowledge and awareness of society by these endangered fishes. Outreach activities
will be of great importance as they are expected to involve a significant amount of
people out of the scientific scope as well, and will allow to raise awareness and
increase the perception of the present situation concerning sharks and rays, which
may contribute to change mentalities and attitudes, and ultimately to these species
conservation.
Is dermal denticle size a good discriminant criteria to identify
           Deania species (Fam. Centrophoridae)?

            Cristina Rodríguez-Cabello1, Irene Grasa1, Montserrat Pérez2

            1Spanish Institute of Oceanography (IEO). Apdo. 240. 39080 Santander. Spain.
              2Spanish Institute of Oceanography (IEO). Apdo. XX. 39080 Vigo. Spain.

                                    Email: cristina.cabello@ieo.es




       Three elasmobranch species of the genus Deania are reported from NE Atlantic
waters: D. calcea, D. hystricosa and D. profundorum. Whereas D. profundorum is easily
recognized by the presence of a sub-caudal keel on the lower caudal peduncle, the
other two species are mainly discriminated by the size of the dermal denticles and
body color. In this study we explore the feasibility of this criterion by examining
several individuals (N=32) of diverse size and sex caught in different areas (Le Danois
Bank, Aviles Canyon, continental slope) of the Cantabrian Sea. Morphometric
measurements of 40 characters, denticle size and genetic analysis were undertaken for
each individual. Multivariate analysis was used to check differences among samples.
Size and shape of dermal denticles varied according to body region. Furthermore the
size of dermal denticles is positive correlated to fish length. Other morphometric
characters should be considered for better identification of these species. Reliable and
consistent discrimination of Deania species is essential for conservation and
sustainable management of these deep-water elasmobranchs which are regularly by-
catch of deepwater fisheries.
 Helminth infracommunities in two torpedo species from the
     gulf of València: is EOD behaviour affecting their
                         abundance?

         Jaime Penadés-Suay1,2, Tania Regacho López1, Francisco Javier Aznar1

1Marine Zoology Unit, Cavanilles Institute of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biology, Universitat de València,

                                              València, Spain
             2Associació LAMNA per a l’estudi dels elasmobranquis a la Comunitat Valenciana

                                        Email: jaime.penades@uv.es




        In this project we have studied the intestinal parasitic community of two
species of Torpedo, 30 T. torpedo and 17 T. marmorata. The specimens were collected in
the ports of València and Perelló, on the west coast of the Mediterranean sea and were
captured by trammel fishing nets during March and June 2017. Specimens of three
genera of cestodes were identified: order Onchoproteocephalidea (Acanthobothrium
sp.), order Rhinebothriidea (Rhodobothrium sp.) and order Tetraphyllidea
(Anthobothrium sp.). The characteristics of the host (sex, size and habitat) and the
location of parasitic fauna along the intestinal tract were analyzed. Stadistically there
is no relation between the characteristics of the host and their parasites. The genus
Acanthobothrium seems to have a preference to be in the middle region of the spiral
valve due to a greater absorption of nutrients. It is observed that torpedo have a poor
parasite fauna as genus and when compared with other coastal elasmobranchs. The
causes could be related to a matter of contact with the parasites (influenced by diet or
sedentability) or compatibility. A third hypothesis is studied: wether or not the
Electric Organ Discharge used by Torpedo species when predating affects parasites.
For this, a model species (Micromesistius poutassou) was used to compare the effect of
electric discharges on Anisakis sp., proving that they affect parasites mobility. Further
studies need to be done on its effects on parasite capacity of infection.

        *POSTER CORNER PRESENTATION
       Effects of ocean acidification over the neuroanatomic
                   development of benthic sharks

             Catarina P. Santos1,2, Maria R. Pegado1,2, Marta Pimentel1,
 Maria Paulo3, Ana Couto1, Eduarda Pinto1, Ricardo Cyrne1,2, José R. Paula1, Gabriel
                                Martins2, Rui Rosa1

1MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Laboratório Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências da

         Universidade de Lisboa, Avenida Nossa Senhora do Cabo 939, 2750-374 Cascais, Portugal.
         2 IGC - Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, R. Quinta Grande, 6, 2780-156 Oeiras, Portugal
 3Ghent University, Faculty of Sciences, Marine Biology Research Group, Campus Sterre S8, Krijgslaan 281,

                                           9000 Ghent, Belgium
                                          Email: cdcsantos@fc.ul.pt




       As atmospheric CO2 levels rise, continuous uptake by the oceans is changing
the seawater chemistry, resulting in ocean acidification (OA). Exposure to the foreseen
high CO2 conditions has been reported to trigger an array of behavioral changes
across marine taxa, namely in top-predators such as sharks. Nonetheless, the
consequences of such conditions over the neuroanatomic development are still widely
understudied. Here we investigate the impacts of OA in the early relative brain
development rate and neuroanatomy of temperate shark (Scyliorhinus canicula)
embryos and juveniles reared under either control (400 µatm) or high CO 2 conditions
(900 µatm | Δ 0.3 pH units) since laid. Using the “OpenT” open-source platform for
optical projection tomography, we built three-dimensional neuroanatomic models in
order to evaluate OA effects over the brain development patterns across the
embryogenesis. Additionally, the activity levels and response to food-related
olfactory cues of the juveniles was assessed. Preliminary results suggest changes in
the relative size of the optic lobe following exposure to high-CO2 conditions, with
potential consequences in the processing and integration of visual information and
thus, the ability to properly respond to environmental cues. Moreover, changes in
their behaviour were observed, with OA-exposed individuals showing higher levels
of feeding motivation upon cue delivery. Sharks have a crucial role in the balance of
the oceans trophic ecology and the population decline seen in recent years may result
in a top-down disruption of marine ecosystems. OA may present itself as an
additional threat to this k-strategy predator, particularly if affecting the brain-power
and behaviour of the new recruits.
    Chondrichthyans as bioindicators of marine pollution: a
        potential tool for environmental monitoring

              David Nos1, Joan Navarro1, Claudio Barría1, Montserrat Solé1

 1Institute of Marine Sciences (ICM-CSIC). Renewable Marine Resources Department. Passeig Marítim de la

                                  Barceloneta, 37-49. Barcelona (Spain)
                                       Email: dnfqam@cid.csic.es




       Chondrichthyans are regularly found in the bycatch of commercial fisheries in
the northwestern Mediterranean. They play an important role as predators so these
species could serve as sentinels of pollution in high trophic levels of the marine
ecosystems. Samples of the liver of 20 species of chondrichthyans including 1
chimaera, 11 sharks and 8 rays (rajiformes and myliobatiformes), were collected in
scientific surveys and from the bycatch’s of trawling and longline fisheries between
2011 and 2014. The aim of this study is to evaluate the potential of chondrichthyans as
bioindicators of pollution using the carboxylesterase activity (CE) as biomarker of the
environmental exposition to determinate contaminants. CEs are a versatile family of
enzymes with the ability to metabolize and inhibit many pesticides, pharmaceuticals
and other endogenous products, with a particular affinity for the organophosphate
pesticides. The CE basal activity was measured with the substrates 4-nitrophenyl
acetate (4NPA) and 1-naphtyl acetate (1NA). The substrate 1NA was the one which
showed higher enzymatic activities. Higher CE activity was found in the rajiformes
species, followed by sharks and the chimaera, with lower activities. In vitro sensitivity
to the OP Dichlorvos was tested with the species Scyliorhinus canicula. The results
showed that the substrate 1NA would be the most adequate for biomonitoring, as it
was more sensitive to the pesticide in the liver (IC50 = 2.37 μM) and plasma (IC50 =
0.051 μM). The interspecific variation of the CE basal activity and the different
inhibitions of the pesticide Dichlorvos and the drug fenofibrate, indicate different
sensitivities of each species to determinate pollutants.

       *POSTER CORNER PRESENTATION
  The project “BlueSharker”: Blue harks as biomonitors of
 Atlantic waters through an integrated biomarker assessment

 Luís Alves1, Marco F.L. Lemos1, Begoña Jiménez2, Susana Mendes1, Ana Oropesa-
                     Jiménez3, Dick Roelofs4, Sara C. Novais1

       1MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Intututo Politécnico de Leiria, Portugal
  2 Dept. of Instrumental Analysis and Environmental Chemistry, Institute of Organic Chemistry, (IQOG-

                                          CSIC), Madrid, Spain
3 Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Extremadura, Badajoz, Spain; INBIO G+C - Instituto Universitario de

    Investigación en Biotecnología Ganadera y Cinegética, Universidad de Extremadura, Cáceres, Spain
             4 Institute of Ecological Sciences, Vrije University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

                                        Email: sara.novais@ipleiria.pt




       Marine ecosystems are continuously being burdened with xenobiotic
contaminants released by human activities, often resulting in a decline of their
resources. Long-lived and top predator marine species such as sharks tend to
accumulate particularly high levels of environmental contaminants via
bioaccumulation and biomagnification processes. Given their susceptibility to
pollutant accumulation, their wide distribution and their importance to the
ecosystems, sharks are ideal candidates to be used in marine pollution monitoring
studies. The “BlueSharker” project will focus on the potential of blue sharks (Prionace
glauca) to be used as sentinel species for marine pollution monitoring surveys through
the development and application of suitable biological biomarkers. This work will
focus on linking the tissue contaminant body burdens of sharks (trace elements and
persistent organic pollutants) to their responses at different levels of biological
organization: from molecular markers at the gene level, to biochemical parameters at
the sub-cellular level related to detoxification, oxidative stress, neuronal function,
immune system and energy metabolism, and histological lesions at the tissue/organ
level. Moreover, as an ultimate goal, the research team will check if the correlations
found between the contaminant levels and the biological responses for the other
tissues can be also found in sharks blood and/or skin, which would enable the use of
such biomarkers in a less-invasive way in marine biomonitoring programs.
Ultimately, this research aims to provide a simple and fast way for assessing the
physiological state and general fitness of blue sharks, which given their ecological
impact as top predators, will indirectly allow inferring about the quality of the oceans.
Moreover, by relating the biological responses with contaminant body burden, an
improved understanding on the organisms’ mechanisms to cope with different ocean
contamination scenarios will be provided, enhancing the development of a biomarker
toolbox for biomonitoring marine environments.
            A Devil not so evil: new data from a female Mobula
             mobular (Bonnaterre, 1788) caught in Greece

                  Archontia Chatzispyrou1, Aikaterini Anastasopoulou1

 1Hellenic Center for Marine Research, Institute of Marine Biological Resources and Inland Waters, Athens,

                                          19013 Attica, Greece
                                      Email: a.chatzispyrou@hcmr.gr




        The Giant Devil Ray is an epipelagic filter feeder, mainly occurring in the
Mediterranean Sea, characterized by low growth rate and low productivity. Most
information on Mobula mobular derives from incidental bycatch and opportunistic
sightings. The species is included in Appendix II of the Bern Convention (1982) and
in Annex II of the “Protocol concerning Specially Protected Areas and Biological
Diversity in the Mediterranean” (1996) of the Barcelona Convention (1976); it is also
protected by the Greek national legislation (Presidential Decree 67/1981). The IUCN
Red list classification for the Giant Devil Ray is ‘Endangered’, mainly due to the
scarcity of data and the entanglement in fishing gears as bycatch. Knowledge gaps
still exist on M.mobular and therefore the status of the species is under investigation.
The present study is aiming to contribute valuable information on the biology of the
species from observations on a mature female specimen, accidentally caught in long
line, in July 2018 in Greece. The devil ray weighted 63.5kg and was reported to iSea, a
Greek Environmental Organization, through the citizen science project “Sharks and
rays in Greece and Cyprus”. The authors were informed and in collaboration with the
members of the iSea took samples from the dead ray only for research purposes. The
presence of trophonemata observed in the uterus of the female M.mobular, indicated
the nourishment of an embryo recently. Morphometric measurements were recorded
to the nearest mm and its organs were weighted to the nearest gr in the laboratory.
Results were compared to previous reported measurements from the eastern
Mediterranean Sea. Additional information on the reproductive biology of M.mobular
along with data on its distribution and abundance constitute a useful tool for future
management and conservation actions for this endangered elasmobranch.
 Feeding behaviour of whale shark at Nosy Be (Madagascar)
           and link to phytoplancton community

Emilio Sperone1, Primo Micarelli2, Gianni Giglio1, Chiara Romano2, Sandro Tripepi1,
 Oscar Mari1, Samira Gallo1, Giorgio Pascolo1, Giorgia Zicarelli1, Carlotta Barba3,
                       Francesco Bolinesi4, Olga Mangoni4

        1 Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende (Italy)
                             2 Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima (Italy)
                                 3 Manta Diving, Nost Be (Madagascar)
                      4 Department of Biology, University Federico II, Naples (Italy)




       In December 2017 a research expedition was carried out off the island of Nosy
Be in Madagascar to study the feeding behavior of the whale shark. We report the
behavioral modules of the whale shark and their relationship with the phytoplankton
community in terms of biomass and functional groups. In 31 sites, surface water was
collected in the following five behavioural conditions: 1. absence of whale sharks, 2.
presence of swimming whale sharks, 3. presence of whale sharks in horizontal
feeding, 4. presence of whale sharks in vertical feeding, 5. presence of whale shark in
vertical gulping.
Two liters of seawater were filtered on filters and stored at -20°C for HPLC analyses
to determine phytoplankton pigment spectra. Chlorophyll-a (Chl-a) concentration
was used as an indicator of total biomass and biomarker pigments were used as
chemotaxonomic descriptors to define the contribution of the main phytoplankton
groups to the total Chl-a.
The exhibition of vertical feeding behaviours of whale sharks showed a significant
correlation with sites characterized by higher phytoplankton biomass. Since vertical
feeding is considered as a strong feeding behaviour, we can assume that the
phytoplankton concentration could play a role for the feeding strategy of the species.
Chryptophytes, haptophytes and cyanobacteria were the most abundand taxa in term
of biomass. The results seem to highlight a certain correlation between behavioral
feeding modules exhibited by sharks and the presence of some phytoplankton taxa
that might be involved in the release of the DMS. This substance is produced by
phytoplankton in response environmental stressors such as ocean acidification
nutrient limitation and grazing pressure. Since DMS is a substance characterized by a
strong odor, the results seem to highlight the fundamental role of smell in the
identification of food sources by the whale shark: this will represent the future aim of
the research.
      Surface behaviour of bait attracted white sharks and
       influence of biological and environmental factors

    Giuseppe Rijllo1, Primo Micarelli2, Lorenzo Leporati2, Gianni Giglio1, Chiara
  Romano2, Sandro Tripepi1, Luna Graziadio1, Francesca Romana Reinero1, Angelo
                           Carotenuto3, Emilio Sperone1

        1 Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende (Italy)
                             2 Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima (Italy)
                    3 Department of Biology, University “Federico II”, Naples (Italy)




       Individual surface behaviour of white sharks in the presence of bait has been
studied from 2005 to 2018 at Dyer Island Nature Reserve (South Africa). Observations
were made from a commercial cage-diving boat. We observed 220 white sharks that
exhibited 9 different types of individual behaviour: parading, bait following, visual
inspection, breach, tail slap, tail stand, spy hop, repetitive aerial gaping, and head-up
vertical emerging. We compared the exhibition of these behaviors and the complexity
of the ethograms to both biological (sex, age) and environmental (tides, cloud cover,
underwater visibility, sea surface conditions, temperature, time of the day) factors.
Breach and tail slap were most often performed by male sharks, and tail slap and tail
stand were more often performed by mature animals. The general ethogram consisted
of an average of 20 behavioural units. The comparison of the ethograms between
males and females did not revealed significant correlations, but the ethograms of
female white sharks were more complex with more transitions between behavioural
units. A significant correlation was observed comparing ethograms of mature and
immature white sharks: young sharks performed more complex ethograms with a
higher number of behavioural units.
We observed also that environmental conditions affected the sequence and structure
of individual behaviors and in particular the approach to the bait, the duration of the
ethograms and the complexity of decisional trees and transitional matrices. In
particular, we observed a strong influence of the cloud cover and, consequently,
underwater visibility
Our observations suggested that the surface behaviour of white sharks is a complex
tactical situation in which animals show plastic responses to environmental
conditions and according to sex and age.
 Drone technology to determine the behavior of Carcharodon
           carcharias in Dyer Island, South Africa
               and Guadalupe Island, Mexico

    Claudia Yacuta-Castillo1,2, Edgar E. Becerril-García2,3, Edgar Mauricio Hoyos-
                               Padilla2, Emilio Sperone4

1 Departamento Académico de Ciencias Marinas y Costeras, Universidad Autónoma de Baja California Sur, La

                                                 Paz, Mexico.
                                   2Pelagios Kakunjá A.C., La Paz, Mexico.
      3 Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, Mexico.
      4 Dipartimento di Biologia, Ecologia e Scienze della terra, Università della Calabria, Rende, Italy.

                                             bg.ragde@gmail.com




        The white shark (Carcharodon carcharias) is an apex predator that congregates in
some continental and oceanic islands where ecotourism is a frequent activity.
Although the ecotourism with this species has been an alternative to the fishing
pressure, information about its biology, behavior, and ecology is still scarce and
necessary for its management. Studies about the interactions between sharks and baits
during ecotourism activity are also still limited. This project aims to describe an
ethological comparison of the white shark between Guadalupe Island, Mexico and
Dyer Island, South Africa, that shown oceanic and coastal environments, respectively.
The behavior will be recorded onboard local tourism boats at these locations.
Intraspecific and shark-bait interactions will be registered using drone techonology
during aerial census of 20 min per flight and 10 m of height at 7:00, 10:00, 13:00 and
16:00 h. The comparison of behavioral patterns in both locations will be useful to
describe the effect on behaviour of the environmental factors such as surface
temperature, visibility, wind speed, and cloudiness. Sexual behavior patterns will be
analyzed in collaboration with citizen science programs, using underwater pictures
and videos from the tourists to identify the sex of the animals. This study will be the
first to compare the behaviour of two different white shark populations by the use of
drones. The results will provide information for tourism, the scientific community,
and for the authorithies in charge of the improvement and management of this
vulnerable species.
   Abundance, distribution and behavior of Elasmobranchs
    with app reports in the Gulf of Papagayo, Costa Rica

                Erwan Piot2, Ilena Zanella1, Andrés López1, Pablo Fallas3

                 1Asociación Conservacionista Misión Tiburón, Playa del Coco, Costa Rica
                              2 Veterinary student, ONIRIS, Nantes, France
                                  3 Big Shot apps, San Pedro, Costa Rica

  E-mail: erwan.piot@orange.fr, izanella@misiontiburon.org, alopez@misiontiburon.org, pablolf@gmail.com




        The Gulf of Papagayo, located in northwestern Costa Rica, presents significant
touristic infrastructures and year round aquatic activities. Its northern part features
an important Marine Protected Area whereas the rest of the gulf is not protected. The
substantial diversity of Elasmobranch in this area is responsible for a valuable touristic
activity, but information on species, abundance, distribution, behavior are almost
unknown. To fill in this gap in wildlife documentation, the organization “Misiόn
Tiburόn” created in 2016 a smartphone application called “Misiόn Tiburόn”® and
successfully drew in sea professionals, especially divers, to report Elasmobranch
sightings within the application. Recorded variables included basic diving data (date,
GPS coordinates, dive time, depth, water temperature) and quantity, specie, sex,
behavior for each Elasmobranch observation. By enhancing direct observation
reporting, and engaging Costa Rican citizens and tourists, this project aimed to raise
public awareness on Elasmobranch ecology and extinction threats. The present is
based on the data collected between 06/01/2016 and 06/01/2018, and specifically
describes Elasmobranch population in term of species, distribution and behaviour in
relation to its marine environment in the Gulf of Papagayo. In 2 years, more than 1244
observations from all Costa Rican coasts have been reported and validated, among
which 64% covered the Pacific coast and particularly the Gulf of Papagayo. We first
classified species based on seasonal or resident characteristics, before describing
relationships between distribution patterns and specific ocean condition for some
species. We show evidence for abundance variations for specific species, both in terms
of time distribution (monthly variation) and space distribution (within the gulf). The
evolution of these patterns will be studied by continuing diving reports through the
application. In future works, impacts of the abundant aquatic recreational activities
and their development needs to be evaluated to paint an exhaustive view of the
Elasmobranch population and evolution perspectives.
    The Great Eggcase Hunt – a citizen science conservation
        project supporting wider conservation policies

                           Cat Gordon1, Rebecca Gillham1
                                 1The Shark Trust, UK.

                               Email: rebecca@sharktrust.org




       Since its inception in 2003, the Great Eggcase Hunt (GEH) has utilised the
collaborative power of citizen scientists to further research into egglaying
elasmobranchs. To date it has received over 200,000 records and engaged numerous
dedicated eggcase hunters. What started as a way to educate the public about shark
conservation developed into an effective way of collating important, usable data on
the diversity of egglaying elasmobranchs found around British waters, of which there
are 13 species commonly found. The Shark Trust has continued to utilise the
information submitted by the public to gain a better understanding of species
diversity, relative abundance, and distribution as well as the location of potential
egglaying sites. Data obtained from the project has resulted in an in-depth report
celebrating 100,000 submissions, as well as provided updated descriptions detailed in
a peer reviewed publication (with another currently in prep). To support the ease and
accuracy of recording and to encourage regular submissions, a smartphone app has
been developed and translated into additional languages with project partners.
International submissions have been received from as far afield as Australia and
Ecuador increasing knowledge of eggcase identification from around the world. A
push for divers and snorkellers to look for underwater eggcases in situ supports
research into egglaying grounds and an improved understanding of the substrates
eggcases are deposited on. Data collated and analysed from the GEH has allowed the
Shark Trust to provide scientific input into conservation policies; most recently the
UK government Marine Conservation Zone (MCZ) designation process that aims to
identify species and habitats requiring protection. The static life history phase of an
oviparous species leaves them at risk to human disturbance. Therefore, understanding
the location of egglaying sites and habitat preference is vital when considering spatial
protection. Here we present examples of how this citizen science project is able to
support and influence conservation policies affecting elasmobranchs.
   Photo-identification of Bull rays (Aetomylaeus bovinus)
                 (Geoffroy St. Hilaire, 1817)

 Silvio Solleliet-Ferreira1,2,3, G. Nowell 4, N. Vasco Rodrigues 5, Simon Charter 6,
  Jurgen den Hartog 7, Renate Reijns 7, D. Das1,2,3, R.M. Boys1,2,3, J. Fontes1,2,3, P.
                                       Afonso 1,2,3

 1Department of Oceanography and Fisheries, Centre of IMAR of the University of the Azores, Horta, Azores,

                                                  Portugal
              2Okeanos research centre of the University of the Azores, Horta, Azores, Portugal
3Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre and Centre of the Institute of Marine Research of the University of

                       the Azores, R. Frederico Machado 4, 9901-862 Horta, Portugal
                                              4Sharklab-Malta,
                                            5Oceanário de Lisboa
                    6South African Association of Marine Biological Research (SAAMBR)
                                                    7I3S




    The bull ray Aetomylaeus bovinus requires urgent conservation measures,
consubstantiated by an upgrade of its IUCN conservation status in 2015 to Critically
Endangered for the Mediterranean Sea. This coastal and large but very poorly studied
elasmobranch is mainly threatened by habitat degradation and bycatch due to the use
of non-selective fishing gears. However, such proximity to anthropic activities offers
an advantage to deepen our knowledge of this species. If appropriately applied and
fine-tuned, photo-identification is an affordable, accurate and non-invasive technique
which allows scientists to reliably identify individuals within a population. Bull rays
exhibit very distinctive and individual dorsal colour patterns, bluish strips which
remind the reflex of the surface on a sandy bottom. As benthos-pelagic feeders,
spending most of their time feeding on the sea floor, bull rays are constantly exposing
their natural patterns. Thus, any snorkeler with a camera can gather pictures of the
species and contribute to a global demographic scientific initiative. Here we propose
a novel, semi-automated photo-identification methodology to study the demography,
habitat and ecology of A. bovinus populations for the first time as a key tool embedded
in a global citizen science initiative. We also present some preliminary results,
extracted from the 223 high quality pictures collected during 103 snorkelling surveys
ran in Malta and the Canary Islands. At least 15 individuals could be reliably
identified, and some re-sightings support eventual sight fidelity and seasonal
migrations.
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE

                                 João Correia
                                   Luís Alves
                               Marco Lemos
                                  Sara Novais
                       Sofia Esteves da Silva



ORGANIZING COMMITTEE

                                 João Correia
                                   Luís Alves
                               Marco Lemos
                                  Sara Novais
                       Sofia Esteves da Silva

                          Adriana Januário
                        Alexandre Marques
                              Ana Augusto
                           Cláudia Correia
                              Cristina Salas
                                Inês Morão
                                 Joana Silva
                                 Lénia Rato
                            Luana Granada
                             Manuel Seixas
                            Sofia Ferradosa
                                Rafael Félix
                              Tiago Simões
ORGANIZED BY




SPONSORED BY




                                     l emos
               laboratory of ecology and mechanismsof stress
               marine ecology | ecotoxicology | applied biotechnology | aquaculture
