                                                                                                          1



Schedule

FRIDAY 1st

14.00-16.30   EEA Board meeting – attendance by board members.

17.00-19.00   EEA Annual General Meeting – open to the membership of all EEA member groups.

19.30-21.00   Evening Reception - National Marine Aquarium - registration open.




SATURDAY 2nd

9.00-9.40     Registration – posters to be exhibited and presentations given to AV technicians.

9.40-9.50     Welcome

9.50-10.00    Opening Address: Fiona Harrison, Deputy Chief Scientific Advisor to the Department of
              Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra).

Theatre 1     Keynote Address:
10.00-10.40   The changing landscape and challenges of shark conservation and management, 1980s to
              present.
              Sarah Fowler

Session 1 Elasmobranchs in European seas (I)
Theatre 1     Session Chair: Matt Gollock, Zoological Society London

10.40-11.00   The role of the elasmobranchs in the Italian implementation of the EU Marine Strategy
              Framework Directive (MSFD).
              Massimiliano Bottaro, Scacco, U., La Mesa, G. and Tunesi, L.

11.00-11.20   Chondrichthyan fish of the British Isles: Prioritising species for further study and the
              utility of Ecological Risk Assessments for informing management.
              Sophy McCully and Ellis, J.

11.20-11.40   Who ray?! DNA Barcoding unveils skate species diversity in ‘ray’ products sold across
              Ireland and the UK.
              Andrew Mark Griffiths, Miller, D.D. and Mariani, S.

11.40-12.00   DNA barcoding of the Northeast Atlantic skates (Chondrichthyes: Rajidae), with remarks
              on the widely distributed Starry Ray Amblyraja radiata.
              Lynghammar A, Christiansen, J.S., Griffiths, A.M., Fevolden, S.E., Hop, H. and Bakken, T.

12.00-12.20   The skate complex of the British Isles: current status, discard survival and management
              options.
              Jim R. Ellis, McCully, S.R. and Silva, J.F.

12.20-12.40   How many gulper shark species are there? Revisiting the North Atlantic species diversity
              of a troubled deepwater shark group - the genus Centrophorus.
              Ana Veríssimo, Cotton C., Buch, R., Burgess, G.H. and Guallart, J.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                                      2



12.40-13.40 Lunch and poster session

Session 2A Elasmobranchs in European seas (II) (parallel session)
Theatre 1      Session Chair: Nick Dulvy, IUCN SSG

13.40-13.50   Biological studies to inform management of Smoothhounds Mustelus spp. in the North-
              east Atlantic.
              Sophy McCully and Ellis, J.

13.50-14.00   Sharks within the MSFD – from national to international.
              Irene Kingma, and Walker, P.

14.00-14.10   Indicator species selection for elasmobranchs on the Dutch Continental shelf.
              C.M. (Dianne) van der Craats and van Rijn, J.

14.10-14.20   Bycatch and discarding patterns of dogfish and sharks taken in commercial fisheries
              around the British Isles.
              Silva, J F., Jim R. Ellis, Catchpole, T.L. and Righton, D.

14.20-14.30   Sawfish in the Mediterranean: vagrant species or an undetected case of regional
              extinction?
              Francesco Ferretti, Morey Verd, G., Seret, B., Šprem, J.S. and Micheli, F.

14.30-14.40   Cryptic invaders from the Red Sea: The Dusky Shark in the Mediterranean.
              Adi Barash, Tokochinski, Y., Blaustein, L. and Rilov, G.

14.40-14.50   First results on migration behaviour of Leafscale Gulper Shark Centrophorus squamosus
              tagged in the Cantabrian Sea (NE Atlantic).
              Cristina Rodriguez-Cabello, Arronte, J,C., Bolado, I., Abaunza, P. and Sánchez, F.

14.50-15.00   Mustelus asterias in the Netherlands.
              Niels Brevé

15.00-15.15   Discussion session

Session 2B Manta Rays, Whale Sharks, Basking Sharks and White Sharks (parallel)
Theatre 2 Session Chair: Sarah Fowler, Save our Seas Foundation

13.40-13.50   Using biochemical markers to investigate the hidden lives of Whale Sharks.
              Clare E.M. Prebble, Pierce, S., Rohner, C., Robinson, D. and Trueman, C.

13.50-14.00   Towards understanding Basking Shark Cetorhinus maximus connectivity – novel marker
              development and on-going genetic monitoring.
              LiIlian Lieber, Berrow, S., Hall, G., Hall, J., Gubili, C., Sarginson, J., Witt, M.J., Henderson, S.,
              Dawson, D., Horsburgh, J.G., Burke, T.A., Sims, D.W., Jones, C.S. and Noble, L.R.

14.00-14.10   Ambiguity, bycatch and demand - valid excuses for ineffective mobulid conservation?
              Daniel Fernando

14.10-14.20   Wanted dead or alive! How tourism could save the Manta Ray.
              Katie Lee-Brooks

14.20-14.30   Multiple paternity in Lamnid sharks: implications for conservation management?


European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                                  3



              Leslie R. Noble, Gubili, C., Smith, S.L., Robinson, C.E., Martin, A.P., Mucientes, G.R., Queiroz,
              N.M., Schrey, A.W., Heist, E., Sims, D.W., Hsu, H.H., Domeier, M.L. and Jones, C.S.

14.30-14.40   Whale Shark Provisioning: The case study of Oslob, Philippines.
              Sally Snow, Ponzo, A., Araujo, G., Labaja, J., So, C., Geary, D., Craven, S. and Lucey, A.

14.40-14.50   Seaquest Southwest Basking Shark Project.
              Clear, N., Abby Crosby and Williams, R.

14.50-15.00   A regional dorsal fin-based population estimate for White Sharks Carcharodon carcharias
              in Gansbaai, South Africa.
              Towner, A.V., Michelle A. Wcisel, Reisinger, R.R., Edwards, D. and Jewell, O.J.D.

15.00-15.15   Discussion session

15.15-15.50 Afternoon tea

Session 3 Shark habitats and management
Theatre 1 Session Chair: Jim Ellis, CEFAS

15.50-16.00   Using videography to understand the effects of large marine reserves on pelagic,
              migratory species.
              Matthew Gollock, Letessier, T., Koldewey, H., Fletcher, G. and Meeuwig, J.

16.00-16.10   Exploring ENGO perspectives on shark conservation through narrative analysis.
              Kate Massarella

16.10-16.30   Shark nursery identification on a shoestring without getting wet: evidence for the regional
              importance of the threatened Tigris-Euphrates system to Bull Sharks.
              Alec B.M. Moore

16.30-16.50   Core habitat use of an apex predator in a complex marine landscape.
              Oliver J.D. Jewell, Wcisel, M.A., Towner, A.V., Chivell, W., van der Merwe, L. and Bester, M.

16.50-17.10   The Great Eggcase Hunt: ten years on.
              Cat Gordon and Hood, A.

17.10-17.30   Migration patterns of an apex marine predator targetting pelagic prey.
              James Lea, Wetherbee B., Queiroz N., Mucientes, G., Burney, N., Humphries, N., Aming, C.,
              Sousa, L, Harvey, G, Sims, D. and Shivji, M.

17.30-17.50   Sharks across the pond: divergence and convergence in US-EU elasmobranch
              conservation.
              Sonja Fordham

17.50         Close




19.30 Conference dinner and auction
        Rockfish, National Marine Aquarium Plaza




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                              4




SUNDAY 3rd

9.20-10.00 Poster session and coffee

Theatre 1     Keynote Address
10.00-10.40   The two T’s, tracking and taxonomy: implications of recent research findings for the
              management of White Sharks and Spurdogs in New Zealand waters and beyond.
              Clinton Duffy

Session 4 Pelagic sharks
Theatre 1 Session Chair: Sophy McCully, CEFAS

10.40-11.00   Quantifying the impact of environmental variables upon Blue Shark Prionace glauca catch-
              per-unit-effort in the Western English Channel.
              Jonathan Mitchell, Collins, K., Miller, P. and Suberg, L.

11.00-11.20   Big catch, little sharks: Peruvian small-scale longline fisheries likely to be unsustainable.
              Philip D. Doherty, Alfaro-Shigueto, J., Mangel, J.C., Witt, M.J., and Godley B.J.

11.20-11.40   Habitat-use, foraging behaviour and fisheries overlap of Shortfin Mako Sharks Isurus
              oxyrinchus in the North Atlantic.
              Nuno Queiroz, Mucientes, G., Humphries, N.E. and Sims, D.W.

11.40-12.00   Tracking migration routes in pelagic shark populations through dynamic isoscapes.
              Sarah Magozzi, Trueman, C., MacKenzie, K. and Yool, A.

12.00-12.20   Genetic population structure among Atlantic nurseries of the highly mobile oceanic Blue
              Shark Prionace glauca.
              Ana Veríssimo, Sampaio, Í., McDowell, J. and Alexandrino, P.

12.20-12.40   Are we doing the right thing to save sharks and rays? How to plan for conservation
              success.
              Nicholas K. Dulvy and Simpfendorfer, C.K.


12.40-13.40 Lunch and poster session

Session 5A Shark biology (Parallel session)
Theatre 1 Session Chair: Paddy Walker, NEV

13.40-13.50   Can microtextural analyses be used as a dietary discriminator in sharks?
              Laura McLennan, and Purnell, M.

13.50-14.00   Shark and other fish eye lenses – a window to cryptic life history behaviours.
              Katie Quaeck, Trueman, C., MacKenzie, K. and Bendall, V.

14.00-14.10   Quantification of metabolic rate in free ranging elasmobranch species by means of tri-axial
              accelerometry.
              Lauran Brewster, Guttridge, T., Bullock, R., Gruber, S., Gleiss, A. and Whitney, N.

14.10-14.20   Neophilia and boldness in juvenile Lemon Shark: Are novel object answer and frightening
              stimulus reaction relevant behavior indicators to shark personality?
              Clément Chazot, Finger, J.S., Guttridge, T. and Gruber, S.H.


European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                                5



14.20-14.30   Bioaccumulation of trace metals and organochlorines in North-East Atlantic Porbeagle
              Sharks Lamna nasus.
              Victoria A. Bendall, Law, R.J., Maes, T., Barber, J.L., Papachlimitzou, A., Hetherington, S.J.,
              Silva, J., McCully, S., Ellis, J. & Righton, D.

14.30-14.40   Adaptive Divergence in the Thornback Ray Raja clavata.
              Rachel Ball, Jones, C. and Noble, L.

14.40-14.50   Population genetic structure and phylogeography of the Smallspotted Catshark
              Scyliorhinus canicula in European waters.
              Chrysoula Gubili, Sims, D.W., Genner, M. and Griffiths. A.M.

14.50-15.00   Endothermy in sharks: a Comparative Transcriptome Approach.
              Emily Humble, Savolainen, V., Noble, L., Jones, C. & Stefanni, S.

15.00-15.15   Discussion session

Session 5B Stakeholder engagement (Parallel session)
Theatre 2 Session Chair: Ali Hood, Shark Trust

13.40-13.50   A European Shark Tagging Programme and the importance of volunteers in ongoing
              scientific research into shark populations.
              James Thorburn, Burrett, I., Bastiman, S., Noble, L.R., Jones, C.S.

13.50-14.00   Using Fishers’ Ecological Knowledge to assess the status and cultural importance of
              sawfish in Guinea-Bissau.
              Ruth H. Leeney and Poncelet, P.

14.00-14.10   Shark ByWatch UK – Regional bycatch awareness of sharks and rays in the southern
              North Sea.
              Victoria A. Bendall, Hetherington, S.J., Corton, J., Randall, P. and Duggan, K.

14.10-14.20   Managing a captive species – Raja undulata.
              Jean-Denis Hibbitt

14.20-14.30   Using community-based data collectors to assess the status of the traditional shark
              fishery in Madagascar.
              Frances Humber, Andriamahaino, E., Beriziny, T., Botosoamananto, R., Godley, R., Gough, C.,
              Ramahery, V. and Broderick, A.

14.30-14.40   “Science & Fishery Collaboration”: A new collaborative approach to scientists and
              fishermen actively working together to provide evidence and inform policy needs.

              Stuart J. Hetherington and Bendall, V.A.

14.40-14.50   Shark hand signals for shark identification.
              Riccardo Sturla Avogadri

14.50-15.00   Bycatch or Targeted Fisheries? Artisanal Shark Fishing in Fiji, South Pacific.
              Kerstin B.J. Glaus, Kalchhauser, I. , Burkhardt-Holm, P. and Brunnschweiler, J.M.

15.00-15.15   Discussion session


15.15-15.45 Afternoon tea


European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                             6



Session 6 Manta Rays, Whale Sharks, Basking Sharks
Theatre 1 Session Chair: Sonja Fordham, Shark Advocates International

15.45-16.05   Basking Shark Watch and wider science and conservation in the NE Atlantic – an update.
              Jean-Luc Solandt, Richardson, P., Witt, W., Ranger, S., Duncan, C. and Pikesley S.K.

16.05-16.25   Diel patterns in vertical movement and locomotor activity of Whale Sharks at Ningaloo
              Reef.
              Gleiss, A.C., Serena Wright, Liebsch, N., Wilson, R.P. and Norman, B.

16.25-16.45   Structure and dynamics of an unexploited population of the Reef Manta Ray Manta alfredi.
              Lydie I. E. Couturier, Dudgeon, C.L., Pollock, K.H., Jaine, F.R.A., Bennett, M.B., Townsend,
              K.A., Weeks, S.J. and Richardson, A.J.

16.45-17.05   Vertical foraging strategies of Basking Sharks in coastal waters and their implication for
              population surveys.
              Emmett M. Johnston, Griffin, D.C. and Houghton, J.D.R.

17.05-17.25   Basking Sharks and oceanic fronts: remotely-sensed ocean front metrics for improving
              understanding of marine megavertebrate habitat use.
              Kylie L. Scales and Miller, P.

17.25-17.30   Closing address

Conference ends.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                         7



Saturday 2nd November

Keynote
The changing landscape and challenges of shark conservation and
management, 1980s to present.
Sarah Fowler
Save our Seas Foundation
Prior to the 1980s, suggestions that the conservation and management of sharks, skates
and rays warranted attention were more likely to raise quizzical eyebrows than to generate
action in governmental and non-governmental marine policy circles. This presentation will
review how and why this picture has changed over the decades. It will cover increased
public awareness and shark research; trends in demand for elasmobranch products and
ecotourism services; the struggle to promote and adopt fisheries management measures;
the rise of the shark conservation NGOs, and the recent inclusion of commercially-important
species in the Appendices of major biodiversity environment instruments (the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species–CITES, and the Conservation of Migratory
Species–CMS). While there are many achievements to celebrate, the future of shark
conservation now stands upon the cusp: failure to implement Shark Plans and to deliver
sustainable trade management under CITES threatens not only the survival of many shark
populations, but possibly also the continued engagement and support of governments,
biodiversity conventions and even the public.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                           8



Session 1: Elasmobranchs in European Seas

The role of the elasmobranchs in the Italian implementation of the EU Marine
Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD).
Massimiliano Bottaro, Scacco, U., La Mesa, G. and Tunesi, L.
Italian National Institute for Environmental Protection and Research (ISPRA)
The European Union Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD) has the objective of
achieving or maintaining Good Environmental Status (GES) in European seas by 2020. The
first requirement was the “initial assessment” of the status of marine waters in relation to
eleven qualitative “descriptors of GES”. In particular, the “descriptor 1” requires that “the
biological diversity is maintained” and it includes elasmobranchs. In order to pursue this
goal, Italy decided to analyse all the available information on the elasmobranchs in the
National waters and specific attention was devoted to the analysis of data of the EU
MEDITS project (International Bottom Trawl Survey in the Mediterranean), for the period
1994-2011. Based on this information the “initial assessment” was performed. Moreover the
functional group of the “demersal elasmobranchs” was proposed for two indicators to
evaluate the GES: “condition of the typical species and communities” and the "relative
abundance and/or biomass", and the associated metrics (the Shannon-Wiener diversity
index and the abundance and biomass of piscivorous species). The contribution of these two
indicators to the GES is based on temporal trend analyses. For these two indicators was
proposed an operational target directly linked to management actions related to initiatives
devoted to inform and increase awareness of professional fishermen on the best practices of
handling and release of by-catches. The next key steps are the start-up of these activities
that should be conceived in line with similar initiative defined by other EU Member States.
MSFD, Italy, Elasmobranchs, GES, Target.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                            9



Session 1: Elasmobranchs in European Seas

Chondrichthyan fish of the British Isles: prioritising species for further study
and the utility of Ecological Risk Assessments for informing management.
Sophy McCully and Ellis, J.
Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (CEFAS), UK
An updated taxonomic list of chondrichthyans reported from around the British Isles was
compiled, with 80 species from the area. A prioritisation exercise was performed for all these
species, with species scored qualitatively under four categories (conservation interest;
commercial importance; biological vulnerability; and importance of the UK to the species
range). Those species that ranked highest were subsequently investigated in terms of data
availability and data gaps, and whether or not ICES has been able to evaluate the stock
status and formulate advice. This exercise can serve as an evidence base to better identify
those data collection programmes (biological sampling and/or field studies) that could
usefully be undertaken to inform appropriate regional management. Alternative approaches
for prioritising species of interest, acting at a finer fishery-based scale, are Productivity
Susceptibility Analyses (PSA). A PSA of the Celtic Seas skate complex interaction with
demersal gillnet and trawl fleets was trialled at ICES this year. The preliminary results,
suggested refinements and future direction of such methods are discussed in relation to
management of data limited elasmobranch fisheries.
Elasmobranchii, risk assessment, data limited, Celtic Sea, management.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                               10



Session 1: Elasmobranchs in European Seas

Who Ray?! DNA barcoding unveils skate species diversity in ‘ray’ products
sold across Ireland and the UK.
Andrew Mark Griffiths, Miller, D.D. and Mariani, S.
University of Salford, UK
Recent food mislabelling scandals have ensured that food authenticity has a very high
profile, with molecular methods to identify species in foods gaining renewed interest.
Applications of DNA barcoding for identifying elasmobranch species have been very
successful during investigations of the damaging trade in shark fins, helping inform
management and conservation decisions. But whilst considerable effort has been spent
identifying the species sold in shark products, little attention has focused on sales of skate
(Rajidae).

 Skates are widely consumed across the globe, but many large species are subject to
considerable concern for their conservation, with limits placed on the landings. Yet within the
EU, sale of skates is still made under a blanket term of ‘ray’ with the fish only valued for their
wings. So before sale, their bodies are usually discarded and often skinned, making
morphological identification impossible. For the first time, DNA barcoding was applied to
samples of skate wings traded across the British Isles. The results showed that five species
were commonly being sold (Raja brachyura, Raja montagui, Raja clavata, Leucoraja naevus
& Raja microocellata) and indicated that endangered species are not being passed on to
consumers. However, the investigation highlights that the sale of skate wings under
ambiguous labels makes it extremely difficult for consumers to exercise a right to choose
species of less conservation concern. Additionally, in the minority of cases where ray wings
were labelled with species names a high level of mislabelling was identified.
Ray wings, DNA barcoding, Forensically Informative Nucleotide Sequencing, species
identification, mislabelling.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                               11



Session 1: Elasmobranchs in European Seas

DNA barcoding of the Northeast Atlantic skates (Chondrichthyes: Rajidae),
with remarks on the widely distributed Starry Ray Amblyraja radiata.

Lynghammar A, Christiansen, J.S., Griffiths, A.M., Fevolden, S.E., Hop, H. and Bakken, T.
UiT The Arctic University of Norway
Morphological identification of skates is difficult for non-specialists due to morphological
conservatism between species and high intraspecific variation due to factors such as
ontogenetic changes. Being an understudied group, changes in taxonomy are still made and
species boundaries are debated. Here, we analysed the mitochondrial ‘barcode gene’, COI,
from a total of 175 specimens distributed in 15 species and 6 genera in the North Atlantic
Ocean. A barcode gap was confirmed between all species pairs, facilitating unambiguous
genetic identification of species. This is the first study that uses COI to successfully
separate the cryptic Dipturus batis, and the first genetic evidence on the reallocation of
Dipturus linteus to Rajella lintea. This is also the first report of Raja montagui from
Norwegian waters.
A remarkably high number of haplotypes was found in the Starry Ray Amblyraja radiata. Due
to striking differences in life history parameters, particularly size at maturity, cryptic species
diversity has previously been suspected in this group. There was, however, no concordance
between haplotype and morphotype and the present data do not support any subdivision of
the Starry Ray.
Forensically informative sequencing, FINS.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                            12



Session 1: Elasmobranchs in European Seas

The skate complex of the British Isles: current status, discard survival and
management options.

Jim R. Ellis, McCully, S.R. and Silva, J.F.

Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (CEFAS), UK
The composition and abundance of the skate assemblage around the British Isles has
changed over the last century. The largest species (e.g. White Skate Rostroraja alba) are
near extirpated from former habitats, whilst the populations of smaller-bodied species (e.g.
Spotted Ray Raja montagui and Thornback Ray R. clavata) appear healthier. Current
management regulations for skates include quota for the complex as a whole, prohibited
status for some of the more vulnerable species and, in some inshore waters of England and
Wales, a minimum landing size. The efficacy of these and other potential measures is highly
dependent on whether fish survive discarding. Here we provide a synthesis of skate fisheries
around the British Isles, the discard and retention patterns of skates in various fisheries and
available information on skate survivorship. Short-term survival for longline-caught skates
was high, although overnight soak times increased jaw damage. Skates taken in inshore
gillnet fisheries also had a high survival, ranging from 98% (<24 hour soak time) to about
88% (43–48 hour soak time). In contrast, the survivorship of skates captured by beam trawl
was lower, with about half the fish surviving. Improving our knowledge of the survivorship of
skates taken in various fisheries not only helps inform on assessment and management of
the stocks, but will also provide relevant information in relation to proposed discard bans
under the reformed Common Fisheries Policy.
Elasmobranchii, Rajidae, discard survival, tagging, management.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                         13



Session 1: Elasmobranchs in European Seas

How many gulper shark species are there? Revisiting the North Atlantic
species diversity of a troubled deepwater shark group - the genus
Centrophorus.
Ana Veríssimo, Cotton C., Buch, R., Burgess, G.H. and Guallart, J.
CIBIO – Center for Research in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources, Portugal
The gulper sharks are a group of medium-sized benthopelagic sharks usually found on
continental and insular slopes of the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific oceans. Many of the 13-15
recognized species are routinely caught in mid- and deep-water fisheries worldwide and
some have shown a considerable decline in abundance in the last few decades. Despite the
need for efficient and sustainable management of these species, clear and consistent
species discrimination and taxonomic identification of Centrophorus remains problematic.
We used molecular (COI and 16S gene sequences) and morphometric data to re-evaluate
the diversity of Centrophorus in the North Atlantic, including the Gulf of Mexico and the
Mediterranean Sea. Data were collected from fresh specimens caught by commercial and
research vessels, from preserved specimens deposited in museum and research institute
collections, and from publicly available databases (e.g. GenBank). Molecular data separated
North Atlantic Centrophorus specimens into five well-supported groups while morphometric
measurements corroborated the existence of these five groups but indicated the presence of
three additional groups for which no molecular data were available. Comparison of North
Atlantic specimens with those collected elsewhere showed that four of the five groups
identified above also occur in the Indian and/or Pacific oceans. Our results extend the
reported range of some species considerably and suggest that most Centrophorus have
wider geographic distributions than previously reported.
Gulper Sharks, alpha taxonomy, genetics, morphology, North Atlantic.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                            14



Session 2A: Elasmobranchs in European Seas

Biological studies to inform management of Smoothhounds Mustelus spp. in
the Northeast Atlantic.

Sophy McCully and Ellis, J.

Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (CEFAS), UK
Seasonal catches of Starry Smoothhound Mustelus asterias have been commonplace
around the UK coast for many years. However, until recently, all but the largest of these
have predominantly been discarded due to a low commercial value. In the 33 year time-
series of national landings reported to ICES, Smoothhound catches are at an all-time high,
with nearly 3,000 t reported in 2012. Within parts of the UK, Smoothhound landings have
increased in recent years, which may relate to increased abundance in northern European
waters and/or emerging market opportunities. In terms of the latter, anecdotal accounts from
the fishing industry suggest that this is in part a response to the current zero catch of
Spurdog Squalus acanthias. Following a prioritisation exercise of the chondrichthyans of the
British Isles, this species was deemed to be a high priority for study, given its life history,
importance of UK waters to the stock and the emerging commercial interest. As little is
known regarding many aspects of the biology of this species, a biological sampling
programme was initiated to help collect life history parameters necessary for future stock
assessments and management measures to be appraised. Monthly samples of Mustelus
have been obtained since June, and fully dissected. Preliminary data on conversion factors,
maturity and fecundity information and hepatosomatic indices are presented, with comments
made on the utility of these for informing on future management.
Mustelus, Triakidae, life history, maturity, fecundity, conversion factors.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                              15



Session 2A: Elasmobranchs in European Seas

Sharks within the MSFD – from national to international.
Irene Kingma, and Walker, P.
Nederlandse Elasmobranchen Vereniging / Dutch Elasmobranch Society
Following the recommendations made in the Dutch Shark Action Plan, the Dutch
government will address the management and conservation of sharks and skates through
the implementation of the Marine Framework Strategy. The mainstay will be Descriptor 1
with the objective to retain biodiversity. The Dutch Elasmobranch Society (NEV) has been
asked to advise the government on a management plan by 2014. The primary aim of the
plan will be to improve the size, distribution and condition of the populations of sharks and
rays on the Dutch continental shelf and will be part of the Dutch management plan to be
presented to the European Commission
The project has three phases: (1) to identify the current and historical status of the
elasmobranchs on the Dutch continental shelf (DCS) and to assess the suitability of species
to function as indicator species for the whole group; (2) to identify the factors influencing the
abundance, distribution and condition of the elasmobranchs on the DCS; and (3) to develop
cost-effective management measures.
This paper will present the framework and first results of the project. The necessity and
possibilities for cooperation and harmonisation at a European level will be discussed.
Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD), management.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                              16



Session 2A: Elasmobranchs in European Seas

Indicator species selection for elasmobranchs on the Dutch Ccontinental
shelf.
C.M. (Dianne) van der Craats and van Rijn, J.
Nederlandse Elasmobranchen Vereniging/Van Hall Larenstein University of Applied
Sciences

Indicators provide insight into phenomena and trends that are not directly perceivable. They
compress large amounts of information and make it possible to share knowledge in an
accessible way. Indicator species are used to determine the state of or change in an
ecosystem, habitat or population. The information indicator species provide is for instance
needed to monitor the effects of conservation methods.

The downside of indicators (species) is that the process of indicator selection is often
obscure and unfounded. There is no method available for selection of indicators. Literature
on the subject often only describes preparation and not the process of indicator selection
itself.

The aim of our thesis completed at the ‘NEV’ was to appoint multiple indicator species that
indicate the population condition of elasmobranchs on the Dutch Continental Shelf. To do so
we developed a method and indicator selection model based on available literature. The
model consists of multiple criteria (taking both ecological and legislative factors into
account): historical data, monitoring robustness, early warning and international relevance.
Each criteria consists of multiple features. How well the elasmobranch species meet the
features and criteria will determine how suitable they are as an indicator species. Finally it is
possible to express preference for features by assigning different weighting to features that
are perceived as important (by for example policy makers or researchers).

The model we created makes indicator selection transparent, repeatable and clear. It makes
it possible to make an informed decision in regard to indicator selection because the model
takes a broad range of factors into account. Finally the model is adaptable (for new
knowledge and features) and thus also applicable in other countries.

Indicator selection, indicator selection model/method, Marine Strategy Framework
Directive (MSFD), NEV.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                           17



Session 2A: Elasmobranchs in European Seas

Bycatch and discarding patterns of dogfish and sharks taken in commercial
fisheries around the British Isles.

Silva, J F., Jim R. Ellis, Catchpole, T.L. and Righton, D.

Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (CEFAS), UK

The discard and retention patterns of dogfish and sharks taken as a bycatch in UK
commercial fisheries were examined. Data were collected primarily on English vessels
fishing on the continental shelf of the North Sea ecoregion (ICES Divisions IV a–c, VIId) and
Celtic Seas ecoregion (ICES Divisions VIa, VIIa–c,e–k). Vessels examined represented four
main gear types (otter, beam and Nephrops trawls, and gillnet), with only limited data
available for longline and mid-water trawl. Beam trawlers generally captured proportionally
more small (juvenile) dogfish than otter trawlers. Gillnets were the most size selective gear.
Data on the elasmobranch catches from Nephrops trawlers were frequently too limited to
draw an accurate discard/retention pattern, which may reflect a low catchability of sharks by
this gear and/or that elasmobranchs are not abundant on these muddy fishing grounds. In
general, juvenile sharks (Triakidae and Squalidae) were usually discarded, and larger fish
retained, whilst catsharks (Scyliorhinidae) were generally discarded. Temporal changes in
discarding patterns are examined in relation to recent changes in management regulations,
and potential implications of recent reform of the Common Fisheries Policy, in terms of
discard bans, discussed.

Elasmobranchii, Squalus acanthias, Scyliorhinus, Mustelus asterias, North Sea, Celtic
Sea.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                            18



Session 2A: Elasmobranchs in European Seas

Sawfish in the Mediterranean: vagrant species or an undetected case of
regional extinction?

Francesco Ferretti, Morey Verd, G., Seret, B., Šprem, J.S. and Micheli, F.

Stanford University, USA

The impact of humans on ocean ecosystems dates prehistoric times. However, only recently
science has been able to describe these changes. For many animal populations, scientific
observation has captured the epilogue of complex changes in abundance, distribution and
interspecific interactions, and for sawfishes, their extinctions in many coastal zones. In the
Mediterranean, a scant set of records raised doubts on whether sawfishes ever occurred in
the region. It is currently suggested that sawfishes could not have inhabited the
Mediterranean Sea because of the incongruent local oceanographic conditions with the
known sawfish ecology. Here we will show the result of a bibliographic, archival and
extinction analysis where we reconstructed the sawfish history in the Mediterranean.
Between 1576 and 1956, we found 48 independent accounts on the occurrence of large and
small-tooth sawfishes, including 23 documented catches. Sawfishes were mainly recorded in
the western Mediterranean, in areas close to large rivers and light human impact. Most of
the documented sawfishes were juveniles suggesting local parturition and the presence of
resident populations. These populations, however, disappeared during the last five decades.
We will discuss how our results challenge current assumptions on sawfish biogeography and
ecology, highlight the importance of historical literature analyses in reconstructing baselines
of animal populations, and call for a large-scale molecular and genetic characterization of
sawfish exhibits present in Mediterranean and European museums.

Ecological baselines, extinction analyses, vagrancy, historical ecology, museums
records, literature analysis.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                            19



Session 2A: Elasmobranchs in European Seas

Cryptic invaders from the Red Sea: the Dusky Shark in the Mediterranean.

Adi Barash, Tokochinski, Y., Blaustein, L. and Rilov, G.

Institute of Evolution and Department of Evolutionary & Environmental Biology University of
Haifa/ Israel Oceanographic and Limnological Research.

Since the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869, many marine species have passed through
from the Red Seato the Mediterranean. This extensive phenomenon, known as Lessepsian
migration, has so far resulted in the migration of over 400 species into the Levant Basin.
Unlike other closely monitored marine megafauna such as marine mammals and sea turtles,
little is known about shark populations in Israel. The Dusky Shark Carcharhinus obscurus is
rarely found in most parts of the Mediterranean but is surprisingly common in Israel. In
collaboration with Ecoocean organization, we aimed to explore the variability of Dusky
Sharks off the Israeli coast and determine its origin by molecular techniques.

Previous work on the Dusky Shark found the Indo-Pacific population to be genetically
separated from the Atlantic one. We collected tissue samples of sharks caught by fishermen
off the Israel Mediterranean coast. DNA was extracted and the mitochondrial control region
(D-Loop) was sequenced. Results show that samples consisted of haplotypes from both the
Atlantic and Indo-Pacific, indicating that Lessepsian migration of the Dusky Shark has
occurred. Albeit rare, the Dusky Shark is indigenous in the Mediterranean, thus the usual
definition of invasion does not apply. We address it as cryptic invasion, a term used for the
phenomenon of individuals entering an existing population of the same species from a
different biogeographic region. Identifying cryptic invasions is especially important in highly
invaded regions such as the Mediterranean, and presents an especially difficult challenge in
protecting the species while eradicating invaders and protecting the genetic diversity.

Genetics, C.obscurus, cryptic invasion.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                         20



Session 2A: Elasmobranchs in European Seas

First results on migration behaviour of Leafscale Gulper Shark Centrophorus
squamosus tagged in the Cantabrian Sea (NE Atlantic).

Cristina Rodriguez-Cabello, Arronte, J,C., Bolado, I., Abaunza, P. and Sánchez, F.

Instituto Español de Oceanografia (IEO)

Several Leafscale Gulper Sharks, Centrophorus squamosus were tagged with conventional
tags in the North of Spain waters (Cantabrian Sea, NE Atlantic). In addition six specimens
were tagged with satellite tags (PAT) in the Marine Protected Area (MPA) of Le Danois Bank
(El Cachucho) in the central Cantabrian Sea in 2012 and 2013. Up to date data from three of
these tags were recovered. The first one corresponded to a male of 104 cm which was 45
days at liberty and in this time it travelled about 246 miles towards the north east (French
continental shelf) hypothetically following the continental slope at a mean depth of 900 m.
The second shark, a male of 93 cm, spent almost 4 months (116 days) in which it moved
188 miles to the west (Galician coast) following the slope at a mean depth of 1200 m.
Finally, the third one a male of 118 cm moved to the NW (Porcupine Bank) travelling
approximately 550 miles during three months.

Centrophorus squamosus, tagging, PAT, Cantabrian Sea, Cachucho.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                          21



Session 2A: Elasmobranchs in European Seas

Mustelus asterias in the Netherlands.
Niels Brevé
Sportvisserij Nederland
Sharkatag in Zeeland: Sharks and rays are an extremely rare (by)catch for anglers in the
Dutch part of the North Sea. However, in 2010 skippers of deep sea angling charters,
operating in the south of the Netherlands, noticed an unexpected increase in catches of the
Starry Smoothhound Mustelus asterias. In 2011, the Royal Dutch Angling Organisation
started a long-lasting tagging program together with the research institute IMARES and 15
skippers.
After 3 years, nearly 1500 Starry Smoothhound Sharks have been tagged & released.
Recaptures (22 so far) were sent to us by commercial fisherman from Belgium, France and
the UK.
Preliminary results show that the main migration route of the smoothhounds goes south
through the Channel, and back again. It also seems that the large female smoothhound
sharks gather in summer in a Nature 2000 area the "Oosterschelde", where they presumably
give birth to their offspring.
In addition to this on-going tagging program, the Angling Organisation organizes an event
known as “Sharkatag”. The licensed skippers take 300 anglers, including policy makers and
politicians, out to go shark-fishing. This event raises good media attention and is broadcast
on the national news. The objective is primarily to generate more awareness amongst the
general public and with policy-makers and politicians.
Also anglers want the Dutch fisheries law to be re-evaluated on sharks & rays. The objective
is to see that all sharks and rays caught in the Dutch part of the North Sea are released,
since they are so rare, and important to the aquatic ecosystem.
Mustelus asterias, North Sea, angling, catch & release, migration.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                          22



Session 2B: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks, Basking Sharks, and White Sharks

Using biochemical markers to investigate the hidden lives of Whale Sharks.
Clare E.M. Prebble, Pierce, S., Rohner, C., Robinson, D. and Trueman, C.
Marine Megafauna Foundation, Mozambique
Little is known about the long-term movements and feeding ecology of whale sharks away
from coastal aggregation sites. Examining tissue biopsies using ‘biochemical tagging’
methods can provide information on their assimilated diet and movement patterns.
Skin biopsies were collected from free-swimming Whale Sharks in Mozambique, Qatar, and
Tanzania between 2011 and 2013. Stomach contents were collected from five stranded
Whale Sharks in Mozambique and South Africa. Coastal zooplankton samples were
collected at the surface and at 300m depth from Mozambique. Fatty acid profiles were
assessed from the Mozambique biopsies alongside other planktivores and known or
potential prey items. Carbon and nitrogen stable isotope ratios were determined from all skin
biopsies.
δN and δC values of skin biopsies differed by location, demonstrating consistent spatial
segregation over the timescale of isotopic integration. This is supported by photo
identification data which show negligible overlap of individuals between sites, and point to
strong stock separation of whale sharks in the Western Indian Ocean.
Fatty acid profiles of Whale Sharks were significantly different to all prey items. Several
mesoand bathypelagic species showed among the highest similarity. Mysid shrimps
dominated stomach contents numerically and by mass. Together this suggests Whale
Sharks feed not only during daylight on surface zooplankton, but at night on demersal
zooplankton and, on oceanic, and deep water zooplankton and fishes.
Whale Sharks likely target multiple environments to feeding in the patchy prey fields of
tropical systems, but appear to forage within a relatively limited latitudinal range.
Whale Sharks, stable isotopes, fatty acids.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                              23



Session 2B: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks, Basking Sharks, and White Sharks

Towards understanding Basking Shark Cetorhinus maximus connectivity –
novel marker development and on-going genetic monitoring.
LiIlian Lieber, Berrow, S., Hall, G., Hall, J., Gubili, C., Sarginson, J., Witt, M.J., Henderson,
S., Dawson, D., Horsburgh, J.G., Burke, T.A., Sims, D.W., Jones, C.S. and Noble, L.R.
University of Aberdeen
Classified on the IUCN Red List as ‘Vulnerable’ worldwide and ‘Endangered’ in the
Northeast Atlantic (NEA) region, the filter-feeding basking shark, Cetorhinus maximus, is a
marine conservation priority species in the UK. Although recent advances in satellite tracking
have shed new light upon its movement and dispersal potential, little is known about Basking
Shark connectivity, population size, or even basic life history traits. Following a century of
commercial hunting, it has become vital for current conservation efforts to develop new tools
to monitor numbers, migration units and gene flow within the NEA. Despite extensive
migratory behaviour, Basking Sharks seasonally aggregate off Scotland, Ireland, southern
England and the Isle of Man. As these aggregations could present a significant proportion of
the global population, we have gathered long-term population samples using skin mucus
swabs to allow monitoring of these key sites. Here, 13 novel, species-specific microsatellite
genetic markers haven been developed and tested to allow first estimates of effective
population sizes and genetic diversity. Furthermore, high-throughput RAD (restriction site –
associated DNA) sequences are currently being filtered for hundreds of SNP (single
nucleotide polymorphism) markers from the Basking Shark genome to provide more
powerful, precise and robust tools for future monitoring. Individual identification is essential
for estimates of animal movement and abundance and on-going genetic tagging will allow a
range of hypotheses to be tested regarding annual site-fidelity, kinship and large-scale
population structuring – parameters essential for meaningful stock assessments and
management units in the light of offshore development and climate change.
Basking Shark, connectivity, genetic monitoring, novel genetic markers.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                24



Session 2B: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks, Basking Sharks, and White Sharks

Ambiguity, bycatch and demand - valid excuses for ineffective mobulid
conservation?
Daniel Fernando
Linnaeus University, Kalmar (Sweden) and The Manta Trust (UK)
The family Mobulidae comprises of two genera, Manta and Mobula, with 11 extant species
worldwide and all are listed on the IUCN Red List as either “Vulnerable”, “Near Threatened”
or “Data Deficient”. Limited data is available for these species and given that they have few
natural predators, slow growth rates, low fecundity and late maturity, anthropogenic threats
can have a severe impact on their global populations.
Mobulid rays are landed as non-discarded by-catch in tuna gill-net fisheries across South
Asia. The abundant species recorded are Mobula japanica and Mobula tarapacana, followed
by Manta birostris and Mobula thurstoni. While Manta has some protection in certain regions
and under the forthcoming CITES implementation, none of the Mobula species are
adequately protected. This lack of protection is due to the scarcity of data which prevents a
listing under multilateral treaties such as CITES.
One critical factor currently affecting data collection are the similar external features among
mobulids which often result in taxonomic ambiguities even in published scientific literature.
This highlights the urgent necessity for a set of clear identification tools to help researchers
fill in knowledge gaps, as the continuing difficulty of identification to species level is severely
hindering our ability to understand more about these animals and recommend concrete
conservation actions.
With demand for mobulids growing due to the expanding international trade in their gill plates
used in Traditional Chinese Medicine, it is imperative these rays are provided with some
form of protection before their fragile populations are pushed beyond breaking point.
Mobulidae, fisheries, South Asia, bycatch, trade, conservation.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                           25



Session 2B: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks, Basking Sharks, and White Sharks
Wanted dead or alive! How tourism could save the manta ray.
Katie Lee-Brooks
The Manta Trust, UK
In recent years manta rays have faced increasing threats from both targeted and by-catch
fisheries due to a growing trade in their highly valued gill plates. Listed as “Vulnerable” on
the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, with life history traits including slow growth, late
maturity and long pregnancies that usually result in the birth of a single pup, mantas are
extremely susceptible to any consumptive exploitation.
Manta rays are however, regarded as one of our oceans’ most charismatic species with
many divers listing them high on their dive career bucket list. By harnessing this potential
there are numerous opportunities that allow the public a very active role in saving these
iconic species.
Changing policy often requires scientists to take an interdisciplinary approach to providing
evidence for reform. Tourism with mantas is one such example, with the direct economic
impact of manta ray dive tourism estimated at US$140 million globally each year. When
compared to an estimated US$5 million from the annual trade in manta gill plates, the
alternative of simply swimming with mantas is an enormous economic incentive for
protection.
Tourism has also been used in conjunction with biological data in MPA designation affecting
these species and has a vital role to play in funding ongoing management initiatives.
Divers can also take a personal role, capturing images of each manta ray’s unique underside
as they swim with them and subsequently working with researchers to identify animals they
have encountered, providing vital data on manta populations, migrations and habitat use.


Manta rays, ecotourism, citizen science, conservation.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                               26



Session 2B: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks, Basking Sharks, and White Sharks
Multiple paternity         in    Lamnid     sharks:     implications       for   conservation
management?
Leslie R. Noble, Gubili, C., Smith, S.L., Robinson, C.E., Martin, A.P., Mucientes, G.R.,
Queiroz, N.M., Schrey, A.W., Heist, E., Sims, D.W., Hsu, H.H., Domeier, M.L. and Jones,
C.S.
University of Aberdeen, UK
The vagility and intractability of elasmobranchs makes their reproductive interactions
inherently difficult to study. Observations of mating behaviour are often rare or nonexistent,
except for a few relatively tractable species with well-defined inshore nursery areas. The
application of molecular methods to assign paternity is relatively recent in sharks, yet four
out of eight extant orders have been shown to exhibit multiple paternity. We have used
biparentally inherited microsatellite markers to extend these finding to another order of
sharks, the Lamniformes. Here we report evidence of multiple paternity in three species from
the family Lamnidae caught in the Pacific Ocean: the Great White, Carcharodon carcharias
(off Japan and Taiwan), the Shortfin Mako, Isurus oxyrinchus (central south Pacific), and
Porbeagle, Lamna nasus (south Pacific). Understanding the extent and prevalence of
polyandry in large pelagic sharks could be of fundamental importance, as biological dogma
dictates that multiply sired litters have a positive effect on the effective population size (NE),
a parameter central to the philosophy of conservation biology.
Multiple paternity, microsatellites, polyandry, White Shark, mako, Porbeagle.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                              27



Session 2B: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks, Basking Sharks, and White Sharks
Whale Shark provisioning: the case study of Oslob, Philippines.
Sally Snow, Ponzo, A., Araujo, G., Labaja, J., So, C., Geary, D., Craven, S. and Lucey, A.
Physalus (NGO), Large Marine Vertebrate Project, Philippines.
This represents the first description of the Whale Shark aggregation associated with the
provisioning activities and tourism industry in the waters of Oslob, Philippines. Provisioning
started in late 2011, and within the first year over 100,000 tourists were attracted to the site,
transforming into one of the largest marine wildlife tourist attractions in South East Asia.
Since March 2012 researchers collected photographic identification during 443 days of
surveys, 200h of shark behavioural observations and 1000h of dive profiles from TDR tags
as well as daily observations of tourists’ and operators’ compliance with local and national
laws and 500 tourist satisfaction questionnaires.
Daily sightings ranged from 2 to 23 different animals in the interaction area (mean=11.14). A
total of 109 males, 15 females and 11 sharks of undetermined sex were described.
Resighting (>1d) was observed in 66.7% of the individuals. Five animals were present for
>300d (n=443) in the interaction area and nine were successfully matched across regional
hotspots including Donsol and Southern Leyte.
Whale Sharks are present in the interaction area year round, with a maximum of 46 different
animals present in the month of June 2012 and May 2013 (monthly average: 28.9). Although
the benefits for the community and regional economy are undeniable, evidence of
behavioural modification, extended residency time and thermal stress related to the
extended permanence in shallow water, suggests that the impact of the provisioning needs
to be further investigated and highlights the need of a proper management plan for the
tourism industry.
Whale Shark watching, limits of acceptable change, Oslob, Philippines, tourism.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                         28



Session 2B: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks, Basking Sharks, and White Sharks
Seaquest Southwest Basking Shark Project.
Clear, N., Abby Crosby and Williams, R.
Cornwall Wildlife Trust
The Seaquest Basking Shark Project is an effort-based annual survey of basking shark
sightings carried out in Cornwall by a large team of volunteers. The sightings scheme aims
to;
   Maintain a database with information on the number of sightings recorded at Hella Point
    each year
   Collect and analyse sightings data to improve knowledge of Basking Shark distribution,
    behaviour and threats around the coast of Cornwall
   Raise public awareness about basking sharks and the threats they face.
The Seaquest Basking Shark Project was launched by Cornwall Wildlife Trust in 2008 and
ran until 2012, collecting over 3270 hours of effort data.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                          29



Session 2B: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks, Basking Sharks, and White Sharks
A regional dorsal fin-based population estimate for White Sharks Carcharodon
carcharias in Gansbaai, South Africa.
Towner, A.V., Michelle A. Wcisel, Reisinger, R.R., Edwards, D. and Jewell, O.J.D.
The Dyer Island Conservation Trust, South Africa
Gansbaai, South Africa is reputed to host the world’s largest remaining population of White
Sharks, yet no regional estimates existed for the area prior to this study and the only
previous regional population estimate of White Sharks in South Africa relied on culled
animals. We used dorsal fin photographs (fin IDs) collected during commercial cage diving
trips to identify individual white sharks from January 2007 – December 2011, totalling 4120
hours of observer effort without seasonal paucity. We utilized the computer programme
DARWIN to catalogue and match fin IDs of individuals. Of 1682 fin IDs used, 532 unique
individuals were identified. Population size was determined using the open-population
POPAN parameterisation in Program MARK, which estimated the superpopulation size at
908 (95% confidence interval 808–1008). Dorsal fins were found to be an inconsistent mark-
recapture feature, as individual fins were found to change over time, which was not related
to the size or sex of sharks. Our estimated population size is larger than those described at
other aggregation areas of the species, yet is comparable to a previous regional population
estimate conducted 16 years prior using animals caught in KwaZulu Natal shark nets. This
suggests the species has not made a marked recovery since being nationally protected in
1991. As such, additional international protection may prove vital for the long-term
conservation of this threatened species. This study was recently published in PLOS ONE:
http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0066035
POPAN, DARWIN, MARK, open-population, mark-recapture.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                          30



Session 3: Elasmobranch habitats and management.
Using videography to understand the effects of large marine reserves on
pelagic, migratory species.
Matthew Gollock, Letessier, T., Koldewey, H., Fletcher, G. and Meeuwig, J.
Zoological Society of London
Large, pelagic predators, such as sharks, are fundamental to marine ecosystem health, but
have been seriously impacted by industrial fisheries, and populations of a number of species
have declined significantly. As such, the development of methods that can be used to
establish baselines and deliver on-going monitoring of pelagic species using safe, non-
destructive, low-cost and transferable technology is essential for improving their
management.
Stereo baited remote underwater video systems (BRUVS) are an established survey
technique for monitoring fish and in 2011, we began adapting BRUVs for use in the pelagic
realm. The adaptation of this technique to the pelagic environment aimed to document the
diversity, abundance and size structure of mobile pelagic predators, including sharks. Sea
trials of these units have now taken place off Dirk Hartog Island, Western Australia, and the
Chagos Marine Reserve and results will be presented.
This video technique is presently being progressed to develop units that record data over
extended time periods using still photography, videography and a suite of environmental
sensors that would be satellite-linked and allow immediate remote access to data. This
development would pose a number of technological challenges, and a number of lab and
aquarium-based trials were carried out in 2012-2013, prior to the first field trials of a
monitoring buoy which housed still cameras in Chagos in February 2013. Preliminary
findings of these trials will be presented.
It is hoped that data gathered from these unit will address management and legislative
issues related to conservation of sharks globally.
Sharks, videography, pelagic, MPA.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                              31



Session 3: Elasmobranch habitats and management.
Exploring ENGO perspectives on shark conservation through narrative
analysis.
Kate Massarella
University of Leeds
Within social science studies of conservation, it is increasingly acknowledged that the way in
which key stakeholders understand, prioritise, articulate and communicate issues can have a
significant influence on the way in which such issues are managed. This is particularly
important in areas of high uncertainty, such as the conservation of migratory marine species
that include sharks, skates, rays and chimaeras. Environmental non-governmental
organisations (ENGOs) have a key role in how shark conservation issues are understood,
prioritised and addressed in both policy and public arenas. This research report uses six
case studies to illustrate how
ENGOs perceive and frame shark conservation issues and how they present their evidence
and arguments. It finds that a contested mix of science, moral and economic arguments are
used across organisations and that three broad narratives are deployed by ENGOs, focusing
on sustainability, shark finning, and ecosystemic and intrinsic species value. By gaining a
better understanding of the way in which these influential ENGOs articulate shark
conservation issues, along with the factors that influence this, we are able to gain insight into
the opportunities and challenges this may pose for policy-making and conservation
management. The research also
identifies changes that appear to be occurring in the way in which shark conservation issues
are articulated, which may have further policy implications into the future.
ENGOs, environmental narratives, conservation framing & management.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                               32



Session 3: Elasmobranch habitats and management.
Shark nursery identification on a shoestring without getting wet: evidence for
the regional importance of the threatened Tigris-Euphrates system to Bull
Sharks.
Alec B.M. Moore
RSK Environment Ltd/Bangor University
The identification of nursery areas is recognised as a key priority for elasmobranch
conservation, yet the logistics and cost of obtaining the field survey data required to fulfil the
strict criteria of a nursery can be prohibitive. Although a relatively well-studied species
worldwide, the ecology of the Bull Shark in the Tigris-Euphrates river system in Iraq, Kuwait
and Iran is poorly known, a situation not helped by three decades of warfare and border
tensions. A range of data is presented, including from anecdotal and historical sources,
which build support for a Bull Shark nursery of potentially regional importance. This nursery
warrants further investigation, especially in light of the many environmental pressures on the
area.
Nursery, Bull Shark, Persian Gulf, Arabian Gulf, estuary, river.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                        33



Session 3: Elasmobranch habitats and management.
Core habitat use of an apex predator in a complex marine landscape.
Oliver J.D. Jewell, Wcisel, M.A., Towner, A.V., Chivell, W., van der Merwe, L. and Bester,
M.
Dyer Island Conservation Trust, South Africa
Manual acoustic telemetry was used to describe core habitat use of white sharks in the
complex marine landscape of the Dyer Island and Geyser Rock system near Gansbaai,
South Africa. Home range estimates and swimming pattern analyses were compared to
patterns established at Mossel Bay, another aggregation area roughly 300 km to the east.
Traditional home range estimates used in Mossel Bay did not account for movement or
barriers, and as a result were biased towards resting areas. We found that adapting a
movement-based kernel density estimate (MKDE) resolved these issues and produced more
accurate results. At Dyer Island and Geyser Rock, shark daytime habitat use was adjacent
to the seal colony, with slow rates of movement, non-linear swimming patterns and small
activity areas. At night, rates of movement increased as sharks travelled further from the
islands into deeper waters. MKDEs revealed four focal areas of habitat use; a channel
between the two islands, an area to the south of the seal colony, another area near a kelp
feature to the south-west of the seal colony and a reef system to the north-west. These
results differed significantly from patterns at Mossel Bay, where sharks were found to only
approach the seal colony during the hours of dawn and dusk and spent the majority of their
time patrolling distant reefs. Possible reasons for these differences are discussed within.
This study is the first to make use of MKDEs in a complex marine landscape.
White Shark, Carcharodon carcharias, home range, acoustic telemetry, Movement-
based Kernel Density Estimate (MKDE).




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                           34



Session 3: Elasmobranch habitats and management.
The Great Eggcase Hunt: ten years on.
Cat Gordon and Hood, A.
The Shark Trust, UK
Spawning and nursery grounds are ecologically-important habitats, yet surprisingly little is
known about the locations of such sites for skate species (Rajidae) and oviparous sharks in
the North Atlantic. These grounds may be identified by the presence of large numbers of
mature females or by a high density of eggcases on the sea floor. However, empty eggcases
which have washed ashore can also provide an easily accessible source of information on
the broad distribution and diversity of egglaying elasmobranch populations, although the site
where an eggcase is found is not necessarily indicative of where it was laid.
The Great Eggcase Hunt (GEH) is a Shark Trust public awareness and recording project
that aims to discover where different species of skate and oviparous shark lay their eggs.
Initially, it was driven by evidence of declining populations and the lack of species-specific
recording, which demonstrated the need for an increased understanding of all aspects of life
history strategy: the GEH represents the public aspect of this work. Eggcase taxonomy
featured heavily during the early days of the project, as limited published information was
available on the egglaying phase of the skate life cycle, despite many being commercially
important species. Now in its tenth year, over 35,000 individual eggcases, representing 13
species of skate and shark species, have been recorded to the project.
In a changing landscape for elasmobranch management, the GEH continues to provide a
valuable source of information which has the potential to feed into management measures,
while also operating as an educational tool to raise awareness of the presence and diversity
of elasmobranchs in British waters and further afield.
Oviparous, nursery grounds, Rajidae, life history, management, citizen science.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                          35



Session 3: Elasmobranch habitats and management.
Migration patterns of an apex marine predator targetting pelagic prey.
James Lea, Wetherbee B., Queiroz N., Mucientes, G., Burney, N., Humphries, N., Aming,
C., Sousa, L, Harvey, G, Sims, D. and Shivji, M.
Plymouth University, UK
Migration strategies are an adaptive response to temporal variation in availability and
location of resources. Migrations of highly connected predators are of particular interest
given their central role in maintaining ecosystem stability. Despite a traditional focus on
terrestrial species, advances in remote telemetry have facilitated descriptions of migrations
in various marine predators. However, the underlying motivations for migration and whether
they are partial or not often remain overlooked. Consequently this study aimed to determine
the factors driving migration in an apex marine predator: the Tiger Shark Galeocerdo cuvier.
Satellite-derived movement data from the Northwest Atlantic revealed seasonal, round-trip
migrations of 4,000 km between insular regions in winter and offshore pelagic areas in
summer. These migrations were partial, with the majority of observed migrations undertaken
by mature males. Combining these findings with stomach data and existing literature
indicates the motivation behind summer migrations is likely linked to foraging on juvenile
Loggerhead Turtles Caretta caretta, before returning to mate at breeding grounds in winter.
Migrating to target turtles may be an adaptation for avoiding competition with other large,
sympatric, predators that favour teleosts and cephalopods.
Philopatry, sexual segregation, state-space model, predator-prey interactions,
foraging ecology.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                           36



Session 3: Elasmobranch habitats and management.
Sharks across the pond: divergence and convergence in US-EU elasmobranch
conservation.
Sonja Fordham
Shark Advocates International, USA.
The European Union (EU) and the United States (US) are significant players in global shark
fishing and policy. The US has championed shark safeguards for two decades and now
boasts several success stories. EU shark and ray policies have improved markedly in recent
years, and are now in some cases more precautionary than those of the US.
For Spurdog, Porbeagle, and skates, Europe has a much longer fishing history and provides
the demand that drives US fisheries. For these and other elasmobranch species, current
management strategies and results differ, with approaches to deepsea sharks being the
most divergent. Both entities have taken the same unfortunate path regarding
smoothhounds: allowing targeted fishing without population assessment or limits.
The EU finning ban -- long notorious as the world’s worst -- is now in line with best practice
(fins remain attached through landing) and more stringent than those in the US, where such
policies first emerged. US promotion of international fins-attached policies have recently
been boosted by EU partnership. The US and EU have collaborated toward international
safeguards for pelagic sharks and clashed on those for skates. Both parties are leaders in
advancing and implementing shark and ray conservation through the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) and the Convention on Migratory
Species (CMS).
These converging and diverging policies leave significant deficiencies and opportunities on
both sides of the Atlantic. Recommendations for change will be offered.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                         37



Sunday 3rd November

Keynote
The two T’s, tracking and taxonomy: implications of recent research findings
for the management of White Sharks and Spurdogs in New Zealand waters and
beyond.
Clinton Duffy
Department of Conservation, The University of Auckland
High tech versus low tech, cutting edge versus quaint and outdated. These are arguably
widely held views of modern electronic tracking and taxonomic studies of elasmobranchs
respectively. But which has the most influence on management? Overviews of ongoing
research on the movements and habitat preferences of White Shark’s Carcharodon
carcharias and the taxonomy of spurdogs Squalus spp. in New Zealand waters will be
presented with this question in mind. The rapid taxonomic approach adopted to identify new
chondrichthyan taxa in Australasia has proved to be a powerful means of addressing the
pressing need to clarify the taxonomic status of a large number of exploited species in the
region. Personal observations on the application of this approach, including the combination
of morphological and molecular analyses to identify and diagnose species, will also be
provided.
Carcharodon, Squalus, satellite tagging, taxonomy.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                              38



Session 4: Pelagic Sharks
Quantifying the impact of environmental variables upon Blue Shark Prionace
glauca Catch-Per-Unit-Effort in the Western English Channel.
Jonathan Mitchell, Collins, K., Miller, P. and Suberg, L.
University of Southampton, UK
The North Atlantic Blue Shark Prionace glauca population has declined significantly in recent
decades, due to increasing fishing pressure driven by demand for fins. This highlights the
need for greater understanding of P. glauca biology and ecology, and its interaction with
fisheries, to prevent further declines. This research quantified the impact of environmental
variables on P. glauca Catch-Per-Unit-Effort (CPUE) in a recreational fishery in the Western
English Channel, using Generalized Additive Models (GAM). Surface chlorophyll a
concentration (CHL) caused 27.5% of the deviance in the GAM response variable, CPUE,
and increasing CHL positively affected CPUE up to a peak at 1.77mg m -3, likely due to
higher productivity supporting greater prey biomass. Conversely, tidal mixing front density
explained only 5% of model deviance, and was negatively associated with CPUE. However,
time-lagged front density positively influenced CPUE, and explained 12.6% of model
deviance, suggesting a delay between the evolution of frontal features and the subsequent
accumulation of productivity and attraction of higher trophic-level consumers, i.e. P. glauca.
Sea Surface Temperature (SST) only accounted for 1.4% of GAM deviance, with maximum
CPUE occurring at 16.7⁰C, reflecting thermal preferences of this species, and supporting
previous data for the influence of SST on P. glauca CPUE. This knowledge of environmental
preferences and their impact upon the likelihood of P. glauca being caught in fisheries, may
be combined with information on migratory movements and population dynamics in the
North Atlantic population, offering potential for the creation of effective, integrated fisheries
management models for this species.
Blue Shark, generalized additive model, environmental parameters, catch-per-unit-
effort, fisheries Management.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                              39



Session 4: Pelagic Sharks
Big catch, little sharks: Peruvian small-scale longline fisheries likely to be
unsustainable.
Philip D. Doherty, Alfaro-Shigueto, J., Mangel, J.C., Witt, M.J., and Godley B.J.
University of Exeter, UK & Pro Delphinus
Shark take, driven by vast demand for their meat and fins is increasing. We set out to gain
insights into the impact of small-scale longline fisheries in Peru. Onboard observers were
used to document catch from 145 longline fishing trips originating from southern Peru.
Fishing effort is divided into two seasons; targeting dolphinfish Dec to Feb), and sharks (Mar
to Nov). A total of 16,610 sharks were observed caught, with 11,166 identified to species
level. Of these 70.6% were Blue Sharks Prionace glauca, 28.4% Shortfin Mako Sharks
Isurus oxyrinchus, and 1% were other species. Mean ± SD catch per unit effort of 36.8 ±
11.9 sharks per 1,000 hooks was recorded from positive sets (93.7% of total sets) during the
shark season and 6.6 ± 9.7 sharks per 1,000 hooks were caught in positive sets (24.4% of
total sets) in the dolphinfish season. An average of 83.7% of sharks caught (74.7% Blue
Sharks; 93.3% mako sharks) were deemed sexually immature and under the legal minimum
landing size. Since these growing fisheries operate along the entire Peruvian coast, we
conclude that their continued expansion, along with ineffective legislative approaches
resulting in removal of immature individuals, has the potential to threaten the sustainability of
the fishery, its target species and ecosystem. There is a need for novel management
strategies to alleviate the pressure on sharks while maintaining fisher livelihoods.
Sharks, CPUE, artisanal fisheries, sustainability, Peru, conservation.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                          40



Session 4: Pelagic Sharks
Habitat-use, foraging behaviour and fisheries overlap of Shortfin Mako sharks
Isurus oxyrinchus in the North Atlantic.
Nuno Queiroz, Mucientes, G., Humphries, N.E. and Sims, D.W.
CIBIO – Center for Research in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources, Portugal
The Shortfin Mako Isurus oxyrinchus is a highly migratory, pelagic species with a
circumglobal distribution. However, despite reported population declines prompting an
urgent need for information relevant to conservation, very little is known about its biology,
including movement patterns, behaviour and habitat preferences. As a precautionary
approach it has recently been proposed by ICCAT that fishing mortality of mako sharks
should not be increased, because the precise location and composition of catches is lacking
and, as such, it is challenging to determine if the observed variability in CPUE trends is
related to variations in the area targeted. This study aimed to determine the movements and
behaviour of satellite-linked mako sharks to identify (i) preferred habitat from remotely
sensed environmental fields and (ii) critical habitat from the extent of overlap with tracked
longlining vessels. Tagged sharks (#15) exhibited different movement patterns, including a
trans-Atlantic migration ~3500 km into western Iberia waters. Nonetheless, space-use of
mako sharks appears highly influenced by the North Atlantic Current – Labrador Current
Convergence Zone (NAC-LCCZ) with the majority of sharks remaining or moving into this
area, which is characterised by high prevalence of oceanic fronts. Mako Sharks also
displayed wide ranging vertical movements (usually to depths below 1000 m), with shifts in
thermal and depth-use patterns seemingly correlated with environmental variation.
Importantly, mako sharks had more than 76% of their range overlapped by longliners and,
although fishing effort was highly heterogeneous, the NAC-LCCZ area was also heavily
targeted by longlining vessels.
Shortfin Mako, habitat-use, fisheries overlap, diving behaviour, trans-Atlantic
migration.
.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                               41



Session 4: Pelagic Sharks
Tracking migration routes in pelagic shark populations through dynamic
isoscapes.
Sarah Magozzi, Trueman, C., MacKenzie, K. and Yool, A.
University of Southampton, NOCS, UK
Highly migratory, pelagic sharks have declined in abundance by >90% in the last 25 years,
largely due to unsustainable fishing and by-catch. Managing and conserving the remaining
populations requires a complete understanding of their spatial ecology. Migration routes in
pelagic sharks, however, are difficult to reconstruct, particularly at a population level. Despite
recent advances in satellite tagging technologies, smart tags are still expensive and
relatively few, large individuals can be studied. In terrestrial ecosystems, knowledge of the
spatial ecology of highly migratory organisms, such as birds, insects and mammals, has
been revolutionised by natural stable isotope markers. Location and movements are
reconstructed indirectly, by relating the tissue isotopic composition of an animal to known
geographic variations in the isotopic composition of the local food web or environment
(isotopic baseline). In marine settings, isotopic baselines are highly dynamic, and the nature,
extent and implications of baseline variations are poorly known, limiting the confidence that
can be placed in ecological inferences based on isotopic datasets. We have developed a
mechanistic, predictive modelling approach to produce dynamic maps of baseline variations
(isoscapes). Here we apply these isoscapes to track migration routes in pelagic shark
populations from literature-derived and newly measured tissue isotopic compositions. We
believe that, when baseline variations are known or predictable, stable isotopes markers
may be as effective at revealing migratory behaviour in pelagic sharks as they have been in
terrestrial birds, insects and mammals.
Migration, movement, population ecology, stable isotopes, baseline variations,
isoscapes.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                            42



Session 4: Pelagic Sharks
Genetic population structure among Atlantic nurseries of the highly mobile
oceanic Blue Shark Prionace glauca.
Ana Veríssimo, Sampaio, Í., McDowell, J. and Alexandrino, P.
CIBIO – Center for Research in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources, Portugal
The Blue Shark Prionace glauca is a cosmopolitan oceanic shark that is heavily targeted as
a by-catch of tuna and billfish fisheries, particularly in the Atlantic Ocean. Concerns for the
exploitation status of this species have been raised following the detection of declines in
Blue Shark abundance in the North Atlantic. Despite its high fishing mortality, Blue Shark
stock structure is still poorly understood and based almost exclusively on data from tag-
recapture studies. In order to help clarify the stock structure of Blue Sharks, we applied
molecular markers, e.g. nuclear microsatellites and mitochondrial control region sequences,
to study the patterns of genetic population structure within the Atlantic. The high dispersal
ability of P. glauca, coupled to its complex movement patterns and spatial segregation by
sex and size, require a carefully designed sampling strategy in order to clearly delineate the
putative stocks. We have sampled small juveniles (< 2 yr) at each of three reported Atlantic
Blue Shark nurseries, i.e. western Iberia, Azores and South Africa, thus targeting the least
mobile component of the population and avoiding sampling of highly mobile adults of
unknown origin. Our data show significant genetic heterogeneity among nurseries at both
nuclear and mitochondrial markers, but also suggest a signal of temporal structure within as
well as across nurseries. These results raise additional questions regarding the existence of
distinct reproductive units that may co-occur in time and space within Atlantic waters, and
the possibility of annual variability in the composition of the breeding component of the
populations.
Blue Sharks, nurseries, genetic structure, Atlantic.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                         43



Session 4: Pelagic Sharks
Are we doing the right thing to save sharks and rays? How to plan for
conservation success.
Nicholas K. Dulvy and Simpfendorfer, C.K.
International Union for the Conservation of Nature/ Department of Biological Sciences,
Simon Fraser University, Canada.
There is too little money to save all the species we want to save. So how should we go about
figuring out which sharks and rays to save? We could do this in an idiosyncratic manner and
just save our favourite study species. But then the oceans would be a much poorer place if
we only saved the 20 or so most-studied sharks and rays out of the 1100 known
chondrichthyans. We can take an evidence-based approach to conservation planning. Now
that we have Red List Assessments for all of the world’s sharks, rays and chimaeras we can
use this information to set conservation priorities. Here, we describe how we identify those
families that are at most risk of extinction. We then describe how we used the IUCN
conservation strategic planning process to identify those action and locations that are most
likely to contribution to effective conservation of Sawfishes. We conclude with plans to
develop conservation strategies the manta and devil rays and the Angelshark Squatina
squatina.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                             44



Session 5A: Elasmobranch Biology
Can microtextural analyses be used as a dietary discriminator in sharks?
Laura McLennan, and Purnell, M.
University of Leicester, UK
Determining the dietary preferences and trophic niches of elasmobranchs can be difficult, yet
this information is essential for ecological analysis and successful conservation. Stomach
contents analyses have traditionally been used but this approach has many drawbacks, and
requires large sample sizes to be reliable. This and other issues make stomach contents
analyses problematic for many elasmobranch species and thus it is essential that alternative
methods are developed to quantify diet. Quantitative microtextural analysis of tooth wear is
one such approach to dietary discrimination. Until recently its application was restricted to
terrestrial mammals, but it is now known to be a powerful tool for analysis of trophic niche
and dietary change in fishes. Microtextural analysis of shark teeth has never been
attempted, and the hypothesis that it is correlated with diet, feeding and/or trophic niche thus
remains untested. Here we present the results of a proof-of-concept study designed to
investigate the potential of microwear analysis for dietary discrimination in elasmobranchs.
Using the Port Jackson Shark, Heterodontus portusjacksoni, analysis of variation in sub-
micron scale microtextures within a tooth, between teeth within an individual, and between
individuals, suggests that a dietary signal is preserved. These results indicate that
microtextural analysis provides a new approach to investigating diet in sharks. Future work
will apply these methods to other elasmobranchs, including endangered and lesser known
modern species, to determine ontogenetic, geographical and evolutionary changes in diet.
Heterodontus portusjacksoni, microwear, dietary discrimination.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                            45



Session 5A: Elasmobranch Biology
Shark and other fish eye lenses – a window to cryptic life history behaviours.
Katie Quaeck, Trueman, C., MacKenzie, K. and Bendall, V.
University of Southampton, UK
Traditionally, tagging studies provide information relating to the distribution and movement
patterns of pelagic sharks. Electronic tags, however, are expensive, may have low return
rates, and cannot be attached to small juveniles. Incrementally grown tissues offer an
alternative biochemical method to study ecology retrospectively. Otoliths, for example,
contain a wealth of information pertaining to the age, growth and whole life, including
juvenile, ecology of a species. The crystalline lens in the vertebrate eye also grows
incrementally, but this structure has received relatively little analytical attention. Unlike
otoliths, lenses are proteinaceous structures formed by fibre cell addition and subsequent
progressive dehydration towards the core. They are acellular, and are not remodelled or
replaced. Consequently, lenses have the potential to serve as a chronological record of
biochemical information allowing examination of ontogenetic movement patterns, migration
and juvenile ecology in a wide range of functional groups, including elasmobranchs.
Here we report pilot data examining the dietary ecology and movement/migration of the
Porbeagle Shark Lamna nasus using stable isotope analyses from sequential samples of
eye lens tissue. We explore the potential for eye lenses as a log of life-long diet and spatial
ecology, and compare their role as biochemical host tissues with vertebrae. We use the
recovered diet and migration data to reconstruct feeding and movement ecology in juvenile
Porbeagle Sharks and compare inferences from stable isotope data with those from physical
tagging.
Porbeagle, lens, life history, ecology, stable isotope.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                        46



Session 5A: Elasmobranch Biology
Quantification of metabolic rate in free ranging elasmobranch species by
means of tri-axial accelerometry.
Lauran Brewster, Guttridge, T., Bullock, R., Gruber, S., Gleiss, A. and Whitney, N.
Bimini Biological Field Station Foundation, Bahamas
Determining accurate field metabolic rate (FMR) is important for quantifying a species’
impact on the ecosystem, estimating effects of their removal on lower trophic levels and
producing reliable bioenergetics models for fisheries management. This multi-institutional
project aims to determine FMR in three elasmobranch species with contrasting energetic
requirements: the sedentary, benthic Nurse Shark Ginglymostoma cirratum, intermediate
Lemon Shark Negaprion brevirostris and active, obligate ram ventilating Blacktip Shark
Carcharhinus limbatus. Since activity-based energy expenditure is likely to be the largest
component of FMR in sharks, their fine-scale activity levels can be used as a proxy for
relative FMR at varying temperatures. This study uses animal-borne, tri-axial acceleration
loggers that measure dynamic acceleration from body movement in the three orthogonal
planes (heave, surge and sway) at a rate of up to 30Hz. To date, useable acceleration data
has been collected around the Bimini Islands from four free-living nurse sharks (<90cm TL;
one winter, three summer) and 14 Lemon Sharks (four winter, 10 summer). Preliminary
analysis for N. brevirostris data allowed us to characterize behaviours such as resting,
steady and fast-start swimming. These activities showed an average of 10.83% ± 5.92
(mean ± SD) and 15.74% ± 5.64 time spent resting during summer and winter respectively;
89.04% ± 5.90 and 84.17% ± 5.65 for steady swimming; 0.12% ±0.04 and 0.08% ±0.03 for
fast-start swimming. This study is still continuing but once complete is expected to
demonstrate a revolutionary technique in determining FMR in marine predators, a thus far
unattained goal.
Accelerometer, field metabolic rate, bioenergetics.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                            47



Session 5A: Elasmobranch Biology

Neophilia and boldness in juvenile Lemon Shark: are novel object answer and
frightening stimulus reaction relevant behavior indicators to shark
personality?
Clément Chazot, Finger, J.S., Guttridge, T. and Gruber, S.H.
Bimini Biological Field Station, Bahamas
Recent interest for personality has led to an increasing number of studies on a variety of
animals regarding this topic. While we know how to investigate this phenomenon in certain
species, it takes creativity and imagination to test for personality in others never studied
before. Here we focus on the juvenile Lemon Shark, Negaprion brevirostris, a species that
has never been tested regarding that matter. We looked at different personality traits,
features of a personality, and the potential links which exist in between them. Correlated
traits are referred to as behavioral syndromes, and this notion is steadily gaining interest in
the scientific community. We conducted two experiments to find signs of personality in this
key predator: the novel object experiment and that of the frightening stimulus. Since we have
no previous reference, we assume that they are measuring for neophilia and boldness
respectively. Our aim is to determine whether this assumption is verified. In order to do so,
we compare different shark populations which will enable us to confirm the so-far-putative
trait associated with each experiment. Our findings suggest that neophilia in sharks tested
with the novel object experiment is consistent, which is a clear sign of personality. Then,
some potential behavioral syndromes have been discovered, even though further
investigations are needed to assert them. Personality can explain some behaviors which
don’t seem adaptive at first, and could, in the end, be a deciding tool regarding both habitat
and stock management.
Lemon Shark, personality, behavioral syndrome, neophilia, boldness, Shy-Bold
Continuum.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                            48



Session 5A: Elasmobranch Biology
Bioaccumulation of trace metals and organochlorines in North-East Atlantic
Porbeagle Sharks Lamna nasus.
Victoria A. Bendall, Law, R.J., Maes, T., Barber, J.L., Papachlimitzou, A., Hetherington,
S.J., Silva, J., McCully, S., Ellis, J. & Righton, D.
Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (CEFAS), UK
In marine ecosystem management there is a growing concern over the levels of trace metals
and organochlorines (OC), due to their bio-accumulative nature at high trophic levels.
Numerous studies around the coast of UK have looked into the accumulation of trace metals
and organochlorine (OC) contaminants in the blubber and liver tissues of various marine
mammal species. However the impact of such contaminants on the fitness of other top
predators such as Porbeagle Sharks remains relatively unknown.
In this study, we describe the bioaccumulation of trace metals and organochlorines within
the dorsal muscle and liver tissue of 12 Porbeagles (mean length 169cm, range 117 -
245cm), by-caught during commercial gill netting operations within the Celtic Sea. Our
results show levels of trace metals such as zinc (6.78 ± 3.18 mg/kg ww), and arsenic (10.00
± 3.63 mg/kg ww), to be relatively high, together with significant levels of cadmium (7.2
mg/kg ww), observed in one individual suggestive of potential dietary influences upon prey
such as squid. For organochlorine contaminants HCB, α-HCH, γ-HCH and p,p'-TDE, all
were found to be below detectable limits (0.25 ug/kg ww) of quantitation (LOQ), which given
the lipophilic nature of these contaminants may be accounted for by the notable lean lipid
content (<1-2%), of the dorsal muscle tissue. PCBs and dieldrin were detected in all 12
animals (at 0.85 ± 0.61 ∑PCB mg/kg lipid and 0.04 ± 0.01 mg/kg lipid respectively), with
PBDEs, p,p’-DDT and p,p’-DDE detected in 8, 2 and 11 animals, respectively.
Porbeagle, bio-accumulation,             trophic   level,   organochlorines,   trace   metals,
contaminants.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                            49



Session 5A: Elasmobranch Biology
Adaptive divergence in the Thornback Ray Raja clavata.
Rachel Ball, Jones, C. and Noble, L.
University of Aberdeen, UK
The Thornback Ray Raja clavata is common to the varying environments of European
waters. Although its dispersal is limited, it occupies a range of habitats along a considerable
latitudinal gradient, factors which may contribute to genetic differentiation and local
adaptation. Studies employing solely neutral molecular markers, whilst usefully determining
population history and connectivity, may overlook important functional traits under strong
environmental selection such as body shape, colouration and armour. Given that natural
selection acts on the phenotype, genetic variation in quantitative traits, such as these, is a
prerequisite for a successful response to changing environmental conditions. The
preservation of such diversity has perceivable benefits for species conservation yet the
geography of adaptive variation remains poorly understood in marine systems.
Understanding how European skates and rays interact with their environment provides much
needed information to assist with defining appropriate fisheries management units to aid
sustainability and conservation.
We have contrasted the variation of distinct morphological characteristics with neutral
genetic divergence in a number of populations to assess the extent of evolutionary
adaptation at both local and broader geographic scales, and discuss the implications of this
for stock management and the preservation of functional diversity.
Rajidae, phenotype, adaptation.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                               50



Session 5A: Elasmobranch Biology
Population genetic structure and phylogeography of the Smallspotted
Catshark Scyliorhinus canicula in European waters.
Chrysoula Gubili, Sims, D.W., Genner, M. and Griffiths. A.M.
University of Calgary/ University of Salford
The Smallspotted Catshark Scyliorhinus canicula is distributed in the continental shelf and
uppermost slope waters of the North Eastern Atlantic; from Norway and the British Isles
south to Senegal, including the Mediterranean Sea. It is considered to be the most abundant
catshark in European inshore waters. In the Atlantic, it is often caught as bycatch in
demersal fisheries, with a growing commercial importance through its use as whelk bait,
whilst it is targeted for consumption in the Mediterranean. In this study we used 526
specimens collected from eleven localities to assess population genetic structure by
examining control region mtDNA and microsatellite diversities. Both markers showed similar
genetic signatures, with significant separation of catshark populations across the
Mediterranean, weak genetic differentiation of Portuguese sharks, and extensive gene flow
within the rest of the North Atlantic. Our data imply that distinct evolutionary significant units
occur within the Mediterranean, whereas little genetic sub-division could be recognised in
the North East Atlantic. Therefore, like many coastal species, the Smallspotted Catshark
should be managed regionally.
Scyliorhinus canicula, Mediterranean, North East Atlantic.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                             51



Session 5A: Elasmobranch Biology
Endothermy in sharks: a Comparative Transcriptome Approach.
Emily Humble, Savolainen, V., Noble, L., Jones, C. & Stefanni, S.
Imperial College London & University of Aberdeen
The Shortfin Mako shark is one of the fastest living sharks and along with all other members
of the Lamnidae family, shows the unique ability to maintain a super-predatory lifestyle in
cool waters. Despite the energetic cost, lamnid sharks are endothermic, where some are
able to sustain a body temperature 10°C higher than that of the ambient temperature. This
adaptation to produce and retain metabolic heat has inevitably enabled their successful
niche expansion.
Shark endothermy has been characterized at a physiological level yet its molecular
underpinnings have received little attention. Both functional evolutionary innovation in protein
structure, or regulation of gene expression, could result in greater metabolic activities
causing endothermy. Evidence for strong adaptive evolution in conserved metabolic genes is
rare, although has been documented where selection pressure for enhanced aerobic
metabolism has been particularly strong. Due to the extreme cost of maintaining an elevated
body temperature in a marine environment, lamnid sharks represent an interesting group to
investigate molecular evolutionary adaptation.
Here, we used revolutionary RNA-seq to sequence the muscle transcriptomes of two
endothermic sharks: the Shortfin Mako and Porbeagle, and their ectothermic sister species
the Sandtiger Shark. Functional annotation and analysis of positive selection reveal that it is
likely endothermy in sharks is governed by changes in gene expression and/or membrane
modification. This work represents a substantial increase in available shark sequence data
that will prove useful in light of an up-and-coming elasmobranch reference genome for
assessing how sharks evolve and cope with ecological and environmental challenges.
Comparative transcriptomics, endothermy, sharks, selection, metabolism.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                           52



Session 5B: Stakeholder engagement
A European Shark Tagging Programme and the importance of volunteers in
ongoing scientific research into shark populations.
James Thorburn, Burrett, I., Bastiman, S., Noble, L.R., Jones, C.S.
Scottish Sea angling Conservation Network/Aberdeen University
Many of Scotland’s native elasmobranchs are now considered severely depleted as a result
of overfishing and other anthropogenic pressures. The Scottish Shark Tagging Programme
(SSTP) is a mark/recapture scheme established to record data on Scotland’s elasmobranch
species. The voluntary nature of the SSTP drastically reduces the labour and financial costs
normally associated with shark research allowing the SSTP to compile a database of over
6,500 records spanning a period of several decades. This has provided a much needed
insight into the movements of sharks throughout European waters highlighting the need for
data collection along entire migration routes to ensure suitable management as some
species pass through the territorial waters of several EU member states.
The SSTP has shown volunteer anglers can be a valuable data source, capable of
contributing to and working with Government bodies such as Marine Scotland Science.
SSTP data has served as a foundation for two government research projects and two PhD
studentships researching the spatial ecology of elasmobranchs.
The SSTP model has now been adopted by other EU member states in the hope of
providing information on the cross-border movements of highly migratory species. This effort
has provided valuable insight into shared stocks as well as raising the profile of sea angling
and the role of citizen science in marine conservation.
This presentation focuses on the importance of volunteer participation and the data collected
by the SSTP as well as looking forwards towards the benefits of a European shark tagging
program to ensure shared marine resources are managed sustainably.
Citizen science, shark tagging, volunteer, data collection.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                             53



Session 5B: Stakeholder engagement
Using Fishers’ ecological knowledge to assess the status and cultural
importance of sawfish in Guinea-Bissau.
Ruth H. Leeney and Poncelet, P.
Benguela Research & Training Noé Conservation
Sawfishes have declined dramatically in West Africa and may be extinct throughout much of
their range. Guinea-Bissau is considered to be one of the last remaining places in West
Africa where sawfish persist. Fishers’ Ecological Knowledge (FEK) can provide valuable
baseline data, which can be used to direct scientific studies in situations where information is
scarce or lacking and can also provide insight into local attitudes towards species of interest.
Interview surveys were used to collect data on the past and current range of sawfishes
within Guinea-Bissau waters, perceived causes of the decline amongst fishermen, and the
local cultural importance of this species. Data were collected from 274 respondents, of
whom 85% could identify a sawfish from an image. The majority of respondents reported to
have last seen a sawfish in the 1980s, although this varied considerably by region, and 30%
of respondents in the south had seen or captured sawfishes in the past decade. Overfishing
or excessive fishing pressure was most frequently cited as a perceived cause for sawfish
decline, followed by shark finning and overseas fishermen. The sawfish is primarily of
cultural importance in the Bijagos Islands, where it is central to many traditional ceremonies.
Information on recent catches will be useful for directing future work to locate and protect
remaining sawfish in Guinea-Bissau. Insight gained into the cultural importance of sawfishes
to Bissau-Guineans and their concerns in relation to the sustainability of their local fishery
resources will be important to consider when designing management strategies.
Bijagos Archipelago, endangered species, interviews, shark finning, ceremonies.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                           54



Session 5B: Stakeholder engagement
Shark ByWatch UK – regional bycatch awareness of sharks and rays in the
southern North Sea.
Victoria A. Bendall, Hetherington, S.J., Corton, J., Randall, P. and Duggan, K.
Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (CEFAS), UK
Shark By-Watch UK, a forward thinking pilot project, supported by scientists, but led by
fishermen, aims to increase knowledge of shark and ray by-catch and discarding in the
inshore fisheries of the southern North Sea (ICES area IVc), to better inform policy decisions
and improve fishing practices that will support long-term sustainable shark and ray fisheries.
Through dedicated engagement workshops, regional inshore fishermen have been able to
voice the important issues to them, which have become the foundation of this research
programme.
As a result the project has taken forward two industry focussed Case Studies 1) The current
status of the Thames Estuary Thornback Ray and lost and 2) Forgotten shark and ray
fisheries off East Anglia. Strong partnerships between coastal fishermen and scientists have
been developed to collect and share data through engagement workshops, fishery-
dependent shark and ray field surveys, mark ID tagging programmes, dedicated website and
social media. To date, field data have been collected for over 6000 individual sharks and
rays, highlighting their potential abundance and commercial value to local inshore fleets off
the coast of East Anglia.
The project has gained significant attention from Defra Fisheries Minister Richard Benyon,
shark policy advisors and regional Inshore Fisheries Conservation Authority (IFCA)
organisations who support such a proof of concept within the Shark By-Watch UK pilot study
and avidly see the need for such work to be rolled out at a nationwide scale to help provide
evidence and support for future management issues regarding “live” discarding measures
around the UK.
Sharks, rays, by-catch, discards, fisher led, engagement.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                        55



Session 5B: Stakeholder engagement
Managing a captive species – Raja undulata.
Jean-Denis Hibbitt
SEA LIFE Weymouth
The Undulate Ray Raja undulata is classified on the IUCN redlist as ‘Endangered’. This has
led to the landing of the undulate ray in UK waters to be prohibited since 2009 while wild
populations recover.
In captivity, it is a great ‘poster species’ allowing aquariums to engage with the public
regarding issues such as overfishing and habitat degradation. There is a healthy aquarium
population, so over the last 3 years Displays Development Department at Weymouth SEA
LIFE Park have been leading a managed UK breeding program of the species to ensure the
future of the undulate ray on public display. This raises the challenge of sustaining a
genetically healthy and stable population without the option of introducing wild caught
specimens from UK waters.
Involving aquaria throughout the UK and coordinated through the BIAZA native ray and
skate focus group the project is now also monitoring the European captive population via
EAZA. This presentation explains the method behind the current breeding program, its
progress so far and the challenges involved in managing a breeding program restricted to a
captive population with a small founder population.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                             56



Session 5B: Stakeholder engagement

Using community-based data collectors to assess the status of the traditional
shark fishery in Madagascar.
Frances Humber, Andriamahaino, E., Beriziny, T., Botosoamananto, R., Godley, R.,
Gough, C., Ramahery, V. and Broderick, A.
Blue Ventures Conservation/ University of Exeter
Madagascar’s >5,000 km coastal waters harbour an estimated 123 elasmobranch species.
Despite the enormous biodiversity and economic and social value of Madagascar’s sharks,
the country has no coherent shark conservation strategy.
A major barrier to establishing effective, national-scale conservation of sharks is the paucity
of information on their ecology, fisheries and socioeconomic value, in particular for isolated
fishing communities where dried shark fins are a significant source of income.
We monitored shark landings in 19 villages in SW Madagascar between 2007-2012 using
community-based data collectors from each village. Community members were trained to
collect biological and fisheries data on sharks landed in the traditional fishery (non-motorised
vessels), and to use digital cameras to visually record catch to verify species and size.
In six years >20,000 shark landings, of more than 25 different species, were documented, of
which 20% were classified as immature. Two species, Scalloped Hammerhead Sphyrna
lewini and Sliteye Shark Loxodon macrorhinus, accounted for 66.5% of landings. Community
focus groups suggested the decline in numbers recorded since 2009 was due to a reduction
in shark fishing in this region, with migrant fishers moving to less exploited shark fishing
grounds.
Despite the unreliability of national export statistics, it is likely that the fishery in
Madagascar’s EEZ is severely underreported. We estimate that up to 40,000 sharks/year
are landed in the traditional fishery in the Toliara Province alone. Combined with recent by-
catch and illegal fishing estimates of 4300 tonnes/year, there is a clear need for
management action across all fishing sectors.
Madagascar, small-scale fisheries, community-based monitoring, Sphyrna lewini,
Loxodon macrorhinus.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                           57



Session 5B: Stakeholder engagement

“Science & Fishery Collaboration”: a new collaborative approach to scientists
and fishermen actively working together to provide evidence and inform policy
needs.
Stuart J. Hetherington and Bendall, V.A.
Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (CEFAS), UK
Cefas scientific research combines a variety of different approaches in order to collect high
resolution temporal, spatial, behavioural and biological data of elasmobranches to meet UK
policy need. Such approaches include direct engagement and collaboration with UK
commercial fishermen, whose livelihoods are ultimately affected by changes to stock
assessments, advice and management of their fisheries.
Through Defra and EU funded elasmobranch research programmes, Cefas scientists
engage and work in partnership with fishermen who regularly encounter elasmobanch
species, rapidly and efficiently collecting valuable ‘real-time’ data, required by stock
assessors and policy makers. Key to the success of these programmes is direct
engagement with fishermen, utilisation of commercial fishing vessels as ‘scientific platforms’
and direct harnessing of fisher expertise and knowledge.
Different approaches will be described highlighting examples of current Cefas research
programmes with their suitability for application in two very different commercial fisheries;
the South West UK off-shore gill net fishery with a by-catch of Spurdog Squalus acanthias,
Porbeagle Lamna nasus, and Common Skate Dipturus batis ‘complex’; and the South East
UK inshore mixed fishery with a restricted quota of Thornback Ray Raja clavata, leading to
substantial discarding of the species.
New collaborative roles expected of the fisherman, the scientist, the advisor and the policy
maker in such collaborative approaches will be illustrated, along with the potential benefits,
challenges and impact of each approach.
Fisheries management, engagement, Porbeagle, Spurdog, Common Skate, Thornback
Ray.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                             58



Session 5B: Stakeholder engagement

Shark hand signals for shark identification.
Riccardo Sturla Avogadri
Shark Academy, Italy
Hand signals are the common way for scuba divers and swimmers to communicate
underwater. Divers use signals for emergency purposes, routine communication and for
general reasons such as to indicate a marine life form to the buddy.This communication
method has multiple advantages: it is simple, effective and easy to use. Each signal is
characterized by a gesture, which immediately identifies the shark in question. It refers to
gestures one can make with one or two hands and are completed by the position of the arm.
These signals let one not only communicate the type of shark which is coming close, but
also to know in which direction to look. As a matter of fact, if a seabed shark is signalled
(benthonic) the diver will look among the rocks and not upwards, as instead one would if it
referred to a surface shark (pelagic). The information therefore supplies, the position of the
shark, and would not only be used in case of danger, but having once checked the shark
species, the diver could decide to avoid the wrong type of behaviour, with incorrect
movements, inciting the shark to attack, but would also make taking photos and filming
easier, as well as confirming the precise identification or a useless encounter in the case of
uncertainty. It is important to be able to directly encounter the shark head on if one is trying
to identify it and to get out of the water with both the same opinion about the sighting: this
lets one be more precise in filling in any identification file. To know the movements of
differing shark species and their habitat, gives indirect information about the whole marine
ecosystem.
Shark photo, rare shark, common shark, hand signal, scientific names.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                               59



Session 5B: Stakeholder engagement

Bycatch or targeted fisheries? Artisanal shark fishing in Fiji, South Pacific.
Kerstin B.J. Glaus, Kalchhauser, I. , Burkhardt-Holm, P. and Brunnschweiler, J.M.
Program Man-Society-Environment, Dept of Environmental Sciences, University of Basel
Artisanal fisheries comprise more than 95 % of the world’s fishermen. Although the main
purpose of artisanal fisheries is supposedly subsistence, in fact excess catch or high value
products such as shark fins are increasingly sold to gain additional income.
Here, we present a first quantitative description of artisanal shark fishing in Fiji. Our major
aim was to explore the extent of targeted and bycatch fisheries. 254 semi-structured
interviews were conducted with fishermen from villages and communities associated with the
coastline of Viti Levu, Vanua Levu, Taveuni, Ovalau and a number of islands of the
Mamanucas and Yasawas. Of 254 fishermen interviewed, 15 % reported to target sharks,
and 70 % reported to have sharks as bycatch while only 15 % do not catch sharks at all.
Those specifically targeting sharks are mainly interested in selling shark fins, reflecting Fiji’s
role as a turntable in international shark fin trade. Of the 70 % having sharks as bycatch, 18
% reported to sell fins. The most commonly captured species were Blacktip Reef Sharks
Carcharhinus melanopterus and Whitetip Reef Sharks Triaenodon obesus.
To confirm these reports and to account for difficulties in species identification by non-
experts, 25 tissue samples collected from fishermen and/or local markets were analyzed
using the COI locus. We identified ten coastal shark species and confirmed catch reports of
endangered or vulnerable species such as Sphyrna lewini and Nebrius ferrugineus.
Additionally, we found several cases of misidentification by fishermen, highlighting the
importance of molecular approaches in managing artisanal small-scale fisheries.
Elasmobranchii, small-scale fisheries, quantification, bycatch.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                         60



Session 6: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks and Basking Sharks

Basking Shark Watch and wider science and conservation in the NE Atlantic –
an update.
Jean-Luc Solandt, Richardson, P., Witt, W., Ranger, S., Duncan, C. and Pikesley S.K.
Marine Conservation Society, UK
25 years of Basking Shark watch sightings have revealed considerable spatio-temporal
trends of shark occurrence in the British Isles. Hotspots of shark sightings persist in the
Southwest, Isle of Man and western Scotland. The treatment of the data to reduce the
impact of observer bias has shown that strong North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) years are
persistent with longer Basking Shark surface sightings seasons, and that sea surface
temperature (SST) appears to be the key signal of the onset of Basking Shark surface
feeding. Other research has suggested that a reduction in surface plankton concentration
appears to lead to the tailing off of the Basking Shark sightings. Concomitant conservation
work focused around the UK Biodiversity Action Plan for the species has led to the
successful annexation of the species on the Bonn Convention of Migratory Species since
tagging studies have proven international migrations of the species. Although there has been
considerable progress in the conservation and knowledge of essential habitat requirements
of the species at different spatial scales, fundamental questions such as population
numbers, and population trends are still beyond us. Despite these issues, an international
Basking Shark conference on the Isle of Man in 2009 recommended that the database is
continued, because of its long-term spatio-temporal time series. It demonstrates that public
sightings schemes have considerable worth when combined with rigorous scientific
research, and applied conservation work.
Basking Shark, hotspots, migrations, science, public sightings.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                               61



Session 6: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks and Basking Sharks

Diel patterns in vertical movement and locomotor activity of Whale Sharks at
Ningaloo Reef.
Gleiss, A.C., Serena Wright, Liebsch, N., Wilson, R.P. and Norman, B.
Bioscience, College of Science, Swansea University
Activity patterns of animals often relate to environmental variables such as food availability
and predation pressure. Technological advances are providing us with new tools to monitor
and better understand these activity patterns. We used animal-attached data loggers
recording acceleration and depth to compare activity patterns and vertical habitat use of
Whale Sharks Rhincodon typus at Ningaloo Reef, Western Australia. Whale Sharks showed
a moderate reverse diel vertical migration but exhibited a clear crepuscular pattern in
locomotory activity. Peak activity occurred at sunset, whereas vertical movement peaked
prior to this. Typical ram surface filter feeding could be identified and occurred primarily
during sunset and the first hours of night. At such times, direct observations indicated whale
sharks were feeding on tropical krill swarms. Diel patterns in activity and diving suggest that
whale sharks have tuned their diving behaviour in anticipation of the formation of these high-
density patches which appear to only be periodically, but predictably available at sunset. Our
results confirm that diel patterns in vertical habitat selection and vertical movements do not
necessarily reflect patterns in activity and foraging behaviour. Direct quantification of activity
and behaviour is required in gaining accurate representation of diel activity patterns. We also
note that by combining behavioural tracking with environmental monitoring we can start to
identify and map regions of seasonal importance, including hotspots for feeding and
spawning for example.
Telemetry, acceleration, behaviour, feeding, DVM.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                           62



Session 6: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks and Basking Sharks

Structure and dynamics of an unexploited population of the Reef Manta Ray
Manta alfredi.
Lydie I. E. Couturier, Dudgeon, C.L., Pollock, K.H., Jaine, F.R.A., Bennett, M.B.,
Townsend, K.A., Weeks, S.J. and Richardson, A.J.
School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland, St Lucia QLD 4072,
Australia.
Reliable abundance assessments are essential to the study of population dynamics and
underpin conservation biology and management of a species. Although fishing pressure is a
major threat to manta spp., information on the trends and status of many of the species’
subpopulations is lacking. Here we use photographic identification and mark-recapture
methods to report on the site affinity, size and structure of an unexploited subpopulation of
Manta alfredi in eastern Australian waters. A total of 716 individuals were identified between
2007 and 2012, including 636 at Lady Elliot Island (LEI), southern Great Barrier Reef. Over
60% of individuals were resighted at least once during the study period. Multiple resightings
within and among years imply a high degree of site affinity to aggregation sites by
individuals. One individual was sighted 11 times at LEI within a 27-year period. The sex ratio
of this manta ray subpopulation was significantly biased toward females with an overall 1.3:1
female-to-male ratio. Overall, females were more likely to be resighted than males, however,
site visitation at LEI varied between sexes. Robust design population models were used to
estimate the population size of the winter aggregation at LEI over a 4-year period. The
model estimated up to 532 individuals in the population within one winter season and that
survivorship of M. alfredi between consecutive years was exceptionally high (φ~1). Our
findings highlighted the importance of aggregation sites for M. alfredi subpopulations, and
provide a valuable baseline to assist in the status assessment of exploited manta ray
subpopulations.
Abundance, aggregation, photographic-ID, program-Mark, survival, site-affinity.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                          63



Session 6: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks and Basking Sharks

Vertical foraging strategies of Basking Sharks in coastal waters and their
implication for population surveys.
Emmett M. Johnston, Griffin, D.C. and Houghton, J.D.R.
Queens University Belfast / Irish Basking Shark Study Group
The adoption of the distance sampling survey method for estimating Basking Shark density
and relative abundance has proven difficult because estimates of time at the surface, under
varying conditions, are poorly understood (Sims et al., 2003; Southall et al., 2005; Campana,
2008). Here we explore how variance in vertical prey (zooplankton) distribution under
different sea states account for variance in the period of time sharks spend in the top metre
of the water column where they are detectable during surveys. Vertical prey distribution was
recorded by variable depth sampling (1-30 metres) across a grid of nine coastal sample sites
located at Malin Head, Ireland. Zooplankton samples were taken via Von Dorn Bottle and
vertical plankton net hauls during calm (Force 0-2) and moderate (Force 3-4) conditions.
Shark positions throughout the water column (i.e. depth) were determined at one second
intervals using CEFAS G5 Time Depth Recorders (TDR’s) attached for 1-6 days (N=11
sharks). By considering the vertical movements of predators concurrent with estimates of
prey field and weather we determined survey weightings applicable to mixed coastal water
habitats during calm and moderate conditions.
Shark, behaviour, prey, zooplankton, distance sampling.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                            64



Session 6: Manta Rays, Whale Sharks and Basking Sharks

Basking Sharks and oceanic fronts: remotely-sensed ocean front metrics for
improving understanding of marine megavertebrate habitat use.
Kylie L. Scales and Miller, P.I.
Plymouth Marine Laboratory, UK
Oceanic fronts delineate between water masses, manifesting as enhanced horizontal
gradients in temperature, salinity, density, turbidity or colour. Bio-physical coupling along
fronts can drive the formation of pelagic foraging hotspots. Many, taxonomically diverse
marine vertebrates are known to associate with fronts, including several pelagic sharks and
the giant manta Manta birostris. For example, the planktivorous Basking Shark Cetorhinus
maximus is known to exploit rich foraging opportunities afforded by zooplankton aggregation
along fronts over a range of spatial scales. Recent advances in remote sensing, coupled
with animal tracking/biologging, can now generate high-resolution, individual-level insights
into the physical drivers of habitat selection. Composite front mapping enables objective
detection of thermal and chlorophyll-a fronts and the derivation of metrics quantifying frontal
activity in an animal’s proximal environment. Use of these methods has improved
understanding of levels of association between basking sharks and fronts in the North
Atlantic. Our findings show strong associations in some cases, with sharks following the
surface profile of thermal fronts for several days. Recent collaborative work also identifies
persistent open ocean frontal zones as a ‘front line’ in shark conservation, as hotspots of
overlap between high-use habitat and intensive pelagic longlining activity. Broad-scale,
objective detection of frontal zones and their spatiotemporal dynamics could help in
identification of priority conservation areas in the open oceans, where sharks and rays
remain largely unprotected from deleterious interactions with anthropogenic activity.
Oceanic front, remote sensing, habitat use, marine megavertebrate, Basking Shark.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                     65




                                            POSTER
                                         PRESENTATIONS




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                  66



Evidence of sexual conflict in                     Shark hand signals for shark
Potamotrygon motoro Chondrichthyes-                identification.
Potamotrygonidae at Rio Negro Basin.               Riccardo Sturla Avogadri
Maria Lúcia Góes de Araújo; Melo, S. And           Shark Academy, Italy
Lessa, R.
                                                   Hand signals are the common way for scuba
DIMAR-UFRPE                                        divers and swimmers to communicate
Potamotrygon motoro (Müller & Henle, 1841)         underwater. Divers use signals for emergency
is a freshwater stingray member of                 purposes, routine communication and for
Potamotrygonidae family. It exhibits a             general reasons such as to indicate a marine
wide distribution in the Neotropical Region. At    life form to the buddy.This communication
Rio Negro basin, Amazonas State, Brazil, this      method has multiple advantages: it is simple,
species reach sexual maturity with 39.0-42.00      effective and easy to use. Each signal is
cm disc width, 4-5 years. The reproductive         characterized by a gesture, which immediately
cycle events (mate, ovulation, gestation and       identifies the shark in question. It refers to
birth) are regulated by the level of the river.    gestures one can make with one or two hands
Dermal bites wounds are visible in female and      and are completed by the position of the arm.
male skins during the dry season. In the           These signals let one not only communicate
complex       reproductive     behaviour      of   the type of shark which is coming close, but
elasmobranchs male bites female as a               also to know in which direction to look. As a
precopulatory mechanism to have female             matter of fact, if a seabed shark is signalled
acquiescence during courtship. Records were        (benthonic) the diver will look among the rocks
done of females bit the mating males, and the      and not upwards, as instead one would if it
authors suggest a sexual hierarchy during the      referred to a surface shark (pelagic). The
copulation event. To understand the meaning        information therefore supplies, the position of
of male dermal bites of P.motoro from Rio          the shark, and would not only be used in case
Negro basin, 65 adult male skin were analysed      of danger, but having once checked the shark
and compare with teeth morphology of male          species, the diver could decide to avoid the
and female tooth forms. Ours results indicate      wrong type of behaviour, with incorrect
that P .motoro has teeth sexually dimorphic,       movements, inciting the shark to attack, but
females teeth with rhombic posterior margin,       would also make taking photos and filming
mature males with cuspidate posterior margin.      easier, as well as confirming the precise
All scars in male skins were impressions of        identification or a useless encounter in the
male cuspidate form of teeth. Despite the adult    case of uncertainty. It is important to be able to
sexual ratio at mate area be 1:1, these findings   directly encounter the shark head on if one is
suggest the occurrence of male dispute during      trying to identify it and to get out of the water
the mating season of Potamotrygon motoro at        with both the same opinion about the sighting:
Rio Negro basin.                                   this lets one be more precise in filling in any
                                                   identification file. To know the movements of
Potamotrygon      motoro,      male,     sexual
                                                   differing shark species and their habitat, gives
conflict, Rio Negro.
                                                   indirect information about the whole marine
                                                   ecosystem.
                                                   Shark photo, rare shark, common shark,
                                                   hand signal, scientific names.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                  67



Influence of sexual maturity and age on              OLSHARK program: preliminary results
the bathymetric distribution of Dipturus             of first satellite tagging of Thresher.
oxyrinchus in the Sardinian seas                     Shark Alopias pelagicus in Eastern
(Central Western Mediterranean).                     Tropical Pacific.
Andrea Bellodi, Mulas A., Follesa M.C.,              JUNG, A., Cécile Brigaudeau, Moreno, L.A.,
Cannas R., Cannas S., Marongiu M.F., Porcu           Velasquez, J. and Bessudo, S.
C. and Cau A.
                                                     Des Requins et des Hommes (DRDH)
Dipartimento di Scienze della            Vita   e
dell’Ambiente - Università di Cagliari               The Pelagic Thresher Shark Alopias pelagicus
                                                     is one of the largest and most abundant open
The influence of maturity stage and age on the       ocean predators in the Eastern Tropical Pacific
bathymetric distribution of Longnosed Skate          (ETP), and one of the most exploited shark in
Dipturus oxyrinchus (Linnaeus, 1758) in the          the sub-region. A. pelagicus has been
Sardinian seas was investigated. Since 2005          classified as Vulnerable on the IUCN Red List
to 2012, a total of 494 (266 females and 228         since 2004.
males) individuals, from 15.7 and 115.5 cm TL,
were caught during experimental and                  Since 1994, there have been a progressive
commercial trawl surveys at depths between           reduction of the landed volumes and the
129 and 650m. Each individual was measured           average size of captures. This information is a
and weighted. Maturity stages were attributed        serious concern; given the number of people
following the MEDITS scales for the                  who depend on fishing in this area and the
Elasmobranchs. The age was evaluated                 ecological repercussions linked to top
through the count of vertebral centra’s annuli       elasmobranchs decrease.
from a subsample of 75 females and 53 males.         Nonetheless, little is known about the biology
The VBGF parameters were determined (L∞ =            and ecology of this species and the pelagic
149.2, s.e.= 15.72; k = 0.08, s.e. = 0.02; t0 = -    thresher shark is consequently recognized has
0.8, s.e. = 0.29 and L∞ = 118.97, s.e. = 10.82;      the highest priority species for management in
k = 0.11, s.e. = 0.02; t0 = -1.08, s.e. = 0.32 for   the Colombian (Shark NPOA) which various
females and males, respectively). ANOSIM             time series research activities for the study of
showed differences (global R = 0.136,                its biology and ecology. Short-term research
p<0.001) among the six considered strata (A          activities include the study of the migrations
to F with intervals of 100m). Upper than 300m        and movement patterns along the Pacific
(A and B strata) were mostly found immature          Coast while population genetics are identified
individuals from 3+ to 6+ and specimens ≥12+         as long-term activities both selected
at maturity stage 2 and 3 for females and
males, respectively. Between 300-500m (C-D           DRDH with the Foundation Malpelo and the
strata), the population was composed almost          Ministry of Fisheries of Colombia (AUNAP),
exclusively by immature skates <5+. Over             created in 2012 the COLSHARK program to
500m (E-F) younger immatures (<3+) of both           study this specie. One of the objectives was to
sexes and older females (>12+, stage 3 and 4)        organize for the first time in the ETP, a
were mainly present. D. oxyrinchus seems to          scientific fishery expedition to tag Pelagic
mate in shallower waters. After that, females        Thresher Sharks off Pacific Colombian coasts.
migrate to deeper strata to spawn, while             The 10 days expedition took place in March
younger individuals carry out a reverse              2013 in Baya Solano (El Choco area) 11
migration during growth.                             satellite mini PAT tags and 20 visual tags were
Dipturus       oxyrinchus,       bathymetric         successfully deployed. After 6 months, 10
distribution, sexual maturity, age.                  satellite tags have been released and DRDH is
                                                     able to present some preliminary results on
                                                     Alopias pelagicus movement patterns in ETP.
                                                     Alopias pelagicus, ETP, thresher shark,
                                                     Colombia, tagging.


European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                               68



Seaquest Southwest Basking Shark                  How many Basking Sharks are there?
Project.                                          Using photo-identification to assess
Niki Clear, Crosby, A. and Williams, R.
                                                  population abundance.

Cornwall Wildlife Trust                           Gore, M.A., Allan, H., Berrow, S., Vittoria
                                                  Correale, Dick, C., Frey, P.H., Gilkes, G.,
The Seaquest Basking Shark Project is an
                                                  Ormond, R.F. and Speedie, C.
effort-based annual survey of basking shark
sightings carried out in Cornwall by a large      Marine Conservational International, Heriot-
team of volunteers. The sightings scheme          Watt University, Edinburgh.
aims to;
                                                  Basking Sharks are considered Endangered in
   Maintain a database with information on       the Northeast Atlantic, but the size of this
    the number of sightings recorded at Hella     population is uncertain. We used photo-
    Point each year                               identification to investigate their abundance
                                                  both in a focal study area (the islands of Mull,
   Collect and analyse sightings data to
                                                  Coll and Tiree on Scotland’s west coast), and
    improve knowledge of basking shark
                                                  over the larger region probably incorporating
    distribution, behaviour and threats around
                                                  the whole western British Isles. In our focal
    the coast of Cornwall
                                                  area, from a total of 793 photographed
   Raise public awareness about basking          encounters, 615 sharks were found to have
    sharks and the threats they face.             distinguishing features, but, of these, only 35
                                                  individuals were re-sighted. Most were re-
The Seaquest Basking Shark Project was
                                                  sighted within 1-3 days but only a few between
launched by Cornwall Wildlife Trust in 2008
                                                  years.
and ran until 2012, collecting over 3270 hours
of effort data.                                   We did obtain sufficient re-sightings to
                                                  generate reliable estimates for our small focal
                                                  study area for two short periods, but the very
SHARKLIFE and tag & release                       low recapture rate between years precluded
                                                  precise abundance estimates for the wider
Simona Clò and Terlizzi, A.                       British Isles region.      This low rate does
MedSharks                                         however indicate a much larger regional
                                                  population (up to 10,000 or more) than
SHARKLIFE,       supported   by    European
                                                  previously anticipated. To investigate these
Commission within Life plus programme, is a
                                                  low recapture rates further, most recently we
project aimed at performing concrete actions
                                                  have repeated (in 2013) photo-identification of
to the conservation and safeguards of sharks
                                                  sharks in our focal area, and have also
in the Mediterranean sea.
                                                  compared our pictures with those submitted to
One important project’s goal is the 100%          the Shark Trust photo-identification database
reduction of elasmobranch captures during         by colleagues in England and Ireland. In all
national sport fishing competitions. The aim of   cases the proportion of re-sightings between
this action is to modify the regulations of       different years and between different locations
surface sport fishing tournaments forbidding      has proved to be only a few percent, indicating
landings of elasmobranchs and implementing        a regional (British Isles) population in the low
a tag&release policy.                             tens of thousands. These data suggest that
                                                  there may have been a significant recovery of
Since 2012 more than 18000 fishermen have
                                                  the regional Basking Shark population since
been involved in 432 competitions and in the
                                                  the 1980s when their exploitation ceased.
conservation of these animals and 50 sharks
tagged.                                           Basking Shark, photo-identification, mark-
                                                  recapture, population estimation, Scottish
Tag & release, Mediterranean.
                                                  west coast, British Isles.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                   69



Mapping to manage: Irish Sea rays                   Status, exploitation and management
Simon Dedman
                                                    of Starry Smoothhound Mustelus
                                                    asterias in the Northeast Atlantic.
Marine and Freshwater Research Centre,
Galway-Mayo Institute of Technology.                Manuel Dureuil

Poor or patchy data hamper better                   Helmholtz Centre for Ocean             Research
management of the Irish Sea assemblage of           (GEOMAR), Kiel, Germany
Cuckoo Ray Leucoraja naevus, Thornback              The Starry Smoothhound Mustelus asterias is
Ray Raja clavata, Blonde Ray Raja brachyura,        classified as Least Concern on the IUCN Red
and Spotted Ray Raja montagui. Pursuing             List. However catch rates have increased in
traditional stock assessments for these             recent years and therefore appropriate
species is not possible: species-specific           management is needed. Here the Northeast
landings data are unavailable. Species              Atlantic stock was examined on the basis of
misidentification, use of inappropriate survey      ICES survey data, with respect to exploitation
gear, and variable availability of tagging,         and abundance trends. Information on biology
fecundity, and age data also preclude typical       and life history was summarised from the
single-species assessment and management            literature, as well as partly recalculated by this
of these stocks.                                    study. The median of empirical equations
The most recent ICES advice recommends              drawing on growth parameters and age at
that a suite of species and fishery-specific        maturity served as estimate of natural
measures be developed to address these              mortality. Total mortality was obtained from
problems, and to achieve recovery of the            pooled catch-at-age data for two different time
depleted species.                                   periods. Total mortality minus natural mortality
                                                    was used as a proxy for fishing mortality.
The aim of this study is to synthesise
numerous disparate datasets to describe the         The results were compared with the fishing
southern Irish Sea ray fishery, and highlight       mortality that would produce maximum
key areas that warrant protection as part of a      sustainable yield, defined as half the intrinsic
future spatial management plan for the species      rate of population increase. Recent and
assemblage.                                         historical trends in CPUE were derived from
                                                    abundance data (years 1992 to 2012).
The datasets available include environmental        Relative exploitation levels from survey and
(e.g.    temperature,      salinity,   substrate,   catch data were examined from 1997 to 2011
bathymetry, currents, etc.), biological (ICES       and compared to a 1:1 replacement ratio. It is
surveys, existing scientifically derived species    hoped that these results will help in
parameters), and fisheries data (landings,          sustainable management of this species.
effort, discard, observer and eggcase data,
economic and social assessment of the               Starry Smoothhound, Northeast Atlantic,
fishery). Appropriate data assimilation tools       management,    exploitation, mortality,
may include the MPA zoning software                 abundance.
‘MARXAN’, species distribution modelling
‘MaxEnt’, or the fish stock simulator ‘GislaSim’.
Data deficiencies may also be filled by
borrowing knowledge from similar, more data-
rich stocks (the ‘Robin Hood’ approach).
The research outputs are intended to improve
spatial management by identifying areas of
highest value as nurseries, or refugia
containing high diversity.
Rays, Irish Sea, mapping, MPA, nursery.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                    70



Status, exploitation and management                 Crossing paths: Marine Protected
of Tope Galeorhinus galeus in the                   Areas and migratory sharks.
Northeast Atlantic.                                 Sara Eckert, Llewellyn, F., Yesson, C. and
Manuel Dureuil                                      Gollock, M.

Helmholtz Centre for Ocean            Research      Zoological Society of London
(GEOMAR), Kiel, Germany                             The value of marine protected areas (MPAs)
Tope Galeorhinus galeus is classified as Data       for the protection of marine species has been
Deficient on the IUCN Red List for the              extensively cited. However, recent work on the
Northeast Atlantic, but its status is Vulnerable    protection of migratory species has called into
worldwide. Here, the Northeast Atlantic stock       question the effectiveness of the current MPA
was examined with respect to exploitation and       network in safeguarding these often critically
abundance trends. The study was based on            endangered species. Highly migratory pelagic
ICES survey data. Information on biology and        species, such as sharks, whales, and tuna,
life history traits was summarised from the         tend to have high aesthetic and/or commercial
literature, as well as partly reanalysed by this    value, putting their protection at the forefront of
study. A newly developed approach was               conservation activity. While properly placed
applied to determine von Bertalanffy growth         MPAs can contribute to the protection of
parameters from tagging data. The median of         migratory species, it is unclear how existing
empirical equations drawing on growth               MPA networks overlap with migratory patterns
parameters and age at maturity served as            of endangered species.
estimate of natural mortality. Total mortality      A subset of sharks listed by the Convention on
was obtained from pooled catch-at-age data of       Migratory Species (CMS) and the Convention
a representative area. Total mortality minus        on International Trade in Endangered Species
natural mortality was used as a proxy for           of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) was selected
fishing mortality.                                  to determine how the distribution and presence
The results were compared with the fishing          of these species overlaps with global MPA
mortality that would produce maximum                coverage. The selection of these two
sustainable yield, defined as half the intrinsic    conventions for this analysis is highly topical:
                                                                                                  th
rate of population increase.        Recent and      CITES CoP16 occurred in March and the 11
historical trends in CPUE were derived from         CMS CoP will take place in 2014.
abundance data (years 1992 to 2012).                Using the World Database on Protected Areas
Relative exploitation levels from survey and        (WDPA) and shark range data, this study
catch data were calculated for the time period      presents the overlap between distributions of
1997 to 2011 and compared to a 1:1                  endangered sharks with both general and ‘no-
replacement ratio. Furthermore, the study           take’ MPAs. The data derived contribute to the
shows that even with presumably sustainable         understanding of the effectiveness of the
fishing pressure, shark stocks can be severely      current MPA network for migratory sharks in
overfished if fishing starts at early ages. It is   terms of locality and connectivity. Critical
hoped that this results will help in the            analysis of international progress towards
sustainable management of this species.             marine protection targets will provide guidance
Tope, Northeast Atlantic, management,               for future MPA development, and identify
exploitation, mortality, abundance.                 possibilities for international cooperation in the
                                                    conservation of migratory species.
                                                    Species distribution, marine protected
                                                    areas, conservation prioritisation, MPA
                                                    network.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                  71



Fishery of Alopias vulpinus in the                  Fishery and reproductive biology of
northern Adriatic Sea.                              Scyliorhinus canicula in the northern
Licia Finotto, Barausse, A., Correale, V.,
                                                    Adriatic.
Curkovic, A., Riginella, E., Visentin, E. and       Licia Finotto, Correale V., Riginella E. And
Mazzoldi, C.                                        Mazzoldi C.
University of Padova                                University of Padova
The Thresher Shark Alopias vulpinus is a large      Scyliorhinus canicula is a small, benthic,
top-predator showing a marked decline in the        oviparous species, inhabiting the Northeast
Mediterranean Sea. This species is considered       Atlantic and the Mediterranean Sea. This study
critically endangered in Italian waters. This       focuses on the fishery and reproductive
study focused on the occurrence and fishery of      biology of this species in the northern Adriatic
this species in the northern Adriatic Sea.          Sea. Analysis of historical landings data from
Despite being not continuous, annual fishery        the fish market of Chioggia (the major market
data (1945-2012) from the fish market of            for the northern Adriatic) revealed a 89.4%
Chioggia, (home to the major fishing fleet of       decline in the capture of catsharks between
the study area) highlighted a positive              the 1940s and 2012.
correlation between catches of Thresher and
                                                    This species is mainly captured as bycatch in
sardine (rS= + 0.47, p = 0.023, N = 31), while
                                                    beam trawls, especially from October to April.
no correlation was found with anchovy (rS= +
                                                    Data obtained from 188 surveys at the fish
0.18, p = 0.51, N = 31) or sea water
                                                    market (from January 2011 to June 2013)
temperature (rS= + 0.05, p = 0.81, N = 31).
                                                    showed a sex-ratio biased towards female
The correlation between Thresher and sardine        (male:female = 1:3.85). The catch was
suggests migrations of Threshers in the             composed mainly of mature individuals (96%
northern Adriatic according to prey availability.   ±2 female; 97% ±3 male), ranging in size
The estimated annual number of Threshers            between 360 and 530mm (N = 1731).
landed at the fish market (1997-2012) is 14 ±6,     Females carrying egg capsules completely or
mainly caught in mid-water trawls from April to     partially formed were found throughout the
October. More than 30% of landed Threshers          year, suggesting a prolonged laying period.
were below 10kg in eviscerated weight, with         Length at first maturity was 370mm for males
some specimens weighting less than 3kg,             and 390mm for females. Estimates of
indicating a high proportion of catch composed      fecundity (number of oocytes larger than
by small young and newborn individuals.             1.6mm) ranged from 32 to 124 and were
Surveys at the fish market highlighted the          positively correlated to female size (r = 0.40, p
occurrence of both males and females.               < 0.01; N = 98; female size: 390 – 48 mm total
                                                    length). The decline in catch highlighted that
                                                    even a small early maturing species can be
                                                    severely depleted by fishery and/or other
                                                    pressures and calls for management actions.
                                                    Scyliorhinus canicula, Adriatic Sea, fishery,
                                                    reproductive biology.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                  72



Does sperm competition influence                    Public perceptions of sharks:
sperm and genital evolution in sharks?              investigating support for shark
John Fitzpatrick
                                                    conservation.

University of Manchester                            Laura A. Friedrich, Jefferson, R. and Glegg,
                                                    G.
Sperm competition, the contest among sperm
from rival males to fertilize a female’s eggs, is   Centre for Marine and Coastal Policy, Marine
a powerful selective force shaping the              Institute, Plymouth University
evolution of sperm traits and genital               Sharks play an integral role in securing the
morphology in many taxa. Yet very little is         health and productivity of the ocean. At the
known about how sperm competition                   same time, they are very vulnerable to the
influences sperm and genital morphology in          pressures that we are exerting on the marine
sharks. However, recent research reveals that       environment. With increasing evidence of the
female multiple mating is common in sharks,         destructive impacts of human activities on
which sets the stage for sperm competition,         marine ecosystems and key species groups
and that sharks exhibit tremendous diversity        such as sharks there is a growing call for
among species in sperm and genital                  stronger public engagement in marine
morphology, a hallmark of the effects of sperm      governance. Knowledge and understanding of
competition on the evolution of reproductive        the issues as well as pro-environmental values
traits. Here I provide a preliminary assessment     are key elements that influence an individual’s
of the relevance of sperm competition as a          behaviour and motivation to engage in
selective force shaping sperm and genital           conservation. This poster presents a study on
evolution in sharks.                                public perceptions of sharks and shark
Sexual selection, reproductive         biology,     conservation in the UK. The study investigated
claspers, sperm design.                             knowledge of and attitudes towards sharks of
                                                    a group of individuals with a clear interest in
                                                    the marine environment, as well as possible
                                                    factors that might influence their perceptions of
                                                    sharks, in order to make recommendations on
                                                    how to foster shark conservation engagement.
                                                    The key finding was that important
                                                    prerequisites for engagement in shark
                                                    conservation exist among parts of the UK
                                                    public. The majority of respondents had good
                                                    knowledge about sharks and positive, pro-
                                                    conservation attitudes. However, this does not
                                                    seem to be enough to motivate actual
                                                    engagement. The study discusses a number of
                                                    specific challenges with regard to sharks which
                                                    might be influencing the way in which society
                                                    connects to shark related issues.
                                                    Shark conservation, public engagement,
                                                    public perceptions.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                    73



Citizen science in shark conservation.             Basking Shark Photo-ID Community
Cat Gordon
                                                   Database.

The Shark Trust, UK                                Cat Gordon

Citizen science – the involvement of               The Shark Trust, UK
volunteers in science - can be a useful tool in    Basking Sharks are seasonal visitors to the UK
terms of engaging members of the public,           coastline, feeding on zooplankton at the sea
raising awareness and aiding scientific data       surface during spring and summer months.
and information collection. To create effective    These encounters provide researchers and
protected areas and to better manage fisheries     enthusiastic amateurs with the perfect
we need to know as much as possible about          opportunity to photograph this normally elusive
shark populations and movements. The Trust         species.
has a number of citizen science projects which
                                                   Photo-identification is a powerful, non-invasive
contribute to this, including:
                                                   field technique used for studying sharks in
   The Great Eggcase Hunt was conceived           their natural environment. Many sharks display
    as a way to raise public awareness of the      significant and recognisable markings on their
    presence and diversity of sharks, skates       fins, which can be natural (pigmentation) or
    and rays in British waters, whilst also        acquired (injuries). These are used to identify
    securing knowledge on the distribution of      individual sharks, allowing researchers to re-
    these species.                                 identify them between seasons.
   The Angler Recording Project asks for
                                                   The Basking Shark Photo-ID project focuses
    elasmobranch catches to be recorded.
                                                   on the development, population, maintenance
    Information collected for this project
                                                   and expansion of an online centralised
    increases our understanding of inshore
                                                   community database, created in collaboration
    populations in the Southwest of England
                                                   between The Shark Trust, Manx Basking Shark
    and will feed into more effective fisheries
                                                   Watch, Marine Conservation International and the
    management and marine protected areas.
                                                   Irish Basking Shark Study Group.
   The Basking Shark Project: Sightings and
    Photo-ID Databases store valuable              This community database (constructed by the
    information about this charismatic species,    Data Archive for Seabed Species (DASSH) team
    helping to map shark movements.                at the Marine Biological Association) is being used
                                                   as a functional safe repository to store photo-
Whilst providing easily accessible information,
                                                   identification data and images. Users can browse
it must be recognised that citizen science does
                                                   through uploaded images and search the
not provide a fully comprehensive dataset, as
                                                   catalogue       by   various    fields    (including
it relies on occasional finds/submissions rather
                                                   characterising features, location, photographer
than being survey-based. However once
                                                   etc.) to find individual sharks. Members of the
verified, information can become data and by
                                                   public only have access to a limited view of the
harnessing modern technology and public
                                                   database, however partner organisations can
enthusiasm for science, can increase the
                                                   register in order to gain access to additional
datasets available to the Trust for use in
                                                   information held on the full database.
tangible conservation benefits.
                                                   Unfortunately the project has suffered from a
Citizen    science,   data     collection,         number of delays which have postponed the
stakeholders, engagement, awareness.               launch, however once these have been resolved
                                                   the database will go live, allowing partners to
                                                   browse, search and batch upload data.
                                                   Basking Shark, photo-ID,             community,
                                                   collaborative, database.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                  74



Morphometric ontogenetic changes in                 Bottom trawling bycatch on the deep-
the Little Gulper Shark Centrophorus                sea shark Etmopterus spinax
granulosus Squaliformes,                            Squaliformes, Etmopteridae in the Gulf
Centrophoridae from the Mediterranean               of Valencia (Western Mediterranean):
Sea: a critical review of anatomic                  does it affect population density? A
characters used for species                         comparison of data in a 24 years
discrimination within the genus.                    interval.
Javier Guallart,    Garcia-Salinas,      P.   and   Javier Guallart, Martín-Lázaro,       A.,   Bas-
Catalán, A.                                         Silvestre and Gimeno-Giménez, L.
Laboratorio de Biología Marina, Universitat de      Laboratorio de Biología Marina, Universitat de
València                                            València
The deep-sea shark genus Centrophorus is            The Velvet Belly Lanternshark Etmopterus
among the most confused taxa within                 spinax is a common deep-sea squaloid
Squaliformes. Historically, part of this            species distributed in the Eastern Atlantic and
confusion is attributable to ontogenetic            Mediterranean Sea. In the Gulf of Valencia it is
changes that occur in its body shape                commonly caught as bycatch by bottom
throughout their life.                              trawling fishing vessels targeting for bathyal
                                                    crustaceans. The species is classified as
Recent authors agree that only one species of
                                                    “Least concern” in the IUCN Red List.
Centrophorus inhabits the Mediterranean Sea.
We describe here morphoanatomical changes           We compare here catches of E. spinax
in this species from specimens caught in the        resulting from a studied series of fishing
Balearic Sea. Indisputable evidence of              journeys carried out by bottom trawlers in the
existence of these changes arises from              Gulf of Valencia (depth range = 430-790 m) in
marked differences observed between pairs of        1989 (n = 12) and in 2013 (n = 17). The
specimens necessarily conspecific: full-term        purpose is to evaluate if relevant changes in
embryos and females that carry them. Thus           the abundance or structure of the population
we have tried fitting models to describe            have occurred, which could be related to
changes from full-term embryos/newborns             fishing activity.
(FTE&NB) to adults.
                                                    Results show a moderate decrease in this time
Of 63 measurements analysed, 14,3% showed           lapse both in frequency of occurrence (FO)
isometry, 36,5% positive allometry and 49,2%        and in mean number of specimens (MNS)
negative allometry. Negative allometry was          caught per journey: FO 85,71% of journeys in
found in most measurement related with head         1989 and 76,47% of journeys in 2013; MNS:
and tail. Positive allometry was generalised in     4,93 ± 4,60 specimens/journey in 1989 and
measurements from pectoral and pelvic fins.         3,88 ± 4,47 specimens/journey in 2013.
Isometric or nearly isometric measurements          However differences cannot be considered
were related with dorsal fins.                      significant.
Dermic denticles show marked changes in             In both years size frequency distribution of
shape and size. FTE&NB have pointed acute           specimens was similar, including from
denticles whereas adults show sessile               newborns to adult specimens. Many of adult
blocklike denticles.                                females caught were pregnant, mainly carrying
                                                    from mid-term to full-term embryos.
General colour of body changes from gray in
FTE&NB to brown in adults. Juveniles wear           Several authors have pointed out for other
conspicuous withe margins in fins that              geographic areas a marked decrease of
disappear in adults.                                abundance of E. spinax during last decades,
                                                    attributing it to fishing pressure or
Major changes in dentition refer to number of
                                                    environmental changes. Apparently this does
asymmetric teeth in upper series. It increases
                                                    not occur in the Gulf of Valencia but future
from very few in FTE&NB to >10 in adults.
                                                    monitoring studies are advisable.
Relevance of these changes for taxonomic
                                                    Key words      (above):    elasmobranchii,
purposes is discussed and some examples
                                                    bycatch, deep-sea fishing.
presented. Similar pattern of changes are
expected to exist in other species of               Key    words     (left):      elasmobranchii,
Centrophorus and should be considered for its       taxonomy, gulper sharks.
morphoanatomical taxonomic characterisation.


European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                75



New data on the uncommon deep-sea                 An Angular Roughshark Oxynotus
shark Somniosus rostratus                         centrina (Squaliaformes, Oxynotidae) in
(Squaliformes, Somniosidae) in the                captivity feeding exclusively on
Balearic Sea (Western Mediterranean).             elasmobranch eggs: an overlooked
Javier Guallart, Vicent, J.J., Catalán, A. and
                                                  adaptation of the species or an isolated
García-Salinas, P.                                case on “food tastes”?
Laboratorio de Biología Marina, Universitat de    Roche, M., Javier Guallart, Catalán, A.
València                                          Gomez-Heredia, A,. García-Salinas, P. and
                                                  Ahuir-Baraja, A.E.
Eight adult females of the rare Little Sleeper
Shark Somniosus rostratus caught by bottom        L’Oceanografic, Ciudad de las Artes y las
trawling fishing boats in the Balearic Sea were   Ciencias de Valencia
studied (550 - 670 m depth; size range 874 -      The Angular Roughshark Oxynotus centrina is
1042 mm TL). This species is classified as        a poorly known demersal species that
“Data deficient” in the IUCN Red List.            distributes   in    Eastern    Atlantic    and
All these females were pregnant. Three of         Mediterranean Sea. It is included in the IUCN
them had uterine ova without macroscopic          Red List as Vulnerable at global scale but as
embryo and 5 had from small to medium-            Critically Endangered for the Mediterranean,
developed embryos. Uterine fecundity ranged       although actually little is known about its
5 - 17 ova/embryos (mean = 11,1 ± 4,0). None      biology, abundance or population dynamics.
of the females, even those carrying mid-term      Direct observations of specimens in their
embryos, had noticeable vitellogenetic oocytes    habitat or cases of maintenance in aquaria are
in their ovaries, which suggests that             very scarce.
vitellogenesis is not       simultaneous to
                                                  We present here observations about feeding
embryonic development.
                                                  habits of a male specimen of O. centrina 40
Five specimens had recognizable remains in        cm TL caught in March 2013 at 150-200 depth
its stomach contents, which corresponded in       in   the     Gulf   of Valencia    (Western
all cases to cephalopod beaks of mesopelagic      Mediterranean) and kept in controlled
squids Histioteuthis spp. This suggests that S.   conditions in aquaria.
rostratus feeds mainly in the water column.
                                                  After    unsuccessfully    feeding    attempts
From March to August 2013 a complete survey       providing prey-items commonly found in field
of catches at the Ibiza Channel (550-800 m        specimens stomachs according to bibliography
                                             -
depth) showed a mean catch rate of 5,81 * 10      (polychaete, molluscs, crustaceans), it was
2                                          -2
   specimens/journey (about 6,97 * 10             remarkable the predation on a ray egg when it
              2
specimens/km ). Although these values of          was provided. Since then, feeding of this shark
density are low, do not correspond to a           specimen has been managed successfully and
species considered as rare as described.          regularly   using     eggs     from     several
The apparent rarity of this species could be      elasmobranch species.
due to a natural low-density population.
Otherwise, their feeding habits suggest that      The procedure used to ingest the yolky-rich
they actively move throughout the water           contents inside eggs cases by previously
column, which could explain the scarcity of       drilling their capsules was very similar in all
captures in these bathyal demersal fisheries.     cases, what suggests that it is not an
However the reason why only a particular part     incidental use of an prey item but a probable
of the population (pregnant females) is usually   specialized behaviour.
caught near the bottom remains unknown.
                                                  We hypothesize that feeding on elasmobranch
Key     word   (above):  elasmobranchii,          eggs by O. centrina may have been partially
reproduction, trophic ecology, deep-sea           overlooked due to the difficulty of identify yolk
fishing.                                          remains in stomach contents studies from field
Key words (right): elasmobranchii, feeding        specimens.
habits, elasmobranch egg cases.                   If this hypothesis is correct, relative abundance
                                                  of oviparous elasmobranch species and their
                                                  eggs could locally influence the trophic
                                                  resources for this apparently threatened
                                                  species.


European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                   76



Population genetics & phylogeography               Novel insights on the origin of
of the Smallspotted Catshark,                      Mediterranean Great White Shark
Scyliorhinus canicula (Linnaeus 1758).             population from ancient mtDNA gene
Vasiliki Kousteni, Kasapidis, P., Kotoulas, G.,
                                                   variation.
and Megalofonou, P.                                Agostino Leone, Puncher, G.N., Cariani, A.,
Department of Biology, Section of Zoology-         Sperone, E., Tripepi, S., Micarelli, P.,
Marine Biology, University of Athens               Gambarelli, A., Sarà, M., Arculeo, M., Doria**,
                                                   Garibaldi, G.F., Dall’Asta, A., Minelli, D., Cilli,
The Smallspotted Catshark is one of the most       E., Vanni, S., Serena, F. and Tinti, F.
abundant elasmobranchs in the Mediterranean
Sea and the northeastern Atlantic. However, it     Genetics & Genomics of Marine Resources
is not known whether the species is                and Environment Laboratory (GenoDREAM),
represented by a single panmictic population       Italy
or by different reproductively isolated            The origin of a population of Great White
populations. In the present study, a 590bp         Sharks (GWS), Carcharodon carcharias,
fragment of the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)          L.1758, residing in the Mediterranean Sea has
COI gene region and 12 microsatellite loci         remained a mystery despite repeated scientific
were analyzed for 431 and 834 individuals          endeavours to retrace their history. Here we
respectively, in order to assess the genetic       analyze 18 historical specimens (30-180 years
structure of the species. Samples originated       old) collected from several museums, research
from the eastern Mediterranean, the western        institutes and private collections in Italy,
Mediterranean and the Atlantic. Samples from       creating the largest dataset of Mediterranean
the Atlantic and Egypt were included only in       GWS mitochondrial DNA gene sequences (i.e.
mtDNA analysis. The mtDNA median-joining           D-loop and COI). Comparative phylogenetic
network had a star-like shape and consisted of     analyses of the Mediterranean GWS with
a central haplotype that was present in all        populations from global range suggested a
regions, while the rest of the haplotypes had a    closer evolutionary relationship with sharks in
clear geographical distribution and were found     Australia-New Zealand, Japan and the Pacific
either in Atlantic and western Mediterranean or    US rather than to the South-African population.
in eastern Mediterranean. Egypt was an             Estimates of the most recent common
exception as it contained haplotypes from both     ancestor carried out using internal calibration
the aforementioned areas. Microsatellite as        with fossil and paleo-geographical data
well as mtDNA analysis revealed a strong           revealed that Mediterranean GWS population
genetic differentiation and supported mainly       originated in the early Pliocene at the end of
the presence of two genetically distinct groups,   the Messinian Salinity Crisis (ca. 5.3 MYA).
one in the Eastern Mediterranean and another       This dating supports a GWS historical long-
in the Western Mediterranean-Atlantic. There       dispersal and paleo-colonization of the
was also strong evidence for Isolation by          Mediterranean via a route of migration through
Distance.      The     strong      genetic  and    Central America, before the formation of the
phylogeographic pattern found can be               Isthmus of Panama in contrast with a ad hoc
attributed to the low dispersal ability and the    previous      hypothesis    which    suggested
exclusively     demersal     lifestyle   of  the   colonization via South Africa due to
Smallspotted Catshark, which is mainly found       navigational errors during past climatic
in depths less than 500 m. It seems that the       oscillations.
deep marine habitats are a strong barrier for
                                                   White Shark, Mediterranean, ancient DNA,
the dispersal of this species.
                                                   mitochondrial  DNA,      phylogeography,
Scyliorhinus      canicula,      population        migration.
structure, mtDNA, microsatellites.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                  77



How a local ecotour operator can                     On the development of the oviducal
provide a coastal study of sharks.                   gland in the Raijd Brown Ray, Raja
Annabelle Lowe and Lowe, C.
                                                     miraletus Linnaeus, 1758

Atlantic Diving                                      Martina F. Marongiu, Porcu, C., Follesa,
                                                     M.C., Bellodi, A., Cannas, R., Mulas, A. and
Atlantic Diving works towards increasing the         Cau, A.
knowledge of Coastal Sharks and improve
Public perception in three ways:                     Department of Life Science and Environment –
                                                     University of Cagliari.
1. Public Outreach….through “in the field”
public wildlife experience during Blue Shark         The oviducal gland, in oviparous cartilaginous
Cage Diving, Snorkelling with Basking Sharks         fishes, plays the important role to produce the
and Sea Safaris which aim to demystify the
                                                     egg capsules containing fertilized eggs and to
perception of Sharks and bringing passengers
/students/tourists closer to wildlife. These are     storage sperms in some species. To better
species which are often vilified, particuarly in a   understand the reproductive strategies of
surfing and tourist area and whose functions in      these animals, in this work we reported the
the local ecosystems are so poorly understood        first investigation on the macroscopical and
when evidence from further afield suggests           microscopical structure of Raja miraletus’
their presence is pivotal to supporting the          oviducal gland from Sardinian waters (central
healthy seas ,the visitors to Newquay so enjoy.
                                                     western       Mediterranean).     Macroscopical
Also educating about the reasons for shark           analysis showed that the size of the oviducal
decline in modern day time and how                   gland increased with maturity reaching the
passengers can make a difference.
                                                     largest width at the extruding stage, and
2. Provide Data..                                    having a consequent decline in regressing and
a) from extensive time at sea including effort       regenerating      ones.   Histological     study
based surveys.                                       displayed that its development started at the
                                                     maturing stage and completed at mature one.
b) encouraging passengers to send in “Citizen
Knowledge” through recording their sightings         The previous analysis also permitted to
once they have left us.                              discern the four zones composing the gland:
                                                     club, papillary, baffle and terminal. Periodic
c) Collaborating with other excelling Wildlife
Boat Operators within Cornwall as one of 5           acid-Schiff (PAS) and alcian blue (AB)
“Founder Members” of “Cornwall Marinelife            histochemical staining highlighted that the club
Boat Operators” launched this year, to share         zone stained AB+, PAS+ and AB+/PAS+;
data for use within the Academic Population.         papillary showed a mixture of PAS+ and AB+;
d) Master Wise (Wildlife Safe) accredited crew,      baffle seemed not react to this staining
gather data during eco wildlife trips without        technique and the terminal zone was positive
causing disturbance.                                 to AB and PAS near to the lumen.
3. Supporting Scientific Studies such as those       Furthermore, not aggregated sperms were
being conducted by local Universities by a           observed in the secretory ducts of the baffle
collaboration of boat operator’s local and           zone, near to the lamellae and the terminal
practical knowledge together with Scientist’s        zone. The histological measurements allowed,
expertise on wildlife population tracking/           also, to observe an increase in size of the
population size estimation.                          glandular area of each zone with maturity.
Ecotour boat operator, coastal shark study,          Baffle zone, which has the task to form the egg
public   outreach,      citizen   knowledge,         capsule, represented the largest glandular
Cornwall     Marinelife      Boat   Operator,        zone in each stage reaching about 70% of the
population tracking/size estimation.                 total area in mature females.
                                                     Raja     miraletus,       oviducal      gland,
                                                     microstructure,         central        western
                                                     Mediterranean.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                 78



Preliminary data on the Mediterranean               Mortality estimates of the Brazilian
Starry Ray biology and demography in                Sharpnose Shark Rhizoprionodon
the Aegean Sea.                                     lalandii in a nursery area from south-
Persefoni Megalofonou, Renieri, E, and
                                                    eastern Brazil.
Leondari, C.                                        Motta, F.S., Caltabellotta, F.P. and Gadig,
Department of Zoology-Marine             Biology,   O.B.F.
University of Athens                                Universidade Estadual Paulista,        Campus
The Mediterranean Starry Ray, Raja asterias         Experimental do Litoral Paulista
Delaroche, 1809, is a benthic skate (family         The       Brazilian      Sharpnose      Shark
Rajidae) that inhabits inshore waters, on sandy     Rhizoprionodon lalandii is a small coastal
bottoms. It has been considered as one of the       species (maximum length 80cm) widely
endemic species of the Mediterranean Sea;           distributed in the Western Atlantic from
however its presence in the Atlantic Ocean          Panama to Uruguay. In Brazilian waters it is
has to be confirmed. In this study the              an important resource for artisanal fisheries,
demography and aspects of the reproductive          especially in south-east areas, representing
biology of the Starry Ray were examined in the      60% of the total shark landings. Nevertheless,
Central and South Aegean Sea, in the eastern        the lack of ecological data on this species
Mediterranean Sea. The samplings were made          remains a critical issue to delineate
by commercial trawlers at depths ranging from       management and conservation actions.
90 to 350 meters, from December 2009 until
                                                    Mortality rates were estimated using indirect
April 2011. A total of 152 specimens ranging
                                                    methods based on life history parameters and
from 148 to 700 mm in length were gathered.
                                                    direct methods (length-converted catch
The overall sex ratio was almost 1:1.
                                                    curves) based on length frequency of sharks
Frequency distributions of total length and total
                                                    caught by small-scale fisheries that operate
weight were calculated for males and females
                                                    along the south-central coast of São Paulo
separately. Females were generally larger and
                                                    State, south-eastern Brazil, between 1997 and
weighed more than males. Regression
                                                    2003. The total mortality (Z) values from
analysis of the length-weight relationship
                                                    indirect methods were 0.60 to 0.904, whereas
indicated the existence of a positive allometry
                                                    catch curves produced values of 1.72 for
(b > 3). All specimens were classified into
                                                    females and 3.05 for males. Natural mortality
stages of sexual maturation, while their
                                                    (M) varied from 0.78 to 0.815 based on age-
gonadosomatic and hepatosomatic indexes
                                                    independent methods and from 1.24 (0 age) to
were estimated. It was observed that males
                                                    0.52 (7 years) based on age-dependent
reached sexual maturity at smaller size than
                                                    methods.
females.
                                                    Despite the range of estimates observed, the
Raja asterias, distribution, length-weight
                                                    results reflect a high fishing pressure on a
relationship, sexual maturity, Aegean sea.
                                                    population that presents a high natural
                                                    mortality. The fishing operation in a nursery
                                                    ground for this species, using gill nets with
                                                    small mesh sizes, has resulted in the capture
                                                    of neonates right after birth. This scenario of
                                                    overexploitation has been reported to
                                                    governmental authorities as a means of
                                                    contributing to the implementation of a regional
                                                    marine protected area (corresponding to IUCN
                                                    category V) management plan.
                                                    Small-scale fisheries, coastal sharks,
                                                    population dynamics, conservation.



European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                      79



Population size and injury prevalence                Shark and other fish eye lenses – a
among Basking Sharks in Manx waters.                 window to cryptic life history
Natasha Phillips, Stone, E. and Hall, J.
                                                     behaviours.

The Manx Wildlife Trust                              Quaeck, K., Trueman, C., MacKenzie, K. and
                                                     Bendall, V.
The use of photo identification (ID) has the
potential to revolutionise elasmobranch              University of Southampton
research, enabling individual animals to be          Traditionally,    tagging   studies    provide
recognised and tracked over significant time         information relating to the distribution and
periods. The Manx Basking Shark Watch has            movement patterns of pelagic sharks.
catalogued a minimum of 126 individual sharks        Electronic tags, however, are expensive, may
from >5 years of photographic data collection.       have low return rates and cannot be attached
The differing injuries sustained by the dorsal       to small juveniles. Incrementally grown tissues
fin, as used for individual identification, have     offer an alternative biochemical method to
been categorised and assessed. This dataset          study ecology retrospectively.
also provides new evidence for stock
                                                     Otoliths, for example, contain a wealth of
assessment, enabling the first estimate of
                                                     information pertaining to the age, growth and
Basking Shark population size in Manx waters.
                                                     whole life, including juvenile, ecology of a
However, the discovery curve suggests this is
                                                     species. The crystalline lens in the vertebrate
a conservative estimate as the entire
                                                     eye also grows incrementally, but this structure
population has yet to be sampled.
                                                     has received relatively little analytical attention.
Within the catalogue, 71% of sharks display at       Unlike otoliths, lenses are proteinaceous
least one type of human-inflicted injury, with       structures formed by fibre cell addition and
the highest proportion of injuries (46%) caused      subsequent progressive dehydration towards
by fishing nets. The data suggest that fin injury    the core. They are acellular, and are not
type is not significantly related to shark gender    remodelled or replaced. Consequently, lenses
(Chi=8.73, CV=11.07, P<0.05), but is                 have the potential to serve as a chronological
significantly related to shark size (Chi=66.6,       record of biochemical information allowing
CV=18.31, P<0.05).                                   examination     of    ontogenetic       movement
The photo-ID catalogue presents a non-               patterns, migration and juvenile ecology in a
intrusive form of mark/recapture data. Applying      wide range of functional groups, including
Schnabel's Index to our ‘well-marked’                elasmobranchs.
catalogue (sharks with very distinct scars,          Here we report pilot data examining the dietary
notches etc.), estimates a population of 75          ecology and movement/migration of the
‘well-marked’ sharks in Manx waters. These           Porbeagle Shark Lamna nasus using stable
constitute 40.5% of our total catalogue, which       isotope analyses from sequential samples of
equates to an estimated total population of 185      eye lens tissue. We explore the potential for
sharks.                                              eye lenses as a log of life-long diet and spatial
Given the small population size and wide             ecology, and compare their role as
prevalence of injuries, it is important that these   biochemical host tissues with vertebrae. We
data are considered in future management             use the recovered diet and migration data to
decisions. Suggested actions include speed           reconstruct feeding and movement ecology in
limits in shark hotspots, further investigation      juvenile Porbeagle Sharks and compare
into interactions with fishing gear and wide-        inferences from stable isotope data with those
scale collaborations to promote shark                from physical tagging.
awareness.                                           Porbeagle, lens, life history, ecology, stable
Basking       Shark,    injuries,          photo     isotope.
identification, abundance.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                   80



The European Studbook for                           Histophysiological aspects of the
Carcharhinus melanopterus, the                      uterine wall of the Nurse Shark
Blacktip Reef Shark – An update in its              Ginglymostoma cirratum (Bonaterre,
initial stages.                                     1778).
Emma Rees                                           Mariana G. Rêgo, Araujo, M.L., Silveira, L.M.,
                                                    Oliveira, P.G.V., Hazin, F. V. H. And Evêncio-
SEA LIFE, UK
                                                    Neto, J.
This poster will form a short pictorial and
                                                    University Federal Rural de Pernambuco.
graphical update on the first stage of the
European    Studbook       for   Carcharhinus       Although the Nurse Shark, Ginglymostoma
melanopterus, the Blacktip Reef Shark.              cirratum, is listed as endangered in Brazil
                                                    (IN05-2004), it is commonly caught by
The European Studbook is a species
                                                    artisanal fishing in Brazilian northeast coast. In
management programme run by EAZA
                                                    the present study, uterine samples of ten
(European Association of Zoo’s and Aquaria).
                                                    females were collected from nurse sharks
The studbook keeper is the person responsible
                                                    landed in Mucuripe beach, at Ceara State
for collection all the data on births, deaths and
                                                    (Latitude e longitude), being then processed to
transfers from all the EAZA zoos and
                                                    routine histology with HE, PAS and Alcian Blue
aquariums that hold the chosen species.
                                                    2.5% staining. The morphometry of the body
Approval for this was awarded at the Shark          and reproductive tract was conducted to the
Symposium at The Zoological Society of              nearest centimeter. The macroscopic maturity
London in April this year.                          stage was defined, according to literature. All
As part of the Studbook we will also be             females were immature. The uteri of the nurse
producing a husbandry guide that will use the       sharks examined contained three (03) layers:
information gained from the inventories that        mucous, muscular and serous. The uterine
were sent out across the globe. A second            mucosae were internally lined by a simple
questionnaire will soon be distributed that will    columnar epithelium. An undeveloped lamina
delve into more detail surrounding nutrition        propria line was present just below the
within this species and aim to link that with the   epithelium, and it consisted of loose
success of breeding.                                connective tissue with blood and lymph
                                                    vessels. Uterine glands were not observed. In
The 5 aims of the studbook are as follows:          the middle portion of the uterus, a stratified
1. Carry out a questionnaire of all European        epithelium with papiliform projections and
   sites to understand breeding experiences         alcian blue positive were present. The muscle
   and the parameters in which this species         and serosa layers were similar to those of
   is held.                                         other elasmobranch species. The presence of
2. Identify  and   document    from the             vascularized epithelium, mucous cells, and an
   questionnaires and other research,               acellular collagen PAS positive layer under the
   guidelines to help with the breeding             epithelium      line   are     uterine    mucosa
   management of this species.                      specializations which allow the uterus to
3. Make an inventory of this species in             provide a stable physiological environment to
   Europe and include individual histories.         G. cirratum embryos, after they have broken
4. Identify the main conservation issues for        out of the egg case. These histological findings
   this species in the wild and explore if the      indicate that despite the lecithothrophic
   aquarium community can become involved           viviparity of the species, the uterus wall has an
   to help reduce some of these threats.            important role in embryo survivorship.
5. Create a self-sustaining, healthy captive        Shark, reproductive, morphology.
   population of animals that is well-
   managed, thereby negating the need for
   wild animals to be sourced and held in
   public aquariums.



European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                81



Supporting sustainable shark, skate                Results from the Shark Trust’s Angler
and ray fisheries in Northern English              Recording Project.
waters.                                            John Richardson
John Richardson                                    The Shark Trust, UK
The Shark Trust, UK                                Distribution and abundance data are
In recent decades landings of elasmobranchs        fundamental in establishing sustainable
by the Northern English fleet have reduced         elasmobranch fisheries in the Northeast
considerably in volume and are now largely         Atlantic. As well as scientific sources, useful
taken     as     bycatch.         Nevertheless     data can also come from ‘citizen science’
elasmobranchs continue to represent a              projects. In 2010 the Shark Trust initiated the
commercially valuable component within             Angler Recording Project, encouraging sea-
mixed fisheries. In 2012, with funding from the    anglers in the Southwest of England to record
Co-operative Foundation Environment Fund,          and share details of their elasmobranch
the Shark Trust commenced a project                catches.
engaging with the commercial fishing industry      To-date, over 1500 catch records have been
in Northern England. The aim of the project is     submitted by sea-anglers. These range from
to support the industry in maintaining and         the pelagic Porbeagle Shark Lamna nasus to
profiting from well-managed, sustainable           the     demersal     Smallspotted    Catshark
elasmobranch fisheries.                            Scyliorhinus canicula; and from the larger-
The Shark Trust has a solid track record in        bodied Blonde Ray Raja brachyura to the
working with the commercial fishing industry       smaller, faster growing Spotted Ray R.
towards sustainable fisheries; however this        montagui. For all species, fishing effort – as
has largely centred on the Southwest of            opposed to natural abundance and/or
England, home to the major UK elasmobranch         population trends – must be considered the
landing ports. This project shifts the focus to    key driver of results at present. Half of all
Northern England, a region with a long shark       records submitted have come from Cornish
fishing heritage.                                  waters; although falling outside the project
                                                   boundary, South Wales also features
Key project objectives include developing a
                                                   prominently, ining records for a significant
positive relationship with the industry,
                                                   number of pelagic sharks known to move
supporting     accuracy      in   elasmobranch
                                                   throughout the Bristol Channel and Celtic Sea
identification and aiding compliance with
                                                   marine areas. Commercial charter vessels
regulations applicable to a growing number of
                                                   and sea-angling clubs accounted for more
species. As catch and landings data continue
                                                   than 80% of catch records submitted, a bias
to improve, those stocks able to support
                                                   reflected in the project’s overall catch
sustainable fisheries can be more effectively
                                                   composition, with the Blue Shark Prionace
managed, while those showing greatest
                                                   glauca the most frequently recorded
declines can benefit from more bespoke
                                                   elasmobranch – and also the primary target for
protective measures and might again, in time,
                                                   most charter operations. The Blonde Ray is
support well-managed fisheries. The Shark
                                                   the most commonly recorded batoid.
Trust has liaised widely with all sectors of the
Northern English fishing industry to assess        Key challenges arising include maintaining
interest in the project and ensure relevance       interest in the project and the flow of data.
and practicality of supporting materials.          Similarly, the project has experienced
                                                   difficulties in engaging unaffiliated (to a sea-
Commercial fisheries, Northern England,
                                                   angling club or similar organisation) anglers
elasmobranch, engagement.
                                                   who make up approximately 75% of all sea-
                                                   anglers.
                                                   Sea-angling, Southwest, elasmobranch,
                                                   citizen science.


European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                               82



A seasonal hotspot for Cetorhinus                   A major breeding site for the
maximus in Apulia, southern Italy,                  Nursehound Scyliorhinus stellaris
Mediterranean Sea.                                  identified in Italian waters through a
                          1
Eleonora de Sabata , E., Bello , G.,
                                         2          citizen science project.
         3             4            4
Cataldini , G., Mancusi , C., Serena , F. and       Eleonora de Sabata and Clò, S.
   1,5
Clò S.
                                                    MedSharks, Italy
MedSharks, Italy
                                                    A major and regular breeding ground for the
A review of available scientific and reliable       Nursehound Shark, Scyliorhinus stellaris
grey literature, targeted interviews with local     (Linnaeus, 1758), was identified on the Santa
operators and collection of photos and videos       Croce Bank, a marine specially protected zone
carried out within Operazione Squalo Elefante       within the Gulf of Naples, Italy.
and the Mediterranean Large Elasmobranchs
                                                    A preliminary survey of this hotspot – first
Monitoring project - both long-standing
                                                    identified by SCUBA divers taking part in “The
projects on Cetorhinus maximus in the
                                                    Mermaid’s purse” citizen-science project -
Mediterranean Sea - identified the coastal
                                                    confirmed the presence of large numbers
waters of the south-eastern Italian region of
                                                    (100+) of egg-cases, containing embryos at all
Apulia as a seasonal hotspot for Basking
                                                    stages of development. Live specimen are
Sharks.
                                                    also regularly seen on the same dive site,
Over 40 records of landings, strandings and         mostly resting in crevices.
sightings were collected between 1977 and
                                                    Future investigations are planned to provide
2013, mostly occurring from January to April.
                                                    an estimate of the numbers of egg-cases and
Peak years were recorded in 2001, 2011 and
                                                    follow their development in-situ. A community
2013.
                                                    photo-ID project is also being developed to
The sharp increase in numbers since 2001,           identify live specimen and monitor their site
amounting to half of the total sightings, is most   fidelity.
likely due to greater public awareness than
                                                    Scyliorhinus   stellaris,   Nursehound,
actual growth in the population of this shark,
                                                    breeding grounds, Mediterranean, Gulf of
which is listed as Vulnerable in the
                                                    Naples.
Mediterranean basin by the IUCN.
These reports are of a causal nature and not
the result of a properly-structured effort;
however they provide general information on
the distribution and relative abundance of
Basking Sharks in the Mediterranean area.

Basking Shark, Mediterranean Sea, Italy,
Apulia, seasonal hotspot.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                     83



RECOAM: a French project for a better                 Philopatric behaviour in Northeast
knowledge of five skate species.                      Atlantic Spurdog Squalus acanthias, a
Project progress and preliminary                      Critically Endangered elasmobranch.
results on Undulate Ray Raja undulata.                James Thorburn, Neat, F., Bailey, D., Noble,
Eric Stephan, Hennache, C., Delamare, A.              L.R and Jones, C.S.
and LeBlanc, N.                                       Aberdeen University
Association pour l’Etude et la Conservation           Philopatric     behaviour     is    increasingly
des Sélaciens (APECS)                                 recognised as a common feature of several
In the Celtic seas and the Biscay/Iberian             elasmobranch          populations        globally;
ecoregions, most of skate species are little          identification and incorporation of this
known.                                                behaviour into conservation plans has the
                                                      potential to substantially increase the
It’s particularly the case for species that seems
                                                      effectiveness of localised static management
to have patchy coastal distribution which are
                                                      for highly mobile species. Spurdog Squalus
not well sampled by the scientific fishery-
                                                      acanthias, a small, critically endangered
independent surveys. Information on the
                                                      elasmobranch, has been shown to display
mixing between skates of different areas and
                                                      philopatric behaviour in other parts of its global
the populations structures but also on biology
                                                      distribution, but not within the NE Atlantic.
and possible movements between ecologically
                                                      Here we report findings from a multiannual
important       grounds     are     needed     for
                                                      mark/recapture study along with results
management purposes.
                                                      collected over a year from a static acoustic
The French RECOAM project was set up in               curtain and archival tag research programme
2012 to contribute to a better knowledge of five      within Loch Etive on the west coast of
skate species, Undulate Ray Raja undulata,            Scotland. Mark/recapture data suggests
Blonde Ray Raja brachyura, Smalleyed Ray              spurdog of both sexes are present in the loch
Raja microocellata, Thornback Ray Raja                throughout the year, potentially indicating a
clavata and Spotted Ray Raja montagui,                resident       component       within       Etive.
working in two areas of the French waters of          Observational data also support the presence
particular interest, one in the western English       of breeding and neonatal Spurdog within the
Channel and one in the Bay of Biscay.                 loch at different times of the year. Building on
                                                      this, the data storage tags and acoustic curtain
The aims of the project are to investigate the
                                                      revealed mature female Spurdog move out of
populations’ structures, to enhance the
                                                      the loch over winter, returning to the loch in
understanding of skates’ movements which
                                                      spring time; behaviour previously unrecorded
could contribute to identify important grounds
                                                      in NE Atlantic Spurdog. This philopatric
in their life cycles, and to evaluate the length at
                                                      behaviour suggests that spatial management
maturity for each species, a fundamental
                                                      of Loch Etive would effectively aid
parameter given its importance in the
                                                      conservation of different age and sex classes
assessment models.
                                                      of Spurdog.
We present here the project progress and
                                                      Squalus acanthias, philopatry,            spatial
some      preliminary    results,    particularly
                                                      management, tagging.
concerning the Undulate Ray Raya undulata
tagging results and length at maturity.
Raja    undulata, North-East  Atlantic,
population structure, tagging, sexual
maturity.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                  84



Implementation of the European Plan of
Action for the Conservation and
Management of Sharks.
Planthof, L. and Monique van de Water
Dutch Elasmobranch Association
In 2009 the European Commission has issued
a European Community Plan of Action for the
Conservation and Management of sharks (the
CPOA). In addition to mandatory actions for
Regional         Fisheries        Management
Organizations and Member States as part of
the European Community, this policy plan
contains recommendations for voluntary
national measures Member States can
implement to address the data gaps for
elasmobranch species and their role in the
ecosystem, to improve the knowledge about
their fisheries, To ensure more sustainable
fisheries and regulation of bycatch, and to
ensure a coherent approach in policy. In this
study it was assessed to what extent the
CPOA has been implemented by the North
Sea countries and what should still be
undertaken to restore and protect the North
Sea elasmobranch species. After reviewing
the current protection status of species in the
area, the gaps in biological knowledge
necessary for proper management and
conservation are addressed for each species.
Subsequently, the implementation of possible
voluntary measures are assessed, leading up
to recommendations on necessary action.
North    Sea,    policy,    conservation,
knowledge gaps, sharks, skates.




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                 85




                                         DELEGATE
                                              List




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                  86



EEA 2013
Delegates
Adi Barash               Haifa University                  adibarash@hotmail.com

Agostino Leone           University of Bologna             agostino.leone@stusio.unibo.it

Al Reeve                 St Andrews University             al.reeve01@gmail.com

Alec Moore               RSK Environment                   amoore@rsk.co.uk

Alexander Hansell        Northeastern University           hansell.a@husky.neu.edu

Ali Hood                 Shark Trust                       ali@sharktrust.org

Ana Verissimo            CIBIO-ICETA                       verissimoac@gmail.com

Andrea Bellodi           University of Cagliari            abellodi@unica.it

Andrew Griffiths         Salford University                andiff100@googlemail.com

Annabelle Lowe           Atlantic Diving                   sharktoursnewquay@gmail.com

Arve Lynghammar          University of Norway              arve.lynghammar@uit.no

Ben Pedrick                                                benjamin.pedrick@live.cornwall.ac.uk

Bonnie Pickard

Brian Eatough                                              brian.eatough@googlemail.com

Cat Gordon               Shark Trust                       cat@sharktrust.org

Catherine Jones          University of Aberdeen            c.s.jones@abdn.ac.uk

Cecile Brigaudeau        Des Requins et des Hommes         cecile@desrequinsetdeshommes.org

Celene Pickard
                         National Oceanographic
Chris Bird               Centre
                                                           cg1g13@soton.ac.uk

Chris Lowe               Atlantic Diving                   chris@atlanticdiver.co.uk
Christopher
                                                           chrismc53@hotmail.co.uk
McCabe
Chrysoula Gubili         University of Salford             c.gubili@salford.ac.uk
                         Marine Megafauna
Clare Prebble            Foundation
                                                           clare@marinemegafauna.org

Clare Sorensen                                             clare_sorensen@live.co.uk

Clement Chazot           Bimini Biological Field Station   clementchazot@wanadoo.fr

Clinton Duffy            University of Auckland            clinton.duffy@actrix.co.nz
Cristina Rodriguez-      Spanish Institute of
                                                           c.cabello@st.ieo.es
Cabello Rodenas          Oceanography



European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                87



Daniel Fernando          Linnaeus University               daniel@mantatrust.org
Dianne Van Der
                         NEV                               diannevandercraats@hotmail.com
Craats
Dominic Swift                                              ds108@ic.ac.uk
                         Marine Fish Information
Douglas Herdson          Services
                                                           douglas.herdson@btinternet.com

Edward Wright                                              eddwright@gmail.com

Eleanor Stone            Manx Wildlife Trust               eleanor@manxwt.org.uk

Eleonora de Sabata       Medsharks                         ele@medsharks.org

Elizabeth Ross           Devon & Severn IFCA               office@devonandsevernifca.gov.uk

Emily Humble             Imperial College London           e.humble12@imperial.ac.uk

Emma Rees                Sealife                           emma.rees@merlinentertainments.biz

Emma Shipsides                                             eshipsides@gmail.com

Emmett Johnston          Queen University Belfast          emmett.johnston@baskingshark.ie

Eric Stephan             APECS                             eric.stephan@asso-apecs.org
                         Universidade Estadual
Fabio Motta              Paulista
                                                           limbatus@gmail.com

Frances Humber           Blue Ventures                     fran@blueventures.org

Francesco Ferretti       Stanford University               ferretti@stanford.edu

George Davies            Bimini Biological Field Station   georgedavis24@hotmail.co.uk

Georgina Pendell         University of Portsmouth          georgina.pendell@port.ac.uk

Georgina Wiersma         Dutch Shark Society               georgina@dutchsharksociety.org

Glenys Heafield          Shark Trust                       glenys@sharktrust.org

Grace Jones                                                graciecherries@yaho.co.uk

Graham Hall              Manx Basking Shark Watch          inter.tech@btinternet.com

Haley Dolton             Manx Wildlife Trust               haleydolton@gmail.com

Hannah Tarrant           Shark Trust                       hannah@sharktrust.org

Heike Zidowitz           DEG                               heike.zidowitz@elasmo.de

Helene Gadenne           APECS                             helene.gadenne@asso-apecs.org

Irene Kingma             NEV                               kingma.irene@gmail.com

Jackie Hall              Manx Basking Shark Watch          inter.tech@btinternet.com

James Lea                Plymouth University               james.lea@plymouth.ac.uk



European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                  88



James Thorburn           University of Aberdeen            j.thorburn@abdn.ac.uk

Jamie Rendall            DEFRA                             jamie.rendell@defra.gsi.gov.uk

Javier Guallart          L'Elasmogrup                      javier.guallart@uv.es

Jean Luc Solandt         Marine Conservation Society       jls@mcsuk.org

Jean-Denis Hibbit        Sealife                           jean-denis.hibbit@merlinentertainments.biz

Jim Ellis                CEFAS                             jim.ellis@cefas.co.uk

Joanna Barker            Zoological Society London         joanna.barker@zsl.org

Joanna Stead                                               jojostead@hotmail.com

John Fitzpatrick         University of Manchester          john.fitzpatrick@manchester.ac.uk

Jonathan Mitchell                                          jono33@fsmail.net

Katalin Magnenat                                           k_magnenat@hotmail.com

Kate Massaralla          Leeds University                  kate.massarella@gmail.com

Katie Lee-Brooks         Manta Trust                       katie@mantatrust.org

Katie Quaeck             University of Southampton         k.quaeck@noc.soton.ac.uk

Kerstin Glaus            University of Basel               kerstin.glaus@stud.unibas.ch

Kylie Scales             Plymouth Marine Laboratory        kysc@pml.ac.uk

Laura Friedrich          University of Plymouth            laura.friedrich@plymouth.ac.uk

Laura McLennan           University of Leicester           lm275@le.ac.uk

Lauran Brewster          Bimini Biological Field Station   lauran.brewster@gmail.com

Lauren Fear                                                lnfear@hotmail.co.uk

Les Noble                University of Aberdeen            l.r.noble@abdn.ac.uk

Licia Finotto            University of Padova              lippia_89@hotmail.it

Lilian Lieber            University of Aberdeen            l.lieber@abdn.ac.uk

Luigi Fusi               Shark Academy                     luigi.fusi@gmail.com

Lydie Couturier          University of Queensland          l.couturier@uq.edu.au

Manuel Dureuil           GEOMAR                            mdureuil@geomar.de

Marc Smith               Dorset Wildlife Trust             msmith@dorsetwildlifetrust.org.uk

Maria Lucia Araujo       DIMAR/UFRPE                       mlpotamotrygon@gmail.com

Mariana Rego             University of Pernambuco          mari_rego03@hotmail.com

Mark Trigg                                                 mark.trigg447@live.cornwall.ac.uk

European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                    89



Martina Marongiu         University of Cagliari           mfmarongiu@unica.it
Massimiliano
                         ISPRA                            massimiliano.bottaro@isprambiente.it
Bottaro
Matthew Gollock          Zoological Society London        matthew.gollock@zsl.org

Matthew Witt             University Of Exeter             m.j.witt@exeter.ac.uk

Megan McCubbin           University of Liverpool          cybermegs2020@hotmail.com

Michael Scholl           Save our Seas Foundation         michael@SaveOurSeas.com

Michaela Moran           Student                          michaela_moran@hotmail.co.uk
                         Dyer Island Conservation
Michelle Wcisel          Trust
                                                          michellewcisel@gmail.com

Moira Mann               Axoloti Films Ltd                moira.mann@tiscali.co.uk
Monique Van de
                         NEV                              vdwater@elasmobranch.nl
Water
Nadia Bruyndonckx        Save our Seas Foundation         nadia@SaveOurSeas.com

Natasha Phillips         Manx Wildlife Trust              natashaphillipsemail@gmail.com

Nichola Clear            Cornwall Wildlife Trust          niki.clear@cornwallwildlifetrust.org.uk

Nicholas Dulvy           IUCN SSG                         ndulvy@gmail.com

Nicola Clarke            DEFRA                            nicola.clarke@defra.gsi.gov.uk

Niels Breve              Sportvisserji Nederland          breve@sportvisserijnederland.nl

Niki Koltai              Project Aware Foundation         niki.koltai@projectaware.org.uk

Nuno Queiroz             CIBIO/UP                         nuno.queiroz@gmail.com
                         Dyer Island Conservation
Oliver Jewell            Trust
                                                          oliverjewell@gmail.com

Ornella Weideli                                           ornella.weideli@gmail.com
                         Van Hall University of Applied
Paddy Walker             Science/NEV
                                                          paddy.walker@wur.nl
Persefoni
                         University of Athens             pmegalo@biol.uoa.gr
Megalofonou
Peter Verhoog            Dutch Shark Society              peter@dutchsharksociety.org

Philip Doherty           University Of Exeter             p.doherty@exeter.ac.uk

Piers Langhelt                                            planghelt@talktalk.net

Rachel Ball              University of Aberdeen           r.e.ball@abdn.ac.uk

Rebecca Allen            Cornwall College                 rebecca.allen@cornwall.ac.uk

Rebecca Bates                                             toadybates@gmail.com

Rebecca Lunnon                                            reb.lunnon@btinternet.com



European Elasmobranch Association 2013
                                                                                                90



Riccardo Avogadri        Shark Academy                   info@sharkacademy.com

Rolf Williams            RSPB                            rolf.williams@talktalk.net

Rowland Sharp            Natural Resources Wales         rowland.sharp@cyfoethnaturiolcymru.gov.uk

Ruth Harries             University of Swansea           rutheharries@ymail.com
                         Benguela Research &
Ruth Leeney              Training
                                                         ruth.leeney@gmail.com

Sally Snow               Physalus                        sallyj.snow@gmail.com

Sarah Fowler             Save our Seas Foundation        fowler.sarah.123@gmail.com

Sarah Magozzi            University of Southampton       sarah.magozzi@noc.soton.ac.uk

Serena Wright            CEFAS                           serena.wright@cefas.co.uk

Sian Egerton             Cumbria Wildlife Trust          rebeccal@cumbriawildlifetrust.org.uk

Simon Dedman             GMIT                            simondedman@gmail.com

Simone Rizzuto           University of Siena             rsimone1986@libero.it

Simona Clo               CTS                             sharklife@cts.it

Sonja Fordham            Shark Advocates International   sonjaviveka@gmail.com

Sophy McCully            CEFAS                           sophy.mccully@cefas.co.uk

Stuart Hetherington      CEFAS                           stuart.hetherington@cefas.co.uk
                         Marine Megafauna
Thomas Horton            Foundation
                                                         tom@marinemegafauna.org

Ulrich Bosing            Biosci.info                     u.bosing@biosci.info

Vasiliki Kousteni        University of Athens            bkousten@hotmail.com

Victoria Bendell         CEFAS                           victoria.bendall@cefas.co.uk
                         Marine Conservation
Vittoria Correale        International
                                                         vicky3@inwind.it




European Elasmobranch Association 2013
