ration of the sampling methodology.




                                                     45
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


        Shark Research Hub for Dusky Sharks (Carcharhinus obscurus)
               and Sandbar Sharks (Carcharhinus plumbeus)
                   in the Easternmost Mediterranean Sea

              Aviad SCHEININ1, Eyal BIGAL1,2, Ziv ZEMAH SHAMIR1,2, Adi BARASH2,
          Tal STAROSTINETSKY-MALONEK1,2, Stephane MARTINEZ1,2, Danny MORICK1,
                                       Dan TCHERNOV1,2
  1
      Morris Kahn Marine Research Station, Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, ISRAEL
  2
      Department of Marine Biology, Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, ISRAEL
                                              ascheinin@univ.haifa.ac.il




The Top Predator laboratory of Morris Kahn Marine Research Station has been running a shark-
tagging project in the last 4 years, as part of a long-term ecological research programme. The study
takes place at an anthropogenic, seasonal aggregation area of sharks in the warm discharge waters of
power plants along the Mediterranean coast of Israel. Following the tagging protocol of Sharklab
(Bimini, Bahamas), 51 sharks have been tagged thus far, of which 35 were dusky sharks
(Carcharhimus obscurus; 34 females and 1 male) and 16 sandbar sharks (Carcharhinus plumbeus;
all male). These species are listed by the IUCN as data deficient (DD) and endangered (EN) in the
Mediterranean Sea, respectively. The tagging procedure includes morphometric measurements as
well as DNA, stable isotopes, blood chemistry and microbiome sampling. All tagged sharks are issued
a subcutaneous PIT tag as well as a spaghetti tag. 19 dusky sharks and 10 sandbar sharks were tagged
with acoustic transmitters and an array of 11 receivers was placed within the tagging site and in other
aggregation areas, such as offshore mariculture facilities, throughout Israel’s marine space. Results
indicate thermo-regulated fidelity at human-altered habitats and size as well as sex-dependent
aggregating behaviour. In the Mediterranean Sea, where shark populations have declined
dramatically over the last 70 years, Israeli waters have become an oasis for coastal sharks and a hub
for their research, supported by ground-breaking conservation, legislation and enforcement.




                                                         46
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

                 Emerging Technologies in Acoustic Telemetry:
                         Real-time vs. Data Storage

              Andre STECKENREUTER1, Silvana GERMANA2, Richard VALLEE2
                                    1
                                     Innovasea, Cologne, GERMANY
                                      2
                                        Innovasea, Halifax, CANADA
                                   andre.steckenreuter@innovasea.com




Acoustic telemetry is a well-established tool that has been used around the world for more than three
decades to get an understanding of the spatio-temporal movements and associated behaviour of a
wide range of aquatic animals. New emerging technologies are being developed continuously that
allow for new research applications and designs. Examples for these new technologies are (1) real-
time observations of both aquatic animals as well as their aquatic environment and (2) acoustic data
storage tags.
Applied real-time systems may consist of various underwater sensors, acoustic telemetry tags on
aquatic animals, a surface hub that receives data from the sensors as well as from the tags, and a
cloud-centric database. Such systems are now in use at several global installations. Data access is
available via a mobile phone or laptop that provide real-time notifications when tagged animals are
near receivers or the current state of environmental variables.
Acoustic data storage tags might be used especially for far-ranging animals such as sharks and rays
that might inhabit coastal and pelagic regions at different times of the year. These applications can
be used to get a bigger picture of a species behaviour and its spatio-temporal distribution in order to
address conservation and management measures since data is also collected while animals are outside
of acoustic arrays. Here, we will explore the evolution of the use of acoustic telemetry and how
receiving data in real-time and in acoustic data storage applications will help sustain our ocean
ecosystems.




                                                  47
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


   Habitat use of juvenile white sharks (Carcharodon carcharias) and
   shortfin mako sharks (Isurus oxyrinchus) in a nursery area in the
                  west coast of Baja California, México
      Elena TAMBURIN1,2, Sora L. KIM3, Fernando R. ELORRIAGA-VERPLANCKEN1,
    Daniel J. MADIGAN4, Mauricio HOYOS-PADILLA5,6, Alberto SÁNCHEZ-GONZÁLEZ1,
            Agustín HERNÁNDEZ-HERRERA1, José Leonardo CASTILLO-GENIZ7,
               Carlos Javier GODINEZ-PADILLA7, Felipe GALVÁN-MAGAÑA1
          1
             Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, MÉXICO
                           2
                             Fundación Alium Pacfic, Carrera 26 No. 5C–13, Cali, COLOMBIA
                 3
                   Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of California Merced, USA
     4
       Gulf of California International Research Center, Loma los Frailes S/N, Santa Rosalía, BCS 23920, MÉXICO
             5
               Pelagios-Kakunjá A.C, Sinaloa 1540. Col. Las Garzas, C.P. 23070, La Paz, B.C.S., MÉXICO
     6
       Fins Attached: Marine Research and Conservation 19675, Still Glen Drive Colorado Springs, CO 80908, USA
   7
     Centro Regional de Investigación Pesquera de Ensenada, Instituto Nacional de la Pesca (INAPESCA), MÉXICO
                                              elenatambu2588@gmail.com




Information like habitat preferences and trophic ecology regarding juvenile white sharks
Carcharodon carcharias (WS) and shortfin mako sharks Isurus oxyrinchus (MS) is lacking. This
study investigates the habitat use of juvenile MS and WS in the nursery area of Sebastian Vizcaino
Bay (SVB) using stable isotope analysis in multiple tissues. During 2015 and 2016, we collected
muscle (n=165), blood samples (n=147), red blood cells (RBC; n=62) and plasma (n=70) of young
MS and muscle (n=6), RBC (=2) and plasma (n=2) of young WS. The size range for MS was 64.5-
196 cm of total length (TL) and for WS it was 130-292 cm TL.
Shortfin mako and white sharks had significant differences for muscle tissue in δ C values (W =
                                                                                              13



255.5, p < 0.0001), but not in δ N values (W = 1189.5, p = 0.08).
                                  15



We did not find significant differences in δ13C values (W = 228, p-value = 0.045) and δ15N values
(W = 420.5, p-value = 0.8) of whole blood between shortfin mako and white sharks. In addition,
sharks with similar TL of both species (MS > 102 cm TL and WS <186 cm TL) showed a similar
pattern of δ15N values for whole blood, RBCs and plasma.
MS and WS with similar total length (MS> 102 cm TL and WS < 186 cm TL) reflected in their tissues
(muscle, blood, RBC and plasma) the regional baseline 15-N enriched isotopic signature of SVB,
suggesting that SVB has a unique isotopic signature (isoscape). The similarity in isotopic niche and
isotopic composition between shortfin mako and white sharks in multiple tissues reflecting large and
short time periods suggest shared resource and common habitat use inside SVB throughout extended
times confirming their residency in this area during their earlier life stages.




                                                      48
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

Temporal variability in whale shark (Rhincodon typus) presence in the
    South Ari Marine Protected Area, Maldives, Indian Ocean
          Silvia VALSECCHI1, Caterina LANFREDI2, Arianna AZZELLINO3, Alessandra SAVINI1,
            Valentina Alice BRACCHI1, Fabio MARCHESE1, James HANCOCK4, Richard REES4

      1
      Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences DISAT (DISAT), University of Milano Bicocca (MI), ITALY
2
    CoNISMa (The National Inter-University Consortium for Marine Sciences) U.R.L.Politecnico di Milano (MI), ITALY
                         1
                           Environmental Engineering Department (DICA), Politecnico di Milano (MI), ITALY
            4
              Maldives Whale Shark Research Programme (MWSRP), MALDIVES & UNITED KINGDOM
                                            s.valsecchi@campus.unimib.it




Whale sharks are usually observed in coastal areas throughout the highly productive tropical and
subtropical regions. The Indo-Pacific sub-population is declining mainly due to fisheries catches,
bycatch and vessel strikes. Accordingly, in 2016 the species was assessed as “Endangered” on the
IUCN Red List. Despite conservation concerns, there are still substantial gaps in the knowledge of
whale shark ecology. This study investigates the temporal variability of whale shark presence in the
South Ari Atoll Marine Protected Area (S.A.MPA). Even if the area is very limited (about 42km2) it
appears to be an important aggregation site for the species in the Maldives archipelago. Since 2012
the Maldives Whale Shark Research Programme (MWSRP) has been collecting data year-round
within the MPA. Due to the heterogeneity of the effort among different years only data collected
between 2014 and 2017 has been considered in this study. A total of 572 sharks encounters have been
reported in this period. Concurrently, in situ Sea Surface Temperature (SST) has also been collected.
Sightings per Unit of Effort (SPUE) was calculated based on the number of survey trips carried out
per month and per year during favorable environmental conditions (e.g. wind speed not exceed 3 in
the Beaufort scale and partial and total clouds covered conditions). Generalized Linear Models have
been used to analyse the temporal variability of the SPUE. No significant difference has been
observed in SPUE across the study period. However, taking into consideration data on a monthly-
year basis, the species’ occurrence presents significant differences (P-level < 0.01). Further analysis
revealed that SST could be a significant covariate. The understanding offered by this study provides
additional information upon which to base an appropriate management strategy in the MPA for this
wide-ranging species.




                                                         49
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

   The historical occurrence of the angelshark Squatina squatina and
     common skate Dipturus intermedius in Dutch coastal waters

Roeland A. BOM1, Monique VAN DE WATER2, Aafke BRADER2, Henk W. VAN DER VEER1,
                             Anieke VAN LEEUWEN1

   1 Department of Coastal Systems, NIOZ Royal Netherlands Institute for Sea Research, and Utrecht University,
                                              NETHERLANDS
                      2 Stichting Het Wereld Natuur Fonds-Nederland, NETHERLANDS
                                              mwater@wwf.nl




The North Sea is known for its natural richness. Yet it is also one of most intensively exploited seas
in the world, and, as a result, fish species have disappeared or populations are reduced to low numbers.
There is a growing call to restore the natural richness of the North Sea but, it is often unclear what
this is, because baseline studies date back 60 years at best.
Elasmobranchs are an example of a group of species of which populations in the North Sea have
marginalized over the past century. These includes the critically endangered angelshark Squatina
squatina and common skate Dipturus intermedius.
We review the historical abundance and some life-history aspects of these species in the Dutch marine
waters using a variety of historical sources.
Palaeontological sources dating back to the origin of the North Sea suggest that these species always
have been present in the area. Written historical sources from the 16th to the 19th century suggest
that the angelshark used to be fairly common and that the common skate was indeed common.
Catch reports indicate that the angel shark started to decline at the onset of the 20th century and went
locally extinct in the 1970s. Landings and fishery-independent data of common skate show a similar
picture. The start of the decline coincides with the onset of steam-powered fisheries whereas the
demise follows on the intensification of diesel-powered beam-trawlers. Historical reports and catch
data indicates that angelsharks mainly visited the area in summer to reproduce. Common skates were
mainly caught in winter and these were mostly young individuals that supposedly used the area as
nursery grounds.
Our study shows that if we base our ideas of a North Sea ecosystem on a baseline view after 1900 we
may have overly low expectations of its potential natural richness.




                                                       50
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


Movement evaluation of elasmobranch species in the northern-central
      Adriatic Sea using a conventional tagging approach

Matteo BARBATO1, Sara BONANOMI2, Diego BORME3, Federico CALI’2, Sasǎ RAICEVICH4,
                       Antonello SALA2,5, Carlotta MAZZOLDI1
                          1
                              Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padova ITALY
                                            2
                                              CNR-IRBIM, Ancona, ITALY
               3
                 Istituto Nazionale di Oceanografia e di Geofisica Sperimentale - OGS, Trieste, ITALY
                                               4
                                                 ISPRA Chioggia ITALY
   5
     DG Joint Research Centre (JRC) Directorate D - Sustainable Resources Unit D.02 Water and Marine Resources
                                            matteo.barbato.1@phd.unipd.it




The decline of elasmobranch populations in the Mediterranean Sea highlights the need of developing
effective management strategies. The biological traits of such organisms include internal fertilization,
hence decoupling mating from egg release/parturition, a longer life and a slower growth rate
compared to most teleosts, making elasmobranch populations particularly vulnerable to fishery
exploitation. Because of their biology, these species distribution may vary drastically among life
stages (e.g. adults vs juveniles, pregnant vs non-pregnant females) and sexes. Movements across
Mediterranean water bodies, between mating, parturitions, feeding areas and the occurrence of
aggregations in a specific area are fundamental points for understanding their ecology. Therefore,
integrating movement information in management strategies of these species is a crucial step forward.
Such data on pelagic and benthic species are scarce throughout the Mediterranean Sea and especially
in the Adriatic Sea. In this study, we adopted a conventional tagging approach in the Adriatic Sea
using “spaghetti” tags in collaboration with professional and recreational fishermen, elasmobranchs,
caught as target or bycatch, were tagged and released after species identification, recording size, sex
and maturity (for males by clasper calcification and for females TL50 was used if known) and storing
release coordinates in Tshark.org database. So far, we tagged 592 individuals (12 species) among
which the majority are smooth-hound sharks (Mustelus mustelus and M. punctulatus), eagle ray
(Myliobatis aquila) and pelagic sting ray (Pteroplatytrygon violacea). We received 6 recapture
reports out of 301 of tagged Mustelus spp, ranging between 6 months to 5 days after release, and 1 of
pelagic sting ray, after 2 months and 15 days after release. The longest distance recoded was of 20
nautical miles (NM) for Mustelus spp and 125 NM for P. violacea.
As this approach relies on the recapture reporting, the collaboration between research institutions
across Mediterranean countries, and between researchers and fishermen as well, is fundamental to
increase recapture information.




                                                       51
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


       Reconstructing past and present behaviours, occurrence and
    seasonality of elasmobranch species through the recovery of Local
                          Ecological Knowledge
         Matteo BARBATO1, Claudio BARRÍA2, Andrea BELLODI3, Sara BONANOMI4,
       Diego BORME5, Ilija ĆETKOVIĆ6, Ana I. COLMENERO2, Francesco COLLOCA7,
    Fabio CROCETTA8, Egemen DEMİR9, Francesco DE CARLO10, Manfredi DI LORENZO7,
     Maria Cristina FOLLESA3, Fulvio GARIBALDI11, Gianni GIGLIO12, Ioannis GIOVOS13,
     Giulia GUERRIERO14, Olfa HENTATI15, Ana JEVREMOVIĆ16, Claudia KRUSCHEL16,
    Mohamed KSIBI15, Luca LANTERI11, Francesco Luigi LEONETTI12, Alessandro LIGAS10,
              Adriano MADONNA14, Sanja MATIĆ-SKOKO17, Renata MIMICA18,
          Dimitrios K. MOUTOPOULOS19, Antonello MULAS3, Vedrana NERLOVIĆ20,
      Konstantinos TSOUKINDAS19, Ana PEŠIĆ6, Cristina PORCU3, Emilio RIGINELLA8,
      Emilio SPERONE12, Sezginer TUNÇER9, Dario VRDOLJAK17, Carlotta MAZZOLDI1
  1
    Department of Biology - University of Padova, Padova, ITALY; 2Institut de Ciències del Mar (ICM-CSIC),Bacellona, SPAIN;
3
Department of Life Sciences and Environmental, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, ITALY; 4IRBIM-CNR, Ancona, ITALY; 5 Istituto
   Nazionale di Oceanografia e di Geofisica Sperimentale - OGS Trieste, Trieste, ITALY; 6University of Montenegro, Institute of
    Marine Biology, Kotor, Montenegro; 7IRBIM-CNR, Mazara del Vallo, ITALY; 8 Department of Integrative Marine Ecology,
Stazione Zoologia Anton Dohrn, Napoli, ITALY; 9COMU, Marine Science and Technology Faculty, Çanakkale Merkez/Çanakkale,
    TURKEY; 10CIBM/Soc. Coop. Aplysia, Livorno, ITALY; 11Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra dell'Ambiente e della Vita –
 University of Genova, Genova, ITALY;12DiBEST, University of Calabria, Arcavacata di Rende, ITALY; 13iSea-2. Technological
   Educational Institute of Western Greece, Thessaloniki, GREECE; 14Federico II di Napoli, Napoli, ITALY; 15Higher Institute of
 Biotechnology of Sfax, Sfax,TUNISIA; 16University of Zadar, Zadar, CROATIA; 17Institute of Oceanography and Fishery, Split,
CROATIA; 18Fishery Office, Rijeka, CROATIA; 19Technological Educational Institute of Western Greece, Thessaloniki, GREECE;
                          20
                             University of Split, University Department of Marine Studies, Split, CROATIA
                                                     matteo.barbato.1@phd.unipd.it




Elasmobranchs constitute a target or bycatch of a wide variety of fishing techniques. Such
anthropogenic pressure has brought to a drastic reduction of local populations across the
Mediterranean Sea. Moreover, limited-data collection and species misidentification, among others,
have led to a scarcity of historical data on species occurrence and abundance trends in several taxa.
Such information is particularly valuable to study migration dynamics and behaviour variations, as
well as to reconstruct historical trends. To fill this data gap, the use of local ecological knowledge
from professional fishermen can be considered as a valuable source of semi-quantitative information
on several aspects of species ecology, abundance and behavioural aspects.
Through a questionnaire survey, fishermen operating with diverse fishing gears such as bottom and
pelagic trawlers, set nets and longlines were interviewed by trained researchers with the aid of photo-
identification materials. A total of 211 interviews were collected across nine Mediterranean FAO-
GSA sub-areas (9, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 28). Results covered a wide range of elasmobranch
species with regard to coastal, pelagic and deep-sea environment. Interviewers indicated species that
were abundant in the past, declined recently and showed size variation compared to past catches.
Moreover, fishermen reported aggregation sightings/events, seasonal movements and species-
specific fishing area. The present study constitutes a baseline regarding abundance and distribution
of elasmobranch species in historical times and may represent a valuable tool for data deficient taxa.
It also gives new insights on elasmobranchs behavioural and ecological aspects and highlights priority
species and suitable geographic areas for conservation and behavioural studies.


                                                             52
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


 Preliminary data on Zooplankton community structure in Nosybe
Madagascar – Whale shark (Rhincodon typus) feeding ecology project

Paolo BAVA1,2, Primo MICARELLI1, Emilio SPERONE3, Iole DI CAPUA4, Isabella BUTTINO4,5

                    ¹Sharks Studies Center – Scientific Institute, M. Marittima (GR), ITALY
                                       ²Università Bicocca Milano, ITALY
                              ³DiBEST, University of Calabria, Rende (CS), ITALY
                                ⁴Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Napoli, ITALY
                 ⁵Institute for Environmental Protection and Agency, ISPRA, Livorno, ITALY
                                             paolob2v@gmail.com




It is known that juveniles whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) have tendency to gather, seasonally, in a
few coastal areas around the world to feed on zooplankton; however little is known about their food
preferences. The CSS (Centro Studi Squali) scientific coordinator of the project “Whale shark feeding
ecology” (in partnership with University of Calabria, University of Siena, ISPRA, University of
Naples Federico II, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn), in 2016, started the study of these
aggregations. During field observations we collected zooplankton samples and we observed feeding
behaviour of sharks to understand the main characteristics of the zooplankton community that appears
to cause said gatherings.
So far two expeditions (2017 and 2018) have been carried out in the channel of Mozambique, in the
coastal waters of the Nosy Be (MG). Here whale sharks are present in the last four months of the
year: data were collected in the eastern part of the island in late November-early December which is
the peak season for whale shark sightings in the area.
Zooplankton samples were collected vertically from 10 m depth to surface, using a net with 200 µm
mesh aperture. The samples were concentrated using a 50µm filter and fixed with alcohol (70%) and
lugol (1%). At the same time, location, water temperature and transparency, shark presence/absence
and feeding behaviour were recorded.
Quantitative and qualitative analysis of zooplankton samples were performed at Stazione Zoologica
Anton Dohrn and ISPRA laboratories. We calculated zooplankton biomass and abundance. We
identified at species level the most important zooplanktonic taxa (copepods, chetognats etc) and
moreover we calculated their size spectra.




                                                    53
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


                     Deepsea sharks of Guatemala:
        New records of the Atlantic sixgill shark Hexanchus vitulus

      Cristopher AVALOS-CASTILLO1, Omar SANTANA-MORALES2,3, Elisa AREANO1,
                           Edgar E. BECERRIL-GARCÍA3,
                            1
                                 Fundación Mundo Azul, Guatemala city, GUATEMALA
                                      2
                                        ECOCIMATI A. C., Ensenada, MÉXICO
          3
            Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, MEXICO
                                                  bg.rage@gmail.com




The knowledge of Hexanchus vitulus (Springer & Waller, 1969) and other deep-sea sharks in the
Caribbean Sea is considered scarce, as these species are unfrequently captured by local artisanal
fishers and therefore scientific research regarding its biology has not been developed. The present
study reports the first record with morphometry data of H. vitulus in this area, in order to provide
useful information for future comparisons of specimens in other coastal regions. A total of ten
Atlantic six gill sharks was captured offshore El Quetzalito, Guatemala (15.740379 N, -88.274621W)
by artisanal fishers at using longlines and fishing nets at a depth of 275-365 m. The date of capture,
fishing gear, used bait, sex, total length, precaudal length, and fork length were registered from each
shark. Taxonomic identification was carried out through the description published by Compagno et
al., (2005) and Daly-Engel et al., (2018). All the specimens were identified as H. vitulus due to the
presence of six gills, a slender body with brown dorsal and white ventral coloration, narrow head and
mouth, anterior serrations on lower teeth, and large eyes. These characteristics are the same described
for H. nakamurai, because H. vitulus has been describes as a cryptic species with no evident external
differentiation known to date. The length of the specimens ranged between 61-165 cm TL, with a
mean of 142 ± 29 SD cm TL. Most of the captured sharks were considered mature individuals with
the exception of a juvenile female caught in 2015. Sex ratio of this sample was 2.3:1 (Males:Females),
where 90% of the sharks were mature individuals. The high quantity of mature sharks in this sample
differs from what observed in other relatively close areas like Belize. Arguments regarding a potential
segregation between mature and immature individuals related to locality and month are presented.




                                                        54
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


               The presence of Remora remora on Mobula birostris
             in the largest Marine Protected Area of North America

                     E. BECERRIL-GARCÍA1, Miguel A. GUTIÉRREZ-ORTIZ2,3,
                     Paul A. PRECIADO-GONZÁLEZ2,3, Arturo AYALA-BOCOS2
         1
             Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, MEXICO
                         2
                           Ecosistemas y Conservación: Proazul Terrestre A.C., La Paz, MEXICO
                            3
                              Universidad Autónoma de Baja California Sur, La PAZ, MEXICO
                                                  bg.ragde@gmail.com




The ecology of mantas and echeneids in the Eastern Tropical Pacific is poorly understood. In this
study we describe the frequency of interactions between the vulnerable Mobula birostris and its
symbiont Remora remora, through the participation of scientists and tourists in a marine protected
area. Data were obtained by the analysis of underwater pictures of observed mantas with remoras
during 139 diving days at sea during the years 2016-2017. A total of 273 records of mantas with
remoras was registered from 207 identified individuals. Estimated size of mantas ranged from 250-
550 cm DW, with an average size of 380 ± 50 cm SD. Sex ratio of mantas was 1.3:1 (Female:Male)
as observed from our sample of 89 females (42.9%), 68 males (32.8%), and 50 individuals (24%) for
which sex could not be determined. The remora species observed in all the mantas was the common
remora Remora remora. Average number of remoras attached to the mantas was 1.6 ± 0.56 remoras
per manta. Estimated size of the remora ranged between 40-80 cm TL, with an average of 60 cm ±
10 cm SD. During the study period, there were no significant differences between months and the
number of remoras per manta (H7,271=5.13; p=0.64). Most of the mantas usually had one or two
remoras, 43 % (n=117) and 53.5 % (n=147), respectively; while 2.5% of the mantas (n=5) were
observed with three remoras, and only two individuals with four (0.9%). Although a higher number
of remoras in female mantas was observed, there was no significant differences according to the
morphotype or sex of the mantas (H3,208=7.90; p=0.04) confirmed by the Bonferroni post-hoc test.
The study of this host-symbiont interaction is discussed in terms of the potential insights that this
kind of research could provide regarding the ecology of mantas and remoras if compared with other
aggregation sites.




                                                         55
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


    Correlation between phytoplancton abundance and whale shark
              feeding behaviour at Nosy Be (Madagascar)

Francesco BOLINESI1, Martina ARPAIA1, Marica LOPEZ2, Emilio SPERONE2, Gianni GIGLIO2,
   Giorgia ZICARELLI2, Vittoria BATTAGLIA2, Samira GALLO2, Chiara ROMANO2, Mario
   AFFUSO1, Emanuela SERINO1,Anna PALOPOLI2, Sandro TRIPEPI2, Primo MICARELLI3,
                           Carlotta BARBA4, Olga MANGONI1
                         1
                         Department of Biology, University of Naples “Federico II”, ITALY
              2
                  Department of Biology, Ecology and earth Sciences, University of Calabria, ITALY
                                3
                                  Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima (GR) ITALY
                                     4
                                       Manta Diving, Nosy Be, MADAGASCAR
                                            francescobolinesi@gmail.com




In the years 2017, 2018 and 2019 the feeding behavior of the whale shark has been studied off Nosy
Be Island (Madagascar). In particular, the investigations involved the description of the behavioral
modules of the whale shark and their relationship with the phytoplankton communities. In total, 65
phytoplankton samples were collected in the following four behavioural conditions:0 - absence of
whale sharks; 1 - presence of swimming whale sharks; 2 - presence of whale sharks in horizontal
feeding; 3 - presence of whale sharks in vertical passive feeding; 4 - presence of whale sharks in
vertical active feeding. All samples were immediately filtered and then frozen to be subsequently
analyzed by HPLC to identify the total biomass and contribution of the different functional groups of
phytoplankton. In total 8 phytoplanctonic taxa have been identified: Prasinophyceae, Dinoflagellata,
Cryptophyceae, Primnesiophyceae, Pelagophyceae, Chlorophyceae, Cyanobacteria and
Bacillariophyceae. Among them, Cryptophyceae were the most abundant. Our results seemed to
highlight a certain correlation also between behavioral feeding intensity exhibited by sharks and the
total biomass of phytoplancton. In particular, this appeared more evident with some groups of algae
that might be involved in the release of the dimethyl sulfonio propionate (DMSP). This substance is
produced by algal organisms in response to predation by zooplankton organisms. Since DMSP is a
substance characterized by a strong odor, the results could demonstrate the fundamental role of smell
in the identification of food sources by the whale shark, as confirmed for marine birds.




                                                        56
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


Effects of biological acoustic signals and shipping noise on behavioural
     parameters in small-spotted catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula)

      Giovanni DE VINCENZI1,2,3, Primo MICARELLI4, Salvatore VIOLA5, Gaspare BUFFA6,
            Virginia SCIACCA1-3, Vincenzo MACCARRONE6, Valentina CORRIAS1,
                     Francesca Romana REINERO4, Francesco FILICIOTTO1
  1
     National Research Council - Institute for Biological Resources and Marine Biotechnology, Messina, ITALY
               2
                 Departmnt of Life Science and Systems Biology, University of Torino, Torino, ITALY
                          3
                            Association eConscience – Art of Soundscape, Monreale, ITALY
                                 4
                                   Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima (GR), ITALY
  5
    National Institute of Nuclear Physics - National Laboratories of the South (INFN-LNS), Catania (CT), ITALY
     6
       National Research Council - Institute for the Study of Anthropic Impacts and Sustainability in the Marine
                            Environment (IAS–CNR), Campobello di Mazara (TP), ITALY
                                              gioggio.devincenzi@gmail.com




Despite in recent years the interest about the human-made noise effects on marine animals have
received notably increasing, at date few studies have investigated the potential role of acoustic
masking on animal’s bio-ecological relationship. In this study, we exposed twelve specimens of
small-spotted catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula, Linnaeus 1758) to biological and anthropogenic
sounds in order to assess their behavioural changes potentially referable to pray presence and masking
effect due to the shipping noise.
Specifically, the sharks held individually in aquarium were exposed to three acoustic experimental
conditions differentiated in their spectral (Hz) components (biological and anthropogenic mixed
sources) and intensity (dB re 1 µPa) levels. Swimming behaviour and spatial distribution of the
specimens were recorded. The results highlighted significant differences in time spent in swimming
and in spatial use of the aquarium among the experimental conditions. The sharks concentrated their
swimming behaviour in the aquarium’s lower sections when the intensity levels of the biological
acoustic sources were higher than the anthropogenic ones. Conversely, when the intensity levels of
the anthropogenic sources were higher than the biological, the specimens showed the highest values
of time spent in swimming, and changed their spatial distribution highlighting an aquarium occupancy
in favour of the less noisy sections.
In conclusion, in this study was hypothesised that the environmental soundscape could play an
important role in the small-spotted catshark prey-predator relationship and that the impact of masking
effect can strictly depends on the acoustic intensity levels.




                                                         57
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


   First assessment of the genetic structure of deepwaterblackmouth
             catshark (Galeus melastomus Rafinesque, 1810)
               in Atlantic and Mediterranean populations
          Simone DI CRESCENZO, Alice FERRARI, Alessia CARIANI, Fausto TINTI

    Department of Biological, Geological & Environmental Sciences (BiGeA), University of Bologna, Bologna,
                                                    ITALY
                                      simone.dicrescenzo@studio.unibo.it



The worldwide abundance of Galeusmelastomus in the biological composition of fishery bycatch led
to consider this species as a key-taxon for understanding the mysterious biology and ecology of sharks
living in deep ecosystems. With the present work, we aim to unravel the population structure of the
blackmouth catshark in the Mediterranean Sea and adjacent North-Eastern Atlantic with the use of
nuclear molecular markers (simple sequence repeats, SSRs) and compare our results with recent
findings based on mitochondrial DNA supporting total panmixia in the species. Given the absence of
species-specific microsatellite markers we attempted the cross-amplification of a panel of 129 SSRs
developed for Centroselachus crepidater, Galeorhinus galeus, Hexanchus griseus, Mustelus
antarcticus, M. canis, M. henlei, M. mustelus, Negaprionbrevirostris,Scyliorhinuscanicula, Squalus
acanthias and S. mitsukurii on blackmouth catsharks collected during scientific surveys undertakenin
different years. The rationale of the chosen methodology was based on the calculation of genetic
distances between NADH2 sequences (1044bp long) derived from 595 species of elasmobranchs.
Our strategy focused on testing first SSRs markers developed on closely-related species. Then, we
assessed highly polymorphic markers developed on non-closely-related species. After a pilot gradient
amplification on few individuals from three different geographic macro-areas, we screened a total of
24 samples at the established conditions. To date, 16 microsatellite loci have been classified as
potential candidates for the successful cross-amplification on Atlantic and Mediterranean samples of
G. melastomus. These candidate loci will be applied in the population genetic analysis delineated in
the Atlantic Ocean (two sites) and in the Mediterranean Sea (five sites). Hopefully, the higher
resolution power of the markers chosen for this study will be able to disclose any signal of genetic
structure of the blackmouth catsharks and will contribute to improve the knowledge on deep-sharks.




                                                     58
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


           Recent attacks by White Shark in the Strait of Messina

        Achille DE SANCTIS1, Antonio DI NATALE2, Gianni INSACCO1, Bruno ZAVA1,3
               1
                   Museo Civico di Storia Naturale, via degli Studi 9, 97013 Comiso (Ragusa), ITALY
                                 2
                                   Aquastudio, via Trapani 6, 98121 Messina, ITALY
                       3
                        Wilderness Studi Ambientali. Via Cruillas, 27, 90146 Palermo, ITALY
                                             wildernessbz@hotmail.com




According to Boldrocchi et alii (2017) the information on the diet of white sharks in the
Mediterranean inferred from stomach content analyses of 103 stomachs revealed among other prey
items 45 bony fish and 5 cartilaginous fish. The most common teleost prey groups were tuna (Thunnus
spp.) and swordfish (Xiphias gladius). In the Strait of Messina motorboats known as “feluche” or are
used to catch the swordfish. These have a 20-25 m high mast, on the top of which sighters and
helmsmen are placed: on the front there is a walkway up to 45 m long, at the end of which the
harpooner is standing. In this sector of the sea, the press often reports the presence of large sharks. In
the present note we report three shark attacks (documented by photographs) on Red Tuna and
Swordfish in the Strait. On April 5, 2017, during the ascent of a 70 kg line-caught red tuna, a white
shark launched an attack that documented a bite that removed about 30 kg of flesh from the ventral
region. The second attack took place on August 1, 2019 in the water in front of S. Agata of Messina
on a swordfish hooked by a feluca, “Felicia II”; the swordfish after being harpooned fell to the sea
bottom at a depth 80 metres, where it remained for about 20 minutes. Subsequently the fish it was set
on board allowing to record a bite that ha detached about 20 kg of flesh, the entire weight of the fish
was estimated at around 107 kg. The third attack was observed by the same fishermen on August 5,
2019. A swordfish swimming below the surface was successfully attacked by a white shark which
cut off its tail. The same swordfish was subsequently harpooned and hoisted on board on the feluca.




                                                         59
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


             An updated check-list of elasmobranchs of Calabria

    Francesco Luigi LEONETTI1, Gianni GIGLIO1, Armando SANTORO1, Ilaria BERNABÒ1,
     Gianluca MAURO2, Pierluigi RIZZO1, Faustino SCARCELLI1, Pietro GIOVANNELLI1,
       Agostino LEONE1, Primo MICARELLI3, Vincenzo CIRCOSTA1, Sandro TRIPEPI1,
                       Leonard J.V. COMPAGNO3, Emilio SPERONE1
        ¹ Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende (CS), ITALY
                                          ²Amphibian Diving, ITALY
                  3
                    Sharks Studies Center – Scientific Institute, Massa Marittima (GR), ITALY
                                        francescoluigi.leonetti@unical.it




Despite Calabria represents an interesting study area due to its geographic position, nothing is known
of the presence of sharks and rays in this region. Data presented in this work come from nineteen
years of opportunistic fishing surveys (from 2000 to 2019). Our data shows that 53 species of
elasmobranchs are present in Calabrian seas: 30 of these are sharks, 22 are rays. To these, 1 species
of Chimaeras must be added. All they represent about the 50% of species reported for the
Mediterranean. The more widespread encountered species were Hexanchus griseus, Scyliorhinus
canicula, Prionace glauca, Raja asterias and Raja clavata. Very interesting is also the presence and
distribution in the study area of species such as Cetorhinus maximus, Carcharodon carcharias, Isurus
oxyrhincus, Sphyrna zygaena and Mobula mobular. Also, information on localities and specimens
has been presented. We report also new records of Alopias superciliosus, Carcharhinus obscurus and
Sphyrna mokarran.




                                                     60
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


                                   The diet of deep-sea sharks

                                  Ulrich MARTIN1, Jérôme MALLEFET1
           1
               Earth and Life Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-La-Neuve, BELGIUM
                                              Ulrich.martin@uclouvain.be




The deep-sea can be defined as the part of the oceans below 200 meters. The organisms living there
can be qualified as deep-sea organisms. However, a lot of these organisms display vertical movements
bringing them above 200 meters, making it difficult to classify them. Deep-sea organisms are thus
considered here to be organisms spending most of their life cycle below 200 meters. Due to the
technical difficulties linked to deep-sea study, a lot remains to be discovered about the organisms
living in the depths of the oceans. The trophic structure and interactions inside the deep-sea food-
webs remain poorly known for a lot of taxa, including deep-sea sharks.
Here, we first try to separate the known shark species between deep-sea and surface species. We then
try to review the available knowledges on deep-sea sharks’ diet. Most of the information come from
stomach contents but the use of more recent techniques is increasing in order to assess deep-sea
sharks’ trophic ecology. Stable isotope analyzes and fatty acid profiles have proved to provide useful
information in this regard and have been included in our review.




                                                       61
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


    Effect of environmental and temporal variables on the relative
 abundance of Carcharhinus falciformis and Sphyrna zygaena in Cabo
                         San Lucas, Mexico

        Francisco MASCAREÑO-SUAREZ1, Clara CALATAYUD1, Jacopo BRUNETTI2,
                Miguel Ángel ELICECHE-CONSTANTINI2, James KETCHUM3
                             1
                                 Fundación México Azul, Mexico City, MEXICO
                                  2
                                    Cabo Shark Dive, Cabo San Lucas, MEXICO
                                     3
                                       Pelagios Kakunjá A.C., La Paz, MEXICO
                                               kiko.masua@gmail.com




Environmental factors have an important effect on sharks. It has been observed that the horizontal
and vertical movements of these animals, as well as their distribution, abundance, and use of habitat,
can be influenced by biotic and abiotic factors. Due to the fact that pelagic sharks possess specific
environmental preferences, and the area of Cabo San Lucas is characterized by drastic oceanographic
variability between the warm and temperate seasons, we expect the relative abundance of these
organisms to be influenced by environmental factors, especially temperature and chlorophyll
concentration. The main goal of this study was to determine which environmental and temporal
variables (month and hour) have significant influence over the relative abundance of Carcharhinus
falciformis and Sphyrna zygaena in Cabo San Lucas. To do this, submarine censuses were completed,
where we registered the relative abundance of these species, as well as environmental factors such as
sea surface temperature, wind speed, and water color. Also, satellite data regarding chlorophyll a
concentration was downloaded. These variables were incorporated into generalized linear models
(GLM), where the relative abundance was the response factor. For C. falciformis, we found
significant differences for temperature, chlorophyll concentration, month of the year, and hour (GLM,
p<0.001). Its relative abundance was greater with warm waters (29.7±0.3ºC), whereas it was lower
with high concentrations of chlorophyll (0.15±0.002 mg/m3). Also, they were more abundant during
Autumn and between 5 and 6 pm. In contrast, water color was the only variable that showed
significant differences for S. zygaena (GLM, p<0.01), with green water resulting in greater relative
abundance. This is the first study to characterize the abundance and temporality of two highly
exploited shark species in the region, and we found differences amongst them. Our results give
valuable information in terms of management and conservation efforts in the area.




                                                    62
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


    Preliminary data on population trends of Great White Shark,
 Carcharodon carcharias (Linnaeus, 1758), in Gansbaai (Southafrica)
                      between 2009 and 2019

        Primo MICARELLI 1, Davide BONSIGNORI1,3, Francesca Romana REINERO1/2,
                                   Emilio SPERONE2
                                 1
                                   Sharks Studies Center – Scientific Institute, ITALY
              2
                  Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, ITALY
                    3
                      Dipartimento Scienze della vita e ambiente. Politecnico delle Marche, ITALY
                                           direzione@centrostudisquali.org




Since 2000, the CSS team (Sharks Studies Center), as part of the project: "Ecology and Ethology of
the Great White Shark", has been collecting ethological data during Scientific Expeditions organized
in South Africa in Gansbaai, 200 km east of Cape Town. In Gansbaai Bay and around Dyer Island
and Geyser rock, there is a large population of White Sharks that can be observed thanks to the support
of local ecotourism operators authorized to reach the best field observation sites. Research activities
about ethological and ecotoxicological analyses, covered between 2003 and 2019, were developed in
collaboration with: University of Calabria and Siena in Italy and Stellenbosch University in South
Africa. In order to enable proper data collection, it was necessary to develop techniques to identify
white sharks that consist mainly of the collection of various biometric and environmental data in
special sheets, as well as photographs of animals with special attention to the dorsal fins. After the
first years of optimization of the techniques and of staff involved, it was necessary to identify the
individual specimens and, between 2009 and 2019, it was possible to create a db. Since 2009 to 2019,
between march and may, 423 different white sharks were catalogued for a total of 440 hours of field
observations from the boat and 220 hours of observations from the cage, including 99 photographs
of unique dorsal fins. In this work the preliminary results, related to the trends of the population
present in Gansbaai Bay are presented and discussed.




                                                        63
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


         Sharks in hot waters: effects of a simulated marine heatwave
            over the foraging behaviour of a temperate catshark

       Catarina P. SANTOS1, Maria R. PEGADO1, Dayanne RAFFOUL1,2, Marta KONIECZNA1,
                        Paulo JORGE1, Pedro C. MIRANDA3, Rui ROSA1
   1
     MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Laboratório Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências da
             Universidade de Lisboa, Avenida Nossa Senhora do Cabo 939, 2750-374 Cascais, PORTUGAL
                               2
                                 Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Milano, ITALY
3
  Instituto de Biofísica e Engenharia Biomédica, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, PORTUGAL
                                                   draff016@uottawa.ca



Marine heatwaves (MHWs) are known to have large-scale implications over entire ecosystems,
however, their effects over key predators, such as elasmobranchs, are still poorly understood.
Although multiples studies have revealed several developmental, physiological, and behavioural
implications of temperature increase in this group, this has yet to be addressed in an MHW context.
In the present study, we investigated the effects of a simulated MHW over the foraging behaviour of
juvenile temperate sharks (Scyliorhinus canicula). Treatment conditions were chosen to reflect a
realist MHW scenario based on previous events detected in the wild (15 days, Δ 3 °C above
climatological normal; category II). Following exposure, the animal food intake, foraging motivation
and response to both olfactory and electrical cues were assessed. While no changes were observed in
food intake, cue response, and foraging time, there was an increase in the number of turns and biting
events. These behavioural changes may indicate changes in foraging efficiency, which not only have
the potential to undermine the coping capacity of shark juveniles but also to induce changes in the
predation dynamics. As anthropogenic climate change continues unabated, MHWs are expected to
increase in frequency, duration and intensity, which may further challenge the foraging efficiency of
these key predators, with potential cascading consequences in ecosystems already subjected
increasing pressure.




                                                      64
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


                      Behavioural complexity in white sharks:
                       influence of age, sex and environment

     Emilio SPERONE1, Angelo CAROTENUTO2, Lorenzo LEPORATI, Giuseppe RIJLLO1,
       Gianni GIGLIO1, Ylenia FABIETTI1, Sharon CHIRIACO1, Vincenzo CIRCOSTA1,
         Luna GRAZIADIO1, Chiara SPADARO1, Agnese TIGANI1, Sandro TRIPEPI1,
                     Primo MICARELLI3, Leonard J.V. COMPAGNO3
        ¹ Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende (CS), ITALY
                        ²Department of Biology, University “Federico II”, Naples, ITALY
                  3
                    Sharks Studies Center – Scientific Institute, Massa Marittima (GR), ITALY
                                            emilio.sperone@unical.it




From 2005 to 2018 the individual surface behaviour of bait-attracted white sharks during ecotourism
activites has been studied off Dyer Island Nature Reserve (South Africa). Observations were made
from a commercial cage-diving boat both by observers and by a drone. A total of 235 white sharks
has been identified. The individual behavioural units observed were: parading, bait following, visual
inspection, breach, tail slap, tail stand, spy hop, repetitive aerial gaping, and head-up vertical
emerging. We compared the exhibition of these behaviors and the complexity of the ethograms to
both biological (sex, age) and environmental (tides, cloud cover, underwater visibility, sea surface
conditions, temperature, time of the day) factors. We observed no correlation between behavior and
sex of the white sharks, while a significant correlation was observed comparing ethograms of mature
and immature white sharks: young sharks performed more complex ethograms with a higher number
of behavioural units than adult ones. Regarding the effects of environmental conditions, the sequence
and structure of individual behaviors were affected in particular by cloud cover and tides.




                                                     65
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


   Occurrence of the basking shark (Cetorhinus maximus) in French
   waters. 20 years of data from a public sightings recording scheme

                                   Eric STEPHAN1 and Alexandra ROHR1
              1
                  Association Pour l’Etude et la Conservation des Sélaciens (APECS), Brest, FRANCE
                                                  asso@asso-apecs.org




Since 1998, a public basking shark sightings recording scheme is established in French waters. The
aim is to gather simple data on occurrences to locate any sightings hotspots and, in the long term, to
detect possible variations in spatial and seasonal distribution of the sightings. Highlighting such areas
could help to minimize conflict between this species of conservation concern and human activities.
This type of projects involving members of the public are recognised for contributing also in terms
of public awareness. This is something important to make possible the implementation of new
measures to better protect basking sharks.
We analysed data collected between 1998 and 2017 (20 years). 1857 sightings representing 2409
sharks were recorded. Data were analysed in term of spatial, inter-annual and seasonal distribution.
Inter-annual and seasonal distribution were investigated globally and for several geographical areas
(Mediterranean Sea, Bay of Biscay, Celtic Sea, Channel and south North Sea).




                                                        66
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


           First insights into the trophic ecology of young White Sharks
           (Carcharodon carcharias) in Baja California waters, Mexico

 Elena TAMBURIN1,2, Fernando R. ELORRIAGA-VERPLANCKEN1, Colombo ESTUPIÑAN-
MONTAÑO1,2, Daniel J. MADIGAN3, Alberto SÁNCHEZ-GONZÁLEZ1, Toby DALY-ENGEL4,
      Mauricio HOYOS PADILLA5,6, Michelle WCISEL7, Felipe GALVÁN-MAGAÑA1
            1
            Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, MÉXICO
                           2
                             Fundación Alium Pacific, Cra. 26 No. 5C–13, Cali, COLOMBIA
   3
     Gulf of California International Research Center, Loma los Frailes S/N, Santa Rosalía, BCS 23920, MÉXICO
           4
              Florida Institute of Technology, Department of Ocean Engineering and Marine Sciences, USA
            5
              Pelagios-Kakunjá A.C, Sinaloa 1540. Col. Las Garzas, C.P. 23070, La Paz, B.C.S., MÉXICO
   6
     Fins Attached: Marine Research and Conservation 19675, Still Glen Drive Colorado Springs, CO 80908, USA
                                 7
                                   Michigan State University Museum, East Lansing, USA
                                              elenatambu2588@gmail.com




White sharks are usually defined as generalist predators, with a well described ontogenetic dietary
shift that occurs between the subadult and adult stages. Yet the majority of published studies have
focused on large and mature individuals, so the information about feeding habits is still lacking for
young white sharks. It is imperative to improve information about the trophic ecology of white sharks
across life-stages to better understand habitat shifts and their early life movements inside nursery
areas, which are determined by resources availability. This study provides the first insight into the
trophic ecology of young white sharks using stable isotopes analysis (SIA) in muscle tissues to
characterize prey contributions and ontogenetic changes in habitat use. We collected muscle of 21
white sharks from Sebastian Vizcaino Bay (SVB) during the period 2015-2018, including five
newborns, three YOY and three juveniles. White shark isotopic values did not vary by sex (δ N                   15



values: W = 52, p = 0.8 and δ C values: t = 0.25, p = 0.8) as well as age classes (δ N values: W =54,
                                13                                                          15



p = 0.4 and δ C values: t = -0.9, p = 0.4) and we did not find variation based on size classes for δ C
                13                                                                                              13



and δ N. However, we found changes in prey composition across white shark life stages, with
      15



significant changes throughout ontogeny. Mixing model indicate a high use of coastal areas for
foraging, which likely represents the shift from the embryo’s typical maternally-derived isotopic
signature incorporated in offshore foraging regions to the postpartum isotopic composition,
incorporated by neonates from inshore nursery habitats, including SVB. This study reinforces the
assertion that coastal areas, like SVB and the prey preferences that take place in this area (from
previous research) are critical for the development and to the successful foraging of young white
sharks, providing relevant knowledge regarding this species.




                                                      67
Session II: Ecology, Migration and Feeding


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


      Composition of the diet of three Etmopterus species off Angola

                                  Diana ZAERA¹, Claudia JUNGE¹

                                  ¹Institute of Marine Research, NORWAY
                                            diana.zaera-perez@hi.no




Three species of lantern sharks occur in Angolan waters: Etmopterus polli, E. pusillus, and E. spinax,
along the continental slope at depths down to 1000 m. As part of the regional cooperation between
Norway and Angola annual surveys were carried out on board the R/V Dr Fridtjof Nansen. During
these surveys, 4162 individuals were collected, Total length (TL), sex, maturity and stomach content
were recorded. The specimen’s length range was: 10 to 27 cm TL for E. polli, 10 to 55 cm TL for E.
pusillus and 10 to 35 cm TL for E. spinax. Food items were identified to the lowest possibly taxon,
weighed, measured and grouped into three taxonomic groups: teleosts, cephalopods, crustaceans and
remains (e.g. squid beaks, scales and otoliths). Prey importance was evaluated by using the index of
relative importance (IRI), expressed as percentage (%IRI). To determine if there were significant
diﬀerences in stomach contents between sexes and maturity stages, multivariate analysis of variance
(MANOVA) were done. The dependent variable used was the Index of Relative Fullness (IRF).
Preliminary results show that these species consumed a relatively wide range of prey items belonging
to three major groups: teleosts (10 families), crustaceans (7 families), and cephalopods (4 families).
For all three Etmopterus species, cephalopods were the most frequent prey. The other categories
varied in importance in the diet by species and life history stage. There were no significant differences
in the diet of males and females, but we found an ontogenetic dietary shift, reflected in the importance
of teleosts between immature and mature specimens. E. polli had the highest dietary diversity and
seem to feed mainly on fast moving prey. This study provides the first quantitative investigation of
the diets of three species of sharks belonging to the Etmopteridae family off Angola.




                                                   68
          SESSION III
ELASMOBRANCHS AS BIOINDICATORS




              69
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


              Organochlorine compounds in several species of shark
                    sampled in three different world areas

       Guia CONSALES1, Daniele CAGNAZZI2, Primo MICARELLI3, Sandro TRIPEPI4,
Emilio SPERONE4, Matt Kenyon BROADHURST5, Simone RIZZUTO6, Francesca SCHILLACI1,
                        Daniele COPPOLA1, Letizia MARSILI1,7
                1
                  Department of Physical, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Siena, ITALY
  2
      Marine Ecology Research Centre, School of Environment, Science and Engineering, Southern Cross University,
                                                       AUSTRALIA
                       3
                         Sharks Study Center, Aquarium Mondo Marino, Massa Marittima, ITALY
             4
               Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Science (DiBEST), University of Calabria, ITALY
           5
             NSW Department of Primary Industries, Fisheries Conservation Technology Unit, AUSTRALIA
                                6
                                  Lancaster University - Lancaster Environment Center, UK
                            7
                              Inter-University Center of Cetacean Research (CIRCE), ITALY
                                                consales@student.unisi.it




Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) such as organochlorine compounds (OCs) are still exploited in
some countries both for special permit and for the non-regulation of these products. Marine apex
predators like sharks have the potential to accumulate and biomagnify OCs due to their position in the
trophic food web. In this study we analyzed hexachlorobenzene (HCB), dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane
and its metabolites (DDTs) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in 59 muscle samples from by-caught
and free ranging sharks of 6 different species collected in 3 different areas: Mediterranean Sea,
northern New South Wales (Australia) and Dyer Island (South Africa). Overall, South African
specimens were the most impacted by PCBs and Mediterranean species by DDTs. Nevertheless, ratio
between pp’DDE/pp’DDT in South African sharks suggested a recent use of this xenobiotic along
with DDT fingerprint in Australian specimens, while unusually high values of op’ DDT isomers are
probably linked to the use of an industrial (non-insecticidal) DDT.




                                                         70
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


  From purse seine bycatch data to population trends: deriving an
abundance index for the silky shark based on its associative behaviour
             with floating objects in the Indian Ocean
           Alexandra DIALLO1, Mariana TRAVASSOS TOLOTTI1, Philippe SABARROS1,
                           Laurent DAGORN1, Manuela CAPELLO1
      1
          Institut de Recherche pour le Developpement (IRD), UMR MARBEC (IRD, Ifremer, Univ. Montpellier,
                                                CNRS), Sete - FRANCE
                                                 alexandra.diallo@ird.fr




Classified as vulnerable to near-threatened on the IUCN red list, the silky shark, Carcharhinus
falciformis is a pelagic species. The species is vulnerable to overfishing due to its spatial distribution
and biological characteristic. Using data from French and Spanish tropical tuna purse seine fishery,
this study proposes a new method to derive an abundance index for silky shark’s populations in two
areas of the Indian Ocean. Two models were used: the first one describes the dynamics of sharks
associated to floating objects (FOBs) used by tuna purse seiners in a social and in a non-social case.
The second one illustrates the exchanges of individuals between the FOB-associated population and
an external pool of sharks. The parameters estimated of the first model were obtained with fitting
analysis. They were then integrated to the second model, allowing to derive an abundance index for
the silky shark in statistical units of space and time and therefore the construction of temporal series
of the population trend. This methodology has the potential to be applied to many other species
associating with FOBs and serve as a tool for fisheries management.




                                                       71
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


 Challenging the data and status quo: the case of deepwater species in
   the high north – do we need dedicated elasmobranch surveys?

                 Claudia JUNGE1, Marlén K. MYRLUND1, Ole Thomas ALBERT1
                            1
                                Institute of Mairne Research IMR, Tromsø, NORWAY
                                                 claudia.junge@hi.no




Deepwater species are in general more difficult to study compared to species in shallower waters due
to the difficulty of access. This is limiting many studies to determining the presence and population
composition at a very specific timepoint only, that is, the timepoint of catch, usually via a trawl. The
power of such data therefore lies in the establishment of time series with many repeated measurements
over a long time span, ideally also covering a large enough spatial area to capture the entire population
range. We analysed >30 years of survey data from the Institute of Marine Research in Norway
spanning minaly the North Sea and the Norwegian Sea focussing on deepsea sharks, skates and
chimaera. We focussed on annual or bi-annual survey series that have been ongoing for at least 25
years. All survey series are designed to monitor the population status of commercial species like
redfish, greenland halibut and shrimps and are based on trawl catches. Species-specific distributions,
and changes over time, can be detected, as well as developments of population composition (e.g. size
and gender) by such time series. However, critical information like presence/absence and continuous
distribution along different habitat types are typically not possible to assess, and neither are “realistic”
number for species not typically caught in trawls. We would like to present a few discussion points
about the pro’s and con’s for dedicated chondrichthyan surveys and possible methodological
additions to existing surveys, including the critical question about cost/benefit for e.g. rare, threatened
or indicator species.




                                                      72
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


          Using a coastal shark species as sentinel in marine pollution
                             biomonitoring surveys

         Alexandre MARQUES1, Luís M.F. ALVES1, Marco F.L. LEMOS1, Sara C. NOVAIS1
  1
      MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, ESTM, Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, 2520-641, Peniche,
                                                 PORTUGAL
                                            sara.novais@ipleiria.pt




Marine contamination is worse than ever. To have an indication of stress or susceptibility,
understanding how contamination correlates with key biological endpoints is essential. Sharks tend
to accumulate high amounts of contaminants throughout their lives, bioaccumulating pollutants
present in the water and biomagnifying the pollutants from their prey. Many shark species are caught
and consumed all over the world, making them relevant for economical and public health reasons. To
understand possible consequences of contamination, the present work aimed to quantify the levels of
some metals in Scyliorhinus canicula and also measure biochemical biomarkers related with
oxidative stress and energy metabolism. Moreover, efforts were made towards understating how the
contamination-response patterns varied between lethal and less-invasive/non-lethal sampling. Sharks
caught off the coast of Portugal by a commercial trawling boat were sampled. For each individual,
levels of 13 metals were measured in both skin and muscle, while biochemical parameters were
measured in several tissues including muscle, liver, blood and skin. Arsenic (As), iron (Fe), and zinc
(Zn) had the higher mean values of all measured metals. There was a tendency for higher metal
accumulation in skin, with differences being found between life-stages and genders. Furthermore,
some analysed sharks surpassed stipulated guideline limits for human consumption of mercury (Hg)
and As. Regarding the biochemical responses, suitable biomarker candidates could be identified as
several significant correlations were observed between the physiological parameters and contaminant
accumulation levels. When comparing lethal and non-lethal sampling some promising similarities
were observed, especially when using skin biopsies, indicating good potential for being used as proxy
for deeper tissues in future biomonitoring efforts. This study further highlights the effectiveness of
combining biochemical parameters and pollutant body burden determinations to assess effects of
contamination and demonstrates the great potential of sharks to be used in biomonitoring studies of
the marine environment.




                                                        73
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

           Half a century of global decline in oceanic sharks and rays

     Nathan PACOUREAU1, Cassandra L. RIGBY2 Peter M. KYNE3, Richard B. SHERLEY4,
    John, C. CARLSON5, Daniel FERNANDO6, Malcolm P. FRANCIS7, Rima W. JABADO8,
 Sonja V. FORDHAM9, Katelyn B. HERMAN10, Kwang-Ming LIU11, Andrea D. MARSHALL12,
 Riley A. POLLOM1, Evgeny V. ROMANOV13, Colin A. SIMPFENDORFER2, Jamie S. YIN1,14,
                  Holly K. KINDSVATER14,15 and Nicholas K. DULVY1

       1
        Department of Biological Sciences, Earth to Ocean Research Group, Simon Fraser University, CANADA
   2
     Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries and Aquaculture & College of Science and Engineering, James Cook
                                                     University, AUSTRALIA
           3
             Research Institute for the Environment & Livelihoods, Charles Darwin University, AUSTRALIA
  4
    Environment and Sustainability Institute, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, UK
    5
      NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service, Southeast Fisheries Science Center, Panama City Laboratory, USA
                                               6
                                                 Blue Resources Trust, SRI LANKA
                   7
                     National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research, Wellington, NEW ZEALAND
                                     8
                                       Elasmo Project, Dubai, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
                       9
                         Shark Advocates International, The Ocean Foundation, Washington, DC, USA
                                             10
                                                Georgia Aquarium, Atlanta, GA, USA
              11
                 Institute of Marine Affairs and Resource Management, Taiwan Ocean University, TAIWAN
                                      12
                                         Marine Megafauna Foundation, Truckee, CA, USA
                              13
                                 CAP RUN - NEXA, 97420 Le Port, Île de la Réunion, FRANCE
                              14
                                 Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Natural Resources, USA
       15
          Department of Fish and Wildlife Conservation, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, USA
                                                      n.pacoureau@gmail.com




Overexploitation is the primary cause of fish extinction risk, yet individual species declines are
difficult to track, particularly in the high seas. This knowledge gap impedes progress towards Aichi
Biodiversity Targets and Sustainable Development Goals. We take advantage of newly available
timeseries for 53 timeseries of 18 species of oceanic sharks and rays to measure changes in abundance
by calculating the Living Planet Index. Worldwide, the abundance of oceanic sharks and rays has
declined by 71% since 1970, with the steepest ongoing decline occurring in the Indian Ocean. Recent
catch quotas, prohibitions, and international trade regulations provide some hope, yet without a
drastic improvement in implementation of management there is a real risk of worldwide collapse of
these populations and a disruption of their ecological function.




                                                        74
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


Bioaccumulation and trophic transfer of Cadmium in Brown smooth-
hound Mustelus henlei in Las Barrancas, Baja California Sur, Mexico

  Laura PANTOJA1, Ana Judith MARMOLEJO1, Felipe GALVÁN-MAGAÑA1, Arturo TRIPP1,
                       Fernando ELORRIAGA1, Laura ARREOLA2
              1
                Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas Instituto Politécnico Nacional, La Paz, MEXICO
   2
       Centro Interdisciplinario de Investigaciones y Estudios sobre Medio Ambiente y Desarrollo, Ciudad de Mexico,
                                                           MEXICO
                                                 lali.pantoja1990@gmail.com




We analyzed the concentration of cadmium in the mesopredator Mustelus henlei in an area influenced
by a natural deposit of phosphorite and by coastal upwellings. Both processes provide Cd in a natural
way. In the Las Barrancas, Mexico, M. henlei is one of the most important coastal sharks in the
artisanal fishery of the region, representing an important source for human consumption. Due to the
risk that it may constitute for human health, it is necessary to know the concentrations of Cd in muscle
and liver, the risk to consumers and evaluate the biomagnification of this element in the trophic chain.
The concentrations of Cd in the muscle of M. henlei were lower than the limits of detection, then the
meat of this species does not constitute a risk to human health. However, the liver hade average
concentrations of 0.96 µg g-1 (0-6.07, min-max), these values are above what is established by the
official Mexican Norm, probably due to the high influence of the phosphorite deposits present, and
to the upwelling events in the study area. The Mann-Whitney U test showed that had statistically
significant differences in Cd between females 0.65 µg g-1 (0.26-4.85, min-max) and males 1.21 µg g-
1
  (0.43-6.07, min-max): this is probably ta consequence of the metabolic characteristics of each sex.
The linear regression showed that there was no relationship between the length of M. henlei and the
Cd concentration: this let speculate that probably there is no bioaccumulation of the Cd in the liver
as the organisms increase in size. The analysis of Cd in the main prey of M. henlei using the factor of
biomagnification (FBM) indicated that red crab (P. planipes) with respect to M. henlei was: FBM=
1.08; whereas the chub mackerel (S. japonicus) was 4.57, which indicates a higher biomagnification
of this element in chub mackerel.




                                                          75
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


           First determination of organochlorine pollutants (OCs)
                   in oceanic manta rays, Mobula birostris
     Tania PELAMATTI 1,2, Edgar M. HOYOS PADILLA2, Iliana A. FONSECA PONCE 1,3,
                 Lorena RIOS MENDOZA4, Rogelio GONZALEZ ARMAS1,
             Ana J. MARMOLEJO RODRIGUEZ1, Felipe GALVÁN MAGAÑA1.
                                    1
                                   CICIMAR-IPN, La Paz, (BCS), MÉXICO
                                2
                                  Pelagios Kakunjá, La Paz, (BCS), MÉXICO
                     3
                       Proyecto Manta Pacifico Mexicano, Puerto Vallarta, (JAL) MEXICO
                            4
                              University of Wisconsin-Superior, Superior (WI), USA
                                             tpelamatti@gmail.com




Oceanic manta rays Mobula birostris, are broadly distributed in tropical and temperate waters and
their populations are in decline worldwide. In the Mexican Pacific Ocean, they are protected from
fishing activity, with a permanent ban for their capture, possession and commerce in the whole
country. For this reason, data on their ecology and toxicology must be obtained in non-invasive ways
and the biopsies taken from free-ranging animals are a useful tool for toxicological studies. Data on
persistent organochlorines (OCs) in sharks and rays are scarce, in manta rays are unknown.
Occupying a low trophic level, manta rays could be an early sentinel for the contamination levels in
the area. Although many of these persistent organic pollutants are nowadays banned in many
countries of the world because of their negative effects on wildlife, they are still found in the
environment due to their persistence and slow degradation. Concentrations of OCs such as
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and organochlorine pesticides (OCPs) were determined in skin and
muscle biopsies of free-ranging oceanic manta rays in Revillagigedo Archipelago and Banderas Bay,
where they aggregate in the Mexican Pacific Ocean. Biopsies were taken during scuba and freediving
using a pole spear and underwent chemical extraction and subsequent analysis with a gas
chromatograph equipped with mass spectrometer (GC-MS) to identify and quantify individual PCB
congeners and OCPs. PCBs were detected in biopsies, while no OCPs were detected in any sample.
This is the first time that persistent organochlorines are investigated in manta rays and represent a
baseline for future studies. OCs can interfere with reproduction in fish and could pose a serious threat
to the vulnerable populations of oceanic manta rays around the world.




                                                    76
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


      Trace elements concentration in target tissues of a population
      of lesser spotted dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula, from Central
                            Mediterranean Sea

  Francesca Romana REINERO1,2, Emilio SPERONE1, Primo MICARELLI2, Sandro TRIPEPI1,
     Marco MINERVINO1, Cristian MARCHIO1, Gianluca NANIA1, Laura BEVACQUA1,
                                  Donatella BARCA1
         1
             Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende (CS) ITALY
                                 2
                                   Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima (GR) ITALY
                                                 fr.reinero@gmail.com




Humans, in addition to represent a direct threat to sharks, also indirectly exerts a strong pressure on
these animals, due to the continuous release of polluting elements in the water and the atmosphere.
Sharks, as predators at the top of marine food chain, act as final receptors for a series of polluting
elements that are regularly discharged into the sea. The goal of this research was to delineate and
compare trace elements concentration rates in vertebrae, skin and liver of a population of lesser
spotted dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula, from Central Mediterranean. 75 sharks were collected in the
Tyrrhenian Sea, 12 miles off of Rocchette Punta Ala. 46 trace elements were analyzed in 75 vertebrae,
12 livers and 12 pieces of skin. Vertebrae were processed with LA-ICPMs, while liver and skin
through acid attacks combined with ICPMs. The most abundant and potentially toxic elements were:
lead, arsenic, manganese, zinc, nickel, copper, cadmium and iron. Lead, arsenic and manganese
showed highest concentrations in the vertebrae, due to the diet of the sharks that is composed of
crustaceans, bony fish and shellfish that accumulate many of these elements. Iron and nickel showed
highest concentrations in the skin of the samples, due to their presence in the water column, especially
along the coast where sharks were collected. At the end, cadmium, zinc and copper showed highest
concentrations in the liver, due to their ability to induce trace elements binding metallothionein (MT),
which chelates trace metals and reduce the concentration of cadmium.




                                                        77
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


                             How shiny are shark teeth?
                      Major element quantification in bioapatite

             Martina SAVIOLI2, Luca MEDICI1, Annalisa FERRETTI2, Simona CLO3,
                                  Daniele MALFERRARI2
         1
          Institute of Methodologies for Environmental Analysis, National Research Council of Italy, C.da S.
                            Loja-Zona Industriale, I-85050, Tito Scalo (Potenza), ITALY
2
  Department of Chemical and Geological Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via Campi 103, I-41125,
                                                  Modena, ITALY
                              3
                                MedSharks, Via Ruggero Fauro 82, 00197 Rome, ITALY
                                             martina.savioli@unimore.it




Elasmobranchs are among the most successful vertebrates in the Phanerozoic, with a stratigraphic
distribution ranging from the Silurian to Recent times and a global distribution. Like other vertebrates,
they share the use of bioapatite in making mineralized tissues. Bioapatite represents a unique archive
of physical and chemical environmental information. Indeed, bioapatite lattice can accommodate iso-
and hetero-valent substitutions during life or after burial and diagenesis, with a variation of the
chemical composition during geological time. Chemical and crystal-chemical data can be achieved
by different analytical tools, like laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-
ICPMS). As LA-ICPMS results are affected by physical-chemical preperties of the sample matrix,
an internal standard is usually required to correct and validate the analytical results. Unluckily, an
exclusive internal standard is so far missing for bioapatite, strongly affected by isomorphic
sobstitutions. A possible solution can be the calibration with external standards which, however, are
not so diffused. We propose herein a new method to prepare home-made matrix-matched calibration
standards to measure major element concentrations. The method has been tested on living and fossil
shark teeth. The final goal is the development of a reliable tool for chemical characterization by LA-
ICPMS on small sized samples, avoiding the use of electron microprobe, that is considered a more
appropriate technique, but which is more expensive, less diffused and, in any case, once again strictly
dependent on the calibrating standards. Our technique can be useful to study teeth of living
elasmobranchs in order to find possible chemical and crystal-chemical variation in bioapatite related,
for example, to specific habitat, age, gender, etc.




                                                       78
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


  Trace elements and isotopes analysis on historical samples of white
  sharks (Carcharodon carcharias) from central Mediterranean Sea.

        Laura BEVACQUA1, Edgar E. BECERRIL-GARCIA2, Fernando ELLORIAGA-
      VERPLANCKEN2, Diego JUARISTI-VIDEGARAY2, Francesca Romana REINERO1,2,
    Primo MICARELLI3, Felipe GALVAN-MAGANA2, Gianni GIGLIO1, Donatella BARCA1,
                           Sandro TRIPEPI1, Emilio SPERONE1

         1
             Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende (CS) ITALY
             2
             Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas Instituto Politécnico Nacional, La Paz, MEXICO
                                  3
                                    Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima (GR) ITALY.
                                              laura.bevacqua9@gmail.com



Both trace elements and isotopes analysis were performed on two samples of vertebrae of White
Sharks Carcharodon carcharias from Favignana Island (Sicily, central Mediterranean). For the trace
elements analysis, the ICP-MS associated by Laser Ablation allowed us to find 36 trace elements.
More samples were taken, on the same vertebrae, along a transect that goes from the most central part
of the vertebra to the distal one. Among these 36 trace elements we have been detected high
concentrations of Pb, Fe, Zn, Sr, Ba and U. Fluctuations of these elements can be caused by different
kind of processes such as variations in temperature, nutrition, uptake of urban pollutants and
proximity to industrial areas. The stable isotopes (δ15N and δ13C) analysis has been performed through
IRMS (Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometry) and allowed us to understand the trophic levels of
individuals. The two white shark vertebrae showed different isotopic values. The first individual
(seven growth layers) presented isotopic ranges from 9.6‰ to 10.8‰ (δ15N) and from -16.5‰ to -
13.0‰ (δ13C); this showed a mean ± SD value of 10.3 ± 0.4‰ for δ15N and -14.6 ± 1.3‰ for δ13C.
The second individual (five growth layers) presented isotopic ranges from 9.8‰ to 11.1‰ (δ15N) and
from -16.9‰ to -15.0‰ (δ13C), displaying a mean ± SD value of 10.8 ± 0.6‰ for δ15N and -15.8 ±
0.8‰ for δ13C. In terms of δ15N values, there were not significant differences (U = 6, p =0.07346)
between the two individuals; however, there were significant differences (t = -1.8, p =0.049256) in
δ13C values, both at a significance level of 0.05. The absence of differences between the trophic level
of the individuals could be related to the trophic level of their preys at the time of age. The differences
observed in the case of δ13C are probably correlated to the fact that the first shark was feeding near
the coast, while the other feed more offshore.




                                                         79
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


       Microbial infection in sharks as a bioindicator for the state of the
               environment in the eastern Mediterranean Sea

 Eyal BIGAL1,2, Danny MORICK1,2, Nadav DAVIDOVICH3, Natascha WOSNICK4, Ziv ZEMAH
                   SHAMIR1,2, Dan TCHERNOV1,2, Aviad P. SCHEININ1,2
  1
      Department of Marine Biology, Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, ISRAEL
                       2
                         Morris Kahn Marine Research Station, University of Haifa, Haifa, ISRAEL
                                    3
                                      Israeli Veterinary Services, Bet Dagan, ISRAEL
            4
              Departamento de Zoologia, Centro Politécnico, Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, BRAZIL
                                                   eyalbigal@gmail.com




Streptococcus agalactiae (group B streptococcus; GBS) is a zoonotic agent that has a wide range of
hosts including both bony and cartilaginous fishes. We describe meningoencephalitis as a result of S.
agalactiae (serotype Ia) infection in a female sandbar shark (Carcharhinus plumbeus; Nardo, 1827)
that stranded on the eastern Mediterranean coast of Israel in 2018. Based on post-mortem
examination, histopathology, and bacterial identification, we conclude that this pathogen was the
etiologic agent. C. plumbeus is an endangered (EN) species in the Mediterranean Sea according to
the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red list, with a decreasing number of
mature individuals in the population. Information on pathogen prevalence in apex marine predators
could inform about potential risks to threatened species and provide indication on the state of the
environment in this region. Our findings improve current knowledge about the health status of sharks
and warrant further research into the interaction between microbial and high-level organisms in the
marine environment.




                                                         80
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


           Cartilaginous fish as bioindicator in the Algerian basin

                           Sara LADOUL1, Sabrina KEFIL2, Farid HEMIDA1
                                   1
                                     ENSSMAL, Dely-Ibrahim, Algiers, ALGERIA
                2
                    Laboratory of Biodiversity and Environment, USTHB, FBS, Algiers, ALGERIA
                                             sladoul.enssmal@gmail.com



Pollution of marine organisms by heavy metals can occur by direct contamination via the environment
or by ingestion of contaminated preys. In order to monitor ecosystems by apprehending their
disturbances, it is important to identify bio-indicator species potentially capable of informing about
the quality of the environment in which they live. Some sharks and rays as Mustelus sp., Scyliorhinus
canicula (Linné, 1758) and Raja sp. may be used as potentially bioindicators. Closely related and
part of the same communities, these species occur in the same habitat, each one occupying a distinct
ecological niche whose functioning is defined by competition or by prey-predator system. These
cartilaginous fish belong to the characteristic community of Diplodus vulgaris (Sparidae). The
Thalassa campaign data were used and related to distribution, species diversity and associated fauna.
These results are provided by behavioral studies (abundance, spatial distributions, communities), and
monitoring of this bony fish, and are also a first step towards the ecosystem approach to fisheries
(EAF).




                                                      81
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


    Biomagnification of trace elements in the blue shark Prionace glauca
                      in Baja California Sur, Mexico

      Ariagna LARA LORENZO1, Felipe GALVÁN MAGAÑA1, Laura ARREOLA MENDOZA2,
             Fernando ELORRIAGA VERPLANCKEN1, Rogelio GONZÁLEZ ARMAS1,
                           Ana Judith MARMOLEJO RODRIGUEZ1
1
    Departamento de Pesquerías y Ecología Marina, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas del Instituto Politécnico
                               Nacional (CICIMAR-IPN), La Paz, Baja California Sur, MEXICO
    2
      Centro Interdisciplinario de Investigaciones y Estudios Sobre Medio Ambiente y Desarrollo del Instituto Politécnico
                                    Nacional (CIIEMAD-IPN), Ciudad de México, MEXICO
                                                      ariagna@gmail.com




One of the most abundant and consumed sharks worldwide is the blue shark, Prionace glauca. Due to
its high trophic position, it can accumulate large concentrations of potentially toxic elements in its
tissues and constitute a risk to human health due to its consumption. As the main route of uptake of
trace elements is gastrointestinal, the objective of this study was to determine the biomagnification
of mercury (Hg), selenium (Se) and cadmium (Cd) through the main preys of Prionace glauca, on
the coast Western Baja California Sur, Mexico. Low average levels of the three trace elements
analyzed in the shark muscle tissue were found (Hg = 0.43 ± 0.35 µg g-1 wet weight; Se = 0.53 ± 0.43
µg g-1 dry weight; Cd = 0.24 ± 0.81 µg g- 1 wet weight). These values are below the maximum
permissible limits so that their meat is suitable for human consumption. Among the female and male
individuals no statistically significant differences were found for any of the elements studied. The
main prey of the blue shark were the giant squid Dosidicus gigas and the prawn Pleuroncodes
planipes, being the latter who provided the greatest contribution of mercury to the blue shark and
Dosidicus gigas of selenium. In the case of cadmium, biomagnification did not occur because both
preys had higher concentrations of this metal concerning the shark.




                                                            82
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


         White blood cells number is correlated to parasitic charge
           in the small spotted catshark Scyliorhinus canicula

      Cristian MARCHIO1, Francesca romana REINERO1,2, Francesco Luigi LEONETTI1,
     Gianni GIGLIO1, Mariacristina FILICE1, Francesca RIVIELLO1, Marco MINERVINO1,
     Primo MICARELLI2, Emilio SPERONE1, Sandra IMBROGNO1, Concetta MILAZZO1
         1
             Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende (CS) ITALY
                                 2
                                   Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima (GR) ITALY
                                               cristian_marchio@alice.it




Hematology is now a useful diagnostic tool in human and domestic mammalian medicine and is
becoming such also in the clinical evaluation of fish. Most of the current knowledge of fish
hematology derives from research carried out on agnate organisms like missine and lampreys, on a
few species of elasmobranchs and on some species of teleosts, although standardized hematological
methods and reference intervals for elasmobranchs have not yet been established. The goal of this
research was to compare the number of white blood cells present in the specimens of a population of
lesser spotted dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula) from central Mediterranean Sea with the parasitic
charge. 75 sharks were collected in the Tyrrhenian Sea, 12 miles off of Rocchette Punta Ala, in
Tuscany. Helminth communities were analyzed in the stomach, spiral valve, liver, gills, mouth and
nostrils of all the sharks collected, while hematological analysis has been performed taking blood
samples from venous sinus of the cardiac cavity of 32 sharks. Complete blood analysis has been
performed for 10 samples, while for the remaining 22 only the leukocyte count was carried out using
the fluorescence flow cytometry method. All the hematological parameters were correlated with each
other, but just the correlation between the number of white blood cells and parasitic charge for the 32
sharks considered was extremely significant and inversely proportional, as the parasitized sharks
showed fewer white blood cells than the not parasitized ones. The possible explanation of this result
can be found in the immunosoppression from accumulation of trace elements (Hg, Pb, Cd, Cu, As,
Zn) in the tissues of lesser spotted dogfish, as already demonstrated in some studies carried out on
green frogs and bony fish.




                                                        83
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


       Vertebrae as novel target for trace elements accumulation in
             Small-spotted Catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula)

 Marco MINERVINO, Laura BEVACQUA, Cristian MARCHIO, Francesca Romana REINERO,
                        Donatella BARCA, Emilio SPERONE
                      Department of Biology, University of Calabria, Rende (CS) ITALY
                                      Marcominervino90@gmail.com




Elasmobranchs are top-predator organisms, essential to maintain trophic web equilibrium in the
marine environment. Therefore, fishery and pollutants represent a real threat for these organisms,
besides the high lipid content of their diet makes them bioaccumulators organism. Bioaccumulation
was previously studied in liver, gills, gut, but little is known about elasmobranch vertebrae. These are
an interesting target to study for their structure. Indeed vertebrae are made up of concentric rings, the
external are later formed and the inners are the oldest. For this reason, the vertebrae study could allow
to evaluate the correlation between pollutants absorption and life traits.
Small-Spotted Catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula) was chosen as model because its benthic habits and
its ecological importance make it a suitable candidate to study the environmental pollution.
Seventy-five specimens were collected in the ‘Golfo di Follonica’ (Italy).
To assess accumulation in vertebrae structure, we analyzed two different parts: the centre and the
more external ring. This helped us to denote differences between juvenile and adult stages
respectively. Trace element content was assessed through LA-ICP-MS.
Results showed a decrease in Pb accumulation during life stages, the same occurred for arsenic and
nickel. On the opposite, zinc concentration increases in the external section of vertebra compared to
the inner one. This changes could be due to different feeding habits of S. canicula. Indeed, the
juveniles feed on small crustaceans and mollusks, organisms known to accumulate arsenic, nickel.
On the other hand, adults use to pray fish, with a higher content of Zn. Our data confirm that vertebrae
are a reliable marker of pollutant-metals accumulation, and S. canicula is a good candidate for
pollution biomonitoring and shark’s conservation studies.




                                                    84
 Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


 POSTER CONTRIBUTION


                  Shark skin biopsy sampling as a potential non-lethal
                     and less-invasive marine biomonitoring tool

           Alexandre MARQUES1, Luís M.F. ALVES1, Marco F.L. LEMOS1, Sara C. NOVAIS1
    1
        MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, ESTM, Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, 2520-641, Peniche,
                                                   PORTUGAL
                                              sara.novais@ipleiria.pt



Anthropogenic derived contamination is a daily threat to marine resources. Long-living and slow
growing, higher trophic level animals like sharks are usually the most affected. Studies have been made
to assess the impacts of contamination on sharks, but they mostly rely on very invasive or even lethal
sampling. Non-lethal methods must be developed and optimized, with blood and skin biopsies being
already used with some success in large endangered animals like cetaceans. This work aimed to assess
the potential of skin biopsies to be used as sole tissues in the assessment of metal contamination and
biochemical responses in sharks, using the Atlantic lesser-spotted dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula) as
test species. A total of 74 specimens were captured of the shore of Portugal, aboard a commercial
trawling vessel, and sampled for skin and muscle once arrived at the lab (in the same day). A total of
13 metals, along with several energy metabolism and oxidative stress related biochemical responses
were measured. Overall, skin tissue tended to harbour greater metallic contamination when compared
to muscle. However, positive correlations were found between skin and muscle metal levels, across all
tested elements. Biochemical responses, mainly energy metabolism related, also seemed to be similarly
influenced by the same metal contaminants in both tissues. All correlations and interactions found in-
between metals and biomarkers point to a pattern of similar response both in deeper muscle and skin
biopsies. Therefore, this work highlights the potential of skin biopsy to be used as substitute for deeper,
more invasive (and lethal) muscle sampling. Studies like this one, encompassing comparisons between
sub cellular responses to contamination levels in deeper tissues and skin biopsies, are a crucial and
most needed step in validating non-lethal methodologies to be used in future efforts to gather
ecotoxicological data and to protect larger endangered shark species.




                                                          85
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


  Occurrence of anthropogenic litter in stomach contents of demersal
         elasmobranchs from the southern Tyrrhenian Sea
    Cristina PEDÀ1, Michela D’ALESSANDRO1, Federica LAFACE1, Pietro BATTAGLIA2,
     Pierpaolo CONSOLI2, Francesco LONGO2, Franco ANDALORO2, Teresa BOTTARI3,
    Saša RAICEVICH1, Silvio GRECO2, Giuseppe SABATINO4, Maria Teresa CACCAMO4,
                          Salvatore MAGAZÙ4, Teresa ROMEO1,2

                                         1
                                        ISPRA, Milazzo (ME), ITALY
                                        2
                                          SZN, Milazzo (ME), ITALY
                                        3
                                          CNR, Rome, ITALY
  4
    Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Physical Sciences and Earth Sciences, University of Messina,
                                                   ITALY
                                         mhldalessandro@gmail.com




To date, available information on marine litter ingestion in Mediterranean elasmobranchs is still very
poor, although these species have an important role in the marine trophic web as predators. This study
reports the anthropogenic litter ingestion in four elasmobranch species caught by trawlers and
longliners in the southern Tyrrhenian Sea: the lesser-spotted dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula (n= 27;
mean total length TL 40.5 ± 6.3 cm), the velvet belly dogfish, Etmopterus spinax (n= 16; mean TL
21.2 ± 7.7 cm), the blackmouth catshark, Galeus melastomus (n= 12; mean TL 20.7 ± 3.0 cm) and
the thornback ray Raja clavata (n= 6; mean TL 65.8 ± 2.8 cm). A total of 61 stomach contents were
examined by direct visual sorting at a stereo microscope in order to identify the anthropogenic litter.
Once isolated, litter particles were counted and categorized by shape, colour and size. Overall, 18
litter particles were identified from the stomach contents of 14 demersal elasmobranchs (23% of total
occurrence, O%). In details, litter items were recorded in seven S. canicula (O%= 25.9), four G.
melastomus (O%= 33.3), three R. clavata (O%= 50), whereas no litter ingestion was observed in E.
spinax. Transparent and white colours resulted the debris with the highest frequency of ingestion
(O%= 25). Fragments were the most common litter in stomachs of both S. canicula (O%= 87.5%)
and R. clavata (O%= 75), whereas in G. melastomus fragments and filaments occurred with the same
frequency (O%= 50). Most litter particles (55.5% of total debris) had a size less than 5 mm. This is
the first time that litter ingestion is observed in R. clavata in Mediterranean waters. Some of these
species could be considered as indicators for litter ingestion in marine demersal habitats.




                                                       86
Session III: Elasmobranchs as Bioindicators


POSTER CONTRIBUTION


   Morphological and molecular characterization of gastrointestinal
         parasites in Mustelus mustelus from Adriatic Sea

        Perla TEDESCO1, Andrea GUSTINELLI1, Monica CAFFARA1, Andrea MARSELLA2,
                Anna TOFFAN2, Eleonora CACCHI1, Maria Letizia FIORAVANTI1
           1
           Department of Veterinary Medical Sciences, Alma Mater Studiorum University of Bologna, ITALY
   2
       Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie, ITALY
                                               perla.tedesco@unibo.it




Increasing interest in the management and conservation of elasmobranchs highlights the importance
of acquiring further knowledge of their biology and ecology; in this respect, important information
can be derived from the analysis of their parasite fauna. Parasitological investigations focused on
elasmobranchs from Mediterranean Sea are scarce; the compilation of accurate and updated checklists
is further complicated by the occurrence of old records of infection and the doubtful identity of the
shark host. A healthy specimen of Common Smoothhound, Mustelus mustelus, (total length: 66 cm)
fished as bycatch in northern Adriatic Sea was subjected to a complete parasitological examination.
Collected parasites were processed for morphological and morphometric analyses aimed at
identifying them to the species level. Parasite identity was confirmed through amplification and
sequencing of 28S rDNA. Nematodes belonging to the species Acanthocheilus rotundatus (15
specimens) were recovered from the stomach and the proximal intestine, while cestodes belonging to
the species Calliobothrium verticillatum (5 specimens) were collected from the spiral valve.
Calliobothrium spp. are known to parasitize different species of Mustelus around the world’s oceans.
Particularly, C. verticillatum has been reported in M. mustelus from Northeastern Atlantic and only
one report dating back to the 50s on this parasite in M. mustelus from Mediterranean Sea exists. Our
results would therefore confirm the occurrence of this host-parasite association in Mediterranean
waters. Acanthocheilus rotundatus has been described infecting M. mustelus from Adriatic Sea based
on morphological evidence; our work provides the first sequence data of A. rotundatus from
Mediterranean Sea, since only sequences of specimens collected in extra-Mediterranean areas were
available so far. Updated knowledge on the parasite fauna of M. mustelus from Adriatic Sea would
contribute to elucidate aspects of the ecology, biology and health status of elasmobranchs from
Mediterranean Sea, providing useful information for their proper management and conservation.




                                                         87
          SESSION IV
CONSERVATION AND COMMUNICATION




              88
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


KEYNOTE SPEAKER


       Forty-five years of shark conservation: from "Jaws" to 2019




                                        Sarah L. FOWLER

                               Save Our Seas Foundation, SWITZERLAND
                                       Sarah@SaveOurSeas.com



Jaws, the novel, was published in 1974 and the film released in 1975. Forty-five years ago, about 800
species of sharks, rays and chimaeras were known to science and the global human population was
around 4 billion. Today, about 1,250 chondrichthyan fishes have been described and the human
population is roughly 7.5 billion. This presentation reviews the history of shark conservation and
management since the 1970s and current challenges faced as the year 2020 approaches.




                                                 89
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


INVITED SPEAKER


           Use of genomics for applied elasmobranch conservation




       Diana A. PAZMIÑO1,2, Lynne VANHERWERDEN2, Floriaan DEVLOO-DELVA3,4,
                                  Gregory E. MAES 2,5,6
             1
                 Galápagos Science Center, Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Galápagos, ECUADOR
                                        2
                                          James Cook University, AUSTRALIA
                    3
                      School of Biological Sciences – QMS, University of Tasmania, AUSTRALIA
                                   4
                                     Oceans and Atmosphere, CSIRO, AUSTRALIA
              5
                Laboratory of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Genomics, University of Leuven, BELGIUM
    6
      Laboratory for Cytogenetics and Genome Research, Center for Human Genetics, Genomics Core, BELGIUM
                                                dapazmino@usfq.edu.ec

The advent of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies has seen a transition from conservation
genetics to genomics (from gene to genome scales), which is informing our understanding of species and
improving conservation outcomes based on these insights. This technology has provided access to
thousands of genome-wide markers, collectively capable of providing reliable inferences about
demographic patterns and enabling detection of local adaptation. Examples of applied genomics in
elasmobranch conservation and forensics at different levels, from species to individuals are becoming
more common as we develop genomic resources for non-model species. For species identification, when
diagnostic external morphological characters are lacking, or when identifications rely on body parts, the
use of non-expensive techniques such as mtDNA sequencing is often used. However, when dealing with
closely related, recently diverged species, as is the case of the Galapagos (Carcharhinus
galapagensis) and dusky (C. obscurus) sharks, the combination of mtDNA and genome-wide diagnostic
markers is required to distinguish the species. This also allows other biologically relevant patterns of
genetic variation to be explored, such as those that arise due to hybridization. A first population
connectivity assessment of C. galapagensis in the Eastern Tropical Pacific resulted in the development of
1,873 high-resolution SNP markers. A selected subset of SNPs was further used to successfully assess
hybridisation patterns between this, and C. obscurus. Future steps include the use of such markers as
forensic tools to develop a cost-effective PCR-based essay to rapidly distinguish the two species from
carcases or body parts. Likewise, the development of worldwide genomic resources capable of detecting
population structure at large as well as fine geographic scales is crucial at the population level to identify
particular signatures of selection and local adaptation that can lead to provenience-detecting markers.
Finally, at the individual level the inference of the sex-determination systems in new species is leading
the way towards the identification of sex-linked markers that can aid sex identification from fin or tissue
samples. Current efforts using in silico and PCR validations are showing that SNP markers can be
effective at assigning the correct sex in at least twelve of the sixteen species tested. Applying fundamental
knowledge towards the development of molecular traceability tools is the logical and much needed step
towards shark conservation.


                                                     90
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


   A world platform to support data collection on endangered shark
                  species in the Mediterranean Sea

      Filippo BARGNESI1,2, Stefano MORO3,4, Agostino LEONE5, Francesco FERRETTI6,7
        1
         Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona ITALY
                                   2
                                     Cattolica Aquarium, Cattolica (RN), ITALY
               3
                 Department of Environmental Biology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome ITALY
               4
                 Department of Environmental Biology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome ITALY
     5
       Department of Biological, Geological & Environmental Sciences, University of Bologna, Ravenna ITALY
                        6
                          Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford University, Monterey (CA) USA
              7
                Department of Fish and Wildlife Conservation, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg (VA) USA
                                              f.bargnesi@pm.univpm.it




In the Mediterranean Sea, sharks are currently one of the less frequently observed groups of animals.
Scientific surveys do not provide enough observation effort to collect relevant data on the presence
and distribution of the species, and fisheries data have been historically scattered and rarely adequate
in terms of taxonomic resolution. Following the IUCN regional assessment 57% of the species are
listed as endangered and 25 % as still data deficient. New monitoring strategies need to take place in
the area to improve data collection, and new technologies can create a link between people and
scientists. Data management is crucial in these cases. Here we present sharkPulse, a collaborative
international project aiming to involve divers, fishermen, surfers, beachgoers and other ocean users
in sharing image-based sightings of sharks. To facilitate users participation the sharkPulse team has
developed a web platform (http:\\sharkpulse.org) and a mobile application (IOS and Android). All
the data collected are available and shared online with summary tables and distribution maps. To
break linguistic barriers and boost participation, the project has created national focal points in several
parts of the world (Italy, UK, New Zealand, South Africa, Greece). From 2016, the Italian national
focal point has focused his activity on the Mediterranean Sea, collecting more than 900 photographic
records of 35 shark species. Here we present a first exploration of these data and highlight some
emerging patterns: i) possible identification of strongholds for rare and endangered species; ii)
seasonal shifts in pelagic shark distributions; and iii) presence of newborns and immature specimens
for broad-ranging species such as the shortfin mako (Isurus oxyrinchus) for which these sightings are
more frequent (75% of the records) than adults. Integrated collection and analysis of these data can
improve scientific understanding of sharks in the Mediterranean Sea, fill the data gap that has
historically characterized the basin on these species, and stimulate conservation and recovery actions.




                                                      91
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


                  Shark and Ray Forensics, a conservation tool
                     for the Western Indian Ocean region

                    Tamaryn ASBURY1, Aletta BESTER-VAN DER MERWE1
                      1
                          Department of Genetics, Stellenbosch University, SOUTH AFRICA
                                                   aeb@sun.ac.za




Worldwide, ocean and coastal threat is driven by the rapid expansion of fisheries and global trade
markets, whereby overfishing activities and habitat degradation have severely altered elasmobranch
populations. The western Indian Ocean is an important conservation area for sharks and rays as this
region is a global hotspot for biodiversity and for threatened species. The harvesting of elasmobranchs
in this region is amongst others driven by the international shark meat and shark fin trade. In this
study, we assessed marine forensics as a tool for complementing traditional identification methods –
through the development of a mini-barcoding assay as well as High Resolution Melt (HRM) analysis,
relevant to elasmobranch species occurring in the western Indian Ocean region. This involved the
testing and optimisation of the standard barcoding region of the cytochrome oxidase c subunit 1
(COI), using traditional barcoding primers as well as two sets of nested PCR primers in a multiplex
assay. Preliminary results (only a 22% species identification success rate) indicated the limitations of
using only the traditional COI primers and warrented the inclusion of additional gene regions for
species identification of future shark forensic cases. In this study, a mini-barcoding multiplex assay
comprising three primer sets were optimised and applied to a wide range of shark forensic case
studies, involving confiscated shark fins possibly for illegal trade. Furthermore, a HRM approach
was validated based on six southern African houndshark species and further optimised for additional
commercially exploited species such as hammerhead S. lewini and S. zygaena, copper C. brachyurus,
dusky C. obscurus, bull C. leucas, blacktip C. limbatus and blue shark P. glauca. Ultimately, these
approaches can be combined to develop a relatively fast and cost-effective identification protocol that
can be applied to identify most, if not all, elasmobranch species involved in trade regionally.




                                                      92
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

   Reducing bycatch and mortality in the Med: the project proposal
        eLIFE (elasmobranch low impact fishing experience)

   Massimiliano BOTTARO1, Francesca BATTISTELLI2, Flavia BINDA3, Periklis KLEITOU4,
   Alessandro LUCCHETTI5, Carlotta MAZZOLDI6, Giovanni MOSCA7, Augusto NAVONE8,
                       Bruna VALETTINI9, Giulia VISCONTI10

¹Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn - Italian National Institute for Marine Biology, Ecology and Biotechnology, ITALY
                                                   ²Legambiente, ITALY
                                             ³Consorzio Mediterraneo, ITALY
                              ⁴Marine and Environmental Research (MER) Lab., CYPRUS
      5
        Italian National Research Council, Institute for Biological Resources and Marine Biotechnology, ITALY
                                  6
                                    University of Padua, Department of Biology, ITALY
                                                      7
                                                        Softeco, ITALY
                            8
                              Marine Protected Area of Tavolara-Punta coda Cavallo, ITALY
                                                9
                                                  Costa Edutainment, ITALY
                                     10
                                        Marine Protected Area of Isole Pelagie, ITALY
                                                massimiliano.bottaro@szn.it


Over-exploitation and fishery by-catch leads to an increasing decline of elasmobranchs worlwide;
with unpredictable consequences for the health and structure of the ecosystems
According to IUCN, the Mediterranean Sea is amongst the three top regions where the biodiversity
of sharks and rays is seriously threatened. Considering the European waters, the IUCN reveals that
half of the assessed elasmobranch species, 39 out of 73, are threatened at Mediterranean level.
Despite some recent efforts in EU to reduce shark by-catch and mortality (i.e., adoption of the
European Commission's Action plan for the Conservation and Management of Sharks, and adoption
of the Council Regulation (EU) 2017/127), the EC goals are far from being achieved, and
conservation actions need to be set up. Current legislation only prevents retention and trade,but not
the actual capture or the mortality that may occur as a result.
The factors that contribute to the by-catch and the mortality of elasmobranch during fisheries capture
are - in fact - many, but the major is the fishers’ attitude. The consciuous and responsible behavior of
the employees in commercial fishing activities is fundamental to mitigate the impact of their actions
on the marine biodiversity, cartilaginous fishes included.
The project eLIFE (elasmobranch low impact fishing experience), has been recently funded by the
EU’s LIFE programme for the protection of the enviornment. It aims to reduce the elasmobranch by-
catch and mortality by promoting best conservation practices in the context of the EU commercial
fishing activities in the Mediterranean Sea.
It targets several sharks listed as endengered or critically endengered in the Red List of the European
marine fishes of the IUCN and it includes the partecipation of 3 EU countries (Italy, Cyprus and
Greece). eLIFE is based on the direct involvement of the professional fishers, and will test the
efficiency of using low impact fishing gears and correct methods of manipulation for the
elasmobranch incidental caught, as well as the use of digital technology, like satellite tags and a
smartphone application to monitor the efficency of the conservation actions and to obtain new spatial
information.

                                                       93
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


                How key stakeholders can help secure the future
                   of the Critically Endangered Angelshark

          María Belén CARO1, Joanna BARKER1,2, Michael SEALEY1, Eva MEYERS1,4,
                               David Jiménez ALVARADO1,3
                                 1
                                    Angel Shark Project, CANARY ISLANDS
                          2
                            Conservation & Policy, Zoological Society of London, UK
                 3
                   EcoAqua, Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Islas Canarias, SPAIN
                      4
                        Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig, Bonn, GERMANY
                                          info@angelsharkproject.com



The Angelshark (Squatina squatina) was once widespread throughout the Eastern Atlantic and
Mediterranean Sea, but now is one of the most threatened fish in European waters. Indeed, the angel
shark family is identified as the second most threatened elasmobranch taxon after a global review of
extinction risk by the IUCN. A unique stronghold remains for the Angelshark in the Canary Islands,
but even here the species is under threat.
Given the importance of forging bonds with key stakeholders to secure the future of this species,
Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands (ASP:CI), a collaboration between Universidad de Las Palmas
de Gran Canaria, Zoological Society of London and Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander
Koenig, has developed a number of tools to engage interested parties and encourage them to provide
information to aid scientific research. Our focus is on the recreational sector, specifically divers and
fishers.
This year, ASP:CI has re-launched best practice guidelines in collaboration with the recreational
fishing sector to a) encourage fishers to safely release any accidentally caught Angelsharks, b) report
these encounters and c) gain the trust of the fishing community and raise the awareness on the species.
In addition, we completed the first Count the Angels event in Fuerteventura, which brings together
dive centres to complete a census of Angelsharks across the island via coordinated diving. A total of
7 dive centres participated, 24 Angelsharks sighted and over 882 diving hours were completed during
this event. This not only reinforces the bond with the diving community, but enables greater coverage
across large stretches of coastline to better understand Angelshark presence, and in the future,
calculate abundance metrics.
These tools will ensure and reinforce the bond between scientists and the recreational community, a
key task when working with a Critically Endangered species.




                                                     94
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION

                      Longline fishery in a marine reserve –
              catching protected megafauna in the Galapagos Islands

 Florencia CERUTTI1, Nicolás MOITY1, Manuel DUREUIL2,3, Jorge RAMÍREZ-GONZÁLEZ1,
    Harry REYES4, Kayla BUDD1,5, José MARÍN-JARRÍN1*, Pelayo SALINAS-DE-LEÓN1,6

       1
           Department of Marine Biology, Charles Darwin Research Station, Charles Darwin Foundation, Av Charles
                                        Darwin s/n, Puerto Ayora, Galapagos, ECUADOR
            2
              Dalhousie University, Department of Biology, 1355 Oxford Street, Halifax, NS, B3H 4R2, CANADA
           3
             Sharks of the Atlantic. Research and Conservation Centre (ShARCC), Halifax, Nova Scotia, CANADA
             4
               Galápagos National Park Directorate, Av Charles Darwin s/n, Puerto Ayora, Galapagos, ECUADOR
                                5
                                  Department of Biology, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire, USA
                     6
                       Pristine Seas, National Geographic Society, Washington, District of Columbia, USA
                     *
                      Current Address: Fisheries Biology Department, Humboldt State University, California, USA
                                                   florenciacp@gmail.com




Marine megafauna (elasmobranchs, mammals, turtles, birds) is important from an ecological point of
view because it occupies upper trophic levels and is also often essential for marine tourism. Species
belonging to this group are often heavily impacted by fishing due to their longevity, late sexual
maturity and low reproductive output, which affect the capability to recover from depletion. In the
Galapagos, marine megafauna is protected throughout the marine reserve and is the main attraction
for marine tourism, generating millions of dollars in revenue annually. Multiple artisanal longlining
projects were carried out since the 1990s with the aim of redirecting fishing effort from the depleted
coastal-demersal species to pelagic fish, such as yellowfin tuna, Thunnus albacares and swordfish,
Xiphias gladius. All these projects have resulted in high bycatch of megafauna. Despite its importance
in the archipelago, megafauna is still being caught as bycatch in the longline fishery, without
independent scientific studies to evaluate its impact, largely due to poor objective definition, data
collection, and enforcement. To fill in this knowledge gap, we analyzed data of the fifth longline
fishing project (2012-2013) to describe the fishery, identify variables affecting bycatch, and suggest
mitigation strategies. This experimental project involved twelve fishing vessels, which deployed
42,007 hooks catching 4,893 individuals belonging to 33 species, mostly yellowfin tuna. Of those,
16 species were protected megafauna, particularly blacktip sharks, Carcharhinus limbatus and
oceanic manta, Manta birostris. These species were regularly captured during the two fishing seasons
and in all the four bioregions that occur in the archipelago, suggesting little potential to mitigate their
catch. As an alternative, we identified 14 hotspots where yellowfin tuna and swordfish could be
harvested through more selective fishing techniques. In an archipelago where the main economic
activity is marine wildlife tourism, the implementation of an extractive and unselective activity such
as pelagic longline fishing should be avoided to ensure the preservation of the Galapagos marine
ecosystem and its booming tourism industry.




                                                         95
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


          Using local ecological knowledge to reconstruct trends in
              elasmobranch populations in the Strait of Sicily

 Virginia CARROZZI1, Manfredi DI LORENZO1, Andrea SIMONETTI2, Francesco COLLOCA1
                                 1
                                     CNR-IRBIM, Mazara del Vallo, ITALY
                                      2
                                        University of Turin, Torino, ITALY
                                            francesco.colloca@cnr.it




Fishers have a rich knowledge of the resources and the environment in which they work, that is rarely
utilised to provide advice on the status of exploited populations. Fishers “local ecological knowledge”
(LEK) can be used to reconstruct species trends, like sharks, that currently are at very low biomass
due to overfishing. In this study we used the historical memories of Sicilian fishers to gather data on
change in fishing practices and capture of cartilaginous species in the Strait of Sicily over the last
decades. We conducted interviews with 27 retired trawl fishers from Mazara del Vallo harbour (SW
Sicily) using a pre-defined questionnaire with a series of open and fixed questions and comparing to
the present abundance. The questionnaire included specific questions about the trends they perceived
in cartilaginous fish occurence abundance between 1940s and 2000s (according to three main time
periods 1940-1960, 1961-1980 and 1981-2010), in order to facilitate the estimation of eventual
changes over time. A total of 29 species were mentioned by fishermen during interviews, including
large pelagic sharks (Carcharhinidae, Sphyrnidae and Lamnidae), mesopredatory demersal sharks
(Squalidae, Hexanchidae, Centrophoridae, Oxynotidae, Triakidae, Scyliorhinidae and Squatinidae)
and batoids. Overall shark catches were perceived to have diminished since the early 1940s: about
95% of fishers reported the decline of commercially important species (e.g. Mustelus spp.) and
indicated species that could have been depleted (e.g. Squatina spp., Sphyrna spp.).
Our study shows that LEK of fishers can be beneficial for reconstructing long-term population trends
of exploited species when traditional standard data on fisheries catch or species relative abundance
from surveys is limited or only available for recent periods. The results obtained cleary indicate the
rapid and alarming decline of elasmobranchs in the Strait of Sicily highlighting the need for urgent
conservation measures to be adopted.




                                                     96
Session IV: Conservation and Communication


ORAL CONTRIBUTION


       Molecular identification of endangered marine predators by
       barcoding ancient museum rostra of Mediterranean sawfish
                               populations

        Valentina CROBE1, Caterina BERGONZINI1, Elisabetta CILLI2, Alice FERRARI1,
         Agostino LEONE3, Francesco FERRETTI4, Fausto TINTI1, Alessia CARIANI1