nd February 2014. On the other hand, some females
were detected only for a few weeks; the 30321 have transmitted 707 detections and stay at the
site only one month period. The tendency to stay during daylight hours in the island (more that
75%), it probably related to reproductive aspects, since it is common to see females with post-
copula marks. In turn, the absence of detections during the night suggests that bull sharks move
to other surrounding areas to feed.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                 53
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Measuring and mitigating extinction risk in European Chondrichthyans

Rachel Walls1, Sarah Fowler2 and Nicholas Dulvy1


1Simon Fraser University, 8888 University Drive, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canada

21 Admiralty Cottages, Admiralty Road, Plymouth, Devon PL1 3RS, United Kingdom




The International Union for Conservation of Nature’s (IUCN) Red List Assessments contribute to the
motivation and foundation for global and regional biodiversity conservation and fisheries management
efforts. Some of the earliest chondrichthyan fish Red List Assessments were undertaken in Europe,
through workshops for the Mediterranean Sea (2003) and the Northeast Atlantic (2006). The following
decade saw the introduction of several conservation and fisheries management measures for
elasmobranchs in both sea areas. The IUCN Shark Specialist Group has recently reassessed the status of
all chondrichthyans in European waters. This has allowed us to review changes in the Red List Index
since these workshops, compare these with trends in the Red List Indices prepared for other taxonomic
groups, and consider the extent to which conservation and management actions have mitigated the status
of European elasmobranchs. Our comparison revealed striking differences in the overall status of
elasmobranchs since the previous assessments and between regions, and compared with other taxa. The
Red List Index for elasmobranchs is significantly lower (worse) than for any other major taxonomic group
reviewed. Approximately 35% of Northeast Atlantic elasmobranchs are considered “safe”, compared to
only 10% of Mediterranean species. Similarly, 31% of Northeast Atlantic species are threatened with an
elevated risk of extinction, compared to almost 50% in the Mediterranean; the latter has the highest
proportion of threatened species in any region globally. Despite the downlisting of some Northeast Atlantic
species since 2006, the overall Red List Index for chondrichthyans has deteriorated in both sea areas. We
conclude by identifying the biodiversity and fisheries conservation and management measures that have
been proposed; which ones have been adopted; which of the latter have been implemented effectively;
and where improvements are most urgently needed.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                           54
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Can public aquaria help change the World?

João Correia1

1Flying Sharks




Public aquaria and zoos have come a long way from early XXth Century facilities focused exclusively on
displaying live animals to an audience thirsty for novel and interesting sights. As the end of the millennium
approached, zoological institutions took on a role of leadership, steering the public towards a more
enlightened view on the environment, conservation and education. This presentation reports on a myriad
of such examples, ranging from the world famous ‘Sea Food Watch’ card promoted by the Monterey Bay
Aquarium, or even ‘The Great Egg Case’ hunt promoted by Shark Trust and strongly supported, and
disseminated, by Sea Life Centres worldwide. Likewise, the European Association of Zoos and Aquaria
has lead nearly a dozen conservation campaigns, ranging from Apes, to Carnivores, to Bushmeat,
amongst many other environmental issues crying for attention. These campaigns enjoy monumental
support from the millions of visitors that zoos and aquaria welcome through their admission gates every
year and these efforts have raised nearly 4 million euros thus far. These are but a few of multiple
examples where the public aquaria, and zoo, community are spearheading the conservation of the natural
world and education of society.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                     55
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


The Bristol Channel Skate Fishery (ICES Division VIIf): investigating sustainability and responsible
consumption

John Richardson1


1The Shark Trust




The Bristol Channel (ICES Division VIIf) offers a salient example of a UK regional skate fishery in
transition. As the conservative life-history characteristics of skate are now widely recognised, it is clear
many species and populations are intrinsically vulnerable to elevated fishing mortality. In the move
towards sustainable skate fisheries in EU waters, increasingly precautionary management measures
have been introduced for the Celtic Sea Eco-region, including a reduction in the ‘Skate and Ray’ Total
Allowable Catch (TAC). For the Bristol Channel fleet this has resulted in a significant decrease in TAC
available to individual vessels, with direct ramifications for local fishing communities.
In response, the regional fishing industry has questioned the accuracy of stock assessments based on
macro-scale management units (i.e. eco-regions), which they do not believe accurately reflects the
situation in the Bristol Channel.
The Shark Trust is currently working with sectors of the fishing industry and supply chain. Using ICES
Advice as a foundation, the Trust is evaluating a range of additional, complementary data to investigate
the sustainability of the skate fishery, as well as potential support for the responsible consumption of
appropriately managed species and stocks caught in the Bristol Channel. The Trust’s primary focus is to
secure a sustainable future for Bristol Channel skate populations and associated fisheries.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                       56
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Combining forces: a multidisciplinary approach to unravel population structure in a heavily
bycaught deepwater shark

Claudia Junge1,2, Armelle Jung3,Sienna Gray4, Matt McMillan1, Chris Izzo1, Bronwyn Gillanders1, Ole Thomas Albert5, Steve
Pedderson6, Wolf Isbert7, Timon Brueggemann2, Giovanni Romagnoni2, Diana Zaera8, Farid Hemida9, D. Jasper Maaholm10,
Michalis Mihalitsis10, Fabrizia Serena11, Einar Eg Nielsen12


1Southern Seas Ecology Laboratories, School of Biological Sciences, and Environment Institute, University of Adelaide, Australia;

2Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis (CEES), University of Oslo, Norway;

3Les requins et des hommes, France;

4University of Edinburgh;

5Institute for Marine Research (IMR), Trømsø, Norway;

6Bioinformatics Hub, University of Adelaide, Australia;

7Cavanilles Institute of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biology, University of Valencia, Spain;

8Institute for Marine Research (IMR), Bergen, Norway;

9Ecole National e Superieure des Sciences de la Meret de l‘Amenagement du Littoral (ENSSMAL), Algeria;

10University of Copenhagen, Denmark;

11Environmental Protection Agency – Marine Science, Italy;

12National Institute of Aquatic Resources, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark




The velvet belly lantern shark, E. spinaxis a small-sized deepwater shark, which is often captured as by-
catch in commercial deep-water fisheries and discarded due to its low commercial value. A decline has
been observed in some areas attributed to excessive fishing pressure. Despite being a commonly found
shark, there is a lack of knowledge about its population structure, ecology and response to environmental
or anthropogenic changes. Due to its extensive latitudinal distribution, E. spinax could be a useful model
species for understanding the level of connectivity and potential adaptive differences between deep-sea
shark populations, especially with regard to anthropogenic impacts. This knowledge is crucial for the
sustainable management of this species and possibly its habitat. In our multidisciplinary study, we aim to
unravel what constitutes a population in a deepwater shark, using Etmopterus spinax as a model species,
and how these populations differ from each other. We have population genetic data (mitochondrial DNA)
as well as population genomic pilot data from thousands of SNPs across the genome (RAD Seq), and will
discuss findings together with chemistry and pilot parasite data.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                                 57
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Discard survival of European skates: the need for species-specific data

Linda Planthof1


1Dutch Elasmobranch Society




The practice of discarding unwanted catch negatively affects the sustainable exploitation of resources and
financial viability of fisheries. The reformed Common Fisheries Policy has introduced a landing obligation
which will make compulsory the landing of all species that are subject to catch limits, including skates. As
the intrinsic vulnerability of skate species vary, as well as the conditions under which they are fished upon,
the discard survival rate of distinct species is highly variable. It is important to take these species-specific
differences into account in policy decisions and management measures. This presentation will give an
overview of the current knowledge on the discard survival rate of European skate species, and will
discuss the necessary research to underpin future management decisions.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                      58
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Spatial management of data-poor elasmobranchs using Boosted Regression Tree modelling

Simon Dedman1


1Galway-Mayo Institute of Technology




Skates and rays represent one of the most vulnerable components of the fish community in temperate
demersal fisheries such as the Irish Sea. They also tend to be data poor in comparison to commercially
exploited teleost fish. Spatial management has been suggested as an important tool in protecting these
species, but this requires an understanding of the abundance distribution, and its relationship with the
environment at both adult and juvenile life history stages. In this analysis, delta log-normal boosted
regression tree models were used with bottom trawl survey data to derive rays' spatial abundance, and
environmental links. The modelling approach allowed the development of detailed predictive maps of
abundance of four common and rare skate and ray species implicated in the fishery: thornback, spotted,
cuckoo and blonde rays. The distributions were driven by a general preference for sand and courser
substrates, higher salinities, temperatures and currents speeds. The abundance distribution maps were
examined together with maps of skate and ray commercial landings, suggesting that the main hotspots for
the species were away from the main commercial fishing areas. The maps were also compared to
potential MPAs proposed for wider ecosystem protection, and the main hotspots were well covered by the
proposed MPAs. This combination of the main abundance hotspots in areas of low fishing, and wider
potential ecosystem protection, suggests good potential for spatial management measures to protect
these species in the Irish Sea. The methodology has been extended to encompass commercial fishing
and predation by larger fish, as well as to automatically suggest optimal MPAs based on minimising
fishery impact while still maintaining precautionary point biomass, Bpa. This complex methodology is
bundled into an R package that enables environmental scientists and fisheries managers to enjoy the
benefits of these powerful statistical approaches without having to become an R expert.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                   59
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Elasmobranchs & the E.U.: advocating for effective science-based management

Ali Hood1


1The Shark Trust




The vulnerability of elasmobranchs to fisheries pressure is well documented in scientific literature, yet the
application of science-based fisheries management has often lagged behind that of more traditional
commercial target species.
Historically Europe has played a central role in elasmobranch fisheries and despite the adoption in 2009 of
the Community Plan of Action for Sharks1 (CPOA-sharks); the revision2 of the EU shark finning regulation 3
to requires fins-naturally-attached; and closure of fisheries for depleted species, the EU remains a global
fishing power supporting a substantial export and consumer market, ranking highly in global ‘shark’ league
tables for recorded landings, and failing to set catch limits on many of its substantial shark fisheries.
However, concurrently the EU has emerged as an international leader with regards RFMO proposals
demonstrating potential to act as a highly influential global fisheries manager.
In this context we discuss the pivotal role of the EU and the importance of effective implementation of the
EU finning regulation. And, with shark meat now often surpassing fins as the primary driver for retention of
sharks, there is also an increasing need to ensure advocacy efforts and public understanding reaches
beyond shark finning and the fin trade. The No Limits? campaign will be referenced as a route to drawing
both public and political attention to the pressing need for the adoption of science-based catch limits for
those stocks currently devoid of European management.
Particular attention will be paid to the Blue Shark Prionace glauca in light of its dominance in global shark
landings.


Presentation type: Oral




1 COM(2009) 40
2 (EU) No.605/2013
3 (EC) No.1185/2003


                                                     60
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Environmental impact and management perspectives for shark and ray provisioning tourism

Pierpaolo Brena1


1CRIOBE (Centre de Recherches Insulaires et Observatoire de l'Environnement). USR 3278 CNRS-EPHE, BP 1013, 98729


Papetoai, Moorea, French Polynesia.


The use of olfactory stimuli and the provision of food are a common practice to prompt artificial
aggregations of elasmobranch species, and ensure their visibility to tourists. By promoting the non-
extractive value of elasmobranchs and enhancing positive attitudes towards this threatened taxon, shark
and ray provisioning activities are promoted as a conservation tool. However, concerns arise about the
ecological consequences of shark provisioning and its long-term sustainability. By using a functional
framework, we conduct an exhaustive review of the ecological, behavioral and physiological effects of
shark and ray provisioning around the world. Focusing on the underlying processes that rule the response
of targeted elasmobranch species, we report effects acting at the individual, group, and community-scale.
We suggest that the most commonly described alterations of individual movement patterns have
cascading effects through the group and community-scale, ultimately resulting in altered health condition
and behavior toward humans. We conclude by stressing the potential for provisioning activities to support
the investigation of complex ecological processes in elasmobranchs, and the promising insights provided
by social sciences to fill the gap between sustainable tourism, science and conservation.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                      61
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Turning the tide – can reintroduction help elasmobranch populations recover?

Paddy Walker1


1Dutch Elasmobranch Society




The steady decline of many species of elasmobranchs in the past decennia has been well documented.
Progress made in international protective legislation, the implementation of the EU Community Plan of
Action for Sharks and national management plans has not yet proved effective for restoring shark and ray
populations in European waters. Although realistically any improvement will take many years to come to
light due to the long generation time typical to elasmobranchs.
Conservation organisations and managers alike are increasingly inclined to take matters into their own
hands and species which are locally extinct such as the Atlantic sturgeon and salmon have been, or are
being, reintroduced.
As an answer to this increase in “conservation through intervention” IUCN has developed guidelines to
ensure that there is an adequate appreciation of the risks and enough (scientific) evidence to assess the
feasibility of reintroduction of species.
This paper will present an analysis of the IUCN Guidelines for reintroductions and other conservation
translocations and how they could be applied to the reintroduction of elasmobranch species in the North
Sea. The feasibility of reintroduction and the important role that aquaria might play in a reintroduction
scenario will be explored. Intervention as a conservation option will be discussed.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                     62
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Introducing Save our Sharks – a campaign for shark & ray management in the Dutch Caribbean

Irene Kingma1


1Dutch Elasmobranch Society




The waters round the islands Aruba, Bonaire, Curacao, Saba, Statia and St. Maarten are home to
approximately 30 species of sharks and rays. Among these are charismatic species like whale shark, tiger
shark and greater hammerhead shark. Up to now there has not been effective management or
conservation in these countries.
The Dutch Caribbean Nature Alliance hopes to change this. Together with the Dutch Elasmobranch
Society and research institute Imares they have launched a 3 year campaign which goal is to stop the
decline of in the Dutch Caribbean and encourage islanders to benefit from their presence as a valuable
tourism asset.
In the project we will focus on:
     •    Educating both local people and Dutch citizens on the importance role sharks play in the marine
          ecosystem
     •    Working with local fishermen to find solutions workable solutions to stop shark (by)catches
     •    Work with government to have effective management and control of shark populations
     •    Enhance the scientific knowledge needed for conservation and management


Presentation type: Oral




                                                     63
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Can Deep Sea Sharks respond to short term protection? Looking into the deep

Jorge Fontes1


1MARE/IMAR - DOP Cais de Sta Cruz 9900-Horta




As global fishing effort increasingly expands into deeper water, concerns exist over the ability of deep-sea
cartilaginous fishes to sustain fisheries such pressure, due to intrinsically low rates of population recovery,
the lowest levels observed to date. Once a stock has been depleted it will take decades, and potentially
centuries, before it will recover.
Here, we present the preliminary results from a monitoring study on a seamount marine reserve, from the
Azores (Condor seamount), to investigate the potential short term (four years) effect of protection on the
community structure, with focus on dep sea elasmobranchs and other top predators. We used
multidisciplinary approach, and a combination of data from classic scientific fishing experiments, remote
video surveys and acoustic telemetry.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                      64
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Reproduction of Velez ray (Raja velezi, Chirichigno 1973) in the Mexican Pacific

Katherin Soto López1


1Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas- IPN




Raja velezi (Chirichigno 1973) is an oviparous ray from the Rajidae family, caught by the artisanal fishery
in the western coast of Baja California Sur, Mexico. The biology of this species is poorly known, being
recorded only in the Mexican Pacific coast. The present study provides information on the reproductive
biology of R. velezi to recommend possible measurements to help with its fishery management. A total of
105 rays were analyzed, 56 males and 49 females, caught from March to July. The sizes ranged from 53
to 96 cm of disc width (AD). Three stages of sexual development were identified: immature, maturing and
mature. Females attained larger sizes than males; such differences were presented only in mature
organisms but not in immature and maturing organisms. The sex ratio was 0.87H:1M. Both ovaries were
functional, with a visible asynchronously oocyte development. The ovary was classified as an outer type.
The oviducal gland (GO) show a linear relationship between AD increments. The histological description of
the GO allowed identifying four zones: "club", "papillary", "baffle" and "terminal". The "club" and “baffle”
zones showed the development of secretions; whereas sperm storage was located in the "terminal" zone.
The uterus showed structural segmentation when maturity is reached. In males both testis were functional
as well, but the right testicle presented larger development. Although significant differences were found
between testis sizes, the development area of testicular lobes was similar in both, without relationship
between testis size and AD.. First maturity of females is reached at 68.7 cm of AD and 65.1 cm of AD for
males. Gravid females were registered during April and May, presenting two ovigerous capsules, one in
each uterus, thus being classified as simple oviparity.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                      65
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Reproductive biology aspects of the bathypelagic shark Etmopterus spinax (Elasmobranchii,
Etmopteridae) in the Balearic Sea

Alba Martín-Lázaro1, Bas-Silvestre M.1, Serrano-Rodríguez N.1, Guallart J.1, Romana C.1


1Marine Biology Laboratory, Zoology Department. Universitat de València




The Velvet Belly Lanternshark Etmopterus spinax (Linnaeus, 1758) is a deep-sea squaloid species that
can be found in the Central and Northeastern Atlantic and in the Mediterranean Sea. It has been classified
as “Least Concern” in the IUCN Red List.
Aspects of the reproductive biology of this shark in the Balearic Sea have been studied from incidental
catches in a bottom trawl fishery targeting red shrimp (Aristeus antennatus) at the Ibiza Channel.
Specimens (n = 322) were obtained from June 2013 to May 2014 in a depth range of 380 to 730 m.
Mother-embryo nutritional relationship has also been studied through the analysis of changes during
development in total wet weight, water content and, organic and inorganic matter from oocytes to full-term
embryos.
Sizes distribution of catches covers all the range, from newborns to large adults. Maximum size was
higher in females (449 mm TL) than in males (399 mm TL). Sexual maturity was reached in the range 292
– 331 mm TL for males (M50 = 310,0 mm TL) and 326 – 416 mm TL (M50 = 339,8 mm TL) in females.
The mean (± s.d.) ovarian fecundity was 14,15 ± 4,73 oocytes and the uterine fecundity was 8,20 ± 3,27
embryos. No seasonal reproductive pattern was found.
One hermaphrodite specimen (with developed claspers together with ovaries and uterus) was found,
which represents 1,62% of adult specimens studied.
During embryonic development, changes in composition from ova to full-term embryo were estimated as:
wet weight +42,1%, water content +102,4%, organic matter -32,2% and inorganic matter +159,7%. These
results suggest that Etmopterus spinax is a lecithotropic species (or with possible incipient histotrophy), in
which females do not provide to the embryos organic matter during their development; instead, they
provide water and mineral salts.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                              66
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Age and growth of the butterfly ray Gymnura marmorata (Cooper, 1864) in the southern occidental
coast of Baja California Sur, México

Jesús Bernardo Sánchez Cota1


1Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas #5992 Instituto Politecnico Nacional STREET, colonia: Palo de santarita, P.C.


23096, La p Paz, Baja California Sur, México.


G. marmorata is the fifth specie most captured in the Mexican artisanal fishery of rays and the biological
information is lacking, so is very difficult to propose management measures. The aim of this research
project is to generate baseline information for this batoid. The age and growth of G. marmorata, in Baja
California Sur (BCS), México, was investigated comparing the adjustment of five growth curves. These
models are the Von Bertalanffy growth model of 2 parameters (VBGM-2), the Von Bertalanffy growth
model of 3 parameters (VBGM-3), the Gompertz growth model of 2 parameters (GGM-2), the Gompertz
growth model of 3 parameters (GGM-3) and finally the two phases growth model (TPGM-5).These curves
are the most used to describe the age and growth of batoids. During this research project 167 vertebrae
samples of G. marmorata (55 Male; 112 Female) were collected from artisanal fishery, through the years
2013 and 2014The organisms collected presented width measures which ranged from 340 mm to 1410
mm (340-798 mm Male; 370-1410 mm Female).For each ray a longitudinal section of the vertebral centra
(0.4mm of thickness) was developed to evidence the vertebrae bands pattern. The reading of growth
bands was made using digital enhanced images, analysing precision and agebias among readings and
among readers. The deposition time of growth marks was assumed to be about one year, using indirect
methods. The GGM-3 model (AD∞=138.3, k=0.171, t0=1.14) presented the better fitting among curves
used, according to the Akaike’s information criterion (AIC). Due to this the GGM-3 model offered the best
description of G. marmorata growth trendin this study. The results obtained during this research project
accorded to others age and growth researches developed in different ray species and represented one of
the first baseline information for G. marmorata biology.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                            67
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Age and growth of the smooth hammerhead shark, Sphyrna zygaena, in the Atlantic Ocean


Daniela Rosa1, Rui Coelho1, Joana Fernandez-Carvalho1; Miguel N. Santos1


1Portuguese Institute for the Ocean and Atmosphere (IPMA)




        The smooth hammerhead shark (Sphyrna zygaena) is regularly caught as by-catch in pelagic
longline fisheries, but is one of the least studied of all pelagic sharks. Age and growth of this hammerhead
was studied along a wide Atlantic region covering both hemispheres. Data from 304 specimens, ranging in
size from 126 to 253 cm fork length (FL) were analysed. Growth models were fitted using the von
Bertalanffy growth equation re-parameterised to calculate L0, using the sampled and several back-
calculated datasets. The von Bertalanffy growth equation fitted to a modified Fraser-Lee back-calculated
dataset seems to be the most adequate to describe the growth in this species, with resulting growth
parameters of Linf = 248cm FL, k = 0.10 year-1 for males and Linf = 273 cm FL, k = 0.09 year-1 for females.
Although further work is still needed, this study adds to the knowledge of vital life-history parameters of the
smooth hammerhead shark in the Atlantic Ocean, which can now be used for population dynamics and
stock assessment models to aid in the management and conservation of this species.



Presentation type: Oral




                                                            68
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Seasonal variability in the distribution of giant manta rays Manta cf. birostris in the Mexican
Caribbean Sea and evaluation of habitat suitability

Ana Hacohen-Domené1


1Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas (CICIMAR)




Manta rays are filter feeder elasmobranchs that usually aggregate in tropical and subtropical waters
around the world. These aggregations are often related to biological and environmental variables, such as
abundance of their prey (zooplankton), preferred sea surface temperature, and bathymetric features (sea
depth and distance to the coast). The goal of the present study is to describe the spatial distribution of
manta rays in the northern Caribbean Sea and evaluate if there is a seasonal variability of the habitat
preference related to the environment. To do so, we analyzed surface sightings made during scientific
boat surveys, conducted from 2006-2011, through MaxEnt model. Manta ray distribution patterns during
the study period, showed manta rays are distributed in the north of Isla Holbox and the northwest of Isla
Contoy, and are more abundant during July – August. Also, effects of environmental variables on manta
rays suggest that manta ray abundance is closely related to food availability (areas with high primary
productivity), in shallow areas close to shore. Moreover, model responses suggest that suitable habitat
from May – August is dependent on a mix of chlorophyll-a, primary productivity and distance to the coast.
Our results also show heterogeneity of habitat use, in the form of seasonal variability in habitat suitability
between May and September. This data presented in this study regarding the seasonal distribution of
manta rays and the suitability of their habitat may be used to develop management strategies as design of
marine protected area for this species in the Mexican Caribbean Sea.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                           69
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association




                                             70
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


RAIMEST: Study of skates stock in the Eastern English Channel (VIId)

Charlotte Fabjanczyk1, Hélène Gadenne2, Nicolas Leblanc, Alain Tétard, Théo Filippi, Richard Brouzes


1OPBN (Organisation de producteur Basse Normandie)

2IFREMER (French Research Institute For Exploitation of the Sea)




In the Eastern English Channel (ICES VIId division), skates are economically important for fishermen and
the lack of fishery data precludes the definition of stocks units and the creation of management measures
for a sustainable fishery.
In this framework, the RAIMEST project is conducted by the French fisheries producer organization and
the French regional committees to enhance the data collection. The main objective is to improve the
existing knowledge about skate stocks in the Channel (especially in ICES VIId division). Data are provided
by two complementary sources: empirical fishermen knowledge (interviews with fishermen) and scientific
data (“OBSMER” French observation at sea program). The objectives of this study are (i) to improve the
knowledge of the functional areas and the spatial distribution of 6 skate species using fishermen
observation, (ii) to improve the stocks assessment method, and (iii) to evaluate error rates in skates
identification by the fishermen.
This report shows that skates are widely distributed over the Eastern English Channel, and the dominant
species is the tornback ray (raja clavata). The juveniles are mainly concentrated in the coastal areas. The
fishermen identification of tornback is correct most of the time but they misname the others skate species
in this area, despite they are able to correctly recognize the species. This last point is very encouraging for
future enhancement of this fishery management.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                             71
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


AGE and GROWTH of three different rajids from the central Mediterranean sea

Bellodi A.1, Mulas A.1, Cau Al.1, Cuccu D.1, Vacca L.1, Vittori S.1, Follesa M.C. 1

1Department of Life Science and Environment – University of Cagliari




Elasmobranchs age and growth estimation is generally considered more challenging than in teleosts due
to the intrinsic difficulties linked to the absence of otoliths and the consequent employment of other
calcified structures. Moreover, recently, several authors stated that not always the more known von
Bertalanffy Growth Function (VBGF) represents the more precise way to describe elasmobranchs growth,
especially for batoids. In this study four of the most used staining techniques (unstained, Alizarin, silver-
nitrate and EDTA decalcification)were tested on vertebral centra of three Rajids caught in Sardinian sea:
Raja brachyura (77 females, 92 males), Dipturus oxyrinchus (76 females, 54 males) and the
Mediterranean endemic R. polystigma (97 females, 87 males). Furthermore, four different growth models
were applied: the VBGF, the Exponential, the Gompertz and finally the Logistic, with the aim of stating
which of them provided the best fitting result to age at length data of the studied Rajids. According to the
Index of Average Percent Error (IAPE) and CV%, the observation of unstained vertebral centra achieved
the best results in terms of readings precision and reproducibility for R. brachyuraand D. oxyrinchus, while
the same outcome was provided by Alizarin red stained centra for R. polystigma. For what concerns the
modelling of growth curves, according to the Akaike’s Information Criterion, the VBGF showed the best
fitting to the observed data for R. brachyura. Instead, the S-shaped functions, the Gompertz and the
Logistic model displayed the best growth curves for D. oxyrinchus and R. polystigma respectively. Given
the importance of age and growth data in the definition of effective management plans, our results
highlighted the importance and necessity for rajids to test different staining techniques and growth models
in order to reach the finest results.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                                  72
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in juvenile blue shark (Prionace glauca) from Portuguese
coastal waters

Luís Miguel Fonseca Alves1*, Margarida Nunes2*, Philippe Marchand2, Bruno Le Bizec2, Marco F.L. Lemos1 & Sara C. Novais1


1MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, ESTM, Instituto Politécnico de Leiria, 2520-641 Peniche, Portugal

2LUNAM Université, Oniris, Laboratoire d’Étude des Résidus et Contaminants dans les Aliments (LABERCA), F-44307 Nantes,

France
*Luís Alves and Margarida Nunes contributed equally for this work.


Human activities constantly release harmful contaminants into the environment, many of which end up
reaching marine ecosystems. Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are known to adversely affect marine
biota due to their toxicity. Since these contaminants tend to accumulate in animal tissues, predators like
sharks are particularly vulnerable to POP exposure. The blue shark (Prionace glauca, L.1758) is one of
the most consumed sharks in the world, being the most commonly caught shark species globally, mainly
due to bycatch, and recent studies have demonstrated its potential to be used as a sentinel for marine
contamination.
Twenty juvenile blue sharks were sampled off the coast of Portugal (NE Atlantic Ocean), aboard a
commercial swordfishing boat. The concentration of dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls (DL-PCBs),
polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs), perfluorinated
compounds (PFCs) and brominated flame retardants (BFRs) was determined in liver and muscle tissues.
Contaminants were found in higher levels in liver when compared to muscle, and these tissues showed
different contamination profiles for PCDDs, PCDFs, PFCs (perfluoroalkyl sulphonates and perfluoroalkyl
carboxylates) and BFRs (polybrominated diphenyl ethers and polybrominated biphenyls). DL-PCB profile
was dominated by congener #118 in both liver and muscle. To our knowledge, this is the first study
addressing the presence of PFCs in blue sharks and its presence, as a risk to human health, is also
addressed.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                              73
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Reproductive biology of the brown ray Raja miraletus (Chondrichthyes: Rajidae) from Sardinian
waters (Central Western Mediterranean)

Marongiu M.F.1, Porcu C.1, Cannas R.1, Pesci P.1, Soldovilla G.1, Vacca L.1, Follesa M.C.1


1Department of Life Science and Environment – University of Cagliari




The brown ray Raja miraletus Linnaeus, 1758 is a medium-sized skate living in the over soft bottoms of
the shelf and the uppermost slope. In the Mediterranean Sea, it is commonly caught by trawl and gill nets
as by-catch. In Sardinian waters, this species is a regular component of discarded fishes, but sometimes
the largest individuals are commercialized. Considering the rajids vulnerability to overfishing, the aim of
this work is to give information on the reproductive biology of this speciesin order to increase its life history
data. A total of 1131 specimens (584 females and 547 males) were sampled during experimental and
commercial hauls (depths 28-176 meters)around Sardinian seas from 2005 to 2014 years. The total length
(TL, in centimeters), the total weight and the gonad weight(both in grams) were taken. Specimens were
sexed and the maturity stages were determined following the scale of oviparous Elasmobranchs proposed
in the Medits handbook 2013 (Medits, 2013). Females (11.5-49.2 cm TL) and males (9.4-48.9 cm TL)
covered generally similar length ranges. Size at maturity (L50) was similar in both genders (males 41.2 cm
TL) (females 42.2 cm TL). The seasonal evolution of maturity stages highlighted a predominance of
female and male immature specimens throughout the year. Mature females were sampled mostly from
spring to summer, with a high frequency of females with egg cases during the summer months.
Furthermore, male mature specimens were found all over the year, as confirmed by the Gonado-somatic
Index. Ovarian fecundity reached a maximum of 15yolked follicles. In conclusion, this work made a
valuable contribution to the implementation of basic management measures useful to ensure the
sustainability of rajids catches.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                               74
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Seasonal Comparison of Chondrichtyan by-catch of trawl fishery around Imbros (Gokceada, N.E.
Aegean Sea)

Emre Yemişken1, Cem Dalyan1, Suna Tüzün1, Persefoni Megalofonou2, Lütfiye Eryilmaz1


1Department of Biology, Section of Hydrobiology, Faculty of Science, Istanbul University, Turkey

2Department of Biology, Section of Zoology Marine Biology, University of Athens, Greece




The aim of this study is to compare Chondrichthyan species by-catch of trawl fisheries of Imbros among
four seasons within the fishing closure period (between 15 April and 15 September) and fishing period
(between 15 September and 15 April). Chondrichthyan species composition, abundance (individuals/km 2)
and biomass (kg/km2) were investigated from June 2014 to April 2015, using seasonal commercial trawl
surveys. Data were collected by 52 hauls from three depth contours (0-100 m, 100-200 m and 200-400
m). Fifteen Chondricthyan species comprising 221 individuals were caught, including 2 Dipturusbatis,
which is a critically endangered species, as well as 16 Galeus melastomus, 137 Scyliorhinuscanicula, 1
Squalus blainville, 2 Etmopterusspinax, 1 Leucaraja naevus and 7 Raja miraletus that are of least concern
status in IUCN red list in the Mediterranean Sea. Totally, 11.75 % of the total biomass consisted of
Chondrichthyan species and their abundance represented 5.96 % of the total number of fish caught. Mean
biomass of Chondrichtyan species was 3.4 kg/ km2 and their abundance 47.26 individuals / km2. Statistical
analysis were shown that there wasn’t a relation between depth and abundance of Chondrichthyans
(ANOSIM, R= 0.02). However, there wasn’t significant differences between catch period and abundance
(ANOSIM, R=0.156) as well as between the fishing closure period and fishing period (t-test = 0.0347,
p>0.05). Scyliorhinus canicula was the main Chondrichthyan species in all three depths contours (mean
1.31 kg/km2). Its abundance showed a decline trend from September, beginning of the fishing period, to
April, the end of fishing period (22.78 individuals/km2in September 2014, 3.87 individuals/km2in January
2015 and 0.74 individuals/km2in April 2015).


Presentation type: Poster




                                                               75
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


By-catch distribution and survival rate estimate of Common skate, Dipturus cf flossada, by French
fishing trawlers in the Celtic Sea.

Thomas Barreau1


1French National Museum of Natural History




During 7 surveys on board of French fishing trawlers, data have been collected on 329 fishing operations.
For each of them common skate bycatch were exhaustively counted ending up to a total of 1385
specimens. On this amount 1215 were measured. Total lengths range between 192 and 1420 mm.
Population size distribution is showing numerous individual between 200 and 800 mm then fewer from 800
to 1100 mm and a peak on larger animals around 1200. Fishing boats were volunteers to accept an
observer and didn’t change their fishing habits for the occasion. Boarding was organised when areas
exploited by fisherman had high chances of common skate by-catch. Maps of distribution and density per
km² in the visited area were produced showing by-catch distribution. Average densities were calculated on
mesh of 0.25x0.25 degrees. Spatial analyses show a high average density of 25 individual par km² for
small skates (< 400 mm) in the south west of the Scilly Islands. This results correlate with bathymetry
(shallower) and seafloor (roller and gravel) could indicate the presence a common skate nursery in this
specific area. Condition of the 1215 measured individual were estimate following a scale based on
physical criteria such as spiracle’s movement (0: Dead; 1: Poor; 2: Good; 3: Excellent). Considering that
skates categorised as 0 and 1 didn’t survive, survival rate is 46.4%. Size influences the survival rates and
smaller individual less than 400 mm long have a survival rate of 33.4%.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                    76
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Using Baited Remote Underwater Video To Assess The Biodiversity And Relative Abundance Of
Elasmobranch Species at Tubbataha Reefs Natural Park

Henriette Grimmel1


1The Large Marine Vertebrate Project Philippines




Elasmobranchs are amongst the most threatened group of marine species. Over-fishing, coupled with life
history characteristics of shark and ray species has resulted in sharp decrease in population numbers
worldwide. The use of non-invasive and non-extractive survey techniques are becoming more widespread
in elasmobranch ecology literature. Baited remote underwater video surveys (BRUV) are a relatively new
and cost effective means of survey for numerous marine and aquatic species including sharks and rays. A
total of 87 BRUV surveys was were conducted between the months of March – June in 2015 across 3
habitat zones within the waters of Tubbataha Reefs Natural Park, located in the middle of the Sulu Sea. A
total of 287 encounters were recorded throughout the study. 11 species of elasmobranch were
documented during BRUV surveys, in order of decreasing frequency :Grey reef shark Carcharhinus
amblyrnchus , whitetip reef shark Triaenodon obesus , tiger shark Galeocerdo cuvier , pelagic thresher
alopias pelagicus , scalloped hammerhead Sphyrna lewini. grey nurse shark nebrius ferrugineus, blacktip
reef shark Carcharhinus melonopterus, silky shark Carcharhinus falciformis, spotted eagle ray Aetobatus
narinari, , marble ray Taeniura meyeni whaleshark Rhincodon typus. Relative abundance of elasmobranch
encounters did not differ with respect to depth. Species richness increased with an increase in survey
length and an increase in depth of sampling.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                   77
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


New insights on the biology and the abundance of the uncommon deep-sea Little sleeper shark
Somniosus rostratus (Somniosidae) from the Balearic Sea (Western Mediterranean): do
mesopelagic habits partially explain rarity of its catches?

Javier Guallart1, Pablo García-Salinas1


1University of Valencia




The Little sleeper shark is considered avery uncommon species inhabiting NE Atlantic and Mediterranean
deep-sea waters. Its current IUCN status is “Data Deficient”.
Data obtained from bottom trawling fishery targeting red shrimps (Aristeus antennatus) at the Ibiza
Channel (Western Mediterranean) (500-800 m depth) showed that it is not as uncommon as thought.
During 18 months of surveillance (March 2013 - August 2014) results showed a catches frequency of 5.12
* 10-2specimens * fishing-journey-1 or a density of about 6.14 * 10-2 specimens*km-²: on average it
represents the catch of about one specimen per month and fishing vessel trawling on these bottoms.
Although literature describes the species as demersal, several evidences presented here suggest
mesopelagic habits.
Among specimens studied (n = 20), 40.0% had the stomach empty and 60.0% showed cephalopod
remains in its contents. The majority of these remains belonged to species of Histioteuthis. Both species of
the genus inhabiting the Mediterranean Sea (H. bonelli and H. reversa) have mesopelagic habits, carrying
out vertical migrations along the water column.
In addition, a specimen carrying a hook in its mouth was found. This type of hook is used in a local fishery
on midwater (typically, about 500 m depth over 1.000 m bottoms) targeting for swordfish (Xiphias gladius).
Some authors have related the rarity of catches of S.rostratus with a preference of the species for habitats
deeper than 1.000 m. However, most of records presented in literature correspond to catches made at
shallower depths, supporting the information presented here.
Therefore, we hypothesize that Somniousus rostratus has mainly mesopelagic habits, inhabiting the water
column over the slope or the deep-sea floor. Deep midwater habitats are almost unexploited by
commercial fisheries and are poorly studied by scientific surveys. That could explain the supposed rarity of
this species throughout its geographic range.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                    78
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


First record of young of the year scalloped hammerhead shark, Sphyrna lewini
(Carcharhiniformes: Sphyrnidae) from Isla del Coco National Park, Costa Rica

Geiner Golfin Duarte1


1Isla del Coco National Park of Costa Rica




The scalloped hammerhead shark, Sphyrna lewini is a coastal and pelagic circumglobal species that
resides within coastal warm temperate and tropical seas. Sphyrna lewini exhibits strong intraspecific
segregation: neonates and young-of-the-year spend the first part of life in coastal inshore waters (nursery
grounds), while adults migrate offshore, yet return to protected nursery habitats for mating and pupping.
On December 3, 2014, at approximately 19:00, four young of the year S. lewini were caught with hand line
and a modified size 5 circular hook, in Wafer Bay, Isla del Coco, Costa Rica (5.5451ºN 87.0626ºW). A
total of 3 males (total length 73, 73, 76 cm) and 1 female (total length 75 cm) were recorded. The
presence of these individuals at Isla del Coco suggests that a pregnant female gave birth at Wafer Bay,
which may be used as a nursery ground by S. lewini. We recommend further study to evaluate the
presence and movements of young-of-the-year and juvenile S. lewini in Wafer Bay to determine if this was
an isolated incident or if the bay is a nursery ground for S. lewini.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                       79
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


First record of the blacktip reef shark Carcharhinus melanopterus (Carcharhiniformes:
Carcharhinidae) from the Tropical Eastern Pacific

Maikel Perez Montero1


1Cocos Island National Park of Costa Rica




The blacktip reef shark Carcharhinus melanopterus, is one of the most common IndoPacific reef sharks.
On April 29, 2012 at 20:00 hrs., a blacktip reef shark, was caught during a tagging expedition studying
population dynamics of the whitetip reef shark Triaenodon obesus, in Chatham Bay, Isla del Coco National
Park. Chatham Bay is located on the north side of Isla del Coco between coordinates 5º33’25.28”N,
87°02’53.11”W and 5º33’04.71”N, 87°02’13.76”W. Positive identification of the species was attained by
analysis of the following distinctive characters (Compagno 1998, Compagno 2005):
1. Short rounded snout with large anterior nasal flaps.
2. Black tips on all fins, including the edge of the caudal fin’s upper lobe
3. Light band that borders the black mark on the first dorsal fin.
4. Distinctive body color: yellow-brown dorsal surface and white underside, with conspicuous dark bands
on the flanks that extend back towards the pelvic fins.
The shark’s size (89cm TL) together with the low calcification of its claspers, suggests the individual was a
juvenile. This is the first record of a blacktip reef shark from Isla del Coco National Park and from the
Tropical Eastern Pacific (Allen & Robertson 1998, Robertson & Allen 2008). Garrison (2005) identified
over 270 fish species (including 7 sharks and 4 rays) at Isla del Coco: 30 species have a circumtropical or
circumglobal distribution and over 40 species are reported from scattered Indo-Pacific locations or
throughout the Indo-Pacific Ocean (most of these are bony fish, e.g. the genus Thalassoma, that probably
travelled 5000km with floating debris to arrive in the Eastern Pacific Ocean (EPT). Several Indo-Pacific
elasmobranchs are present at Isla del Coco, including the silvertip (Carcharhinus albimarginatus) and the
white-tip shark (T. besus). Their distribution extends into the continental waters of Central America. Other
example is the marble ray (Taeniura meyeni); is only present at Isla del Coco and Galapagos Islands in
the Tropical Eastern Pacific, and absent from the central American mainland (Grove & Lavenberg 1997).
The presence of a juvenile blacktip reef shark at Isla del Coco suggests that a pregnant female traveled at
least 5000km and arrived at Isla del Coco to give birth at Chatham Bay. C. melanopterus possibly
represents a new arrival for Isla del Coco National Park.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                       80
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Skate eggcases collected ashore as indicators of the seasonality of the egg laying

Martin M.C.1, Rohr A., Stéphan E., Gadenne H.


1Association Pour l'Etude et la Conservation des Sélaciens (APECS)




Several skate species have been recorded in French coastal waters and most of them are still little known.
With the CapOeRa program (based on the Shark Trust Great Eggcase Hunt), the NGO APECS look at the
interest of the eggcases as signs of presence to improve the understanding of the breeding ecology and to
locate oviposition sites. This Citizen Science program started in 2008 invites the public to collect eggcases
washed ashore along the French shore. In parallel, APECS started in 2011 a second protocol called
“Sentinelles” which has a stricter collection protocol (e.g., same location being sampled over time, regular
sampling intervals). We will present the results of comparisons between both protocols. Preliminary
analyses suggest interesting seasonal patterns. In addition, we will discuss our findings that opportunistic
public data collection might not be always efficient at detecting seasonality signals. Thus, both protocols
demonstrate complementarities for investigating skate ecology.



Presentation type: Poster




                                                             81
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Can opportunistic sampling provide information for conservation of sharks and rays?
Chondrichthyans Population genetics and breeding ecology in Turkish seas

Elizabeth Grace Tunka Eronat1


1Ege University, Faculty of Fisheries




Chondrichthyans are one of the top predators in marine ecosystems. This study will build important data to
help us understand the abundance of chondrichthyans throughout the Turkish coast. In Turkish seas,
there are 66 cartilaginous species (32 selachii, 33 batoid, and 1 chimaera) which represents 75% of the
total chondrichthyan species found in the Mediterranean and 12% of the total marine fish fauna of Turkey.
Almost half of these species are listed by IUCN as Near Threatened, Critically Endangered, or Vulnerable
and of the remaining species a further 15 are data deficient. Fisheries activities are intensively done
throughout Turkey and while chondrichthyans are not specifically targeted they are caught frequently as
by-catch. On this regard to provide information and sufficient data to understand chondrichthyans biology
and ecology for conservation measures in these waters a project was proposed and is funded by The
Rufford Foundation.
The aim of the project, is to use participatory methods and opportunistic sampling of by-caught
chondrichthyans to provide and generate data on the species for future conservation measures. First, a
network was set between fishermen/fisherwomen from various parts of Turkey. Samples are being
collected since May 2015. With the beginning of the project, 10 g of tissue samples are collected from
every species for DNA barcoding and to identify phylogenetic relations between species and populations.
Where fresh whole individuals were received, to obtain more data on their reproduction systems, gonads
were dissected for histological studies. Also on individuals dissections were conducted and stomach
contents were identified and recorded. By collecting all the info and data we can, we hope to generate a
wide range of information for future chondrichthyan conservation studies or actions in Eastern
Mediterranean.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                   82
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Parasite fauna in the mesopelagic shark Etmopterus spinax (Squaliformes, Etmopteridae) from the
Ibiza Channel (Western Mediterranean)

Bas-Silvestre M.1, Martín-Lázaro A.1, Serrano-Rodríguez N.1, Guallart J.1, Montero F.E.1


1Instituto Cavanilles de Biodiversidad y Biología Evolutiva




Despite the key role of sharks in the marine ecosystems, many biological and ecological aspects of sharks
remain unknown. This scarce knowledge is particularly substantial in the case of deep sea sharks, as the
Velvet Belly Lanternshark Etmopterus spinax. Parasites and other pathogens of these sharks are also
unknown. Parasites provide information not only on the health of these sharks, but also are very
informative as indicators of several aspects of the biology of their hosts and their surrounding ecosystems.
For example, heteroxenous parasites can provide information on other animals acting as intermediate or
definitive hosts, while monoxenous parasites inform about the demography and populations of the same
shark species.
This study is based on the analysis of the parasite fauna of 48 specimens of the mesopelagic shark
Etmopterus spinax (428-144 mm TL size range) captured as by-catching a bottom trawl fishery (380-730
depth range) targeting red shrimp (Aristeus antennatus) at the Ibiza Channel (Western Mediterranean).
The most prevalent (47,92%) and abundant (898±87,77) parasite species were Tetraphyllidea fam. gen.
sp. (Platyhelmintha, Cestoda) (commonly known as the species complex, "Scolex pleuronectis"), found in
the digestive. The rest of the parasites collected (Trypanorhyncha fam. gen. sp. and Anisakis sp. larva 3,
type 2) appeared to be accidental. All these parasite species are larval, what implies that Etmopterus
spinax is mostly a prey of other predators (e.g. larger shark species), required to complete the life cycles.
A morphological study of the plerocercoid of Tetraphyllidea fam. gen. sp. has been also developed in
order to find morphological traits to differ the morphotype found in E. spinax.
Although this shark is classified as "least concern" by the IUCN Red List, these kind of studies are needed
not only to improve the management and conservation of this species but their delicate ecosystems.



Presentation type: Poster




                                                               83
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Trophic ecology of the velvet belly lanternshark, Etmopterus spinax (Chondrichtyes:
Etmopteridae) in the Western Mediterranean (Valencia’s Gulf)

Serrano-Rodríguez N.1, Vicent-Rubert J.J.1, Bas-Silvestre M.1, Martin-Lazaro A.1, Guallart J.1


1University of Valencia




Etmopterus spinax is a bathypelagic shark that inhabits the upper slope and the external part of the
continental shelf, is a common species captured by fishing vessels in deep-water fisheries. Feeding habits
of E. spinax in Valencia’s Gulf and Alicante (Western Mediterranean) have been investigated through the
analysis of the stomach contents of 200 specimens. In this work it has been described his diet composition
and its variation with size, sexual maturity, sex, bathymetry and seasonality. The analysis of the diet of E.
spinax suggest that he is a macropredator of mesopelagic species as cephalopods, crustaceans and
teleost; benthic species are excluded from his diet. This species exhibits a group hunting behavior in
smaller sharks and an opportunistic and scavenger feeding habits in larger sharks.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                               84
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


First Record of Tortonese’s Stingray, Dasyatis tortonesei (Myliobatiformes: Dasyatidae) from Sea
of Marmara (North-East Mediterranean Sea)

Taner Yildiz1, Emre Yemişken2, Cem Dalyan2, Uğur Uzer1, F. Saadet Karakulak1


1Istanbul University, Faculty of Fisheries, Department of Fisheries Technology, Istanbul, Turkey

2Department of Biology, Section of Hydrobiology, Faculty of Science, Istanbul University, Turkey




The Tortonese’s stingray, Dasyatis tortonesei, Capape 1975 was firstly reported in Sea of Marmara. The
Tortenese Stingray, Dasyatis tortonesei, Capape 1975 is one of the endemic chondrichtyan species in
Mediterranean Sea. Sixteen batoid fishes were reported from Sea of Marmara which is a deep inland
connecting from North Aegean Sea to Black Sea East in Mediterranean Sea. However, there was just
recorded, Dasyatis pastinaca belong to family Dasyatidae, from Sea of Marmara. Although, D. pastinaca is
well documented of distribution and biology in Mediterranean Sea, the limited information have been
obtained about D. tortonesei because of the point of valid species discussion. On 6-7 May2015, Twenty-
four specimens of Tortonese’s stingrays were captured from three hauls as 34, 61 and 63 m depths (40°
56'016 N 29° 06' 101 E - 40° 39'520 N - 28° 26' 591 E) on a muddy bottom by using bottom trawl net in
North of Sea of Marmara. The species morphological measurements were noted with length-weight
relationship (a= 0.0018 and b= 3.3491).
In this study, we present a preliminary information about Tortonese Stingray, D. tortonesei from Sea of
Marmara.The record of D. tortenesei is become more of an issue about knowledge of endemic species
distribution not only evaluation of biogeographical situations but also discussion of the ecosystem
problems in Mediterranean Sea.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                                85
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


The study of the relationship between squamation pattern and lifestyle as a potential tool for
ecological inferences in deep water sharks

Humberto G. Ferrón1, Carlos Martinez-Pérez, Alba Martín-Lázaro and Héctor Botella


1Geology Department. Universitat de València




More than one third of all described species of chondrichthyans inhabit deep water environments. The
ecology and behaviour of most of these species is poorly known because many of them have never been
studied in situ and only some biological aspects have been inferred from indirect observations on the
morphology, anatomy and stomach contents of captured individuals. Interestingly, the close relationship
between morphology and function in shark scales is well known, being involved in at least four functions
(protection against abrasion, defense against ectoparasites, reduction of the skin friction drag and
accommodation of photophores in bioluminescent sharks). Here we propose a new methodology, based
on the study of the relationship between the squamation pattern and the ecology in well-studied sharks,
that could be useful for ecological inferences in less known species such as those living in deep water
environments.
With this aim, we have characterized the scale morphologies associated to each function by classic
morphometrics and discriminant analysis. Subsequently, we have studied the squamation patterns of 43
species of sharks, whose ecology is well known, taking into account both the arrangement and the
percentages of body area occupied by each scale morphology and scale functional type. Then the species
were classified into ecological groups and the relationship between the lifestyle and the squamation
pattern was established by two different ways. Firstly, we described the typical squamation pattern of each
ecological group taking into account the distribution of the functional types on the body and, secondly, we
performed a discriminant analysis taking into account the percentages of coverage of each functional type.
In both cases we found a good correlation between the lifestyle and the squamation in all studied sharks.
In this way, it is established a robust comparative framework where poorly known species, such as deep
water sharks, can be included for ecological inferences in future works.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                            86
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


The occurence of Squatina squatina Linnaeus, 1758 from Gokceada (North-Eastern Aegean Sea)

Emre Yemişken1, Persefoni Megalofonou2, Cem Dalyan1,


1Istanbul University, Faculty of Fisheries, Department of Fisheries Technology, Istanbul, Turkey

2Department of Biology, Section of Zoology Marine Biology, University of Athens, Greece




In this study, provided to update knowledge of occurrence of Squatina squatina Linnaeus, 1758 from North
Aegean Sea and gave an information about deposition of calcified on vertebrae to age determination of
the specie. Two female individuals of Squatina squatina were caught by longline in offshore of Gokceada
(Imbros-North Eastern Aegean Sea) from 109 m depths. The band pairs of vertebrae was investigated by
using colorization and non-colorization method. Some vertebrae measurements were counted. And the
translucent and opaque bands on the vertebrae observed in detail. The discriminative band pair numbers
showed variety between colorization methods such as 22 – 24 (Total Length: 596 mm), 24-28 (Total
Length: 1177 mm). There is no differences view of band on vertebrae between Silver nitrate colorization
method and without colorization method. However, the red alzarine method didn’t demostrate a good
results to clarify the bands.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                                87
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Diet of an endangered Rajid species in the Celtic Sea: the common skate, Dipturus cf. flossada


Sarah Brown-Vuillemin1

1French National Museum of Natural History and Université du littoral Côte d’Opale (ULCO)




Stomach contents from 313 Dipturus cf. flossada captured during trawl surveys in Celtic sea (2012-2015)
were analyzed to examine their diet composition. Fifty prey species were identified and have been
regrouped into 6 categories of prey for the analyses. D. cf. flossada feed mainly on shrimps, crabs and
fishes. No differences between sexes are observed, but analysis showed significant ontogenetic changes
in diet. Specimen’s total lengths range between 197 and 1412 millimeters. The Levin’s index indicates that
D. cf. flossada is a specialist predator (Bi<0.6) for all stages of life. The value of the Prey-Specific Index of
Relative Importance (%PSIRI) showed that shrimps (%PSIRI=98) largely dominated the diets of smaller
individuals (<455 mm), then their proportion decreases during growth to be replaced by crabs and fishes.
Longer individual (>1229 mm) show a specialization for fishes (%PSIRI=81). This specialization is
confirmed by a high trophic level (TL>4) corresponding to a tertiary consumer in the food chain. The low
dietary overlaps between juveniles, sub-adults and adults suggest the possibility of sharing resources.
Similarly, in the same size classes, differences in diets according to the stage of maturity are observed
with a large dominance of fishes, (%PSIRI=80) for mature individuals in comparison with immature
(%PSIRI=40). Results implicate that an accurate diet characterization requires taking into account the life
cycle.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                             88
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Systemic gas embolism in sharks! Evidence of decompression like lesions in by-caught little
sleeper sharks Somniosus rostratus from deep sea trawls

Daniel García1, José Luis Crespo1, Javier Guallart1, Pablo García-Salinas1, Maria Ángeles Jiménez1, Micah Brodsky1


1University of Valencia




Gas embolism associated with decompression has been described in air breathing marine vertebrates,
including cetaceans, pinnipeds, and sea turtles, and in teleost fish possessing a swim bladder. In air
breathing marine vertebrates, gas embolism has been associated with anthropogenic factors, such as
exposure to sonar and by-catch in commercial fishing gear. In mammals and turtles gas bubbles have
been observed in several tissues and are considered to reflect nitrogen supersaturation caused by
changes in diving behaviour or physiology.
This is the first report describing decompression like gas bubbles emboli in cartilaginous fish, such as
elasmobranchs, that lack internal gas filled spaces. Results from post mortem CT scans, necropsy, and
histopathology of three specimens of deep-sea shark Somniosus rostratus caught at 600-800 m depth in
commercial bottom trawls in the Ibiza Channel (Western Mediterranean) are consistent with signs of gas
emboli.
Gas bubbles were observed on CT images in several tissues including the eyes, brain case, and
urogenital system. Macroscopic gas bubbles and lesions were observed during necropsies.
Histopathology revealed tissue damage consistent with gas bubble trauma underneath serosal
membranes of the intestine, liver and spleen. In addition, vascular ectasia consistent with gas filling of
blood capillaries and lymphatic vessels was observed in multiple tissues, including kidney, liver, spleen
and meninges. We theorize that these bubbles could most probably originate from either oxygen or CO2
supersaturation. We plan to discuss and contrast our findings with other zoological groups and present
plans for future research to characterize this phenomenon and mechanisms of decompression associated
with gas embolic disease in cartilaginous fishes.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                             89
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Climate change is affecting elasmobranch biodiversity in the marine waters of the Madeira
Archipelago (NE Atlantic)

Mafalda Freitas1,2, João Canning-Clode2,3


1Estação de Biologia Marinha do Funchal, Cais do Carvão, Promenade da Orla Marítima do Funchal, 9000-107 Funchal, Madeira,


Portugal.
2MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Estação de Biologia Marinha do Funchal, Cais do Carvão 9000-107


Funchal, Madeira, Portugal.
3Smithsonian Environmental Research Center, 647 Contees Wharf Road, Edgewater, MD 21037, USA




The global warming of the oceans and the ability of many successful non-native marine species to tolerate
a broader thermal range than similar native species is changing species distributions across seas and
oceans. As a response to this recent warming, a poleward movement in latitude of numerous species has
been observed in many biogeographic regions.
The Madeira Archipelago is located southwest of continental Europe and 700 km off the Moroccan coast
in the Atlantic Ocean. In recent years several new records of marine invertebrates and fish have been
registered in Madeiran waters due to biological invasions but also due to climate change.
For the past 20 years, several species of marine fishes from tropical and subtropical seas have been
showing up in Madeira and as a result, these new records have been expanding their distribution range,
particularly its north limit. In this context, we present in this account four new elasmobranch species we
consider are range expansions for the Madeira island system.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                           90
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Deep-sea Chondrichthyes caught in an experimental fishing survey off the Canary Islands (NE
Atlantic Ocean)

Mafalda Freitas1,2; Ana Luísa Costa1,2,João Delgado3; S. Jiménez4; J. A. González5; Viriato Timóteo3


1 Estação de Biologia Marinha do Funchal, Cais do Carvão, Gorgulho, 9000-107, Funchal, Madeira, Portugal.

2MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Estação de Biologia Marinha do Funchal, Cais do Carvão 9000-107


Funchal, Madeira, Portugal.
3 Direcção de Serviços de Investigação das Pescas, Estrada da Pontinha, 9004-562 Funchal, Madeira, Portugal.

4 Museo de Ciencias Naturales de Tenerife, 38001 Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain.

5 Grupo de Ecología Marina Aplicada y Pesquerías, Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Departamento de Biología,


Campus de Tafira, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, 35017 Las Palmas, Spain


There is a long tradition in the deep-sea fishery of the bathypelagic black scabbard-fish, Aphanopus carbo
and A. intermedius, in Portugal mainland and in the Archipelago of Madeira. In Madeira, this fishery is
performed with drifting longlines, set between 800 and 1200 m of depth, on the slopes of the islands of the
archipelago and nearby seamounts. This is one of the oldest known fisheries in the world targeting a
deepwater resource.
In March 2009 an experimental survey to obtain indications about the abundance of black scabbard-fish
and to access the by-catch of this type of fishery was carried out inside the Canary Island ZEE, in the
framework of a fisheries agreement between Macaronesian archipelagos (Madeira, Azores and the
Canaries).
Eleven species of Chondrichthyes were identified, belonging to 5 families: Pseudotriakidae,
Centrophoridae, Etmopteridae, Somniosidae and Chimaeridae.For some of the species caught and due to
its rarity, data regarding depth of occurrence, sexual matury and morphometry are given.
Several voucher specimens from all species caught were deposited as reference collections in the Natural
History Museum of Funchal (MMF).


Presentation type: Poster




                                                              91
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


First record of a gravid blue shark, Prionace glauca in Corinthian Gulf, Hellas, eastern
Mediterranean Sea

Persefoni Megalofonou1


1Department of Biology, Section of Zoology-Marine Biology, University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis, 157 84 Athens, Greece




The blue shark is the most abundant shark species of the pelagic ecosystem in the Mediterranean Sea
having a broad geographic distribution from the Strait of Gibraltar to the Lebanon coasts and from the
African to European continental shelf. On 11th February 2015, a large specimen with a total weight of 320
kg was captured in Corinthian Gulf, a semi-enclosed gulf between the Peloponnesus to the south and
Central Hellas to the north with a maximum depth of 935 m. This is the first record of the species in this
area and the largest gravid female ever reported in the Mediterranean Sea. A detailed description of the
specimen by measurements of morphometric characters is given. Fifteen of its embryos were recovered
and measured.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                              92
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


On the occurrence of pelagic sharks in Calabria (Southern Italy, central Mediterranean)

Gianni Giglio1, Silvio Cimbalo, Stefania Giglio, Elena Madeo, Francesco Pellegrino, Francesca Riviello, Giuseppe Rjillo, Sandro
Tripepi, Emilio Sperone


1University of Calabria, Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences




This contribution presents the results of a survey study on the spatiotemporal patterns of distribution of
large predatory sharks in Calabria between the years 2000-2015. The Tyrrhenian side of the study area
lies in the western Mediterranean, while the Ionian side lies in the eastern Mediterranean. Calabria is
divided from Sicily by the Messina Strait The Ionian continental shelf is not particularly wide, and the depth
along the Sicilian coast drops suddenly and reaches -2000 m within few miles from the coast. The
Messina Strait is very important from a geological and an oceanographic point of view, because together
with the Sicily-Tunisian Ridge it is one of the two conjunction points between the western and eastern
basins of the Mediterranean Sea. A total of 14 species were recorded: Alopias superciliosus, Alopias
vulpinus, Carcharhinus brevipinna, Carcharhinus obscurus, Carcharhinus plumbeus, Carcharodon
carcharias, Cetorhinus maximus, Hexanchus griseus, Isurus oxyrhinchus, Lamna nasus, Odontaspis
ferox, Prionace glauca, Sphyrna lewini and Sphyrna zygaena. Among these species, the blue shark
Prionace glauca and the bluntnose sixgill shark Hexanchus griseus were the most common ones. Also of
interest was the frequency of species such as Carcharodon carcharias, Sphyrna zygaena, Isurus
oxyrhinchus and Cetorhinus maximus. 46% of all reported records derived from the Tyrrhenian side of the
region and 54% on the Ionian side. The presence of species such as Alopias superciliosus, Carcharhinus
obscurus and Sphyrna lewini is of interest from a biogeographical point of view. The reproduction of the
species Carcharhinus obscurus, Carcharhinus plumbeus, Hexanchus griseus, Isurus oxyrhinchus,
Prionace galuca and Sphyrna lewini was documented along the Calabrian coast, particularly on the Ionian
side of the region. The recovering of Ionian Sphyrna zygaena, Hexanchus griseus and Prionace glauca
populations and the declining of Lamna nasus and Odontaspis ferox populations were also noted.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                              93
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Deficit in digestive capabilities of shark early stages under climate change

Rui Rosa1, Marta Pimentel1, Juan G. Galan1, Miguel Baptista1, Vanessa M. Lopes1, Catarina Santos1, Ricardo Calado2, Tiago
Repolho1


1MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Laboratório Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de

Lisboa, Av. Nossa Senhora do Cabo, 939, 2750-374 Cascais, Portugal
2Departamento de Biologia & CESAM, Universidade de Aveiro, Campus Universitário de Santiago, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal




Few empirical information is currently available on the potential effects of acidification and/or warming in
sharks, but none exist about digestive capabilities under such future conditions. Here we investigated the
impact of both acidification (ΔpH=0.5) and warming (+4 °C; 30 °C) on the digestive enzyme levels of
recently-hatched tropical bamboo shark (Chiloscyllium punctatum). Thirty days post hatching, juvenile
sharks revealed a significant increase in pancreatic trypsin levels under warming, but also a significant
decrease under acidification, namely a 42 % drop under present-day temperature and 44% drop under the
warming condition. A similar trend was recorded for the alkaline phosphatase activity in shark’s intestine,
i.e., the impact of environmental hypercapnia was also quite notorious - a 50 % drop under present-day
temperature and 49% drop under the warming condition. We argue that these trends might be the result of
reduced protein synthesis due to energetic limitations to fuel essential processes, which led to a decrease
in metabolic rates and general body fitness.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                           94
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Ecto and endo-parasites of elasmobranchs stranded along Calabrian coast (southern Italy, central
Mediterranean)

Elena Madeo1, Stefania Giglio, Emilio Sperone, Gianni Giglio, Sandro Tripepi, Concetta Milazzo


1University of Calabria, Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences




The purpose of this paper was to provide preliminary data on parasites of elasmobranchs stranded along
the Calabrian coast: in particular, we examined two specimens of Dalatias licha, one of Isurus oxyrinchus
and five of Prionace glauca. Specimens were all of different sizes and came from the Ionian coast of the
Calabria region. The isolation of parasites from the organs was performed according to the common
parasitological techniques. Parasites were isolated, cleaned in saline, fixed in ethanol 70°, cleared in
Amman lactophenol and classified according to literature.
In all examined species, nematodes larvae were found in the stomach and the spiral valve. Due to the bad
condition of the samples, it was not possible to obtain an identification at genus or species level just from
the morphology of these larval stages. In addition, the parasitological examination revealed the presence
of the cestodes of the Order Trypanorhyncha (Diesing, 1863) in Isurus oxyrinchus (stomach, spiral valve),
larvae of cestodes Tetraphyllidea (Carus, 1863) in a specimen of D. licha (spiral valve) and cestodes
belonging to the family Phyllobothriidae (Braun, 1900) in P. glauca (spiral valve). During the investigation
we observed the presence of ectoparasites too. In particular, the skin of I. oxyrinchus was infested by the
copepod Euryphorus brachypterus (Gerstaecker, 1853) and by larval stages belonging to the family
Caligidae; on the gills of the same specimen we found females of Nemesis Lamna (Risso 1826). The skin
of P. glauca was infested by the copepod Echthrogaleus coleoptratus (Guérin-Méneville, 1837) and the
gills by a female specimen of Kroyeria lineata (Van Beneden, 1853). The results obtained are in
agreement with literature; some particular cases require further investigations.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                              95
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


ICP-MS as a useful tool to determine heavy metals content in elasmobranchs

Sandro Tripepi1, Raffaella Santoro, Stefania Giglio, Elena Madeo, Concetta Milazzo, Gianni Giglio, Emilio Sperone, Donatella
Barca


1University of Calabria, Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences




Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) is a type of mass spectrometry which is capable
of detecting metals and several non- metals at concentrations as low as one part in 1015 (part per
quadrillion, ppq) on non-interfered low-background isotopes. This is achieved by ionizing the sample
with inductively coupled plasma and then using a mass spectrometer to separate and quantify those ions.
Compared to other techniques, ICP-MS has greater speed, precision, and sensitivity. The surveys are
performed to a level of precision and high sensitivity, with measurement limits in the ppm (mg / kg) and
ppb (micrograms / kg).
This research represents the first attempt to use this technique to determine the content of heavy metals in
elasmobranchs stranded along the coast of Calabria. In particular, we analyzed tissues of Hexanchus
griseus (1 specimen), Galeorhinus galeus (1 specimen), Scyliorhinus canicula (3 specimens), Torpedo
torpedo (1 specimen) and Galeus melastomus (5 specimens). For each specimen were analyzed samples
of brain, fat, muscle and skin. The heavy metals evaluated were: Fe, As, Sr, Cr, Mn, Ni, Cu, Zn, Se, Cd,
Sn, Mo, Pb. The data showed a different capacity to accumulation of heavy metals in relation to the
tissues considered, and in relation to the ecological preferences of the species. Also the size and,
consequently, the age, of the specimen could have an influence on the rate of accumulation. The low
number of samples does not allow further speculation, but the data obtained have verified the
effectiveness of ICP-MS as accurate method for determining the content of heavy metals in tissues of
elasmobranchs.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                              96
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Maximizing smartphone technology in marine recording projects

Cat Gordon1, John Richardson1


1The Shark Trust




Growing acknowledgement of the value and role of citizen science is allowing members of the public to
play a far greater and more effective role in elasmobranch research, and potentially feed into conservation
and management policy. Recognising this, the Shark Trust has developed smartphone apps aimed at
increasing the flow and quality of records for two key Shark Trust citizen science projects: the Great
Eggcase Hunt (GEH) and the Angler Recording Project (ARP).
Each app was developed with a different objective in mind. The GEH receives a high volume of records
(over 80,000 to date) however unverified records have produced some spurious entries in the dataset. As
such, it is important to increase the number of records submitted with photographs of the eggcase,
allowing the records to be verified. The smartphone app should increase both the flow and quality of
records submitted to the project, thereby improving knowledge of egglaying species and those marine
areas important to their static life history stage.
In contrast, the ARP receives fewer records (approx. 8000 to date), due primarily to a general reticence on
the part of sea-anglers to engage in recording projects. The smartphone app will make catch recording
and reporting as simple and straight-forward as possible, with the objective of increasing the volume,
accuracy, and geographic and demographic spread, of records submitted. Ultimately, as the project
grows, trends in the abundance and distribution of species throughout UK waters may become visible,
which can contribute to more effective fisheries management and conservation.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                      97
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Scyliorhinus stellaris eggcase tagging project

Cat Gordon1


1The Shark Trust




The Nursehound (Scyliorhinusstellaris) is one of the most abundant shark species encountered in British
waters, although they are listed as Near Threatened on the IUCN Red List. Despite this widespread
distribution, the eggcases are most commonly washed up and recorded to the Shark Trust’s Great
Eggcase Hunt from around the south and west coast of England and Wales. Egglaying has been
documented as occurring during spring and summer months in shallower waters, with an incubation period
of 9 – 11 months, depending on water temperatures.
In Devon, a local site has been discovered where numerous S. stellaris eggcases have been deposited in
a sheltered channel. The area can be easily snorkelled on a low spring tide, with the depth usually ranging
from 0.5 – 1.5m. There is an abundance of Rainbow Wrack (Cystoseira tamariscifolia) in this channel, and
all eggcases recorded to date have been found attached to this. Since April 2014, the eggcases have
been photographed and tagged, and the water temperature, tide height and time, and significant weather
events have been recorded for each survey.
During the preliminary study all eggcases encountered were tagged, however the main aim is to record
newly deposited eggs (distinguished by their transparency and lack of bio-fouling) in order to monitor the
average development period while in-situ and whether the eggs are deposited outside of the known
egglaying period. Other factors such as the success of hatching for each egg and the level of bio-fouling
with age are also being monitored.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                    98
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


The role of sharks in a coastal ecosystem of the southern Brazil
Hugo Bornatowski H.1; Angelini, R.2; Amorim, A.F.1
1 - Instituto de Pesca. Avenida Bartolomeu de Gusmão, 192. Santos, SP, CEP 11030-906, Brazil

2 - Departamento de Engenharia Sanitária e Ambiental, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte, UFRN, BR-101, Campus

Universitário, Natal, RN CEP59078-970, Brazil




Understanding the ecological role of a species within an ecosystem depends largely on knowledge of its
trophic relations. Comprehending these trophic interactions and the position of species within a foodweb is
a crucial step in clarifying the dynamics of marine communities and the impacts individual components
(i.e. species) have on trophic network compartments. Failure to recognize the importance of direct and
indirect effects can lead to serious gaps in our understanding of the causes and consequences of
disturbances in foodwebs. We used Ecopath with Ecosim models to evaluate the role of coastal sharks
[i.e. Galeocerdo cuvier, Sphyrna spp. (S. zygaena and S. lewini), Carcharhinus obscurus and
Rhizoprionodon lalandii], and their influence on marine structure in a subtropical ecosystem in southern
Brazil. The results showed that tiger G. cuvier and hammerhead Sphyrna spp. sharks are ecologically
important predators of the southern Brazilian coast, and their ecological importance in the food web is
high, being classified as keystone species in this ecosystem. A mixed-trophic impact matrix was generated
and tiger shark exerted a strong positive impact on Tetraodontidae fishes, and negative impacts on sea
birds and Gerreidae fishes. Hammerhead sharks negatively impacted batoids (Rajidae and Dasyatidae),
R. lalandii and Carangidae fishes. Analysis of the Brazilian southern coast reveals that sharks are
keystone predators, and are highly impacted by fishing. Increases in fisheries can have strong effects on
the food web.


Presentation type: Poster




                                                            99
