PROCEEDINGS OF THE EUROPEAN
 ELASMOBRANCH ASSOCIATION
ANNUAL SCIENTIFIC CONFERENCE


     18 years on, Prepared for the Future



        7th to 9th November 2014
                Leeuwarden
             The Netherlands
Colophon
Editing: I. Kingma & L. Planthof
Copy Editing: P. Walker
Illustrations: Dietrich Bürkel
Cover art: I. Kingma
Date of first Publication: 30 October 2014

                                             2
                               INDEX

Foreword                                                 5

Programme                                                9

Sessions                                                12

Keynote addresses                                       17

Abstracts Oral presentations                            27

           Session 1 Elasmobranch Policy                28

           Session 2 Stock Assessment & Management      36

           Session 3 Distribution & Tagging             46

           Session 4 Husbandry & Elasmobranch Biology   57

Abstracts Poster                                        67

Acknowledgements                                        89




                                                             3
4
FOREWORD




           5
6
Foreword

Welcome to the 18th European Elasmobranch Association Annual Scientific
Conference. We are honoured to host the event this year in Leeuwarden at
Van Hall Larenstein University of Applied Sciences. The theme of this year’s
meeting is ‘18 years on – Prepared for the Future’. A lot has changed since
the EEA was founded in the mid-1990s, but the absolute necessity of science-
based management for the protection of sharks and rays world-wide, has not.
 Elasmobranchs are increasingly included in high level policy agreements and
scientific knowledge is essential in the dialogue with policy and managers. The
underlying theme of this conference is how this knowledge can help
coordinate the information necessary for the development and
implementation of management measures for sharks and rays.
We are fortunate to have a large number of exciting presentations and posters
on stock-assessment, distribution & tagging, husbandry & biology, as well as
elasmobranch policy. We have also arranged to have break-out sessions on
Saturday during the lunch break during which you can get together to discuss
subjects of mutual interest and set up joint initiatives. There is also plenty of
opportunity for networking and socialising. The reception on Friday evening,
the celebratory dinner and after-party on Saturday, but also in Leeuwarden
itself. Leeuwarden is a vibrant town with a charming centre and a wide
selection of restaurants and bars. It is the capital city of the northern Province
of Fryslân and will be the Cultural Capital of Europe in 2018.
As one of the founding members of the EEA I am personally very proud to
be part of the organisation of this conference and to see how far we have
come in the past 18 years. It is inspiring to see how many people have worked
together to make EEA 2014 possible. I am convinced that the EEA and its
members are playing a continuing role in shark and ray research and
conservation world-wide, and I believe that we are prepared for the future
I wish you all a stimulating, rewarding and enjoyable conference.
Paddy Walker
President European Elasmobranch Association (EEA)
Chair Dutch Elasmobranch Society (NEV)
Associate Professor VHL University of Applied Sciences




                                                                                7
8
PROGRAMME & SESSIONS




                       9
10
Programme EEA2014

DAY 1 – Friday 7th
Registration desk opens at 11.00
11.30 - 12.30       Annual General Meeting (AGM)
12.30 - 13.30       Lunch
13.30 – 17.30       Session 1 – Elasmobranch Policy
18.00-20.00         Evening reception


DAY2 – Saturday 8th
9.00 – 12.30        Session 2 – Stock Assessment & Management
12.30 – 14.00       Lunch & Breakout Sessions
14.00 – 18.00       Session 3 – Distribution & Tagging
19.30-22.30         Celebratory Conference Dinner & Auction
23.00 – 1.00        After Party


DAY 3 – Sunday 9th
9.00 – 13.15        Session 4 – Husbandry & Elasmobranch Biology
13.15-14.00         Awards and Closure
14.00               End of Conference (packed lunch provided)




                                                                   11
Session 1 – Elasmobranch Policy – 13.30 – 17.30
TIME                    SPEAKER                                 TITLE
                                13.30 - Opening of Conference
        Keynote 1:
        Euan Dunn –
14.00                                  Developing MPAs – a BirdLife perspective
        Royal Society for the
        Protection of Birds
14.30   A. Hood                        No Limits? No Future
                                       Shark attacks at Reunion Island (South-
        B. Seret                       western Indian Ocean): overview,
14.45
                                       hypothesis, prevention and risk reduction
                                       measures
        I. Kingma & P. Walker          Rays of Hope - Discard survival in North
15.00
                                       Sea Rays
15.15   K. De Meyer                    Shark conservation the Dutch Caribbean
                            15.30 – 16.00 Coffee Break
        Keynote 2:
16.00   Angelo Villagomez –            Sharks, Science, CITES, & Sanctuaries
        Pew Charitable Trusts
                                       Shark abundance on the deep island slopes
        A.O. Debrot, I.J.M. van        of the Dutch Caribbean ABC-islands: A
16.30
        Beek & G. v, Buurt             potential conservation and research
                                       opportunity
                                       The Implementation of a Shark Sanctuary
                                       and Continued Conservation Management
16.45   T. Bervoets                    Activities on a Small Island Caribbean
                                       State in the Dutch Caribbean of
                                       presentation
                                       Towards a Shark and Ray Management
        A. de Blaeij, I. Kingma,
                                       Plan for the North Sea : Cost Effectiveness
        W.J. Strietman, M. vd
                                       Analyses and the role of stakeholder
        Water & P. Walker
                                       participation
        J. Richardson                  Incorporating fishermen’s knowledge into
17.15
                                       sustainable sourcing guidance
                                17.30 Closure of day 1




                                                                                12
Session 2 – Stock Assessment & Management – 9.00 – 12.30
TIME          SPEAKER                       TITLE
        Key Note 3
                                       A brief history of Atlantic shark stock
        Enric Cortés - National
 9.00                                  assessment in the USA: past, present,
        Oceanic and Atmospheric
                                       and future
        Administration (NOAA)
        P. Lorance, N. Leblanc, E.     Stock Reduction Analysis of selected
 9.30
        Stéphan & A. Tétard            ray stocks
        J. F. Silva, S. R. McCully
                                       Demersal elasmobranchs in the
 9.45   Phillips, J. R. Ellis & S.
                                       western English Channel
        Kupschus
                                       Understanding Undulates through the
10.00   C. Gordon
                                       Great Eggcase Hunt
                                       Age and growth dynamics of spiny
        R. Gračan, S.A. Heppell, G.    dogfish, Squalus acanthias, in the
10.15
        Lacković, B. Lazar             Adriatic Sea (Eastern Mediterranean
                                       Sea)
                           10.30 – 11.00 Coffee Break
        A. Barash, E. Pickholtz, R.    Shark aggregations at power plants:
11.00   Pickholtz, G. Rilov & L.       describing an emerging phenomenon
        Blaustein                      based on fishermen’s observations
                                       Application of molecular techniques in
        A.E. Bester-van der Merwe,
                                       conservation management of
11.15   D. Bitalo, S. Maduna & K.
                                       elasmobranchs, identifying the way
        Gledhill
                                       forward
                                       Population genetics and spatial
        M. Frost, C.S. Jones, L.R.     management for the conservation of
11.30
        Noble & F. Neat                the critically endangered common
                                       skate species complex
                                       New findings from Area 51 –
        S. Weigmann, M.F.W.
11.45                                  Chondrichthyans of the deep western
        Stehmann & R. Thiel
                                       Indian Ocean
        J.A. Thorburn, F. Neat, D.     A Case for Static Marine Protected
12.00   Bailey, L.R. Noble & C.S.      Areas in Managing a Highly Mobile
        Jones                          Elasmobranch (Squalus acanthias)
        P.A. Walker                    New Horizons for elasmobranch
12.15
                                       fisheries management
                    12.30 – 14.00 Lunch & Breakout Sessions



                                                                                 13
Session 3 – Distribution & Tagging – 14.00 – 18.00
TIME            SPEAKER                       TITLE
         H. J.L. Heessen, N.            Elasmobranchs of the North-East Atlantic
 14.00
         Daan & J.R. Ellis              Shelf
                                        Stock Reduction Analysis of selected ray
 14.20   J. Barker, et.al.
                                        stocks
                                        Why not involve anglers in your
 14.35   N. Brevé
                                        elasmobranch studies?
                                        Starry smooth-hounds tagged in the
 14.45   E. Winter & N. Brevé
                                        Netherlands on the move
 15.00                          Poster Pitches                      .
                      15.30 – 16.15 Coffee Break & Poster Session
                                        Conservation of coastal critical habitats of
         A. Lopez & I. Zanella
 16.15                                  scalloped hammerhead shark (Sphyrna
                                        lewini) in the Easter Pacific Ocean
         E. Meyers, J.Barker,           Patterns in the abundance, distribution,
 16.30   R.Haroun & D.Rödder            and behaviour of the Angel Shark
                                        (Squatina squatina) in the Canary Islands
                                        A ten-year wrap-up of Operazione Squalo
         E. de Sabata & S. Clò
 16.45                                  Elefante, basking shark field research in
                                        the Mediterranean
                                        Atmospheric and oceanographic
         S. Hilbourne, K. Collins
                                        influences on whale shark (Rhincodon
 17.00   & D. Ramirez
                                        typus) seasonality in the Bay of La Paz,
                                        Mexico
                                        Genetic monitoring of basking sharks in
                                        the North-East Atlantic: shark habitat use
 17.15   L. Lieber, et.al               in the Marine Protected Area (MPA)
                                        versus marine renewable energy (MRE)
                                        designation debate
                                        Habitat use and local movements of bull
                                        shark (Carcharhinus leucas) at
 17.30   I. Zanella & A. Lopez
                                        Guanacaste Conservation Area, Costa
                                        Rica
                                        Assessing the Effects of Prey Interactions
 17.45   R.W. Bullock , et.al           on Habitat Use Patterns and Foraging
                                        Effort in Lemon Sharks




                                                                                   14
Session 4 – Husbandry & Elasmobranch Biology – 9.30 – 14.00
TIME                SPEAKER                                    TITLE
         Key Note 4
                                      Can public aquaria help change the
 9.30    João Correira –
                                      World?
         Flying Sharks
                                      Managing the genetics of a species in
 10.00   J.D. Hibbitt
                                      captivity: Raja undulata
         A. Gautier, A.
                                      Spermatogonial stem cells: towards the
 10.15   Bosseboeuf, P. Auvray,
                                      preservation of shark species?
         P. Sourdaine
         F. Dhellemmes, J.S.          Exploring personality and a simple
 10.30   Finger, S.H. Gruber,         learning process in the juvenile lemon
         T.L. Guttridge               shark, Negaprion brevirostris
                                      Making sharks and shark research visible
 10.45   G. Wiersma                   – The first two years of the Dutch Shark
                                      Society
 11.00                          Poster Pitches                 .
                            11.20 – 12.00 Coffee Break
         M. Janse                     European captive breeding programs: one
 12.00
                                      step further
                                      Analysis of carcharhinid transcriptomes
         D.G. Swift, E.J. Brooks,
                                      reveals evidence of positive selection in
 12.15   V. Savolainen
                                      genesassociated with an evolutionary
                                      reversal to aplacental viviparity
         A.M. Luger, P.               Morphological diversity in the
 12.30   Kamminga, L.A.J.             palatoquadrate in extant sharks in relation
         Nagelkerke                   to feeding strategy
         M. de Graaf, I.J.M. van      Diversity, spatial distribution and relative
         Beek, W. van                 abundance of reef sharks using stereo
 12.45   Looijengoed, T. van          baited remote underwater video around
         Kuijk, T. Stoffers &         the windward islands of the Caribbean
         L.A.J. Nagelkerke            Netherlands
 13.00   M. van de Water              Return of sharks and rays in the North Sea
                            13.15 – 14.00 Awards and Closure




                                                                                  15
16
KEYNOTE ADDRESSES




                    17
                    Keynote 1             Euan Dunn




Dr Euan Dunn is Principal Marine Advisor at the Royal Society for the
Protection of Birds (RSPB), Europe's largest wildlife charity and UK partner
of BirdLife International. He is responsible for wide-ranging national and
international policy development and advocacy on the ecosystem approach to
fisheries management, particularly interactions between fisheries and marine
birds.

A key focus of his work is promoting environmental integration in the
Common Fisheries Policy. He has represented BirdLife on the North Sea
Advisory Council (NSAC) since its establishment ten years ago. He chairs the
NSAC’s Spatial Planning Working Group, a major focus of which has been
the engagement of the fishing sector with the Habitats Directive and, in
particular, developing fisheries management measures for the Dogger Bank.
He is also a former Board member of the Marine Stewardship Council (MSC).




                                                                         18
Developing MPAs – a BirdLife perspective
Friday November 7th 14.00-14.30

This presentation will draw on the experience of the RSPB (as UK BirdLife
partner) in setting up Marine Protected Areas in UK waters and in the
surrounding regional seas. The policy background is one of political failure to
progress the establishment of MPAs at any pace commensurate with the need
for site protection (e.g. in 1998 ICES was already flagging the need for closed
areas to protect relict populations of North Sea common skate). This need is
all the more compelling with the mounting pressures on our seas and marine
life, not least from climate change. So it’s a ‘long game’ and requires
persistent application and advocacy. The RSPB has therefore had a long-
standing commitment to a well-managed network of MPAs for the protection
of seabirds and their critical habitats, and has pushed for the designation of
European Marine Sites (especially SPAs) and national marine protected areas.
In this context, we will look at, variously: the push for the necessary
legislative change, the identification, selection, and delineation (boundary-
setting) of sites, and their robust management. Effective stakeholder
engagement, and generating the necessary public support, also play vital roles.
In addressing these issues, I will touch on the exciting research and modelling
that RSPB, on behalf of UK Governments (plural because of the increasingly
devolved governance) is undertaking to identify candidate offshore foraging
sites for seabirds. I will also address (1) our response to the inertia of the UK
to establish offshore MPAs for birds; (2) the role of the RSPB in promoting
the establishment of the ‘sandeel box’ off the east coast of Scotland (a
measure which has now been in place since 2000); and (3) challenges and
lessons learned from the role of the North Sea Advisory Council (in which I
chair the Spatial Planning Working Group) in developing fisheries
management measures for the complex Dogger Bank Special Areas of
Conservation (SACs) under the jurisdiction of, respectively, the UK,
Netherlands and Germany.




                                                                              19
            Keynote 2 Angelo Villagomez




Angelo O'Connor Villagomez is an indigenous conservationist from the
island of Saipan in the Northern Mariana Islands. He has more than a decade
of experience working on environmental policy and community outreach in
small island developing states in the Pacific and Caribbean. Angelo received
his education at Rollins College and the University of Richmond. He has led
The Pew Charitable Trusts shark sanctuary program since 2013.




                                                                         20
Sharks, Science, CITES, & Sanctuaries
Friday 7th of November 16.00-16.30

The shark fin trade is a global issue. Hong Kong is the hub of the global
shark fin trade, but over 120 countries have participated in the trade in the
last 10 years. A global approach to shark conservation requires that we tackle
both issues of supply and demand, and the trade between importing and
exporting countries, at both the international and local level.
There are a range of management options for protecting threatened shark
species with various governments, scientists, and environmental advocates
calling for different polices. Angelo Villagomez, manager of The Pew
Charitable Trusts shark sanctuary program, will discuss how consumer
campaigns, trade restrictions, and strong domestic measures work together to
reduce the overall global mortality of sharks.




                                                                           21
                     Keynote 3               Enric Cortés




Enric Cortés holds a BS in Biology from the University of Barcelona, Spain,
an MS in Biology and Living Resources from the University of Miami
Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, and a PhD in Animal
Biology from the University of Barcelona. After spending several years at
Mote Marine Laboratory in Sarasota, Florida, as a post-doctoral scientist,
Enric became a research associate at Florida State University. Dr. Cortés was
hired by the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration in
1998 and has worked out of the Panama City Laboratory, Florida, since then,
leading Atlantic shark stock assessments and the shark population biology
program. He is currently the chairman of the shark species group of the
International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas. Enric has
diverse fields of interest and expertise that include feeding ecology, life history
theory, demographic methods, quantitative fisheries techniques, and stock
assessment methods. More recently, Dr. Cortés has been working on
application of methods more suitable to data-poor situations, which are often
encountered when working with chondrichthyan fishes.




                                                                                22
A brief history of Atlantic shark stock assessment in the USA:
past, present, and future.
Saturday 8th of November 9.00-9.30

The status of shark stocks on the US Atlantic coast has been assessed since
the 1990s as a result of the implementation of the first Atlantic shark Fishery
Management Plan in 1993. Models used to assess stock status have evolved as
data availability improved. However, of the now more than 40 species
managed, only 11 have been assessed owing to a variety of reasons. I will
review the main methods used for assessing shark populations in the US
western North Atlantic, the data required to apply those methods, and
summarize current stock status of the different species. I will pay particular
attention to the data still needed to conduct better assessments as well as the
factors that limit better management of these resources. I will then identify
some promising methods that have been developed for data-poor situations.




                                                                            23
                      Keynote 4               João Correia




João P. S. Correia is the founder and General Manager of Flying Sharks, a
company that specializes in marine live animal brokerage. It is dedicated to
promoting a sustainable use of the oceans, through providing consultancy and
quality marine animals to institutions focusing on education and research on
the marine environment.

He has a PhD from the University of Aveiro in Portugal in shark and ray
commercial fisheries and has worked for nearly 20 years in and with aquaria
and zoos world-wide, as well as for the Portuguese research institute IPMAR.
He is the founder and member of the Board of the Portuguese Association
for the Study and Conservation of Elasmobranchs, which is a member of the
EEA.

João is a prolific writer and presentor of scientific results, but can just as easily
engage a class of school children, undergraduates or politicians with his in-
depth knowledge and hands-on experience of sharks and rays.




                                                                                  24
Can public aquaria help change the World?
Sunday 9th of November 9.30-10.00


Public aquaria and zoos have come a long way from early XXth Century
facilities focused exclusively on displaying live animals to an audience thirsty
for novel and interesting sights. As the end of the millennium approached,
zoological institutions took on a role of leadership, steering the public
towards a more enlightened view on the environment, conservation and
education. This presentation reports on a myriad of such examples, ranging
from the world famous ‘Sea Food Watch’ card promoted by the Monterey
Bay Aquarium, or even ‘The Great Egg Case’ hunt promoted by Shark Trust
and strongly supported, and disseminated, by Sea Life Centres worldwide.
Likewise, the European Association of Zoos and Aquaria has lead nearly a
dozen conservation campaigns, ranging from Apes, to Carnivores, to
Bushmeat, amongst many other environmental issues crying for attention.
These campaigns enjoy monumental support from the millions of visitors that
zoos and aquaria welcome through their admission gates every year and these
efforts have raised nearly 4 million euros thus far. These are but a few of
multiple examples where the public aquaria, and zoo, community are
spearheading the conservation of the natural world and education of society.




                                                                             25
26
ABSTRACTS ORAL PRESENTATIONS




                               27
Session 1                Elasmobranch Policy                    14:30

No Limits? No Future
A. Hood
Organisation      Shark Trust
Address           4 Creykes Court, 5 Craigie Drive, The Millfields, Plymouth
                  PL1 3JB, UK
Email             ali@sharktrust.org

From 2006 to 2013 the Shark Trust and the European Elasmobranch
Association worked, as founder members of the Shark Alliance, towards the
adoption of a Community Plan of Action for Sharks (CPOA-sharks) and a
revision of the EU shark finning regulation ((EC) No.1185/2003): seeking to
remove loopholes in the regulation and relieve the burden of enforcement of
a complicated and excessively lenient fin to carcass ratio. In 2009 the CPOA-
sharks was adopted (COM(2009) 40) presenting a framework for
sustainability and from 2013 the EU fleet were obliged to land sharks with
their fins naturally attached ((EU) No.605/2013). Integral to compliance with
the regulation is the annual requirement to report to the European
Commission on implementation of the finning regulation by 1st May, at the
time of writing many of those Member States with shark fishing interests have
yet to do so. Despite this the EU continues to champion fins naturally
attached as best practice within high seas fisheries managed by Regional
Fisheries Management Organisations.
Five years after the adoption of the CPOA-sharks the Shark Trust is revisiting
the potential of the CPOA-sharks and asking why more has not been
achieved. In this context, and amidst the potential ramifications of the
discards ban, in May 2014 the Shark Trust launched its No Limits? campaign
www.nolimitsnofuture.org.      No Limits? highlights, to the public and
governments alike, the urgent need to introduce science-based catch limits for
Blue Sharks, Shortfin Mako, Tope, smoothhounds and catsharks – species
with escalating fisheries and accounting for over 97% of reported Atlantic
and Mediterranean shark landings. No Limits? presents a simple request to EU
Member States: stand by the pledges you adopted five years ago within the
CPOA-sharks, and stop uncontrolled shark fishing now!
                 Keywords: CPOA-sharks, catch-limits, Europe




                                                                           28
Session 1                 Elasmobranch Policy                     14:45

Shark attacks at Reunion Island (South-western Indian Ocean):
overview, hypothesis, prevention and risk reduction measures

B. Seret
Organisation      1IRD / Muséum national d’Histoire naturelle, Département
                  Systématique et Evolution
Address           55 rue Buffon, CP 51, 75231 Paris cedex 05, France
Email             seret@mnhn.fr

Since 2011, a series of shark attacks has been occurring at Reunion Island, a
small French territory situated in the South-western Indian Ocean. Shark
attacks have always been recorded from this island with 1 or 2 cases per year
in average. However, for the last three years, 13 cases with 5 fatalities
happened, causing locally a real “shark crisis”. An overview of these attacks
is given, along with the various hypothesis to be tested to explain this recent
increase in shark attack rate; the measures taken or planned to reduce the risk
are presented.
                     Keywords: Reunion Island, shark attack




                                                                             29
Session 1                  Elasmobranch Policy                          15: 00

Rays of Hope - Discard survival in North Sea Rays

I. Kingma and P. Walker
Organisation       Dutch Elasmobranch Society (NEV)
Address            Hobbemakade 118hs, 1071XW Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Email              kingma@elasmobranch.nl

Rays (Rajidae) are vulnerable to fishing pressure due to their specific life
history characteristics, which include slow growth, late ages at maturity, and
the production of a limited number of young. These properties, combined
with the limited data available on ray stocks in North Sea, have led policy
makers to apply a precautionary approach in setting catch limits and
systematically reduce the total allowable catch (TAC) for rays with 10% each
year.
As of January 2016 a landing obligation will be in place for the North Sea
demersal fisheries. Rays are taken as bycatch in this fisheries and the
restrictive ray TAC makes these species potential ‘choke species’. As
elasmobranchs are considered to be among the most resilient species when it
comes to discarding it is hoped they will be exempt from the landing
obligation. At this time however, data on discard survival from commercial
operations is too limited to give clear recommendations on the survivability
of these species.
To advance the knowledge needed for the management of these species the
Dutch Elasmobranch Society will start a cooperative research programme
involving fishing operators in the Dutch demersal fleet. This programme aims
to: (1) bridge the knowledge gaps on ray demographics, catch and bycatch, as
species specific landings data for rays is lacking for most areas; (2) develop a
set of measures based on spatial/ temporal information, gear selectivity and
best practice for on board handling to optimize discard survival. Cooperation
between scientist and fishermen is a key part of the project as this will be
essential for successful implementation of the proposed measures.
The baseline data and constraints for the research will be presented as well as
the outline for necessary protocols.
      Keywords: rajidae; landing obligation; discards; stakeholder participation




                                                                                   30
Session 1                    Elasmobranch Policy                      15:15


Shark Conservation in the Dutch Caribbean
K. De Meyer
Organisation         Dutch Caribbean Nature Alliance (DCNA)
Address              P.O. Box 412, Kralendijk, Bonaire, Dutch Caribbean
Email                director@DCNAnature.org

The Dutch Caribbean Nature Alliance (DCNA) is a regional network of
protected areas, which supports and assists the parks and conservation
organizations on Bonaire, Curaçao, Saba, St. Eustatius and St. Maarten.
A recent study by IMARES has indicated that 36 shark species are present in
the waters of the Dutch Caribbean. These include a healthy deep-water shark
population around the ABC islands as well as the second recorded sighting of
the globally endangered Basking Shark. Although there are no targeted shark
fisheries within the Dutch Caribbean, sharks are killed when they are caught
by artisanal fishers and there is documented illegal fishing by foreign vessels.
And whilst we do not yet know enough about our shark populations the
evidence points to the fact that they are all but gone.
With shark conservation initiatives already underway on St. Maarten and Saba,
DCNA is poised to launch a three year campaign to build popular support for
shark conservation, ban commercial and targeted fishing for sharks and
establish shark sanctuaries as safe haven for sharks
               Keywords: Dutch Carribean; conservation; shark sanctuary




                                                                              31
Session 1                 Elasmobranch Policy                        16:30


Shark abundance on the deep island slopes of the Dutch
Caribbean ABC-islands: A potential conservation and research
opportunity
A.O. Debrot, I.J.M. van Beek and G. v Buurt
Organisation       Institute for Marine Research and Ecosystem Studies,
                   Wageningen UR
Address            P.O. Box 57, 1780AB, Den Helder, The Netherlands
Email              dolfi.debrot@wur.nl

Large marine apex predators have become exceedingly rare in shallow neritic
waters around most Caribbean islands, including the ABC-islands (Aruba,
Bonaire, Curacao) of the Leeward Dutch Caribbean. This is especially the
case for several species of sharks. In May 2000, 24 2-hr long deepwater
submersible dives were conducted off the islands of Aruba, Bonaire and
Curacao, at depths ranging between 80-900 m. Eight shark sightings were
recorded, amounting to 6 different species, among which the endangered
Hexanchus griseus. These observations suggest a surprising diversity and density
of deepwater sharks around the steep island slopes of leeward Dutch islands.
This is further supported by anecdotal accounts by deepwater snapper
fishermen regarding frequent nuisance shark hinder, and clearly contrast to
the very low abundance of sharks in the shallow near shore environment.
Several additional deepwater sharks can be recorded for the island based on
opportunistic catch and collection records, including Hexanchus nakamurai. We
ascribe this apparent abundance of deepwater sharks around these islands to
the combination of steep island slopes and generally strong currents that
greatly hinder effective deepwater snapper fishing and keep deepwater fishing
effort around these islands very low. We conclude by emphasizing the major
contrast between deep and shallow water shark abundance and diversity in
the Leeward Dutch Caribbean and highlight the deepwater shark populations
of these islands as a seemingly fortuitous conservation and research
opportunity.
                           Keywords: Dutch Carribean




                                                                             32
Session 1                   Elasmobranch Policy                       16:45

The Implementation of a Shark Sanctuary and Continued
Conservation Management Activities on a Small Island
Caribbean State in the Dutch Caribbean of presentation

T.Y. Bervoets
Organisation         St. Maarten Nature Foundation/ Dutch Caribbean Nature
                     Alliance
Address              Welsburg Street #1 Unit 25-26. Cole Bay, St. Maarten
Email                manager@naturefoundationsxm.org

On the 11th of October 2011 the Minister of Economic Affairs of ST.
Maarten the Honorable Franklyn Myers issued a Ministerial Decree banning
the hunting and capturing of sharks and rays in the territorial waters of St.
Maarten; a small island-country that is part of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands. The ban came amidst a drastic reduction of the shark
population, with the resident population of especially Caribbean Reef Sharks
being reduced. The management entity of the Man of War Shoal Marine
Protected Area noticed many of the larger females disappearing and a
significant amount of fishing related injuries on juvenile males. A wide scale
lobby was conducted coupled with a valuation study examining the worth of a
single shark to the economy of the island. After wide scale negotiations the
ban was put in place for territorial waters of St. Maarten. Now with the ban in
place the management entity of the Marine Park is conducting a wide-scale
tag and release project involving acoustic and visual tags as well as visual
monitoring and citizen science reports. All of these efforts combined
contribute to the management and of the island’s shark population.
          Keywords: Shark Conservation, Policy, St. Maarten, Dutch Caribbean




                                                                               33
Session 1                 Elasmobranch Policy                       17:15

Towards a Shark and Ray Management Plan for the North Sea:
Cost Effectiveness Analyses and the role of stakeholder
participation

A.T. de Blaeij, P.A. Walker, I. Kingma, M. v.d Water, & W.J. Strietman
Organisation       LEI Wageningen UR; Dutch Elasmobranch Society (NEV)
Address            P.O. Box 29703, 2502 LS The Hague, The Netherlands
Email              Arianne.deblaeij@wur.nl

Since 2012 the Dutch government has given priority to the position of sharks
and rays in all aspects of national and international policy. This means that for
the implementation of the Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD) a
management plan is required, in which the steps to be taken to achieve the
policy objectives for these species are outlined. Although the plan is intended
for the Dutch part of the North Sea, international cooperation is essential.
There are 18 species of sharks and rays in the North Sea populating all
ecological niches from coastal to offshore, pelagic and demersal. These
species are characterised by their late maturity and low fecundity, making
them extra sensitive to enhanced mortality by fishing and loss of coastal and
offshore habitats for nursery and feeding. Many of the species are included in
international policy and conservation guidelines as threatened and some are
locally extinct in the North Sea.
The management plan has been written over a period of 18 months during a
participative process in which scientists, NGOs, fishermen, fisheries
representatives and government officials were invited to share their expertise
to help formulate management objectives. We made use of a cost-
effectiveness analysis (CEA) to propose, formulate and structure the
management measures. The CEA is based on currently available information
and input from experts. Although there is insufficient information to carry
out a complete CEA, we can use it to assess the acceptance of the proposed
measures to stakeholders.
This paper examines the interactive process used to formulate management
objectives for sharks and rays in the Dutch part of the North Sea, explores
the different styles of participation of stakeholders in this process, and looks
at outcomes of the CEA carried out.
  Keywords: MSFD; cost effectiveness; stakeholder participation; management plan




                                                                               34
    Session 1                     Elasmobranch Policy                       17:15

Incorporating fishermen’s knowledge into sustainable sourcing
guidance
J. Richardson
Organisation         Shark Trust
Address              4 Creykes Court, 5 Craigie Drive, The Millfields, Plymouth PL1
                     3JB, UK
Email                john@sharktrust.org


As the importance of elasmobranchs within marine ecosystems is
acknowledged, research into abundance, distribution and life-history has
expanded rapidly. This in turn has supported much greater public awareness
of their key roles as marine top predators. The result has been a significant
shift in the management of elasmobranch fisheries over the last decade –
from a complete absence of management, to a growing number now included
in the EU Common Fisheries Policy.
Tracking this has been a groundswell in consumer demand for sustainable
seafood products – a trend clearly visible in supermarket sourcing policy
throughout the UK. Focusing on UK skate fisheries, as this shift continues,
the commercial fishing industry has repeatedly questioned the datasets used
by fisheries scientists – with fishermen concerned at perceived flaws in the
methodology employed in the scientific trawls on which fisheries
management and policy is based. In addition, isolated incidents of inaccurate
media reporting have resulted in supermarkets removing skate wings from
shelves, with financial ramifications for the fishing industry and seafood retail
sector.
In an attempt to address this, the Shark Trust is developing a guide outlining
species-specific information on the sustainability of regional UK skate
fisheries. Central to this is merging ICES Recommendations with fishing
industry data and knowledge on local skate populations. The objective is to
provide clear guidance for the seafood retail sector and consumers on the
sustainability of skate fisheries, enabling confidence in the sustainability of
skate products while continuing to support effective management and
conservation of threatened species. Challenges to date include sourcing and
validating relevant fishing industry data for UK skate fisheries.
                Keywords: Skate, Sustainable sourcing, Regional fisheries




                                                                                    35
Session 2          Stock Assessment & Management                   9:30

Stock Reduction Analysis of selected ray stocks
P. Lorance, N. Leblanc, E. Stéphan and A. Tétard
Organisation       Ifremer
Address            BP 21105, 44311 Nantes Cedex, France
Email              Pascal.lorance@ifremer.fr

Currently there exist no quantitative stock assessments of rays in the
northeast Atlantic and only few worldwide. To address this short coming this
study uses the Stock Reduction Analysis (SRA) method for a number of
European ray stocks. SRA is based on an age-structured deterministic
production model, which estimates stock biomass and harvest rates from the
time-series of catches, life-history characteristics (von Bertallanfy growth and
natural mortality parameters) and one or several abundance indices. The
abundance index time-series should include at least 3 years, which do not
need to be consecutive. Rays stocks are data-poor, in particular catches were
not reported by species historically and although the situation improved in
recent years, catch by species data often remain uncertain. Life history
characteristics are also uncertain. As a consequence every studied stock is
modelled using two or three alternative assumptions regarding the time-
history of catches or life-history characteristics. Results are presented for the
cuckoo ray (Leucoraja naevus) and the thornback ray (Raja clavata) of the Bay of
Biscay and Celtic Sea and for the undulate ray (R. undulata) in the English
Channel. The few studied examples suggest that plausible stock trajectories
can be derived from limited data. Continued efforts to reconstruct historical
catch time series by species and to obtain abundance indices from surveys or
on-board observations should allow estimating stock biomass and harvest rate
using SRA for a range of elasmobranch stocks.
                       Keywords: Stock assessment, skates




                                                                              36
Session 2           Stock Assessment & Management                    9:45

Demersal elasmobranchs in the western English Channel
J. F. Silva, S. R. McCully Phillips, J. R. Ellis and S. Kupschus
Organisation       Cefas
Address            Pakefield Road, Lowestoft, Suffolk. NR33 0HT, UK
Email              joana.silva@cefas.co.uk

In 2006 a new CEFAS beam trawl survey was initiated in the western English
Channel, with the main policy aim of providing age-based indices for
commercially important sole Solea solea and plaice Pleuronectes platessa, as well as
providing information on other demersal fish and ecosystem components.
The random stratified sampling design allows a better understanding of the
fish assemblages within the area, thus adopting an ecosystem monitoring
approach, where additional environmental data are collected which can
inform Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD) descriptors.
The western English Channel is an important area for a number of
elasmobranchs, with about 30 species known to occur, 15 of which were
recorded in the survey time series. Species of interest including undulate ray
Raja undulata, which is locally abundant and, prior to their prohibited status,
was an important commercial species in some inshore areas.
Preliminary results on the relative abundance, spatial distribution and size
frequency for all dogfish, skates and rays encountered during 2006–2014 are
presented. Results indicated that species including common skate Dipturus
batis-complex, cuckoo ray Leucoraja naevus, thornback ray Raja clavata and
undulate ray showed persistent associations with specific sites, with lesser-
spotted dogfish Scyliorhinus canicula and starry smooth-hound Mustelus asterias
distributed over much of the survey grid. Juvenile skates were routinely
caught, as beam trawls are more selective for smaller fish. Mature specimens
of the smaller bodied skate species, such as cuckoo ray, were also represented
in the catch, while fewer mature specimens of the larger bodied skate species
(e.g. undulate, blonde and thornback ray) were observed.
Keywords: western English Channel, fishery-independent, relative abundance, spatial
                                 distribution




                                                                                 37
Session 2          Stock Assessment & Management                    10:00

Understanding Undulates through the Great Eggcase Hunt
C. Gordon
Organisation      Shark Trust
Address           4 Creykes Court, 5 Craigie Drive, The Millfields, Plymouth PL1
                  3JB, UK
Email             cat@sharktrust.org

The Great Eggcase Hunt (GEH) is a Shark Trust citizen science recording
project that aims to discover where different species of oviparous shark, skate
and ray lay their eggs, while also raising awareness about the diversity of
sharks in UK waters. To date, over 54,000 records have been submitted from
around the British Isles and the project continues to grow in popularity.
An SOSF funded smartphone app for iPhone and Android devices is under
development and shortly due to go live. The app will allow users to navigate
through the Identification Tool in order to discover which species they’ve
found, and upload their records along with photographs and a precise
location. It is hoped that this app will encourage greater accuracy in records
submitted to the project. Whilst the citizen science aspect of the project
focuses on all species, the dataset also enables us to zoom in and focus on
particular species. For skates and rays, the lack of species-specific data has
historically undermined effective management, leading to declines in many
species going unnoticed.
The objective of the Understanding Undulates project is to improve the
resolution of our knowledge of Undulate Ray populations along the southern
and southwest coast of England. The Undulate Ray is listed as Endangered
on the IUCN Red List and could benefit significantly from protection in areas
crucial to its static life-history phase. For the second tranche of English
Marine Conservation Zone designations, 37 new sites are being assessed as
possible candidates, with two of these sites located on the south coast of
England in areas where Undulate Rays are encountered. The Trust is collating
eggcase records (both beach records and in-situ records) for these areas, with
data used to underpin government surveys and contribute to a comprehensive
picture of Undulate Ray populations.
                  Keywords: Eggcase, Undulates, Citizen-science




                                                                               38
Session 2           Stock Assessment & Management                     10:15

Age and growth dynamics of spiny dogfish, Squalus acanthias,
in the Adriatic Sea (Eastern Mediterranean Sea)
R. Gračan1, S.A. Heppell2, G. Lacković1, B. Lazar3
Organisation       1Division of Zoology, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science,
                   University of Zagreb, Croatia
                   2Department of Fisheries and Wildlife, Oregon State University,
                   USA
                   3Department of Biodiversity, Faculty of Mathematics, Natural
                   Sciences and Information Technologies, University of Primorska,
                   Slovenia
Address            Rooseveltov trg 6, HR-10000 Zagreb, Croatia
Email              romana.gracan@biol.pmf.hr

We provide the first information on age and growth estimates for the
endangered Mediterranean subpopulation of spiny dogfish, a commercially
exploited shark, highly sensitive to overexploitation. We collected samples
from 206 specimens caught by commercial bottom trawls in the Adriatic Sea,
and utilizing three ageing protocols achieved good agreement between three
rounds of readings (average percent error = 1.45%). Growth of spiny dogfish
was best described by the Gompertz growth model and the following
parameters: k values for males and females were 0.08 and 0.04 year-1,
respectively, size-at-birth was from 22.2 to 24.2 cm total length, with a
theoretical asymptotic length of 74.9 cm for males and 114.0 cm for females.
The age at which 50% of the population is sexually mature was 10.5 years for
males and 20.1 years for females. The maximum age was estimated at 23 years
for males and 36 years for females, with natural mortality estimates of 0.12
and 0.07 for males and females, respectively. Due to reported demographic
parameter estimates, high fishing effort and particularly low resilience of the
species to exploitation, it is important to produce proper species-specific
management strategy for the spiny dogfish in the region.

               Keywords: elasmobranch, ageing, growth models, spine




                                                                                39
Session 2           Stock Assessment & Management                     11:00


Shark aggregations at power plants: describing an emerging
phenomenon based on fishermen’s observations
A.Barash, E. Pickholtz, R. Pickholtz, G. Rilov and L. Blaustein
Organisation       1. Institute of Evolution and Department of Evolutionary &
                   Environmental Biology, University of Haifa 2. Israel
                   Oceanographic and Limnological Research 3. Department of
                   Statistics and Biostatistics, Rutgers University 4. Department of
                   Zoology, Tel Aviv University
Address            Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of Haifa, 199 Abba Hushi
                   Rd, Haifa, 3498838, Israel
Email              adibarash@hotmail.com

While sharks worldwide are experiencing a rapid decline over the past several
decades, the status of most populations' remains poorly documented. This is
also the case for sharks along the Israeli Mediterranean coast. Along this
coast, anecdotal observations suggest that sharks aggregate at warm effluents
of coastal power plants. This intriguing and undocumented claim also
suggests that some sharks may be quite abundant along the coast. Given
intrinsic challenges in measuring shark abundances, fishermen surveys were
conducted in order to collect 'local ecological knowledge'. Fishermen were
interviewed to reveal whether: a) sharks are sighted more often near power
plant outflows than near structurally similar locations (marinas); b) differences
occur in sighting frequencies among seasons; c) there is a trend in sighting
frequencies of sharks during the past four decades (2013, 20 years earlier and
40 years earlier). A total of 128 fishermen were interviewed at four power
plants and four nearby marinas along the shore: Hadera, Tel-Aviv, Ashdod
and Ashkelon. Results indicate that: a) sharks are observed much more
frequently near power plants at warm water effluents, than in marinas ( Fisher
exact test: P<0.0001); b) shark sightings peak during the cold season, and are
negatively correlated with water temperatures in Hadera (ρ=-0.961, p<0.0001,
n=12) Ashdod (ρ=-0.822, p=0.001, n=12) and Ashkelon (Spearman rank
correlation, ρ=-0.935, p<0.0001, n=12); and c) there has been an increase in
shark sightings between 1993 and 2013 (Wilcoxon signed-ranks, z=275.5,
p<0.001, n=46). Shark aggregations occur at power plant effluents most likely
due to elevated water temperatures. This can be explained either as a
thermoregulatory behavior or due to the high abundance of prey fish
observed at the effluent sites. Further research is needed to understand the
nature of the recent increase in shark abundance and determine whether
conservation and management actions are required.
     Keywords: Carcharhinus, Power plants, Fishermen interviews, Aggregations

                                                                                 40
Session 2          Stock Assessment & Management                     11:15


Application of molecular techniques in conservation
management of elasmobranchs, identifying the way forward
A.E. Bester-van der Merwe, D. Bitalo, S. Maduna and K. Gledhill
Organisation       Department of Genetics, Stellenbosch University, South Africa
Address            Molecular Breeding and Biodiversity Group, Department of
                   Genetics, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch 7600, South
                   Africa
Email              aeb@sun.ac.za

Globally, there is a growing concern for elasmobranchs with fisheries, largely
driven by the Asian shark fin market, contributing to a large proportion of
this decline. Molecular genetic techniques such as DNA barcoding and
genotyping are increasingly being used to assist with conservation
management of elasmobranchs worldwide. Southern Africa is a shark
biodiversity hotspot hosting high endemism while sharing a high number of
species with other parts of the world. Similar to other countries, commercial
shark fisheries have increased over the last decade and there is a need to
ensure sustainable utilisation and conservation of this fisheries resource. Here,
we present an overview of the molecular techniques that are used to assist in
the identification of species, assessment of population structure, reproductive
modes, cryptic speciation and possible inter-species hybridisation of endemic
and cosmopolitan elasmobranch species. We demonstrate application of these
techniques for management and conservation of several species affected by
fisheries including, Mustelus mustelus, Galeorhinus galeus and Carcharhinus
brachyurus. A brief overview of future prospects such as high throughput
development of molecular markers and investigation of ecological
specialization of locally adapted populations will also be presented. We
recommend that acquiring baseline barcode data of all elasmobranchs as a
research priority. Furthermore, analysis of population genetic structure on a
regional and more global scale will aid in effective management of not only
southern African elasmobranchs but also of cosmopolitan species across the
world’s oceans.
   Keywords: molecular techniques, genetics, conservation management, fisheries




                                                                                   41
Session 2          Stock Assessment & Management                 11:30

Population genetics and spatial management for the
conservation of the critically endangered common skate species
complex
M. Frost, C.S. Jones, L.R. Noble and F. Neat
Organisation      University of Aberdeen and Marine Scotland Science
Address           Tillydrone Avenue, Aberdeen, AB24 2TZ , Scotland, UK
Email             r01mbm13@abdn.ac.uk

The common skate (Dipturus batis) is one of the world’s largest rajids. Once
widely distributed throughout European waters it has undergone severe
population declines, as a result of commercial fisheries, and is now critically
endangered (IUCN). Previous genetic and morphometric analyses of the
common skate revealed cryptic speciation that separated it into two distinct
species, the flapper skate (D. intermedia) in the northern region of the
distribution and the blue skate (D. flossada) in southern and offshore areas.
Mitochondrial DNA control region sequences and five nuclear microsatellite
loci were compared between the blue and flapper skate to determine which
species was present in a proposed Marine Protected Area (MPA) on the NW
coast of Scotland. Genetic diversity was examined for skates from along the
western coast of the British Isles, within and outside the MPA, as well as
estimating the population differentiation of the common skate complex along
the Eastern Atlantic shelf. The level of spatial segregation between species
was investigated by mapping the geographic distribution of the species
complex in UK waters.
Microsatellite markers and mtDNA control region sequences indicated D.
intermedia was the only species within the proposed MPA; no evidence of
hybridization between the flapper and blue skate was found. The overall
genetic diversity of D. intermedia was extremely low in the mtDNA control
region and microsatellite loci, and only a single haplotype was found within
the MPA population. D. flossada had much higher control region diversity
indices; however, microsatellite variability was also extremely low. No
significant population differentiation between subpopulations of either
species has thus far been evident. The extreme vulnerability and low genetic
diversity of these two critically endangered species highlights the need for
continued monitoring and spatial management of the last remaining refuge
populations of the common skate.
                 Keywords: Common skate, population, genetics




                                                                            42
Session 2Stock Assessment & Management                     11.45


New findings from Area 51 – Chondrichthyans of the deep
western Indian Ocean
S. Weigmann, M.F.W. Stehmann and R. Thiel
Organisation       aUniversity of Hamburg, Biocenter Grindel and Zoological

                   Museum, bICHTHYS, Ichthyological Research Laboratory
Address            aMartin-Luther-King-Platz 3, 20146 Hamburg, Germany
                   bHildesheimer Weg 13, 22459 Hamburg, Germany

Email              simon.weigmann@uni-hamburg.de

The ecosystems and faunal assemblages of the deep western Indian Ocean are poorly
known, in particular the biodiversity and distribution of chondrichthyans. So
far, 323 of the globally 1186 described and valid species are known to occur
in the western Indian Ocean, including 168 of 508 shark, 145 of 631 batoid,
and 10 of 47 chimaera species. Compared to nine other major ocean areas,
the western Indian Ocean ranks fourth, behind the southwestern Pacific (357
species), eastern Indian Ocean (337 species), and northwestern Pacific (328
species). In the western Indian Ocean, groups with widely distributed, mobile
species such as the Lamniformes, Hexanchiformes, and Carcharhinidae are
best represented with 94%, 83%, and 53% of their species occurring in this
area, respectively. In contrast, orders with mostly shelf species such as the
Heterodontiformes, Orectolobiformes, Squatiniformes, and Myliobatiformes
are underrepresented, possibly due to the narrow continental shelf of the
western Indian Ocean. Furthermore, these orders apparently have differing
centers of distribution, i.e. most heterodontiforms occur in the Pacific, most
orectolobiforms and myliobatiforms in the eastern Indian Ocean and western
Pacific, and most squatiniforms in the Atlantic and western Pacific. Among
the speciose chondrichthyan orders, the Rajiformes is least represented with
only 15% of its species occurring in the western Indian Ocean. Rajiforms
generally inhabit deeper waters in tropical latitudes and most of their taxa
have distribution centers in the northern Atlantic or western Pacific. Since
2011, three new shark and two new rajid species, plus one new pseudotriakid
and one new anacanthobatid genus have been described. The new shark
species belong to the Pristiophoridae, Pseudotriakidae, and Scyliorhinidae, the
new Pristiophorus species represents the first generic record from the area.
Additionally, existing material indicates that the number of described and
valid species in the western Indian Ocean will increase significantly in the
medium term.
Keywords: Annotated global checklist, Biodiversity; Biogeography, New species



                                                                                43
Session 2            Stock Assessment & Management                     12:00


A Case for Static Marine Protected Areas in Managing a Highly
Mobile Elasmobranch (Squalus acanthias)
J.A. Thorburn1, F. Neat2, D. Bailey3, L.R. Noble1 and C.S. Jones1
Organisation        1. School of Biological Sciences, Aberdeen University, 2.Marine
                    Scotland, Aberdeen, 3. Institute of Biodiversity Animal Health
                    and Comparative Medicine, Glasgow Univ
Address             College of Life Sciences & Medicine, University of Aberdeen,
                    Zoology Building, Tillydrone Avenue, Aberdeen, AB24 2TZ
Email               j.thorburn@abdn.ac.uk

Static Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) are being increasingly used to aid the
conservation of elasmobranchs, although as many elasmobranch species tend
to be highly mobile this means static management is only effective for those
species that display strong site association or for which the critical habitats are
known. However, this is reliant on sufficient knowledge of the behaviour and
movement of these species. Spurdog (Squalus acanthias) are one such species
that are in need of appropriate management due to a 95% decrease in their
biomass within the North-East (NE) Atlantic over the last 60 years. Generally
considered a highly mobile species, the management of the remaining UK
stock is hampered by a lack of knowledge of the species within this region.
While previous research suggests that the UK population is one large stock
unit undertaking large migrations, research from other global populations has
shown that some spurdog display a certain level of site fidelity to coastal
areas.
In order to gain insight into the behaviour of coastal spurdog populations in
Scotland, a multidisciplinary study was undertaken in Loch Etive on the west
coast of Scotland. Using a combination of conventional tags, static active
acoustic monitoring, archival data storage tagging (DST) and population
genetics to investigate the movement and wider connectivity of spurdog
within a partially enclosed water body we suggest that some Scottish spurdog
display strong site association and over winter residency within Loch Etive.
This on its own has large management implications, with wider implications
when combined with the genetic study. Genetic markers show that the
spurdog in Loch Etive are part of a wider UK population which suggest that
in protecting a small spatial area, much of the genetic diversity of the UK
spurdog also benefits from this protection.
            Keywords: Residency, Marine protected Area. Squalus acanthias




                                                                                  44
Session 2           Stock Assessment & Management                     12:15

New Horizons for elasmobranch fisheries management
P.A. Walker
Organisation       VHL University of Applied Sciences and Dutch Elasmobranch
                   Society
Address            Postbus 1528, 8901 BV Leeuwarden, NL
Email              paddy.walker@wur.nl

In the EU, the management of elasmobranchs is addressed in policy
frameworks such as the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) and the Marine
Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD). In 2009 the EU adopted the
Community Plan of Action for Sharks, which is being implemented in a
number of European countries. These policy frameworks share common
goals as far as maintaining or restoring healthy fish stocks and marine
biodiversity are concerned. However, many elasmobranch fisheries are still
considered data poor. Although the ICES Working Group on Elasmobranch
Fisheries (WGEF) presents survey trends for over 50 species, management is
based on historical catches, with TACs that have been progressively reduced
under the precautionary approach. Atlantic sharks and rays show broad
biogeography, being found in deep-water, continental shelves and coastal
areas, and in both demersal and pelagic communities. Some species
demonstrate high site fidelity while others migrate thousands of km, moving
between Europe and North America and frequently crossing management
jurisdictions. Many species are taken as by-catch in mixed fisheries and often
discarded. Traditional age-based stock-assessments are frequently not suitable
or cannot be applied. The diversity of species, ecosystems and fisheries,
combined with data limitations, create substantial challenges for the
development and implementation of robust assessment and management
systems. This paper will explore the basis for a new EU project within the
Horizon 2020 framework.
               Keywords: stock-assessment; policy; EU; Horizon 2020




                                                                               45
Session 3               Distribution & Tagging                        14:00


Elasmobranchs of the North-East Atlantic Shelf
H. J.L. Heessen, N. Daan and J.R. Ellis
Organisation       Formerly IMARES
Email              henk.heessen@wur.nl

Data on elasmobranchs will be presented, based on an analysis of more than
60.000 hauls made with research vessels in the Celtic Sea, North Sea and
Baltic Sea in the period 1977–2013. Most of the data originate from ICES
coordinated international trawl surveys, but data of a number of national
surveys have also been used. Focus will be on differences in distribution,
depth distribution, length-frequencies (by area, depth or season), and time
series of abundance. The information presented will be part of a broader
ecological fish atlas of the area that is expected to be published in 2015.
     Keywords: distribution, abundance, surveys, length-frequencies




                                                                              46
Session 3                  Distribution & Tagging                         14:20


Protecting the last angel shark stronghold in the Canary Islands
J. Barker, R. Piper, E. Meyers, Y. Fernández-Palacios and R. Haroun
Organisation          Zoological Society of London
                      Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria (ULPGC)
Address               Regent’s Park, London, NW1 4RY, UK
Email                 joanna.barker@zsl.org

The angel shark (Squatina squatina) was once common throughout Europe’s
seas, but the intensification of demersal fishing practices over the last 100
years has caused widespread decline of this species. As a result, angel sharks
are locally extinct from much of their historic range and are listed as Critically
Endangered on the IUCN Red List. The last known population stronghold is
in the Canary Islands, but here too angel sharks are under threat. The
Zoological Society of London (ZSL) and Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran
Canaria (ULPGC) set up the Angel Shark Project in 2013, to protect the last
known angel shark population stronghold in the Canary Islands. Between
2005 and 2010 the number of recreational angler licenses in the Canary
Islands nearly trebled, from 40,000 to 116,000 licenses, and has continued to
rise to date. There is additional fishing pressure from over c. 830 registered
charter fishing boats. The combined effect of an expanding sportfishing
community, wide-spread use of bottom fishing techniques and the use of
lethal handling techniques is having an adverse impact upon the angel shark,
which is a slow growing and late maturing species. We have recently been
awarded funding to work side by side with the sportfishing community to
reduce sportfishing-related angel shark mortality by:
         Creating a best-practice guide to catch and release to show how
          small changes to fishing, handling and landing techniques will
          dramatically increase angel shark survival.
         Developing a sportfisher-led citizen science tag and release project
          to reveal angel shark movements around the archipelago.
         Encouraging sportfishers and divers to report angel shark sightings
          through our online database (Poseidon), to provide vital ecological
          data to inform a conservation strategy for the region.
               Keywords: sport fishing, best-practice, tagging, conservation




                                                                                  47
Session 3               Distribution & Tagging                       14:35

Why not involve anglers in your elasmobranch studies?
N.W.P. Brevé
Organisation       Sportvisserij Nederland
Address            Leijneseweg 115, 3721 BC, Bilthoven
Email              breve@sportvisserijnederland.nl


Elasmobranchs are vulnerable to over fishing due to their specific life-style
characteristics which result in slow and long reproductive cycles. As a result,
elasmobranch populations have decreased substantially in areas with high
exploitation. The EU shark action plan (CPOA) which also includes skates
and rays, wishes to turn the tide. However, without scientific knowledge,
effective fisheries measures are quite difficult to define. And this is where
sport fishers (fishing with rods, practicing catch & release, not selling fish) can
support elasmobranch studies, and also decision making. Angling has several
benefits over commercial fisheries: e.g. anglers can fish for specific species, on
specific spots such as deep water, and can do so without hardly any by-catch,
also the survival rate of elasmobranchs being caught on rods is very high. And
to prove this, we already have had several good results with tag & release
programs in the UK and the NL.
And there is another catch: the socio-economic benefits derived from sea
angling for elasmobranch species provide a much needed boost to local
economies. A 'Best Value' approach to stock management, which recognises
there is far greater potential for social and economic value if the goal of
fisheries management objectives for certain elasmobranches were aimed at
supporting the development of the recreational sea angling sector.
Anglers represent an importantly large group of eyes and ears. This could
help to distribute the study-results fast, and also help fisheries measures
become more easily accepted. E.g. the Scottish Shark Tagging Program
resulted in Scotland’s sharks being the most protected in Europe and a
Marine Protected Area (MPA) covering 800 sq. km. to conserve the common
skate populations.
So, why not involve anglers in your elasmobranch studies? This is exactly
what we wish to achieve: an EU-wide elasmobranch tagging and research
program using anglers.
Keywords: Sport fishing, tagging, EU Shark Action plan




                                                                                48
Session 3                 Distribution & Tagging                         14:45

Starry smooth-hounds tagged in the Netherlands on the move
E. Winter and N.W.P. Brevé

Organisation        IMARES, Wageningen UR & Sportvisserij Nederland
Address             PO Box 68, 1970 AB IJmuiden, The Netherlands
Email               erwin.winter@wur.nl

Sportvisserij Nederland and IMARES started a long-term tagging program on
starry smooth-hounds (Mustulus asterias) in 2011. In co-operation with local
recreational and professional fishermen, tagging was carried out in the
Oosterscheldt and along the North Sea coast of Zeeland, in the southern part
of the Netherlands. The sharks were tagged with rototags. During 2011-2014,
over 2000 starry smooth-hounds were tagged and over 80 recaptures were
reported. Here we present the tagging results and biological knowledge on the
starry smooth-hound as obtained within the mark-recapture program during
2011-2014. There is a clear seasonal pattern in the tagging-recapture data.
During summer starry smooth hounds were present along the southern
Dutch coast. During autumn they move to the English Channel and during
winter some of them go as far as the Bay of Biscay (> 1000 km one-way trip).
Most recaptures were made in front of the southern Dutch coast, the English
Channel and north-eastern Bay of Biscay, but two outliers were recaptures for
the Scottish and Norwegian coast. Most recaptures were made by trawling
and gillnet fisheries The fact that the Dutch recreational fishermen sometimes
catch very small starry smooth hounds suggests that the marine waters around
Zeeland are used as a pupping and nursery habitat. The catches of large
females, especially in the eastern Oosterscheldt is another indication for this.
            Keywords: tagging; mustelus asterias; distribution; smooth-hound




                                                                                 49
Session 3                Distribution & Tagging                          16:15


Habitat use and local movements of bull shark (Carcharhinus
leucas) at Guanacaste Conservation Area, Costa Rica
I. Zanella and A. Lopez
Organisation        Mission Tiburón – Costa Rica
Email               izanella@misiontiburon.org / ilena.zanella@gmail.com


The Guanacaste Conservation Area (GCA) is located in northwestern Costa
Rica, is an UNESCO World Heritage Site in and has an important MPA
(43,000 ha). This AMP is characterized by the phenomenon of upwelling,
causing a drastic decline of surface water´s temperature (14 º C) during the
dry season. In GCA are located the “Bat Islands”, which are visited by tourist
divers to see the natural congregations of bull sharks (Carcharhinus leucas). The
bull shark has a worldwide distribution; it is migratory and live in coastal
waters, in marine and freshwater ecosystems. Bat Islands are located in the
boundaries of GCA´ MPA, which are constantly visited by illegal fishermen,
they approach into the MPA looking for snappers and sharks. In spite of the
critical habitats presents at GCA, the ecology, the behaviour and the habitat
use of bull sharks are never study in this MPA. The aim of this project is
promote the bullshark conservation toward the local communities and
governmental sector, by the study of its population in GCA. In order to
accomplish this aim, the researchers carry out subaquatic visual counts and an
acoustic tagging program. Between June 2013 and August 2014, eleven bull
sharks are tagged with acoustic transmitters. The information was recorded by
on receiver located in San Pedrillo, Bat Island. The receiver has recorded
more than 27,000 detections, mainly during daylight hours. The data showed
a strong fidelity of females to the islands, the detections during the dry season
are significantly less than during the rainy season. The tendency to stay during
daylight hours in the island, it probably related to reproductive aspects, since
it is common to see females with post-copula marks. In turn, the absence of
detections during the night suggests that bull sharks move to other
surrounding areas to feed.
            Keywords: Bull shark, Carcharhinus leucas, tagging, Habitat use




                                                                                 50
Session 3                 Distribution & Tagging                         16:30


Patterns in the abundance, distribution, and behaviour of the
Angel Shark (Squatina squatina) in the Canary Islands
E. Meyers, J.Barker, R.Haroun and D.Rödder
Organisation         Universidad Las Palmas de Gran Canaria (ULPGC),
                     Zoological Society of London (ZSL), Zoologisches
                     Forschungsmuseum Alexander König (ZFMK)
Address              Fac. Marine Sciences, Campus de Tafira, 35017 Las Palmas,
                     Canary Islands, Spain
Email                e.k.m.meyers@gmail.com


The critically endangered Angel Shark (Squatina squatina) has suffered a vast
fragmentation and deterioration of its former distribution, leaving the Canary
Islands as a unique “hotspot”, where this species can still be regularly
encountered. However, information on its spatial distribution patterns and
abundance are almost unknown. Volunteer citizen-science programs,
including those performed by recreational divers may generate a significant
data pool, and at the same time this engagement contributes to raise public
awareness on shark ecology. We have successfully involved the recreational
SCUBA diving community in the Canary Islands to register Angel Shark
sightings using an online database tool. Divers were required to submit the
exact coordinates, water temperature and depth of their sightings, as well as
other relevant data such as size, sex and behavior. Records where validated
using supplied pictures and/or examining the locations of sightings. Within a
4--month period we have received more than 200 validated records, covering
areas with no previous records. We also identified aggregation sites and
nursery areas. This study provides the first insights on the patterns of the
abundance, distribution and behavior of the Angel Shark populations in the
Canary Islands.
        Keywords: citizen science, diver survey, endangered species, distribution




                                                                                    51
Session 3              Distribution & Tagging                     16:45


A ten-year wrap-up of Operazione Squalo Elefante, basking
shark field research in the Mediterranean
E. de Sabata and S. Clò
Organisation       MedSharks, CTS
Address            Via Ruggero Fauro 82, 00197 Rome
Email              ele@medsharks.org

Operazione Squalo Elefante is an on-going project on basking sharks started
in Italy in 2005, the only field study on this species in the Mediterranean Sea.
After ten years we present an overview of the results of this project,
including:
        The identification of the only two known seasonal aggregation areas
         in the area
        A Mediterranean basking shark tissue samples
        Basking sharks as possible indicators of microplastics in the pelagic
         environment
        A Mediterranean basking shark photo ID bank
        The creation of a network of observers and operators to report
         sightings/captures and collect tissue samples from stranded or by-
         caught animals.
OSE aims to increase the knowledge of this endangered and protected species
contributing information on its ecology, population numbers and structure in
the Mediterranean sea; identify aggregation areas and reduce accidental
captures in some of the most sensitive areas in their range as sharks migrate
along the Italian coast; investigate possible connections with the Atlantic
stock; raise public awareness; promote good management practices and active
participation in local stakeholders. Operazione Squalo Elefante is run with
the generous support of the Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation.
                    Keywords: basking sharks, Mediterranean




                                                                             52
Session 3               Distribution & Tagging                       17:00


Atmospheric and oceanographic influences on whale shark
(Rhincodon typus) seasonality in the Bay of La Paz, Mexico
S. Hilbourne, K. Collins and D. Ramirez
Organisation       University of Southampton, UK, Address, 7 Spear Road,
                   Southampton’, SO14 6UG, England
Email              s.hilbourne7@gmail.com

Global aggregations of juvenile whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) commonly
exhibit definitive seasonality allowing for relatively accurate predictions of
presence and absence at known aggregation sites. The location of the whale
sharks when absent from these sites and the potential oceanographic and
biological drivers that affect their presence as well as potential habitat use, are
largely unknown. Understanding critical habitats for whale sharks is essential
on both a regional and global scale for proper management. The increasingly
economically valuable whale shark aggregations in the Bay of La Paz, Mexico
have displayed considerable inter-annual variation in the timing and duration
of seasonality. Oceanographic and atmospheric variables have previously
been shown to explain changes in whale shark abundance in Ningaloo,
Australia and the Indian Ocean. In order to investigate the spatial and
temporal patterns of whale shark occurrence in relation to oceanographic and
atmospheric features in the Bay of La Paz, sightings data collected by
experienced researchers over 10 seasons between 2003 and 2013 were used to
analyze changes in seasonality. Monthly averaged atmospheric and
oceanographic variables, including sea surface temperature and chlorophyll
levels, obtained by remote sensing, as well as wind speed and direction, and
Multivariate El Niño Southern Oscillation Index, were compared with the
number of unique individual whale sharks identified per month over the 10
seasons. We will present the findings of this preliminary investigation and
identify the parameters that best explain the changing seasonality. A
Maximum Entropy model will later be used to delineate important regional
habitats for this vulnerable and highly migratory species.

  Keywords: Rhincodon typus, seasonality, oceanographic drivers, Maximum Entropy




                                                                                   53
Session 3                 Distribution & Tagging                          17:15


Genetic monitoring of basking sharks in the North-East
Atlantic: shark habitat use in the Marine Protected Area (MPA)
versus marine renewable energy (MRE) designation debate
L. Lieber, S. Berrow, G. Hall, J. Hall, E. de Sabata, C. Duff, M. Francis, B.
Bruce, K. Robinson, C. Gubili, J. Sarginson, M.J. Witt, S. Henderson, D.
Dawson, J.G. Horsburgh, T.A. Burke, D.W. Sims, C.S. Jones and L.R. Noble
Organisation         University of Aberdeen
Address              School of Biological Sciences, University of Aberdeen’ Zoology
                     Building, Tillydrone Avenue, AB24 2TZ Aberdeen, Scotland, UK
Email                l.lieber@abdn.ac.uk

The filter-feeding basking shark (Cetorhinus maximus) is the largest fish in the Northeast
Atlantic, where it is currently classified as ‘Endangered’ (IUCN Red List). Each
summer, basking sharks appear in hundreds in coastal waters around Ireland, southern
England, West Scotland and the Isle of Man. These persistent, seasonal aggregations
may represent a significant proportion of the global population. However, little is
known about the basking shark’s life history, and no reliable population estimates are
available at either global or regional scales. Therefore, as part of the current Scottish
Marine Protected Areas (MPA) Project, basking sharks have recently been included in
the search feature list for Scottish territorial waters.
Despite possible MPA designations, the rapid expansion of marine renewable energy
(MRE; offshore wind-, tidal- and wave- generated) installations has introduced a high
level of uncertainty surrounding their potential impacts as they may spatially overlap
with basking shark key sites and migration pathways. Consequently, there is an urgent
need to develop resource-efficient methods for monitoring basking sharks over time
to assess potential effects of environmental and anthropogenic change. Molecular
markers can often augment traditional approaches to population monitoring, costing
less and proving more reliable for estimates of abundance and site occupancy by
elusive species. We have developed a statistically powerful marker set of 22 species-
specific microsatellites allowing for individual identification and first estimates of
basking shark effective population size, global structure and genetic diversity. Through
genetic recaptures, we are providing evidence of inter- and intra-annual site fidelity at
key sites, and new insights into movement patterns.
Furthermore, high-throughput sequencing data have been screened to produce a
novel, 384 SNP (single nucleotide polymorphism) chip from the basking shark
genome to allow more precise and robust future genetic monitoring and more in-
depth analyses regarding patterns of relatedness at key sites.

            Keywords: Basking shark, habitat use, genetics, microsatellites




                                                                                      54
Session 3               Distribution & Tagging                        17:30


Assessing the Effects of Prey Interactions on Habitat Use
Patterns and Foraging Effort in Lemon Sharks
R.W. Bullock , T.L. Guttridge , M.E. Bond , H.M.V. Grimmel and S.H.
Gruber
Organisation       Bimini Biological Field Station Foundation
Address            9300 SW 99th Street, Miami, Florida. 33176 U.S.A
Email              robwbullock@gmail.com

Coastal nursery sites provide critical refuge for young sharks. Delineating how
sharks use these habitats and interact with other species helps us to better
understand their ecological role and develop sound marine management
policy. In this ongoing study we assess the effects of distribution and
abundance of prey species on lemon shark behaviour, in Bimini, Bahamas.
For this study we developed a ‘tag package’ comprised of a CEFAS G6A tri-
axial accelerometer and a Sonotronics PT4 acoustic transmitter. Tag packages
are externally attached to the first dorsal fin of sharks. Accelerometers
provide quantitative behavioural data used to identify potential foraging
attempts and acoustic transmitters are used to actively track large juvenile
(0.8-1.2m) and sub-adult (1.2-2.0m) lemon sharks. We surveyed the study site
for prey communities using baited remote underwater video stations
(BRUVS). Thus far 12 sharks have been tagged for periods ranging 3 to 5
days. Accelerometer and telemetry data show distinct, tidally mediated
patterns in deil movements and foraging effort in lemon sharks. Relative
abundance data from 150 BRUVS deployments show abundance and
distribution of prey species to vary greatly within the study site. We aim to
identify overlap between patterns in shark movements and foraging effort
with prey availability, demonstrating the importance of predation and inter-
species interactions in the daily habitat use patterns of lemon sharks. This
research is supported by a grant from the Bimini Biological Field Station
Foundation.

       Keywords: accelerometer, BRUVS, inter-species interactions, telemetry




                                                                               55
Session 3               Distribution & Tagging                         17:45


Conservation of coastal critical habitats of scalloped
hammerhead shark (Sphyrna lewini) in the Easter Pacific Ocean
A. Lopez and I. Zanella
Organisation       Mission Tiburón – Costa Rica
Email              alopez@misiontiburon.org / alopezgarro@gmail.com

The scalloped hammerhead shark, Sphyrna lewini, is an endangered and
emblematic shark species in the Eastern Tropical Pacific Seascape (ETPS). It
is characterized for being migratory. Females give birth to their young in
coastal waters. Here, the young are afforded food and protection while they
grow and reach sexual maturity. When sharks reach their adult stage, they
begin large migrations, changing from coastal habitats to oceanic ones.
Aggregation sites for scalloped hammerhead sharks have been identified on
several oceanic islands in the ETPS (Coco, Malpelo and the Galápagos
Archipelago), but little is known about their use of coastal areas. This study
aims to describe the scalloped hammerhead sharks movements in aggregation
sites of Golfo Dulce, South Pacific of Costa Rica. Fisheries-dependent
biological data (size-TL, weight, sex, reproductive status) was gathered for S.
lewini during artisanal fishing trips between May 2010 and May 2011 in Golfo
Dulce. Based on the fisheries dependent data from on board observations,
three aggregations sites were selected using the following technical criteria: 1-
Sites where individuals of S. lewini are found all the year; 2- Sites where the
relative abundance was higher; 3- Sites where the vulnerability is higher; 4-
Sites where the fishing survival was lower. Three acoustic receivers were
installed and 10 hammerhead sharks were tagged with acoustic transmitters in
the selected habitats. Between June 2011 and July 2012, the receivers recorded
almost 40.000 detections. All the sharks marked were reported by the
receivers, showing daily movements between receivers. Sharks are present on
the selected habitats between 09:00 and 22:00, during this period of time,
90% of the detections occur. Hammerhead sharks probably move to other
places at night and during the early morning to feed.
                 Keywords: Critical habitats, S. lewini, Golfo Dulce




                                                                               56
Session 4           Husbandry & Elasmobranch Biology                 10:00

Managing the genetics of a species in captivity: Raja undulata
J.D. Hibbitt
Organisation        SEA LIFE
Address             Displays Development Department, Weymouth SEA LIFE Park,
                    Lodmoor Country park, Preston Road, Weymouth, Dorset, UK,
                    DT4 7SX
Email               Jean-denis.hibbitt@merlinentertainments.biz

Over a number of years, UK aquaria have been collaborating in a managed
breeding program for the endangered and protected Undulate ray, Raja
undulata, with European aquaria recently becoming involved.To further
enhance this program, recent and ongoing genetic research is being
undertaken for the first time on this species of skate. This presentation will
explain the work that has begun, through collaboration between SEA LIFE
and Manchester University, to establish the genetic primers and
microsatellites needed to allow the development of a concise pedigree and
family tree of the existing population. The benefits that this information will
bring in the strategic mating of animals will be discussed while highlighting
how this research could aid in-situ conservation and fisheries management of
the species. There will also be a short update on the European aquarium
studbook for the Blacktip reef shark (Carcharhinus melanopterus) discussing findings
relevant to the scientific community.
                   Keywords: Undulate ray, Raja, DNA, Studbook




                                                                                 57
Session 4             Husbandry & Elasmobranch Biology                    10:15
Spermatogonial stem cells: towards the preservation of shark
species?
A. Gautier, A. Bosseboeuf, P. Auvray and P. Sourdaine
Organisation          UMR BOREA (MNHN, UPMC, UCBN, CNRS-7208, IRD-207)
Address               Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, Esplanade de la Paix, CS
                      14032, 14032 CAEN, cedex 5, France
Email                 aude.gautier@unicaen.fr

Spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) are crucial for the initiation and the maintenance of
spermatogenesis. In vertebrates, SSCs markers (Thy1, GFRα1…) were identified and
validated after cell sorting and transplantation in a recipient. Transplantations
successfully gave rise to trout gametes in salmon recipients. So, this technique was
proposed as a mean to produce gametes of endangered species through domestic
species recipients. SSCs molecular markers and regulations are well studied in
Osteichthyes; in contrast, very few data are available in Chondrichthyes whereas a high
proportion of these fishes are threatened. So, we studied the SSCs niche in the little-
spotted catshark, Scyliorhinus canicula, an abundant chondrichthyan species on the
Normandy coast. Several spermatogonial markers were identified allowing the
distinction of several cell subpopulations. An in vitro model of the testicular germinal
area containing the potential SSCs was established. This primary cell co-culture was
used to study the conservation between Osteichthyes and Chondrichthyes of the
GFRα1 pathway to regulate the SSCs fate. GFRα1 ligand, the Glial cell line-Derived
Neurotrophic Factor (GDNF), was shown to promote proliferation and to decrease
apoptosis. GDNF also increased the number and size of colonies and their content in
stem cells. So, chondrichthyan spermatogonia seem to share common molecular
markers and regulation pathways with other vertebrates, like mammals and teleostean
fishes. Transplantation of SSCs in the little-spotted catshark is now a challenge to take
up.

        Keywords: small spotted catshark, reproduction, spermatogonial stem cells




                                                                                      58
Session 4          Husbandry & Elasmobranch Biology                  10:30


Exploring personality and a simple learning process in the
juvenile lemon shark, Negaprion brevirostris
F. Dhellemmes, J.S. Finger, S.H. Gruber and T.L. Guttridge
Organisation       Bimini Biological Field Station
Address            Bimini Biological Field Station, South Bimini, Bahamas
Email              felicie.dhellemmes@gmail.com

Personality has been widely studied in the animal kingdom and can have
important implications. For instance, some personality traits have been
directly related to the individuals’ mortality rate and fecundity. However,
despite extensive research few studies have explored animal personality and
its interaction with simple learning processes, such as habituation (a reduction
of response to novelty over time). Studies examining personality traits
frequently use experimental setups that investigate exploration of a novel
environment (NE). However, although extensively used within the personality
literature, few researchers identify the actual trait observed (i.e. activity vs.
exploration) as well as investigate the effect that repeated exposure has on
trait expression. Here we introduce the juvenile lemon shark (JLS), as a model
species for personality research and present results from a series of
experiments examining: 1) personality in the context of a NE, and 2)
expression of personality after repeated exposure to the NE. To accomplish
this, twenty-eight JLS (sex ratio 1:1, mean total length ± SD = 68.5 ± 6.3 cm)
were captured intermittently over a 6-month period in South Bimini,
Bahamas. Sharks were housed in a semi-captive holding pen (10m diameter)
built in shallow water. The experimental arena “novel environment” was a
large rectangle (10x6m), demarcated by zones and connected to the holding
pen via a start box. During experiments individual sharks were ushered in this
box (every other day for 6 replicates) and their emergence time and visit to
zones were recorded. Individual visits to zones within the first trial were
shown to be a relevant indicator of the exploration personality trait.
Habituation was expressed by every individual; however exploration had a
strong direct effect on it, with individuals visiting more zones in their first
trial habituating faster. Demonstrating that personality influences a simple
cognitive skill, this study advances our understanding of elasmobranchs
behavioural ecology.

        Keywords: Personality, habituation, elasmobranchs, animal behaviour




                                                                              59
Session 4         Husbandry & Elasmobranch Biology               10:45


Making sharks and shark research visible – The first two years of
the Dutch Shark Society
G. Wiersma
Organisation      Dutch Shark Society
Address           Taets van Amerongenstraat 5, 2681 EG Monster
Email             georgina@dutchsharksociety.org

After their years of work for a number of non-profit organisations in marine
conservation, Peter Verhoog and Georgina Wiersma returned to their home
country. Even though the Netherlands have a relatively long coastline along
the North Sea and the well-known Delta works, sharks and rays seemed to be
non-existent to a wide audience, and several species have nearly disappeared
from the Dutch waters already . Shark conservation? It was a non-issue: there
are no sharks, so why conservation? The existing Shark Action Plan is mainly
a matter of government organisations and scientists and not known to a
general audience. Still… the first reports of higher shark catches by
recreational anglers, and media reports about 'large sharks flooding the Dutch
coasts' showed the need to inform people about the importance of sharks –
before media would get out the message out about the danger of sharks. A
simple, effective information platform, presenting simple knowledge about
(Dutch) sharks and elasmobranch research in general. The Dutch Shark
Society was born. DSS established a relation with partners already working in
the elasmobranch field: several Dutch seawater aquariums with breeding
programmes, National Park Oosterschelde and the Dutch Recreational
Angling Society; weir fishers to document the Dutch sharks and rays in their
natural environment. Results were published on a wide scale, i.e. in National
Geographic Magazine and can freely be used by NGOs working on
elasmobranch conservation. The Society uses its wide network to establish
links between organisations and regularly publishes about (worldwide) citizen
science and elasmobranch research in international and national media. After
two years there are school presentations, collaboration with the British Shark
for the Great Egg case Hunt and other organisations - DSS is a recognised
non-profit organisation with a large group of followers - featured on national
Dutch Television, in newspapers and magazines. Dutch sharks DO exist and
they DO need our protection!

     Keywords: Dutch elasmobranch, platform, media relations




                                                                           60
Session 4         Husbandry & Elasmobranch Biology              12:15


European captive breeding programs: one step further
M. Janse
Organisation      Royal Burgers‘ Zoo
Address           Antoon van Hooffplein 1, 6816 SH Arnhem, the Netherlands
Email             m.janse@burgerszoo.nl

Public zoos and aquaria are important tools to communicate towards the
general public about nature education and conservation. Two organizations:
the European Association of Zoos and Aquaria (EAZA) and European
Union of Aquarium Curators (EUAC) are platforms for interdisciplinary
collaboration. Husbandry information in the widest sense is shared between
the members. This will increase the overall standard and knowledge. A next
step in this field is collaboration within breeding programs. For decades this
common approach is used on mammals and birds and since 2007 the first
programs have started on elasmobranch species. The programs are organized
within the Fish and Aquatic Invertebrate Taxon Advisory Group (FAITAG).
Every species has its own program leader, which knows all details about the
European captive population. This program leader will also compile
husbandry and health information about the specific species and can be an
important link between scientific researchers, IUCN Species specialist group
and public aquarium world. This presentation will give an overview of the
European captive elasmobranch population by using the results of a census in
2011. Within the 66 public aquaria that participate within the census 14% of
all elasmobranch species are kept. Of these species 44.6% are bred in
captivity. During a workshop, a Regional Collection Plan (RCP) was
developed where all species kept in Europe were discussed on the CITES and
IUCN status as well as their potential for a breeding program. The
presentation will give an overview of the current programs and show a few
examples.
                     Keywords: breeding, husbandry, census




                                                                             61
Session 4          Husbandry & Elasmobranch Biology                   12:30


Analysis of carcharhinid transcriptomes reveals evidence of
positive selection in genes associated with an evolutionary
reversal to aplacental viviparity
D.G. Swift, E.J. Brooks, and V. Savolainen
Organisation       Imperial College London and Cape Eleuthera Institute
Email              ds108@icloud.com

All vertebrates initially feed their young using yolk reserves, and some live
birthing (viviparous) species provide extra, maternal nutrition via a placental
connection. The majority of live birthing sharks nourish their young using a
yolk-sac. In some species this later develops into a placenta, providing
additional nutrition. All sharks of the Carcharhinidae family are live birthing
and all of these species but the tiger shark ( Galeocerdo cuvier) develop placental
connections after exhausting yolk-sac reserves. We used RNA-Seq to
sequence the transcriptomes of the aplacental tiger shark and six placental
carcharhinid sharks. We identified 1,172 putative orthologs between the seven
species. We constructed a phylogenetic tree and employed a maximum
likelihood approach with site and branch-site tests to infer signatures of
positive selection in these orthologs. The site test found evidence of positive
selection in 114 sets of orthologs. A significantly larger proportion of
orthologs exhibiting evidence of positive selection were associated with
immunity (p<0.05) and nervous system development (p<0.05) compared with
the total number of orthologs. The branch-site test found signatures of
positive selection in eight sequences of the tiger shark lineage. SET9, BNIP3L
and PHP14 are associated with placental disorders in humans. DGCR14 and
ε-COP are associated with nervous system development. CMPK-like is
associated with sexual reproduction, and DNTTIP1 and translin are associated
with immunological mechanisms. These results provide important
information about the genomic basis of the evolution of aplacental viviparity
in the tiger shark lineage, which likely reflects an evolutionary reversal in
reproductive strategy.
                      Keywords: aplacental viviparity, carcharinids




                                                                                62
Session 4           Husbandry & Elasmobranch Biology                     12:45

Morphological diversity in the palatoquadrate in extant sharks in
relation to feeding strategy
A.M. Luger, P. Kamminga and L.A.J. Nagelkerke
Organisation        Wageningen University and Research
Address             Wageningen Campus, Building 122, De Elst 1, 6708 WD
                    Wageningen
Email               Allison_225@hotmail.com

This study focuses on the morphology of the palatoquadrate, and its relationship with
feeding strategies in sharks. This is the first study on a large scale, comparing 87
different species (143 specimens, 1-3 per species covering 27 families and 8 orders).
All specimens were scanned using computed tomography techniques, and 3D images
were created using the software package Mimics. Variance in morphology was
quantified by placing 14 landmarks based on their functional homology using
Landmark Editor. The results were processed in MorphoJ for further statistical
analysis. The variance in palatoquadrate morphology was quantified using principal
component analyses. Species were categorized into one of four diet groups based on
literature: fish and cephalopod eaters, hard benthos, soft benthos, and generalists. To
correlate the morphological variance with the diet, canonical variate analysis was
performed on PCA results with diet as a priori group. The results from the CVA gave a
significant difference in shape of the palatoquadrate between feeding guilds. Feeding
guilds were strongly correlated with phylogeny, but within phylogenetic groups
consistent differentiation according to feeding guild was found by creating a
phylomorphospace. The results from the phylomorphospace showed that there is a
phylogenetic signal which needs to be taken into account. However, as the previous
results showed comparing species with a higher degree of relatedness, most of the
variation in morphology is likely attributed to adaption to feeding strategies. Studying
the variation in morphology showed that fish and cephalopod eating sharks have
elongated jaws with a higher process on the anterior end for muscle attachment,
suitable for ram feeding. Hard benthos eaters have shorter, robust jaws for crushing
prey, as well as a higher bridge on the anterior end. Soft benthos eaters have jaws
suitable for suction feeding, as they have short jaws, smaller dentition, and a larger
orbital articulation process.
               Keywords: Palatoquadrate, morphology, diet, phylogeny




                                                                                     63
Session 4           Husbandry & Elasmobranch Biology                   13:00


Diversity, spatial distribution and relative abundance of reef
sharks using stereo baited remote underwater video around the
windward islands of the Caribbean Netherlands
M. de Graaf, I.J.M. van Beek, W. van Looijengoed, T. van Kuijk, T. Stoffers
and L.A.J. Nagelkerke
Organisation        Institute of Marine Resources and Ecosystem Studies (IMARES)
                    – Wageningen UR
Address             P.O. Box 68, 1970 AB IJmuiden, the Netherlands
Email               martin.degraaf@wur.nl

The most likely cause for the decline of many elasmobranchs is the
combination of high fishing pressure and slow reproductive life-history
characteristics. A key ambition of the Dutch Caribbean Nature Policy Plan
2013-2017, is the effective implementation of shark protection. The first step
towards effective protection is to conduct a base-line survey and to develop
robust, quantifiable objectives and reference points for conservation (and
fisheries) in order to be able to evaluate the performance of management
actions. Stereo Baited Remote Underwater Video Survey (BRUVS) is a non-
invasive method to study species richness, relative abundance and accurate
length frequency of fish species such as sharks. In this study we used BRUVS
to conduct a base-line survey of sharks on St Eustatius, Saba and the Saba
Bank. Shark assemblages were structured by habitat complexity, depth and to
a lesser extend management zone. Overall, the shark populations appeared to
be in reasonably healthy state. Relative abundance of the different shark
species was higher than reported for similar BRUV studies within the
Caribbean. A possible explanation for the current status of the shark
populations in the Caribbean Netherlands is the lack of destructive industrial-
scale fishery practices (directed shark fisheries, shark finning, long-lining or
gillnetting). The establishment of a formal shark sanctuary in the Caribbean
Netherlands would prevent the future development of such destructive
fishery practices without completely restricting the occasional landing of
sharks as by-catch in the existing artisanal, small-scale fishery.
            Keywords: elasmobranchs, conservation, fisheries, Saba, St Eustatius




                                                                                   64
Session 4           Husbandry & Elasmobranch Biology               13:15


Return of sharks and rays in the North Sea
M. van de Water
Organisation        Dutch Elasmobranch Society (NEV)
Address             Hobbemakade 118hs, 1071XW Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Email               delagua2013@gmail.com

Sharks and rays are characteristic of the North Sea ecosystem. They are top-
predators and perform a vital ecosystem function. Unfortunately, nine out of
eighteen North Sea shark and ray species are listed as critically endangered,
endangered or near threatened on the IUCN Red List. Six species are doing
relatively well. The status of the remaining three species cannot be determined
due to lack of data. The majority of sharks and rays and their habitats are
poorly protected. Habitat restoration and protection alone are not enough to
encourage shark and ray recovery in the Dutch part of the North Sea, as the
probability of repopulation of species such as the Common skate and the
Thornback ray is small. Therefore, reintroduction programs might need to be
an inclusive part of future elasmobranch management in the North Sea.
WWF together with the NEV, the North Sea Foundation, the Dutch Angler
Association and numerous aquaria in the Netherlands have developed a
project that encompasses a reintroduction program according to IUCN/SSC
Guidelines for Re-introduction of species. Shark and ray eggs will be raised in
aquaria and made visible for the public. Next to that the project aims to build
capacity for the management and protection of key spawning grounds and
nursery areas, build capacity for management measures that reduce shark and
ray by-catches in commercial fisheries and build commitment and willingness
in the political arena to implement effective management measures that
improve the protection of rays and sharks and their habitats.
            Keywords: reintroduction, husbandry, management, North Sea




                                                                            65
66
POSTER PRESENTATIONS




                       67
68
                            Poster Presentations

Feasibility of the reintroduction of the thornback ray (Raja
clavata) to the Wadden Sea
L. Allertz
Organisation        Hogeschool Van Hall Larenstein, university of applied sciences
Address             Hogeschool VHL, University of Applied sciences, 8901 BV
                    Leeuwarden
Email               Lana.allertz@wur.nl

The ecosystem of the Wadden Sea appears to be out of balance, with an
absence of top predators, such as large fish.. The reasons are not clear, but it
is thought that fisheries (also in the North Sea), habitat loss and climate
change might play a role. In the last century the thornback ray (Raja clavata)
was caught in and outside the Wadden Sea and Natuurmonumenten, a nature
conservation organization, wants to explore the feasibility of reintroducing
this species to the Wadden Sea. For this the IUCN-guidelines for
reintroduction will be applied to find out how to meet the criteria and to
make an inventory of criteria that have not been achieved, to identify future
research. The thornback ray was chosen to be the prime candidate, not only
because they used to be in the Wadden Sea, but due to their important role in
the food web and predation on crustaceans. Results from a recent mussel
bed restoration programme, show that there is a lot of predation by
crustaceans on mussel seed, which may limit the development of the mussel
banks. This poster will show the framework necessary to identify the essential
steps to be taken for the reintroduction of a top predator, the thornback ray,
to the Wadden Sea. It will contain background information on the projects
that lead to this research, a history of the thornback ray in the Wadden Sea
and the positive effects should reintroduction be feasible.
             Keywords: Thornback Ray, reintroduction, IUCN-Guidelines




                                                                                     69
                               Poster Presentations
Pour old wine in new bottles: How ancient’s museum data can
help in understanding actual distribution of endangered
sawfishes
M. Autret , C. Brigaudeau and A. Jung
Organisation       1DRDH
Address            BLP Technopôle Brest-Iroise, 29260 France
Email              marine.autret@desrequinsetdeshommes.org

Pristidae (sawfishes) are actually considered as the most threatened
elasmobranchs worldwide. From the five species currently described, 3 are
listed as Critically endangered and 2 as Endangered from the IUCN Red List
2013 assessment and their population encountered dramatic decrease in most
of their distribution range. Usefulness information on species distribution,
population structure and life history parameters are still lacking to establish
efficient management measures. In 2012, in complement to its field research
involvement and conservation project on sawfishes in Western Africa,
DRDH has started a follow up of the rostrum Internet black-market in
France and has got closer to French and international museums in order to
increase its sawfish rostrums samples. Morphometric data from 176 rostrums
from 4 sawfishes species have been analyzed in order to find out which
criteria grows up simultaneously with of the rays and may not be good
candidate for identification. Each rostrum was processed individually either
by direct measurements with calliper and measuring tape or photographic
support. Teeth count (right and left), rostrum width (basal and apex), and
teeth parameter were collected as well as all available value data as
geographical origin, sex, total length of the animal or capture parameters.
Various ratios were tested (through R) by species and juvenile and adult
subgroup (determined via average Length at maturity literature data available).
Statistic analysis has been then conducted through Principal Component
Analysis (PCA), distance matrix (Hellinger transformation) and dendrograms
(Ward method) were calculated to test alternatively inter and intra species
variations. Some species identification criteria have been highlighted and used
to propose a new and simple identification guide, easy to handle as well on
field research as for museum collection data. Increasing Pristidea knowledge
will aim, therefore, to strengthen the efforts engaged for Global Conservation
Strategy of these endangered species.
 Keywords : Sawfishes, Morphometric data, Endangered species, Identification guide




                                                                                70
                             Poster Presentations
A multiple models investigation on age and growth of the
speckled ray (Raja polystigma) from Sardinian seas
A. Bellodi, A. Alvito, M. Fois, G. Soldovilla, S. Vittori and A. Mulas
Organisation       University of Cagliari. Department of Life and Environmental
                   Sciences.
Address            Via T. Fiorelli 1, 09126, Cagliari, Italy
Email              amulas@unica.it

Age and growth of the small Mediterranean endemic skate, Raja polystigma
Regan 1923 were studied through the annuli counts in vertebral centra.
During the period between 2012 and 2013 a total of 183 speckled rays (97
females, ranging from 115 to 590 mm in TL and 87 males with TL among
118 and 521 mm) were caught through experimental (MED.I.T.S.) and
commercial trawl surveys. From each individual total length (TL in mm) total
mass (TM in g) in addition to the gender and maturity stage were recorded,
then vertebral centra were extracted from the thoracic cavit. Annuli counts
were made by two readers through the observation of vertebral sections
stained in Alizarin Red. Readings showed a good reproducibility (Percent
Agreement = 86.8, %, Cv = 7.0, Index of Average Percent Error = 5.177).
The oldest skate observed was a female estimated at age 11 (TL = 590 mm)
while the oldest male was aged 8 (TL = 521 mm). Four different models were
applied on length at age data: the common von Bertalanffy growth function,
the Exponential, and finally the Gompertz and the Logistic functions.
According to the Akaike’s Information Criterion values the Logistic model
(L∞ = 691.49 mm ± 10.21; K = 0.26 ± 0.008; point of inflection = 4.03 y -1 ±
0.147), followed by Gompertz function, provided the best fitting curve,
showing a higher growth rate and consequently a lower L∞ value than what
obtained with the VBGF (L∞ = 784.49 mm ± 12.2; K = 0.11 ± 0.004; t0 = -
1.718). This result was obtained also for females and males separately. Given
the best fitting results achieved with the Gompertz and the Logistic functions,
R. polystigma seems to grow relatively faster during the first few years as
previously reported for other batoid species.
     Keywords: Raja polystigma, age & growth, vertebral centra, multiple models.




                                                                                   71
                          Poster Presentations

 Economic importance of the starry smoothhound to anglers in
                     the Netherlands
L.H Beneker
Organisation       Sportvisserij Nederland/Van Hall Larenstein
Address            Leijenseweg 115, 3721BC, Bilthoven
Email              lisa.beneker@wur.nl

The socio-economic value of the Starry smooth-hound (Mustelis asterias) to
anglers in the Netherlands is much more than the price commercial fishers
get for landing a Starry smooth-hound. For decades these sharks have been
nearly absent in the Dutch coastal waters. However, since 2010 this has
changed and they are more abundant then they were, and as a consequence
they became a relative important sport fish. Angling charters and anglers do
not earn money by selling the fish; they earn something that may have a much
higher value. The socio-economic value for an angler of catching a shark is an
experience that will always stay with them. In addition, the value of that catch
may be much more than a commercial fisher gets for landing the shark. For
example: on the 4th of September 2014, three starry smooth-hounds were
caught and sold for less than a euro. In comparison: if one angler wants to go
fishing for sharks in the Netherlands this person will spend about 120 euro
for a day of shark angling. Commercial fishers have all kinds of by-catch.
Demersal fishers who want to catch flatfish or shrimp may also land sharks.
Unfortunately little is known about elasmobranch fish in the southern North
Sea, and due to a lack of information, such as on migration, nursery areas and
behaviour, it is difficult to assess effective fisheries management measures.
This is why Sportvisserij Nederland started a tagging-recapture programme.

          Keywords: Economic importance, starry smooth-hound, anglers




                                                                             72
                               Poster Presentations

Suitability of lesser spotted dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula) as
indicator of trace metals pollution in the Spanish Marine
Strategy monitoring programs
V. Besada, F. Schultze, M. López and C. Rodríguez-Cabello
Organisation          Instituto Español de Oceanografía
Address               1. Instituto Español de Oceanografía, Centro Oceanográfico de
                      Vigo. Subida a Radio Faro 50, 36390 Vigo. Spain.
Email                 Victoria.besada@vi.ieo.es

The Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD, 2008/56/EC), is the main
instrument for the protection of the marine environment in Europe. The
Spanish initial assessment of the environmental status of their national marine
waters, has revealed several gaps and lack of information and knowledge
regarding descriptor 8 (contamination and its effects) in all Spanish waters. In
particular, there is a need to identify a fish species that could be used as
pollution indicator for the Spanish Atlantic and Mediterranean waters .The
lesser spotted dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula), could be considered as an
alternative species to those broadly used in northern Europe. In order to
assess the suitability of this specie as indicator of pollution for MSFD
purposes, this study evaluated trace metals levels (As, Hg, Cd, Cu, Zn, Cr and
Ni) in muscle tissue of specimens collected in three different Spanish
geographical areas: two in the North (Galician and Cantabrian areas) and one
in the South. Females were collected by IEO scientific staff aboard research
vessels during 2012. The analysis of muscle tissue samples includes a nitric
acid digestion in a microwave oven. Metals were analyzed by Atomic
Absorption Spectrometry (F-AAS, GF-AAS, CV-AAS). The quality of the
analyses is demonstrated by the results obtained in intercalibration exercises,
such as QUASIMEME. The internal QC includes analyses of duplicate
samples and procedural blanks as well as control charts of CRMs. Only
statistically significant differences were observed between the three zones for
As and Hg. Regarding Pb, all samples analyzed were below or close to the
detection limit for the analytical method used. For other metals
concentrations, no significant differences between zones were observed.
Further studies on the influence of environmental and biological factors on
metal dynamics are needed. Experimental values for Hg, Pb and Cd were far
below the EU maximum levels for human consumption established by EC
Regulations.
        Keywords: Lesser spotted dogfish, trace metals, Atlantic, Spain




                                                                                73
                           Poster Presentations


First record of the blacktip reef shark Carcharhinus
melanopterus (Carcharhiniformes: Carcharhinidae) from the
Tropical Eastern Pacific
A. López-Garro, I. Zanella, G. Golfín-Duarte and M. Pérez-Montero

Organisation        Mission Tiburón – Costa Rica
Email               maikeel.perez@sinac.go.cr & elcocolaisla@hotmail.com
The blacktip reef shark Carcharhinus melanopterus, is one of the most common
Indo-Pacific reef sharks. On April 29, 2012 at 20:00 hrs., a blacktip reef shark,
was caught during a tagging expedition studying population dynamics of the
whitetip reef shark Triaenodon obesus, in Chatham Bay, Isla del Coco National
Park. Chatham Bay is located on the north side of Isla del Coco between
coordinates 5º33’25.28”N, 87°02’53.11”W and 5º33’04.71”N, 87°02’13.76”W.
Positive identification of the species was attained by analysis of the following
distinctive     characters      (Compagno        1998,      Compagno         2005):
1.Short     rounded        snout     with    large     anterior     nasal     flaps.
2. Black tips on all fins, including the edge of the caudal fin’s upper lobe Figs.
3.Light band that borders the black mark on the first dorsal fin.
4. Distinctive body color: yellow-brown dorsal surface and white underside
,with conspicuous dark bands on the flanks that extend back towards the
pelvicfins.
The shark’s size (89cm TL) together with the low calcification of its claspers,
suggests the individual was a juvenile. This is the first record of a blacktip reef
shark from Isla del Coco National Park and from the Tropical Eastern Pacific
(Allen & Robertson 1998, Robertson & Allen 2008). Garrison (2005)
identified over 270 fish species (including 7 sharks and 4 rays) at Isla del
Coco: 30 species have a circumtropical or circumglobal distribution and over
40 species are reported from scattered Indo-Pacific locations or throughout
the Indo-Pacific Ocean (most of these are bony fish, e.g. the genus
Thalassoma, that probably traveled 5000km with floating debris to arrive in
the Eastern Pacific Ocean (EPT). Several Indo-Pacific elasmobranchs are
present at Isla del Coco, including the silvertip (Carcharhinus albimarginatus) and
the white-tip shark (T. besus). Their distribution extends into the continental
waters of Central America. Other example is the marble ray (Taeniura meyeni);
is only present at Isla del Coco and Galapagos Islands in the Tropical Eastern
Pacific, and absent from the central American mainland (Grove & Lavenberg
1997). The presence of a juvenile blacktip reef shark at Isla del Coco suggests
that a pregnant female traveled at least 5000km and arrived at Isla del Coco to
give birth at Chatham Bay. C.melanopterus possibly represents a new arrival for
Isla del Coco National Park.

 Keywords: Blackip reef shark, Isla del Coco National Park, Tropical Eastern Pacific

                                                                                  74
                         Poster Presentations

Feeding ecology of the Mediterranean endemic speckled skate,
Raja polystigma, from Sardinian waters
A. Mulas, R. Cannas, Al. Cau, A. Consolo, P. Pesci and M.C. Follesa
Organisation       University of Cagliari. Department of Life and Environmental
                   Sciences.
Address            Via T. Fiorelli 1, 09126, Cagliari, Italy
Email              amulas@unica.it

The stomach contents of 328 speckled skates, Raja polystigma, caught in the
seas surrounding Sardinia (central western Mediterranean) were examined
with respect to fish size, sex, season and depth in order to study the feeding
ecology of this Mediterranean endemic species. Samples, 104 to 593 mm in
TL, were collected at depths between 37 and 660 m during experimental trawl
surveys in the period 2005–2011. In the 312 full stomachs (%Cv = 4.88) 67
prey items were found, belonging to seven main taxa: Crustacea,
Osteichthyes, Chondrichthyes, Mollusca, Polychaeta, Priapulida and
Sipunculida. Levins’ index value was low (B i = 0.14). Diet was based on
Crustaceans (%PSIRI = 77.17), particularly Mysids, and Teleosts (%PSIRI =
14.72). Trophic level was 3.49 (s.e.= ±0.53). The feeding patterns changed
with growth (ANOSIM, global R 0.169, P<0.001). Crustaceans’ importance
progressively decreased (%PSIRI = 91.39, 77.35 and 45.65 among immature,
subadults and adults, respectively), while Teleosts were consumed more
intensively (%PSIRI = 4.13, 11.71 and 41.96). Nevertheless, Morisita’s index
showed a high degree of trophic niche overlap (C H>0.90 for all
combinations). This is probably due to the high consumption of Mysids
during all life stages, as revealed by the SIMPER test. Some seasonal and
bathymetrical changes in the alimentary pattern were observed, although not
statistically significant (ANOSIM global R 0.077, P<0.001 for winter and
summer and global R 0.073, P<0.001 for depth strata). Particularly, some
differences in Crustaceans’ composition were noticed. Mysids’ consumption
increased with depth, while Decapods were preyed to a lesser extent. During
winter Amphipods and Isopods grew in importance, while Mysids’
consumption decreased. No alimentary differences were found between males
and females (global R -0.004, P = 0.86 ).
           Keywords: Raja polystigma; feeding ecology; Mediterranean sea




                                                                                  75
                           Poster Presentations

Skates as target monitoring species for demersal fish community
in the Bay of Biscay
L. Modica, C. Rodriguez-Cabello and F. Velasco
Organisation      1. No current affiliation;
                  2. IEO — Instituto Español de Oceanografía,
Address           IEO — Instituto Español de Oceanografía, Centro
                  Oceanográfico de Santander, Promontorio San Martín s/n, 39004
                  Santander, Spain
Email             Larissa.modica@gmail.com

The Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD) requires EU Member
States sharing marine regions to cooperate using the Regional Seas
Conventions. The Comm Dec 477/2010 explicitly suggests the calculation of
Large Fish Indicator (LFI) to implement the MSFD in Member States (MSs).
When applying the established rationale to develop the LFI in the southern
Bay of Biscay it was observed that a remarkable proportion of the biomass of
the large fish community was made up, inter alia, by 2 skates (Raja clavata and
Raja montagui). The abundance trend of both species followed the general
trend of the indicator calculated. Certain interannual variability is observed
across the time series. Lower biomass values characterise the first part of the
time series due to the heavy fishing activity exerted in the area during the
previous years (Modica et al., 2014; Sanchez & Olaso 2004). Contrariwise, in
the second part of the period analysed the LFI increase steadily, as does the
biomass of these two sensitive species. The higher values in LFI have been
linked to the decrease in fishing mortality performed on the community
considered, with an effect delayed 6-7 years in this demersal community
(Modica et al., 2014). These results suggests that skates, as sensitive species,
could be considered as indicator species for monitoring indirect effect of
fishing impacts on the whole demersal fish community in the Cantabrian Sea.
Other parameters, commonly used such as mean length, and sex-ratio have
been calculated to check the general status of both populations across 21-y
time series.
Keywords: Skate, Marine Strategy Framework Directive, monitoring species, demersal
                                    community




                                                                               76
                            Poster Presentations

Egg capsules description of the most common Rajid species
living in Sardinian waters (Central-Western Mediterranean)
M. F. Marongiu, C. Porcu, S. Cabiddu, A. Mulas and M. C. Follesa
Organisation        Department of Life Science and Environment, University of
                    Cagliari, Italy
Address             Via T. Fiorelli, 1 09126 Cagliari, Italy
Email               mfmarongiu@unica.it

The Rajidae family represents the most numerous group among cartilaginous
fish, having 30 genus and 245 valid species. In the Mediterranean basin, this
group is represented by 4 genus and 15 species. Egg capsules are widely
recognized as important in species identification and also provide relevant
information concerning their reproductive biology, systematic and
phylogenetic relationships. For these reasons we focused the attention on the
description of egg capsules belonging to six of eight valid Rajid species
present in Sardinian waters (Central-Western Mediterranean): Dipturus
oxyrinchus, Raja asterias, R. brachyura, R. clavata, R. miraletus and R. polystigma. A
total of 145 egg capsules were obtained from the uteri of gravid females to
confirm their species specific identification. Then these were photographed
and preserved in 80% ethanol. The general morphology, several
morphometric measurements (in millimeters), fresh color, texture, presence
and position of attachment tendrils, presence and shape of velum and keel
were recorded. All egg capsules analyzed showed a rectangular shape, with the
only exception of the thornback ray R. clavata that presented a square shape.
The blonde ray R. brachyura and the longnosed skate D. oxyrinchus showed the
biggest egg capsules length (CL) (mean ± S.D., CL= 122.8 ± 6.9 mm, and
CL= 103.6 ± 5.5 mm, respectively). Egg capsules of the starry ray R. asterias
(CL= 48.9 ± 3.1 mm) and of the brown ray R. miraletus (CL= 46.9 ± 3.5 mm)
reached the smallest sizes. Furthermore, egg capsules were generally well
keeled, except those of the speckled ray R. polystigma and of R. asterias that
showed narrow lateral keels. R. miraletus egg capsules did not have these lateral
extensions.

   Keywords: Rajidae, egg capsules, morphometry, Central-Western Mediterranean




                                                                                   77
                            Poster Presentations

Conversion factors for skates (Rajidae) in Sardinian seas
(Central-Western Mediterranean Sea)
C. Porcu, A. Bellodi,D. Cuccu, D. Moccia and M. F. Marongiu
Organisation        Department of Life Science and Environment, University of
                    Cagliari, Italy
Address             Via T. Fiorelli, 1 09126 Cagliari, Italy
Email               mfmarongiu@unica.it

The availability of updated biological information is essential to any successful
fisheries management plan. An example could be to analyze the main size
conversion factors, commonly used to estimate values from one or more
known body measurements and particularly helpful when a specimen is
damaged and may also serve as a tool for species identification. In the
Mediterranean Sea, limited morphometric information on skates (Rajidae) has
been reported, mainly in association with reproduction and growth studies.
The goal of this paper is to estimate relationships between different body
measurements to increase the information relative to the most common skate
species in Sardinian seas (Central-Western Mediterranean): Dipturus oxyrinchus,
Leucoraja circularis, Raja asterias, R. brachyura, R. clavata, R. miraletus and R.
polystigma. For each species, total length (TL), disc width (DW), disc length
(DL) and length up to the first dorsal fin (D1L), all in millimeters, and total weight
(TW), in grams, were taken. An exploratory analysis of morphometric ratios (DW:TL,
DL:TL, DL:DW, D1L:TL) was performed and the least-squares method was used to
estimate the parameters of the linear expressions TL=aDW+b, TL=aDL+b,
TL=aD1L+b and DW=aDL+b. The relationship between TW and TL was fitted and
the function was log-transformed. All species showed an allometric growth (b>3).
Differences in the morphometric ratios were observed within species. L. circularis and
D. oxyrinchus showed the most distinctive shapes, relative to the other species: the
former showed a narrower disc in relation to TL, the latter had the disc longer in
relation to TL. Both skates had the disc longer than wide. The results indicated that
the conversion factors were useful to determinate catch size, explore life history
change. Moreover, these factors could made morphological comparisons between
different species from different geographical areas and should be considered a useful
tool to discriminate skate species.
  Keywords: Rajidae, biometry, conversion factors, Central-Western Mediterranean




                                                                                   78
                            Poster Presentations

Study of deep sea elasmobranchs in the El Cachucho MPA
(Cantabrian Sea) using non-invasive methods
A. Rodríguez, F. Sánchez, C. González-Pola and C. Rodríguez-Cabello
Organisation         Spanish Institute of Oceanography (IEO)
Address              IEO — Instituto Español de Oceanografía, Centro
                     Oceanográfico de Santander, Promontorio San Martín s/n, 39004
                     Santander, Spain
Email                augusto.rodriguez@st.ieo.es

The use of non-invasive methods is becoming more and more crucial
particularly in the study of singular habitats or vulnerable species such as deep
water elasmobranchs. The use of baited cameras and environmental variables
measurements using landers (benthic oceanographic platforms) is an
important tool for the study of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) for instance,
the El Cachucho MPA (Le Danois Bank). These methods are specially
recommended for sampling in MPAs were other options that may damaged
to the sea floor or species are not acceptable. In June 2014, five moorings of
a specific lander designed at IEO Santander, were deployed on the sea floor
at different depths ranging from 501 to 960 m for a period of 24-26 h. A high
resolution camera took pictures each 2 minutes interval. Species were
attracted using bait (mainly mackerel and horse mackerel). The lander was
also equipped with a CTD Seabird 37, an Aquadopp single-point current
meter an Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP) and a 12 thermistors
chain to record hydrodynamic and hydrographic fields (currents, temperature
and salinity) both near-bottom and the vertical structure above the seafloor.
In total 8 elasmobranch species and 2 skates were identified. Depth zonation
was evident and In general terms the leafscale gulper shark (Centrophorus
squamosus) and Portuguese dogfish (Centroscymnus coelolepis) were the most
recorded species at greater depths. However also blackmouth dogfish (Galeus
melastomus), birdbeak dogfish (Deania calcea) and velvet belly (Etmopterus spinax)
were abundant species and turn out to be some of the species with shorter
first arrival time. This time response ant its relation to the tide period and
currents speed and direction is explored.
        Keywords: Bait camera; deep-water elasmobranchs; MPA; Cantabrian Sea




                                                                               79
                             Poster Presentations

Catch and released survival estimation of deep water sharks
using bottom longline in the Cantabrian Sea (NE Atlantic)

C. Rodríguez-Cabello and F. Sánchez

Organisation          Spanish Institute of Oceanography (IEO)
Address               IEO - Instituto Español de Oceanografía, Centro Oceanográfico
                      de Santander, Promontorio San Martín s/n, 39004 Santander,
                      Spain
Email                 c.cabello@st.ieo.es

Deep-water sharks are considered highly vulnerable species due to their life
characteristics and very low recovery capacity against overfishing. Limited
information exists on some aspects of their biology and in particular about
the survival capacity of these species to fishing gears, which is supposed to be
negligible.
Recently a tagging project (DEEPCON) has been conducted on deep-water
sharks in the North of Spain (Cantabrian Sea, NE Atlantic) aim at studying
their behaviour and migration patterns. In addition survival estimates were
obtained to assess the usefulness of this technique for future studies. During
2012 and 2013 several longlines were set in the El Cachucho MPA (Le
Danois Bank). Deep water sharks were caught using bottom longline at
depths ranging from 900 to 1200 m. The mean number of hooks used was
approximately 950 in each set and soaking time was restricted to 3 hours
maximum. Sharks were carefully removed from the hooks by the crew.
Survivorship was qualitatively evaluated according to the fish health condition
and response after the capture of the fish and posterior release. Four criteria
was chosen: 1) Good 2) Moderate 3) Poor and 4) Dead (or nearly dead). In
the 4 case sharks were obviously not released and kept on board. Several deep
water sharks were caught however 46% of the catch corresponded to the
birdbeak (Deania calcea), the 27% were leafscale gulper sharks (Centrophorus
squamosus) and the 15% corresponded to the Portuguese dogfish (Centroscymnus
coelolepis). The species with highest survival rate was C. squamosus; nearly 40%
of the catch was in good condition. In the case of C. coelolepis only the 16%
were good and the 65% were moderate. D. calcea estimates were approximate
24% good and 59% moderate.
        Keywords: Survival, deep-water sharks, longline, Cantabrian Sea




                                                                                 80
                          Poster Presentations

Maximising smartphone technology in marine recording
projects
J. Richardson and C. Gordon
Organisation       Shark Trust
Address            4 Creykes Court, 5 Craigie Drive, The Millfields, Plymouth PL1
                   3JB, UK
Email              john@sharktrust.org

Growing acknowledgement of the value and role of citizen science is allowing
members of the public to play a far greater and more effective role in
elasmobranch research, and potentially feed into conservation and
management policy. Recognising this, the Shark Trust has developed
smartphone apps aimed at increasing the flow and quality of records for two
key Shark Trust citizen science projects: the Great Eggcase Hunt (GEH) and
the Angler Recording Project (ARP). Each app was developed with a
different objective in mind. The GEH receives a high volume of records
(over 54,000 to date) however unverified records have produced a number of
spurious entries in the dataset. As such, it is important to increase the
number of records submitted which include photographs of the eggcase,
allowing the record to be verified. The smartphone app should increase both
the flow and the quality of records submitted to the project, thereby
improving knowledge of egglaying species and those marine areas important
to various stages in their life history. In contrast, the ARP receives fewer
records (approx. 8000 to date), due primarily to a general reticence on the part
of sea-anglers to engage in recording projects. The smartphone app will make
catch recording and reporting as simple and straight-forward as possible, with
the objective of increasing the volume, accuracy, and geographic and
demographic spread, of records submitted. Ultimately, as the dataset grows,
trends in the abundance and distribution of species throughout UK waters –
including many listed as Critically Endangered – may be visible, which can
contribute to more effective fisheries management and conservation.
                      Keywords: Citizen-science, Eggcase, Angling




                                                                                81
                            Poster Presentations

Note on remarkable accidental catches of juvenile shortfin mako
sharks in Italy
E. de Sabata and S. Clò
Organisation        MedSharks
Address             Via Ruggero Fauro 82, 00197 Rome
Email               ele@medsharks.org

The shortfin mako shark (Isurus oxyrinchus) is listed as Critically Endangered in the
Mediterranean. The species was considered common throughout the area but since
2000 there have been few records in the area. Here we report 9 juvenile makos caught
between 2012 and 2014, including the remarkable catch of five juvenile mako sharks
within one month in different locations of North-Eastern Sardinian waters and four
from other areas of the Central Mediterranean sea.
      Keywords: Isurus oxyrinchus, Mediterranean




                                                                                  82
                          Poster Presentations

The Stellaris project
E. de Sabata and S. Clò
Organisation       MedSharks
Address            Via Ruggero Fauro 82, 00197 Rome
Email              ele@medsharks.org

The Stellaris Project is monitoring the largest known breeding area of the
nursehound (Scyliorhinus stellaris) in the Mediterranean sea, a species whose
basic biology is very poorly known. It is classified as DD (Data Deficient) in
the Italian Red List of vertebrate species and as Near Threatened (outlook:
Vulnerable) in the IUCN regional Red List of endangered species. This
project is monitoring embryos onsite in the rocky Santa Croce Bank in the
Gulf of Naples (Italy), between -20 and -45m of depth, with regular monthly
diving check-ups. Here we present preliminary observations on seasonal
deposition, development times, egg mortality and possible predators, human
interaction and photo-identification of large living animals. This project is also
proving to be a formidable educational tool. The large diving community in
the area was involved in a special event, a BioBlitz, where divers “adopted”
their own shark egg and are now monitoring the development of “their” baby
shark with regular monthly check-ups. Continuous updates, photos and
videos are being posted online on the project’s website and social media
profile, and has been featured on national media, thus reaching a much wider
audience. This has proven to be a powerful awareness and educational tool to
sharpen divers' interest in sharks, increase their general environmental
awareness and induce a sense of responsibility towards the marine
environment. This project, run by MedSharks since 2012, is a spin-off of the
Mermaid’s Purse project, launched with a special grant from the Save Our
Seas Foundation and diving certification agencies.
                           Keywords: Scyliorhinus stellaris




                                                                               83
                            Poster Presentations

Undulate ray population structure along French coasts inferred
from tagging data and genetic analysis: preliminary results
E. Stephan, C. Hennache, E. Etchegaray, N. Leblanc, E. Meheust and J.L.
Jung
Organisation       APECS
Address            13 rue Jean-François Tartu – BP 51151,29211 BREST CEDEX 1,
                   FRANCE
Email              eric.stephan@asso-apecs.org

In the Celtic seas and the Biscay/Iberian ecoregions, most of skate species are
little known. It’s particularly the case for species that seems to have patchy
coastal distributions which are not well sampled by the scientific fishery-
independent surveys. Information on the mixing between skates of different
areas and the stocks structures are needed for management purposes. In order
to help to clarify the undulate ray (Raja undulata) population structure, we used
conventional tagging and molecular markers analysis. 4438 skates have been
tagged along the French Atlantic coasts between 2012 and 2014 and 1164
tissue samples have been collected from 7 locations. We present preliminary
results from 405 tagged skates recaptured and from the analysis of the
polymorphism at 5 nuclear microsatellite loci for 117 individuals from 4
locations.

           Keywords: Raja undulata, population structure, tagging, genetic




                                                                              84
                               Poster Presentations

Detecting genetic differentiation and connectivity among Raja
clavata populations within the Mediterranean Sea
L. Vacca , R. Melis , Al. Cau, M.C. Follesa , A. Cariani , F. Tinti and R.
Cannas
Organisation          1 - Dept. Life and Environmental Sciences - University of
                      Cagliari, Italy, 2 – Dept. Biological, Geological & Environmental
                      Sciences, University of Bologna, Italy
Address               Dept. Life and Environmental Sciences - University of Cagliari
                      Via T. Fiorelli, 1 09126 Cagliari Italy
Email                 rcannas@unica.it

The thornback ray Raja clavata is widely distributed in Mediterranean, Black
Sea and the Atlantic coasts of Europe and Africa. The species has high
commercial value in European waters; it is locally commercially important in
Mediterranean where it is part of the by-catch associated with demersal
fisheries. Because the recent decreases in abundance and distribution, the
species was assessed in the IUCN Red List as Near Threatened. This study
deals with the genetic diversity and the connectivity between Mediterranean
and Atlantic samples in order to acquire useful information for management
and conservation purposes. A total of 235 individuals were collected from
eight sampling areas of Western, Central and Eastern Mediterranean and from
Northeastern Atlantic and they were analyzed at nine polymorphic
microsatellite loci. Low levels of genetic diversity were found (uHe=0.477),
with the highest values recorded in the North Sea (0.525) while the lowest in
the Tyrrhenian Sea (0.432). A fable but significant overall genetic
differentiation was detected among all the investigated populations
(Fst=0.039, P<0.05). Nevertheless, Mantel test allowed the rejection of the
hypothesis of isolation by distance. No genetic differences were found
grouping samples according to the two major geographical areas
(Mediterranean vs Atlantic, AMOVA: FCT=0.007, NS). However, a
significant differentiation emerged within the Mediterranean among Western
/Central/Eastern samples (AMOVA: FCT= 0.047, P<0.05) . In particular,
Cyprus was found to be highly divergent from all the other samples, showing
the highest pairwise Fst and Dest values. According to the Bottleneck results,
all the investigated populations showed a substantial demographic stability.
These data provide a significant contribution for the planning of an effective
management model, ensuring sustainability of resource.
        Keywords: Raja clavata, genetics, connectivity, Mediterranean Sea




                                                                                     85
                         Poster Presentations

An advice about the process to come to a supported recovery
plan for sharks and rays in the Dutch EEZ, regarding the MSFD
W. Vermeulen, S. Pötter, R. Leeuwerik, J. Romp, J. Popping and S. de
Kluijver
Organisation       Hogeschool VHL, University of applied sciences; Integrated
                   Coastal Zone Managment; Policy
Address            Agora 1, Postbus 1528, 8901 BV Leeuwarden
Email              marinepolicyVHL2014@gmail.com

The aim of the research is to give an advice on the process to come to a
supported recovery plan for sharks and rays in the Dutch EEZ, regarding the
MSFD. The focus of our research is on the experiences of the consultative
group and their expected role in the future process of the recovery plan for
sharks and rays. There is a decline in the shark and ray population in the
North Sea. The NEV has been given the assignment to formulate the
supported recovery plan in accordance with stakeholders. This has led to the
formation of a consultative group. The NEV wants to know how the process
until now has been experienced by the consultative group, and what their
opinion is on the follow up of the process. By means of a questionnaire the
experiences until now will be evaluated. As for the follow up of the process a
discussion forum will be used to gather the opinion of the consultative group.
All results will be analysed, after that an advice will be given to the NEV.
     Keywords: evaluation, project process, stakeholders




                                                                                86
                             Poster Presentations

Elasmobranch Diversity in German Waters
H. Zidowitz and R. Thiel
Organisation        University of Hamburg, Biocentre Grindel & Zoological
                    Museum, Department of Ichthyology
Address             Martin-Luther-King-Platz 3, 20146 Hamburg, Germany
Email               heike.zidowitz@uni-hamburg.de

Preliminary results of elasmobranchs recorded in German waters of the North and
Baltic Seas are presented. Catch records were obtained by analysis of historical to
current literature as well as original data gathered from relevant German museum
collections. In addition to German institutions, data from northern European
museums have also been integrated to the study and maps of catch locations of
selected species are presented. Six species of sharks have been recorded so far in
German waters, all of these in the North and two in the Baltic Sea. Ten skates and rays
belong to the recorded elasmobranch species, of which nine have been documented in
the North and five in the Baltic Sea. Some formerly common species have shown
steep declines in their abundance and are today threatened with extinction, while
others are naturally rare or have only been recorded once.
      Keywords: Elasmobranchs, diversity, Germany




                                                                                    87
88
               AKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the following individuals and organisations for their
help and support in making EEA2014 a vibrant and fascinating conference:

VHL University of Applied Sciences:
    Ms Marlous Heemstra
    Mr Jelle Reitsema
    Mr Bauke de Vries
    Ms Angelique Kuiper
    And everybody else at VHL who helped make this conference possible
Gemeente Leeuwarden
   Ms Isabella Diks
Provinsje Fryslân
     Mr Klaas Arie Beks
Save Our Seas Foundation (SOSF)
     Mr Michael Scholl
     Ms Nadia Bruyndonckx
Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs
    Mr Henk Offringa
    Ms Gelare Nader
    Mr Ton IJlstra
Dutch Ministry of Infrastructure and Environment
Dutch Shark Society
    Mr Peter Verhoog
    Ms Georgina Wiersma
Sportvisserij Nederland
     Mr Niels Brevé
Imares Wageningen UR
     Mr Erwin Winter
     Mr Dolfi Debrot
Burgers Dierenpark
     Mr Max Janse
Scottish Sea Angling Conservation Network
      Mr Ian Burrett
Ms Linda Planthof


                                                                         89
2
