                                 6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference



Saturday 7th September

Presentation and Poster Abstracts




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                        7
                                 6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                        8
                                           6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

9.35 –10.45
Welsh Skate and Ray Project

H. Jones, N.K. Dulvy, P.J. Coates and C. Eno

Annual landings of ray species (Rajidae) in England and Wales have fallen from around
18,000 to 3,000 tonnes over the last 40 years. The cause of the decline is believed to be
largely due to over-fishing, particularly from the use of trawl gears.

The Bristol Channel area is of particular importance and used to account for around 25-30%
of UK landings. Common skate (Dipturus batis) was once a frequent catch but is now
commercially extinct. Although data is incomplete larger ray species Raja brachyura (blonde)
and R. clavata (thornback) have apparently declined in both abundance and average size, to
be partly replaced by the smaller species R. montagui (spotted) and Leucoraja naevus
(Cuckoo).

Fishery Managers face the challenge of identifying practical conservation measures that
need to be acceptable to the majority if they are to be effective. Options include:
 Size restrictions i.e. minimum and/or maximum size (and options by species or sex and
   whether applied to part or whole fish).
 Restricted licencing of vessel effort or catch (quotas).
 Technical measures e.g. mesh sizes, vessel size, gear type.
 Gear restrictions (e.g. by location and/or time).
 No take or limited take zones (e.g. no taking of female rays).

As well as being of commercial value, rays are also of wider recreational and conservation
interest and a unique group of interested parties in Wales have come together to address a
"common cause". Comprising fishery managers, scientists, commercial fishermen, anglers
and conservation interests, "The Welsh Rays Group" has been formed with the following
objectives:

   To raise awareness of associated issues.
   To improve understanding.
   To identify projects that will achieve the above.
   To identify practical and appropriate options for future management.

The joint presentation by Group members explains the background to the problem, identifies
some of the difficulties in finding a solution, and which might be best tackled by a joint
approach by interested parties.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  9
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

11.00
Passively monitoring the long-term movements of blacktip sharks in a
nursery area.

Michelle R. Heupel and Robert E. Hueter,
Mote Marine Laboratory, Center for Shark Research, 1600 Ken Thompson Parkway,
Sarasota, Florida 34236, USA
(e-mail: mheupel@mote.org)

A series of 25 acoustic hydrophones were used to passively monitor the movements of
blacktip sharks, Carcharhinus limbatus, within a coastal nursery area on the central Gulf
coast of Florida. In 2001, 41 sharks were fitted with long-life (18 month) acoustic transmitters
and monitored for periods of 1 – 145 days. The movements and behavior patterns of
individuals and the entire monitored population were compared to environmental factors and
habitat conditions. During the course of the summer Tropical Storm Gabrielle made landfall
along the central Gulf Coast of Florida about 50 km south of the nursery area. In the hours
prior to the storm making landfall all 13 sharks being monitored left the nursery area. Sharks
were gone from the nursery for periods of 5-13 days when salinity levels were below the
physiological tolerance of blacktip sharks due to the large rainfall associated with the storm.
Upon the return of salinity to normal levels all 13 sharks returned to the nursery and resumed
movement patterns similar to those exhibited prior to the storm event. Environmental factors
that could have influenced shark movements are examined and reported on.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  10
                                           6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

11.25
Remarkable presence of Basking shark (Cetorhinus maximus) in the
Adriatic Sea

Clò, S.1 & M. Affronte2
(1) ICRAM, via di Casalotti 300, 00166 Roma, Italy
(2) Fondazione Cetacea Onlus, Via Milano 63, 47838 Riccione (RN), Italy
(e-mail: simshark@libero.it; cetacea@iper.net)

Basking shark has seldom been the subject of specific studies in the Adriatic sea, but last
year the North-Central Adriatic sea saw a large increase in the number of sightings of this
shark at the surface, rising from few sightings in 2000 to more than 60 sightings in March
2001. This gave us the opportunity, with the collaboration of professional fishermen and the
Coast Guard, to obtain much information and many images of basking shark. In this work we
give some information on basking shark occurrence in space and time within the Adriatic
Sea. Basking shark distribution has been analysed taking into account surface currents,
temperature and plankton abundance. Many biological samples were taken from specimens
caught for other ongoing research. Records revealed the presence of many sizes specimens
going from very young individuals to adults (max LT of 840 cm).




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                 11
                                                 6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

11.50
Acoustic and satellite archival telemetry reveal patterns of movement and
site fidelity of the whale shark on the Belize Barrier Reef.

Rachel T. Graham and Callum M. Roberts,
Environment Department, University of York, YO10 5DD
(e-mail: rtg@btl.net)

Whale sharks, Rhincodon typus, recently revealed patterns of visitation at specific sites on the
Mesoamerican reef, particularly in Belize. To characterize whale shark foraging behaviour and
patterns of movement and site fidelity, whale sharks were variably tagged with coded acoustic tags,
pop-off satellite tags and marker tags. Acoustic data were recorded from 2000-2002 using an array of
acoustic receivers moored at 13 sites along the Belize Barrier Reef and Atolls. Whale sharks have
shown a high degree of intra-seasonal and inter-seasonal site fidelity at Gladden Spit, a reef
promontory in Belize where the sharks feed on the spawn of reproducing snappers every spring.
Sharks range along the reef with occasional visits to the three atolls between and outside peak snapper
spawning periods. Satellite tags have revealed the whale sharks’ ability to undertake very deep dives,
potentially to forage at depth, particularly between fish spawning moons. In the spring of 2002,
predictable visitations of whale sharks decreased at Gladden Spit. Overall tagging results and possible
reasons for the changes in site fidelity patterns are discussed in the context of whale shark tourism and
conservation.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                         12
                                  6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

12.15
Deployment of satellite tags on great white sharks off South Africa.

R.Bonfils




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                        13
                                           6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

12.30
Informal presentation
The sandbar shark, Carcharhinus plumbeus (Nardo, 1827), in Turkish
water.

Clò S. 1, Modena M. 1, De Sabata E., Aggio L. & Vacchi M. 1
1
  ICRAM, via di Casalotti 300, 00166 Roma, Italy

A video presentation will be given on the presence of sandbar sharks in a particular Bay in
Turkish waters. The video will show the presence of mature male and female specimens, the
Bay could be considered as a reproductive area of the species.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                 14
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.30-14.30
Poster session


Morphology of the ampullae of Lorenzini in selected Mediterranean skates

M. Bottaro1, S. Casazza2, M. Dalù1, S. Ferrando2, C. Grattarola2, G. Tagliafierro2, M. Vacchi1
1
  ICRAM, Rome, Italy.2 Department of Experimental, Environmental and Applied Biology
(DIBISAA), University of Genoa, Italy.
(e-mail: vacchim@tin.it)
The elasmobranch ampullary system plays a fundamental role for foraging and navigation. In
skates, the ampullae of Lorenzini are mainly localized in the cranial region. The aim of this
work was to compare the histomorphological and ultrastructural characteristics (using Light
Microscopy-LM, and Scanning Electron Microscopy-SEM) of these electroreceptors in four
species of skates caught in Mediterranean, in order to investigate a possible relationship
between their anatomy and life style. Furthermore, the presence of presumptive
neurotransmitters was investigated at LM by immunohistochemical techniques. During the
ICRAM elasmobranch research program, specimens of Raja asterias (N=3), Raja clavata
(N=4), Raja miraletus (N=2), and Raja radula (N=1) were collected in the Gulf of Genoa
(Ligurian Sea), and in the Southern-Central Mediterranean Sea by professional bottom
trawlers. After deep anaesthesia by MS 222 and dissection, samples of ampullae of Lorenzini
were fixed in paraformaldehyde and differently prepared for LM and SEM observation, and
for immunohistochemical investigation. In all four species the ampullae are divided in sensory
alveoli and the alveolar epithelium is bistratified. On the contrary, numbers of sensory alveoli
varies according to the species, being more numerous in R. miraletus and R. clavata. Such
feature leads to an increase of the surface of the sensory epithelium harbouring the receptor
cells and may be related to the need of an enhanced sensibility. In this view, we observe a
deeper preferential distribution for these two species. Relationships with taxonomic or other
ecological features may also occur and need to be investigated.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  15
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.30-14.30
Poster session

Raja brachyura, a rare species in the Mediterranean Sea: Notes on its
biology.

CATALANO B., DALÙ M., SCACCO U. AND VACCHI M.
ICRAM, via di Casalotti 300, 00166 Roma, Italy
(e-mail: b.catalano@icram.org)

The blonde ray Raja brachyura is a shallow water species living mainly on sandy and sand-
rock bottoms. Although common in the Eastern sector of North Atlantic, it is considered rare
in the Mediterranean Sea where scarce information is available on this skate. The aim of this
study is to improve our knowledge on the biology and feeding habits of this Rajidae in the
Mediterranean Sea. A total of 314 specimens of Raja brachyura were captured in June 2002
in the surroundings of Asinara island (NW Sardinia, Italy) with trammel nets. Of these, 221
individuals (102 females and 119 males) were examined for size, sex, state of maturity and
stomach contents. Size range of captured animals was between 18.5 and 95.5 cm Total
Length (TL), where longest individuals found were all males. Size relationships for both
sexes were similar: that of total length against weight was exponential whilst total length and
disc width was linearly related with a correlation coefficient of 0.98. Relative clasper length
was used to calculate length at first maturity in males, while in females very few mature
individuals were found. Males and females appear to mature at 45 and 47.5 cm. disc width
respectively. Taking into account the single summer sampling, stomach contents analysis
reveal an almost exclusive feeding on G. cicerellus, a small teleost typical of sandy-gravel
bottoms of the continental shelf. Raja brachyura is one of the most large sized skate in
Mediterranean, where it seems characterised by a patchy distribution. Both features are
considered to increase the vulnerability of a skate to the impact of fishing pressure. Although
essential for a proper management of populations, basic biological information for blonde ray
specimens from Mediterranean is lacking.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  16
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.30-14.30
Poster session

Birth and growth of Dasyatis violacea (Bonaparte, 1832) in captivity.

Cattolica’s Aquarium (Le Navi)
(e-mail: tedechi@libero.it)

A female pelagic stingray was caught in the Adriatic Sea in July 2000. The ray was put in a
circular 50,000l tank (diameter 5m, depth 1m) where she gave birth to 5 young (3 females
and 2 males). The young were immediately separated from the mother and from other
stingrays and maintained in a smaller circular tank of 3,000l. During the first few days, the
young stingrays were fed with small fish (live) and subsequently with pieces of crab and
squid. Over the next two years, there were other births (the last one in June 2002) and data
were recorded.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  17
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.30-14.30
Poster session

Feeding and reproductive biology of the common Torpedo (Torpedo
torpedo, Linnaeus,1758 ), and of the marbled electric ray (Torpedo
marmorata, Risso, 1810) from central Tyrrhenian waters.

Consalvo, I., Scacco, U., Romanelli, M., Vacchi, M. (1)
(1): I.C.R.A.M. via di Casalotti 300 Roma, Italy
(e-mail: vacchim@tin.it)

In the present work we studied the feeding habits and reproductive biology of two electric
rays species Torpedo torpedo and Torpedo marmorata. In 2000–2001 we monthly collected
535 specimens of Torpedo torpedo and 375 of Torpedo marmorata, caught by professional
otter trawlers in Central Tyrrhenian waters. The diet of Torpedo spp. was totally piscivorous
and was principally based on Soleidae for T. torpedo while T. marmorata fed on different
teleost families such as Sparidae, Clupeidae and Gobiidae. T. torpedo and T. marmorata
showed an unbalanced sex-ratio only in upper size classes and size at first maturity in both
sexes of T. torpedo differs from the other studied Mediterranean populations. The ovarian
and uterine fecundity is similar and the reproductive cycle is annual in males and females
with a breeding summer season. Torpedo marmorata females show a significant difference
between ovarian and uterine fecundity. In males of the species we found an annual sexual
cycle while in females it appears to be longer than one year. Our results represent an insight
into the feeding and reproductive biology of the two studied species in Central Tyrrhenian
waters, with the aim to complete the present knowledge on the genus Torpedo spp. in the
Mediterranean sea.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  18
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.30-14.30
Poster session

Elasmobranchs sperm as the object for cryobiology and conservation
biology.

Boris Dzyuba, Institute for Problems of Cryobiology & Cryomedicine of the National Academy
of Sciences of the Ukraine, Kharkov, Ukraine
(e-mail: cryo@online.kharkov.ua)

Nowadays for fishes all over the world just the cryobanks for bony fish species sperm are
available. They allow the extending of the possibilities of conservation biology due to a long-
term storage of spermatozoa fertilising ability. Modern state of the knowledge in the field of
cryobiology allows only partially to predict the possibility of successful cryopreservation of
such a new and absolutely unstudied in this respect object as elasmobranch sperm.
Complicated organisation of both elasmobranch sperm and their system of reproduction in a
whole determine the spectrum of questions, which make difficult the possibility of application
of cryobiological methods. This work is devoted to a detailed analysis of available data on
spermatology and biology of fertilisation in sharks in respect of theoretically existing
possibility of long-term storage of their sperm in a frozen state. The aim of the work is to
discuss the expediency of application of the knowledge in the field of cryobiology to the
investigations of shark sperm for following their application in the measures for biodiversity
conservation.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  19
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.30-14.30
Poster session

Diel activity patterns of the yellow stingray Urobatis jamaicensis, in
coastal waters of Southeast Florida, USA.

Daniel P. Fahy & Richard E. Spieler,
Nova Southeastern University Oceanographic Center (NSUOC), Guy Harvey Research
Institute (GHRI), National Coral Reef Institute (NCRI), 8000 N Ocean Drive, Dania Beach,
Florida 33004 USA
(e-mail: fahyd@nova.edu)

The yellow stingray (Urobatis jamaicensis) is the most common elasmobranch found along
the coastal waters of Southeast Florida. None of the few ecological studies on this species
have addressed daily movement patterns. Ultrasonic telemetry was used to track the diel
movements of 14 stingrays over a period of 18 months to determine their patterns of activity
and space utilization. Continuous manual tracking was conducted for periods of 8 to 30
hours with locations recorded at 15-45 min intervals. Arcview® GIS with Spatial Analyst and
the Animal Movement Analysis Extension (AMEA) was used to analyze location data. The
95% and 50% kernel distributions were calculated to determine the 24-h utilization
distributions (UD) and core areas of intense use, respectively. All diel UD data were divided
into four 6-h periods for statistical analysis of day vs. night rates of activity and area
utilized. Monte Carlo simulations and linearity indices were conducted for comparison of
randomized tracks with observed data to determine if movements were random, confined or
directional. The majority (approximately 80%) of tracked stingrays evidenced intermittent
movement patterns throughout the day with peak activity and larger scale movements during
the night. Short-term tracking suggests that U. jamaicensis possess small home ranges
(HR). Intermittent tracking across several days also demonstrates confined movements,
reflective of home ranging behavior and suggests that only small portions of the HR are
utilized on a daily basis. Further long-term research is necessary to confirm the existence of
a permanent HR or temporary/seasonal HR.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  20
                                           6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.30-14.30
Poster session

A simple technique for a preliminary vertebral ageing study in Etmopterus
spinax in Central Mediterranean Sea

Gennari E., Scacco U., Vacchi M. (1)
(1): I.C.R.A.M- Via di Casalotti 300, 00166 Rome, Italy
(e-mail: vacchim@tin.it)

Etmpoterus spinax (Linnaeus, 1758) is a bottom dwelling shark, typical of bathyal stratum of
Mediterranean Sea and it is usually caught by professional otter trawlers as part of shark by-
catch. By means of these professional deep fisheries, we collected 309 specimens during the
2000, from a depth range 200–1000 metres in the Thyrrhenian and Ligurian Sea. The sample
was analysed in laboratory and pectoral vertebrae were used for a vertebral bands ageing
study. The technique chosen was based on staining the phosphate in the calcified bands with
cobalt nitrate and ammonium sulfide (Hoenig and Brown, 1988), modified and adapted for
Etmopterus spinax vertebrae. Total lengths ranged from 100 to 435 mm and individuals were
grouped in size classes by season. Some length representative vertebrae were chosen from
the sample in order to read vertebral bands and to verify their number increment with the
length. The analysis of length frequency distributions suggests an agreement between band
count and length mode seasonal shift in Etmopterus spinax. The aim of this study is to give a
simple, inexpensive and rapid method for successfully staining and reading E. spinax
vertebrae which present a poor calcified bands such as the other bottom dwelling sharks.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                 21
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.30-14.30
Poster session

Tag and release’ of Raja asterias juveniles in South Ligurian Sea:
Preliminary results and future perspectives

Mancusi C.1, Catalano B. 1, Clò S. 1, Dalù M. 1, Serena F.2 & Vacchi M. 1
1
  ICRAM, via di Casalotti 300, 00166 Roma, Italy
2
  ARPAT, via Marradi 114, 57100 Livorno , Italy

Raja asterias is a skate geographically confined in the Mediterranean Sea inhabiting sandy
shallow grounds. In many Italian fisheries it is a common by-catch of otter trawls and “rapido”
beam trawls and it is of low commercial value. Like for other elasmobranchs, there are
indications of the decline of this resource. In order to improve our knowledge on the biology
and ecology of this species (also for managing purposes), a “tag and release” campaign on
juveniles of R. asterias has been carried out in the South Ligurian Sea. An area previously
identified as a nursery for this species has been chosen for our studies. Specimens were
caught using a small bottom trawl with 40mm mesh size at the cod end. Between July 2001
and May 2002, 103 hauls were carried out in shallow waters within 6 NM from the coast.
Caught specimens were sexed and measured for total length (L T) and disk width (DW). Only
individuals bigger than 13 cm in LT and in good health condition were tagged. Tags used
were of T-bar anchor type (from Floy Tag catalogue mod FF-94). A total of 1034 specimens
out of 1142 captured were tagged. In order to evaluate the effect of tags on such young
animals a vitality experiment was conducted in August 2001, observing an equal number of
tagged and non-tagged specimens in aquaria for a week. To ensure the maximum number of
skate returns, a deep information campaign directed to local fishers, fish-market personnel
and Sea Surveillance Bodies (Coast-guards etc.), was carried out in all fish landing sites of
the studied area. To date only 11 skates have been recaptured, one of which almost a year
after tagging.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  22
                                             6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.30-14.30
Poster session

On the capture of a giant specimen of Greenland Shark Somniosus
microcephalus (Bloch & Schneider, 1801) with some considerations about
maximum sizes collected for the Genus Somniosus compared with the
Genus Carcharodon.

Paul Crozier *, Marco Zuffa **, Tiziano Storai ***.

A large female Greenland Shark, Somniosus microcephalus, measuring 730 cm (Total
Length) was accidentally caught in the nets of a deep-water French fishing-boat on the 17 th of
March 2001 at 58.35ºN, 9.65ºW and at a depth of 1100 m. Although a detailed examination
of the specimen was not possible, some biometrical data and some biological observations
are proposed. From this record, research on scientific literature and on photographic
documentation has been conducted, with the main object being to find other records
concerning sharks of the Genus Somniosus measuring over 600 cm in length. This search
has led to the discovery of 4 other cases concerning captures or documented sightings of
Somniosus: 3 cases concerning S. microcephalus and 1 case concerning Somniosus
pacificus (Bigelow & Schroeder, 1941). Another record of a sighting of a giant S. pacificus
(Wood, 1982) measuring over 900 cm in length has been considered as an over-estimate.
Other cases have not been taken in to consideration because they are not sufficiently reliable
or well documented. A specimen measuring about 600 cm (total length) was captured in the
1930s near a whaler station in Charlotte Island, British Columbia (Sheffer and Slipp, 1944).
This specimen was tentatively identified as a Greenland shark and was the first occurrence
of this species in an area that is also frequented occasionally by large white sharks. On the
basis of the collected data, some considerations are discussed on the maximum sizes of the
two largest species of the Genus Somniosus with those known for the white shark; previously
considered as one of the largest predator sharks, but now considered as reaching smaller
sizes than Somniosus.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                   23
                                             6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.30-14.30
Poster session

Occurrence of a juvenile specimen of sandbar shark Carcharhinus
plumbeus in the Southern Tyrrhenian sea: morphological and meristic
description.

Consoli P 1., Romeo T 2., Florio G 1., Bottari T 1., Perdichizzi F 1.,
Vacchi M 3.

1, Istituto Sperimentale Talassografico C.N.R. Spianata San Raineri, 86
98122 Messina. 2, Università degli studi di Siena. 3, I.C.R.A.M. Roma.


In November 2001 a male specimen of C. plumbeus was collected at the
Golfo di Patti, a Gulf located along the Sicilian coast (Southern Tyrrhenian
Sea). Since 1980 the Gulf has been a closed area for fishing, where trawling is banned
except for scientific purposes. The shark was found during a sampling by bottom trawl gear
in order toevaluate the state of demersal resources (MEDITS and GRUND projects). The
specimen was 75 cm in total length and weighed 2600 grams; morphological measurements
and meristic details are determined and compared with those of other young individuals
coming from other Mediterranean
districts. We also considered the finding of this juvenile as a
contribution to enrich the knowledge of potential nursery areas of C.
plumbeus in Mediterranean Sea.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                   24
                                           6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

14.30
Endangered smalltooth sawfish (Pristis pectinata): science for
conservation

Colin A. Simpfendorfer,
Center for Shark Research, Mote Marine Laboratory
1600 Ken Thompson Parkway, Sarasota, FL, 34236, USA
(e-mail: colins@mote.org)

The smalltooth sawfish, Pristis pectinata, is listed by the World conservation Union as
Critically Endangered in the western Atlantic. Within US waters its historic distribution
reached from New York to the Mexican border. Today, however, the US population has
declined over 95% and is restricted mostly to remote sections of the southern Florida coast.
To address a lack of biological and ecological data on which to base conservation action
Mote Marine Laboratory has been conducting research program that includes surveys, a
public sightings database, acoustic telemetry and monitoring, satellite telemetry and genetic
analysis. The results of this research are reported and its application to conservation is
discussed.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                 25
                                 6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

14.50
Elasmobranch Conservation

Sarah Fowler
Nature Conservation Bureau




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                       26
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

15.05
Finning Finis: Finning bans as a shark conservation strategy

Merry Camhi, Living Oceans Program, National Audubon Society, 550 South Bay Avenue,
Islip, NY 11751, USA.
(e-mail: mcamhi@audubon.org)

It is widely acknowledged that the growing demand for shark fins is a driving force behind
burgeoning shark fisheries and the decline of shark populations worldwide. The high price
paid for fins is fueling the practice of shark finning, which results in the waste of nearly 95
percent of the shark biomass. Fishery managers are slowly becoming aware of the extreme
vulnerability of most sharks to overfishing and the need for conservative management of
shark fisheries. To date, six fishing nations have officially banned the practice of shark
finning, but issues remain concerning the implementation and enforcement of these laws.
This paper will review the status of current and proposed finning bans (including in the EU)
and evaluate the effectiveness of finning bans as a management tool to ensure the long-term
sustainability of shark populations and their fisheries.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  27
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

15.20
The NE Atlantic spurdog and its fishery: Historical perspective and
current status

Jim Ellis*, Rachel Dabney Curtis† and Tim Hammond*
*
  CEFAS Lowestoft Laboratory, Pakefield Road, Lowestoft, Suffolk, NR33 0HT, UK; † School
of Biological Sciences, University of Wales Swansea, Singleton Park, Swansea, SA2 8PP,
Wales
(e-mail: j.r.ellis@cefas.co.uk)

Spurdog (Squalus acanthias) is a relatively small (<125 cm length in the NE Atlantic)
squaliform shark that is one of the most important elasmobranchs fished in European waters.
During the early 1900’s, spurdog were of little economic value and landings were small. As in
other parts of the world, spurdog were viewed as a nuisance, as shoals of spurdog could
cause considerable damage to fishing nets. During the 1950’s and 1960’s, landings of
spurdog in the North Sea increased rapidly and total annual landings rose to 58,000 t during
the 1960’s. The major fishing nations for spurdog were the UK, Norway, Ireland and France,
and the main fishing grounds the Norwegian Sea, North Sea, NW Scotland and the Celtic
Seas. During the 1980’s, long-line fisheries for spurdog became relatively important in the
Irish Sea, with boats targeting shoals of large females. This fishery subsequently declined.
Spurdog are currently taken in mixed demersal fisheries (e.g. otter trawls) and also in gill
nets, where they may be the target species. Since the late 1980’s, total landings of spurdog
have declined and more recent catches (1997-1999) have been around 15,000 t.yr -1. We
have used demographic techniques to estimate the maximum population growth rate (r) for
spurdog. As in McAllister et al. (2001), demographic techniques were used to convert prior
distributions for age-specific fecundity and mortality (based on published information) to prior
distributions for r. The priors for r generated in this manner were then used in a Bayesian,
Schaefer-model assessment, fitted to research vessel survey data (CPUE). The results of
this preliminary assessment, which are coherent with life-history constraints, will be
discussed.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  28
                                  6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

16.00
The Centre for Shark research at Mote Marine Laboratory: Mission, Staff,
Activities and Accomplishments.

R.E.Hueter




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                        29
                                           6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

16.20
The status and conservation of elasmobranchs in the Northeast Atlantic

Rachel Cavanagh
Programme Officer, IUCN Shark Specialist Group, Nature Bureau International, 36 Kingfisher
Court, Hambridge Road, Newbury, Berkshire RG14 5SJ, UK

The conservation status of elasmobranchs in the Northeast Atlantic has recently been
reviewed by the IUCN Shark Specialist Group. This presentation will provide a brief overview
of the current information available for species commonly taken in fisheries in the region. In
the Northeast Atlantic the majority of elasmobranch species are caught as bycatch, and
catch controls are non-existent except for basking sharks and porbeagle sharks. The FAO
International Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks is in urgent
need of development and implementation in Europe, and this will be discussed. The Red List
status of elasmobranchs in the Northeast Atlantic region and the steps taken towards a
finning ban in European waters are also discussed.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                 30
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

16.40
Market demand for shark fin in Hong Kong and the People’s Republic of
China

Shelley Clarke and E.J. Milner-Gulland
Department of Environmental Science and Technology,
Imperial College of Science, Technology & Medicine, London SW7 2BP, UK
(e-mail: shelley.clarke@ic.ac.uk)

Trade in shark fins is believed to represent one of the most serious threats to shark
populations worldwide. Shark fins are served as a delicacy in Chinese communities
throughout the world, where tradition holds that they are auspicious or convey health
benefits. Hong Kong dealers control approximately 50% of the world trade, with the majority
of goods thought to be destined for sale in Mainland China.

An econometric analysis was conducted to determine the role of Hong Kong and Mainland
China market demand in driving shark fin trade dynamics. Shark fin imports to Hong Kong
(quarterly for 1992-2001) were selected as the dependent variable in the model and served
as a proxy for market demand. Explanatory variables considered for the model were limited
by data availability but included wages, private consumption, price of marine fish (substitute
good), restaurant receipts, exchange rates and interest rates for Hong Kong; disposable
income, restaurant receipts, exchange rates and interest rates for the Mainland; and
wholesale (supplier) prices of shark fins compiled by FAO’s INFOFISH bureaux. Following
the Hendry approach, potentially relevant variables, to several lags, were included in
preliminary models and diagnostics were evaluated; if the model was valid, it was
progressively simplified until only those variables with significant coefficients remained. Due
to the presence of serial correlation within and between many of the data sets, two different
forms of least squares regression were performed. Both forms produced similar models
indicating that more than 40% of the variance in the model (based on adjusted R 2) can be
explained by disposable income in Mainland China alone.

These results suggest there is a direct relationship between shark fin imports and Mainland
disposable income, with a 1% increase in income corresponding to a 0.25-0.39% rise in
imports, depending on the form of the model. Continued growth in disposable income in
Mainland China, coupled with reported increased spending on medicinals and tonics, will
thus result in increasing pressures on world shark resources unless steps are taken to
reduce demand. In the absence of definitive data on the role of the fin trade in shark
mortality, these findings point to the importance of consumer education, as well as other
consumer-orientated policy measures, as components of precautionary shark conservation
initiatives in Asia.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  31
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

17.00
Coastal renewable energy resources – implications for elasmobranchs?

Andrew B Gill,
School of Biological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3GS, UK
(e-mail A.B.Gill@Liverpool.ac.uk)

Our demand for energy and increasing interest in renewable resources to satisfy this demand
has lead to a number of European coastal countries developing plans for offshore energy
generation. The sustainability rationale for these developments should be commended as it
brings to the fore our concern for the environment. There is however a potential implication of
large-scale offshore energy installations for elasmobranchs. The ability of all elasmobranchs
to detect electromagnetic emissions and their propensity to utilise coastal habitats brings into
question the potential effect of electricity production in our coastal waters. We are only just
learning about the electroreceptive ability of elasmobranchs but we do know that different
species vary in the range of electric fields that they detect and respond to and that there may
be differences with life history stage. Electrical output from offshore electricity cables is
predicted to be relatively low but the range is within the detection range of the
elasmobranchs. Here I discuss the possible consequences of large-scale electrical energy
production in our coastal waters and how we need to bring elasmobranchs into any
environmental impact assessment in order that we do not put yet another pressure on our
threatened sharks, skates and rays.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  32
                                 6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference



Sunday 8th September

Presentation and Poster Abstracts




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                       33
                                           6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

9.30
The distribution of elasmobranch fishes in the NE Atlantic: The influence
of depth, latitude, temperature and disturbance.

Alicia Cruz†* and Jim Ellis*
†
  School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich;
*
  CEFAS Lowestoft Laboratory, Pakefield Road, Lowestoft, Suffolk, NR33 0HT, UK
(e-mail: j.r.ellis@cefas.co.uk)

The British Isles lies at a biogeographical boundary, with Lusitanean (Mediterranean) fauna
in the south-west and Boreo-Arctic species in more northern waters. The warm waters of the
Gulf Stream also enable several southern species to occur up the western sea-board of the
British Isles. There are more than 100 chondrichthyan fishes recorded in the CLOFNAM area
and more than 50 of these occur around the British Isles. A total of 26 species of
chondrichthyan fishes were recorded from the continental shelf during CEFAS groundfish
surveys (1990–2000), including 10 sharks and dogfish, 15 skates and rays, and 1
chimaeroid. The most frequently observed species were lesser spotted dogfish (Scyliorhinus
canicula), thornback ray (Raja clavata) and spotted ray (R. montagui). Southerly species that
were rare/absent from the North Sea included greater spotted dogfish (Scyliorhinus stellaris)
and smalleyed ray (R. microocellata), whereas the Boreo-Arctic starry ray was only recorded
in the North Sea. The species with the narrowest depth distributions were undulate ray (Raja
undulata: 10–72m) and S. stellaris (13–100m), whereas spurdog (Squalus acanthias) were
found in waters of 15–528m depth. Raja microocellata had the narrowest latitudinal range
(49.6–52.9°N) and cuckoo ray (Leucoraja naevus) had the largest latitudinal range (47.4–
61.5°N). The distribution patterns of demersal elasmobranchs is discussed in relation to their
biogeography, bathymetry, and areas of conservation importance. The importance of indices
of relative abundance in interpreting distribution patterns is also discussed.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                 34
                                           6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

9.50
Remarkable presence of Basking shark (Cetorhinus maximus) in the
Adriatic Sea

Clò, S.1 & M. Affronte2
(1) ICRAM, via di Casalotti 300, 00166 Roma, Italy
(3) Fondazione Cetacea Onlus, Via Milano 63, 47838 Riccione (RN), Italy
(e-mail: simshark@libero.it; cetacea@iper.net)

Basking shark has seldom been the subject of specific studies in the Adriatic sea, but last
year the North-Central Adriatic sea saw a large increase in the number of sightings of this
shark at the surface, rising from few sightings in 2000 to more than 60 sightings in March
2001. This gave us the opportunity, with the collaboration of professional fishermen and the
Coast Guard, to obtain much information and many images of basking shark. In this work we
give some information on basking shark occurrence in space and time within the Adriatic
Sea. Basking shark distribution has been analysed taking into account surface currents,
temperature and plankton abundance. Many biological samples were taken from specimens
caught for other ongoing research. Records revealed the presence of many sizes specimens
going from very young individuals to adults (max LT of 840 cm).




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                 35
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

10.10
First record of the longfin mako, Isurus paucus (isuridae) off the Algerian
coast; confirmation of its occurrence in the Mediterranean.

Farid HEMIDA * & Christian CAPAPÉ †
*Faculté des Sciences Biologiques, Université Houari Boumédienne, BP 32, 16 111 El-Alia,
Algiers, Algeria,
†
  Laboratoire d'Ichtyologie, cc 102, Université Montpellier II, Sciences et Techniques du
Languedoc, 34095 Montpellier cedex 05, France
(e-mail: fhemida@yahoo.fr; capape@univ-montp2-fr)

According to Cadenat and Blache (1981), I. paucus presumably occurs off the western
African coast. In the Mediterranean, I. paucus is cited by Fergusson (1994) and by Moreno
(1995). However, they did not relate captures of specimens in the area where Notabartolo di
Sciarra and Bianchi (1998) considered doubtful its occurrence. Two captures, a male and a
female from off the coast of Algeria were recently recorded, simultaneously with its closed
related species, I. oxyrhinchus. They permit us to confirm the occurrence of the species in
the Mediterranean. The specimens, a male and a female I. paucus, were observed, 17th of
October 2001, at the fishmarket of Algiers. It was caught off Beni Saf (400km west from
Algiers). The body is elongated, fusiform and rather cylindrical. The head is large ending with
a snout broadly pointed but not acute. The eyes are circular with behind them a small
spiracle. The narines are rather large with a long and triangular nasal valve. They are rather
closed to mouth than end of snout. The pectoral fins are large, as long as head, slightly
falcate and brown tipped. The caudal fin is strongly arcuated, with a very long lower lobe.
The body colour is blue, rather blackish on the rigdes of the fins. The ventral face is whitish.
The undersides of pectoral is parsemed with dark blotches. The undersides of snout and
mouth are dusky. The teeth of both jaws present a single pointed medial cusp slightly oblique
towards the commissure of the mouth. The ridges of these cusps are without cusplets or
serrations. The cusps are more developed in the medial series. The tip of the cusps is not
reversed. We have counted 26 teeth in both jaws in both specimen. The dental formula is
13–0–13. The dried jaws of the male specimen are preserved in the collections of the
'laboratoire d'Ecologie et Environnement, équipe halieutique, Université Houari
Boumedienne' of Algiers, Algeria and referenced (S/02/2001).




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  36
                                             6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

11.00
In deep trouble? Deep-water sharks to the west of the UK: one of the most
vulnerable groups of all the elasmobranchs?

Paul Crozier, J.D.M. Gordon, and P. Vas,
Scottish Association for Marine Science, Dunstaffnage Marine Laboratory, Oban, Argyll,
PA34 4AD. Scotland, United Kingdom.
(e-mail: elasmo1@hotmail.com)

In response to declining coastal commercial fisheries a deep-water fishery developed in the
early 1990s in the Northeast Atlantic. Although this fishery mainly targets grenadiers and ling,
several species of deep-water elasmobranchs are taken as either directed landings or by-
catch. It is suggested that deep-water elasmobranchs are especially vulnerable to over-
fishing as they mature at a late stage in life, have long gestation periods and have relatively
few young in comparison to other deep-water teleosts. Data on length, sex and maturity was
examined for 30 species of deep-water elasmobranch from 4 research cruises to the west of
the British Isles, with additional information collected on geographical distributions and depth.
Other areas of the study involved collecting data on the commercial fishery from a group of
French bottom trawlers working to the west of the British Isles. This included a three-year
market sampling program monitoring deep-water landings, and further studies of discard
composition and rates through commercial observer trips at sea. Archived pre-fishery survey
data, taken from the northeast Atlantic, was also made available on several species of deep-
water elasmobranch. Through analysing data on the activities of the commercial fishery and
comparing pre-and post fishery survey data, an attempt has been made to determine which
elasmobranch species are most at risk.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                   37
                                           6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

11.20
Diet of Chimaera monstrosa, L. 1758, in the Sicilian Channel (western
Mediterranean Sea).

E. Luchetti*, S. Clò**, M. Vacchi**, B. Sabelli*
*Department of Biology, University of Bologna, Via Selmi,3
**ICRAM, Roma, Via di Casalotti 300

The intestine contents of 163 specimens of C. monstrosa, or ratfish, from the bathyal bottoms
of the Sicilian Channel were examined. The fish were caught with bottom trawls at depths
ranging from 500 to 700 m between ’97 and ’98. The pre-anal length and the sex of each
specimen were noted. The prey found in the guts had been cut and crushed by the
specialised dentition of the ratfish, comprising three pairs of toothplates. The items of prey
were identified to the lowest possible taxon. The results show that C. monstrosa behaves like
a generalist and feeds all day on a large spectrum of species belonging to various groups of
benthic invertebrates, often infauna, and only occasionally on bony fish. Crustaceans and
molluscs were found in the intestines of the largest number of specimens, echinoderms and
polychaetes in a smaller number of cases, with sipunculids and bony fishes in only a few
cases. Some differences in diet composition were noted and related with the ratfish size: in
the longest fish diet was in the main hardshelled prey, such as Monodaeus couchii
(Brachyura) and Nassarius limatus (Gastropoda), while in the shorter fish amphipods or
delicate bivalves such as Allogramma formosa, predominated. No differences were found
between males and females.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                 38
                                           6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

11.40
Sharksuckers, Echeneis naucrates, attached to blacktip sharks,
Carcharhinus limbatus: what body regions do they choose?

Juerg M. Brunnschweiler., Green Marine, Miami, USA

Sharksuckers, Echeneis naucrates, are known to attach to various shark species.
Nevertheless, it has never been investigated if sharksuckers attach to specific body regions.
This study focusses on sharksuckers attached to blacktip sharks, Carcharhinus limbatus,
with special emphasis on the body regions on which sharksuckers can be observed. Possible
costs and benefits regarding the different attachment sites for both sharks and sharksuckers
are discussed.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                 39
                                  6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

12.00
Informal presentation

Sharks feeding on the sardine ‘run’ in South Africa.
S.Dudley

Transport of sand tiger shark (Carcharias Taurus) from France to Italy,
and its introduction to a new environment.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                        40
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.00-14.00
Poster session

Elasmobranch species from the Celtic Sea and the North Sea: Relative
trophic levels determined through stable isotope analysis

Nadège Domi, Krishna Das and Jean-Marie Bouquegneau, Laboratory for Oceanology, Liege
University, B6 Sart Tilman, B-4000 Liege, Belgium
(e-mail: Nadege_Domi@yahoo.fr)

Sharks are marine consumers believed to occupy generally high trophic positions in marine
food webs. Surprisingly, trophic level estimates for these predators are relatively scarce. In
this study, stable isotope ratios have been determined in muscle and hepatic tissues of five
species of commercial sharks from the Celtic Sea and the North Sea: the tope Galeorhinus
galeus, the black-mouthed dogfish Galeus melastomus, the spiny dogfish Squalus acanthias,
the lesser spotted dogfish Scyliorhinus canicula and the starry smooth hound Mustelus
asterias, in order to determine their relative trophic position and to obtain information on the
ecosystem in which the animals feed. Differences in stable nitrogen (d15N) and carbon (d13C)
isotope ratios have provided valuable insights in the trophic ecology and movements of many
species. For the Celtic sea, tope sharks display the highest d15N and d13C values, reflecting
their more piscivorous diet, their higher trophic position and their coastal feeding habits. The
other species display lower values according to their diet of invertebrates. These results are
compared with trophic levels calculated from those obtained by stomach content analysis.
d15N and d13C results match the stomach contents, except for spiny dogfish. Indeed, spiny
dogfish have the lowest d15N and d13C, although this species is known to be a
teutophagous/piscivorous species. This suggests a more oceanic feeding for this species as
it is known that oceanic food is usually depleted in d15N and d13C compared to coastal ones.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  41
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.00-14.00
Poster session

Life History Aspects of Freshwater Stingrays (Chondrichthyes:
Potamotrygonidae)

Maria Lúcia Góes de Araújo1; Mauricio Pinto de Almeida2
& Patricia Charvet-Almeida3
1
  – Universidade do Amazonas (UA) (e-mail: Mlpotamotrygon@aol.com)
2
  - Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi (MPEG) (e-mail: maupalm@nautilus.com.br)
3
  – Universidade Federal da Paraíba (UFPB) (e-mail: pchalm@nautilus.com.br)

The characteristics that affect elasmobranch life history are more peculiar to analyse when
freshwater stingrays (Potamotrygonidae) are included in the study group. Differently from
their marine counterparts, potamotrygonid stingrays are restricted to freshwater
environments. Some of these species are endemic, apparently require very specific habitat
conditions and it is suggested they present a very narrow limit of tolerance to both natural
and anthropogenic environmental impacts. Since life history knowledge is important to
fisheries assessment and management, a data bank containing basic biological and
ecological information about species of freshwater stingrays has been developed since 1996.
Approximately 15 valid species are listed for the Amazon Basin, and some population
parameters are either known or are currently being studied, for at least seven of these
species (Paratrygon aiereba, Plesiotrygon iwamae, Potamotrygon motoro, P. schroederi, P.
orbignyi, P. scobina and Potamotrygon spp.). The latter species, known locally as “cururu”, is
currently being described. The information collected involves aspects related to habitat,
distribution, reproductive biology, feeding habits, growth and mortality rates, and fisheries in
the Brazilian Amazon. All information available contributes to assist in decision-making
related to public policies, procedures involving sustainable fisheries management, as well as
the conservation of freshwater stingrays and their habitats.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  42
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.00-14.00
Poster session

Research opportunities and benefits for undergraduate students

C. Huveneers
(e-mail: ch299@soton.ac.uk)

The value of different ways of learning is increasingly recognisable and no longer can anyone
assume that learning in the lecture theatre is better than learning from experience. Gaining
work experience is now seen as an excellent way for students to acquire the skills that
employers seek. Virtually all students have completed some form of experiential education
beyond that which is offered at their university. However, the different types of experiential
learning available can be confusing. Shark related experiential learning can be divided into 3
classes which will be developed and illustrated by personal experience:

(1) Pay-to-Volunteer: accessible to anybody willing to pay to join a team of shark scientists.
(2) Volunteer: Unremunerated work but more hands-on experiences with the chance to get
    important contacts for the future.
(3) Internship: Usually the best experiential learning available; constituted of a highly
    structured placement offering graduate-level work.

Of the programs that do offer reflective work, student-centred programmes are more likely to
help for the future. This includes internships that give students projects or papers rather than
those that teach classes.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                   43
                                             6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.00-14.00
Poster session

The elasmobranch fauna of Moreton Bay, Queensland, Australia: ecology,
threats, conservation, management and research.

Peter M. Kynea, Simon J. Piercea, Richard D. Pillansb, Jeff W. Johnsonc & Michael B.
Bennetta
a
  Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia, 4072; b Department of Zoology and Entomology, The
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia, 4072; c Ichthyology, Queensland
Museum, PO Box 3300, South Brisbane, Queensland, Australia, 4101

Moreton Bay comprises a large, shallow, subtropical bay with tidal estuaries in south-eastern
Queensland, Australia, encompassed by a Marine Protected Area of ~306,000 ha. The Bay
is close to three major urban centres (Brisbane, the Gold Coast and the Sunshine Coast),
whose greater region has over 1.5 million human inhabitants. Moreton Bay is a unique
natural system, combining temperate and tropical communities with a diversity of habitats
including mangrove communities, mudflats, seagrass beds, sandy beaches and coral reefs.
The bay is subject to considerable pressure through the effects of both commercial and
recreational fishing, changes in water quality and habitat loss due to development. At least
54 elasmobranch species have been recorded from the bay, but the effects of human
activities on elasmobranch populations is largely unknown, however, declines in the relative
abundance of some species have been noted. For example, the longcomb sawfish, Pristis
zijsron, has not been recorded in Moreton Bay since the 1960s; the estuary stingray,
Dasyatis fluviorum, is under pressure from incidental fishing and habitat modification and
loss; Colcloughs shark, Brachaelurus colcloughi, may be a naturally rare species restricted to
a small geographic area centred around Moreton Bay, which appears under increasing
pressure from fisheries bycatch and seagrass loss. Estuarine and inshore environments of
Moreton Bay appear to serve as important nursery areas for a number of species including
members of the families Orectolobidae, Triakidae, Carcharhinidae, Sphyrnidae,
Rhinobatidae, Dasyatididae and others. The current Zoning Plan of the Moreton Bay Marine
Park and state legislation fails to significantly protect populations and suitable habitats, with
only the white shark, Carcharodon carcharias, and the grey nurse shark, Carcharias taurus,
protected. Current research at the University of Queensland is focusing on the life histories of
common species, the importance of various habitats as feeding grounds and nursery sites
and the effects of habitat modification, particularly canal estate developments on D. fluviorum
and other species. Tracking studies of inshore elasmobranchs, together with movement
patterns and habitat use of the euryhaline bull shark, Carcharhinus leucas, are being actively
pursued.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                   44
                                          6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.00-14.00
Poster session

Preliminary information on the stomach contents of the Caribbean
sharpnose shark, Rhizoprionodon porosus (Poey, 1861), off Pernambuco
State, Brazil.

Sérgio Macedo Gomes de Mattos1 and Fábio HissaVieira Hazin2,
Engº de Pesca, M.Sc. SUDENE, Recursos Naturais Renováveis, Pç. Min. João Gonçalves
de Souza, s/n. 50670-900. Recife-PE; 2 D.Sc. UFRPE, Departamento de Pesca, Laboratório
de Oceanografia Pesqueira
 (E-mail: smattos@sudene.gov.br; fhvhazin@terra.com.br)

This paper presents preliminary information on the stomach contents of the Caribbean
sharpnose shark, Rhizoprionodon porosus (Poey, 1861), off Pernambuco, Brazil, during April
1996 to July 1997. A total of 189 stomachs were analysed, 121 being from adult specimens
and 68 from juveniles. Stomachs with contents were found only in 29 adults. Five degrees of
repletion were identified, with the degree of repletion I (empty) being the most frequent
(84.7% of the total and 76% among adults). For the 4 digestion levels considered, contents
with no digestion were found in 6.1% of the analysed stomachs; in 12.1%, they were at the
beginning of the digestion process; in 36.4%, they were digested but identifiable; and in
45.4% they were digested and not identifiable. Teleosts were found in 90% of the stomachs
with contents. Cephalopods were present in 13.3% and crustaceans in 3.3%. The
hepatosomatic index - HSI was calculated, for males and females, for the whole period
studied and grouped bimonthly and by maturational stage. A statistical analysis of the HSI
showed that no significant difference occurred between sexes or periods of the year.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                45
                                           6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.00-14.00
Poster session

The biology of the African angel shark, Squatina africana, from net
catches off KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa

Richard L. Shelmerdine* and Geremy Cliff†
* Department of Zoology, University of Aberdeen, Tillydrone Avenue, Aberdeen, AB24 2TZ,
   UK. † Natal Sharks Board, Private Bag 2, Umhlanga Rocks 4320, South Africa.
(e-mail: desshelmerdine@hotmail.com)

Between 1978 and 2001, 755 African angel sharks, Squatina africana, were caught in the
nets which protect 42 swimming beaches spanning 326 km of coastline in South Africa. The
species was caught throughout the year, mainly in the winter months of April to September,
with an average annual catch of 33 sharks. Catch was distributed in the southern region of
the netted area with a sex ratio of 1 male to 3 females. Both males and females matured at
around 700 mm precaudal length (PCL) with the highest gonad indexes (GI) found in January
for male and female sharks with females showing a second maximum GI in December. Only
two sharks were caught mating in April and May suggesting mating takes place between
January and May. December showed the highest hepatosomic index (HSI) for pregnant
females with the lowest value in June. This corresponded with the onset of maturity and
parturition, respectively. The average litter size was 6 with length at birth between 209 and
240 mm PCL. Pregnant sharks were caught in two main areas, a main one in the south with
a smaller one to the north. Males preyed mainly on teleosts with females preying on both
teleosts and cephalopods.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                 46
                                           6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.00-14.00
Poster session

Foraging strategy of a planktivorous marine predator, the basking shark
(Cetorhinus maximus).

E.J. Southall, 1., D.W. Sims1 and J.D. Metcalfe2
1
 Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, The Laboratory, Citadel Hill, Plymouth,
Devon, PL1 2PB, UK 2Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, Lowestoft
Laboratory, Pakefield Road, Lowestoft, NR33 0HT, UK
(e-mail ejso@mba.ac.uk)

The factors influencing the distribution and behaviour of highly migratory fish in the sea
remain poorly understood. This lack of knowledge is surprising given that understanding the
type of habitats fish select at certain times, and what factors affect migration routes are
central questions relevant to animal behaviour, climate change and fisheries management. In
this research the migratory movements and preferred habitat of a model open-ocean species
(the plankton-feeding basking shark) were determined using satellite tracking and remote-
sensing technology. These data were used to examine how shark behavioural strategies
changed in response to variations in ocean productivity and thermal regime.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                 47
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

13.00-14.00
Poster session

Historical analysis (1993-2000) of the thematic exhibitions of natural
history collections concerning elasmobranchs in Italy, with a proposal for
the future.

Tiiziano Storai, Marco Zuffa, Gildo Gavanelli

A synthesis of didactic-educative activities (the thematic exposure of naturalistic collections
concerning elasmobranches) realized in Italy during last decade is proposed. The main
objective of these activities is to provide correct information on elasmobranches for the
general public. Some tables show the most significant events occurred during this period,
with attention on findings kind and collaborators. Particular leading principles about planning,
organization and realization of events are also quoted. The collected data explain the
substantial interested of people and particularly children, on the matter. On the basis of these
experiences, an embryonic project named EVME (European Virtual Museum of
Elasmobranches) is suggested, as a desirable tools of naturalistic education and to raise an
ecological awareness. The present study hypothesis that the annual EEA Meeting may
demonstrate the ideal situation where a temporary, thematic exhibition of cartilaginous fishes
findings could be realized, allowing a considerable contact between scientific researchers
and general public.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  48
                                            6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

14.00
U.S. Initiatives to Conserve Northwest Atlantic Skates.

Sonja V. Fordham, The Ocean Conservancy, 1725 DeSales Street, NW; Suite 600;
Washington, DC 20036 USA
(e-mail: sonja@oceanconservancy.org)

In just the last five years, conservation and management attention to skates of the Northwest
Atlantic Ocean has intensified and yet these vulnerable species remain completely
unprotected with some stocks facing potential endangered status. Skates in US Atlantic
waters, caught primarily as bycatch in groundfish fisheries for decades, are now the subject
of growing European markets for wings as well as domestic demand for bait. In recent years
off the New England coast, retention of skates has reached record high levels while skate
discards are estimated to be at least twice the level of skate landings. A 1998 paper in
Science by Casey and Myers that suggested the barndoor skate (Dipturus laevis) was in
danger of extinction spurred intense attention from conservationists including two petitions to
list the species under the United States Endangered Species Act. Although not yet
answered, petitions prompted population assessments for the entire regional skate complex
(seven species) and “overfished” determinations for several stocks. Populations of barndoor
and thorny skate (Amblyraja radiata) were shown to be particularly depleted with thorny skate
indices at record low levels. Various scientific panels have highlighted both as species of
concern. Although US fisheries law mandates timely and relatively stringent rebuilding of
overfished stocks, the regional fishery management council’s draft skate fishery management
plan is seriously flawed and nearly two years behind schedule. On an international level, US
scientists and policy makers have spearheaded efforts to assess skate populations and
establish skate quotas under the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization (NAFO), as
consistent with the 1999 United Nations Fish and Agricultural Organization (FAO)
International Plan of Action for Sharks. There is however not much support outside the US
for these proposals, nor are skates a high priority issue for the US at NAFO meetings. The
latest developments on all these management fronts will be reviewed with an eye toward
fostering cooperation and conservation support from European elasmobranch experts.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                  49
                                           6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

14.20
2001-2002 Educational programs by Uno Squalo Per Amico

Marco Affronte1 and Irene Bianchi2
1
 Fondazione Cetacea, Riccione, Italy (e-mail: cetacea@iper.net)
2
 Uno Squalo Per Amico, Republic of San Marino
(e-mail: ibianchi@omniway.sm; uspa@omniway.sm)

Education about sharks is very important in the area where the USPA (Uno Squalo Per
Amico) association is based. In fact, San Marino is just 20km away from the Adriatic Sea,
where sport angling is very strong and the blue shark and thresher shark populations have
been overfished, as reported in many papers. Indeed, the Adriatic Sea is a nursery area for
blue and thresher sharks. The educational programs have been developed at a variety of
levels:
 Presentations in secondary school (generally a 2 hour slide show)
 Occasional lectures addressed to the general public
 Monthly lectures to divers and "shark-fans"
 Elasmobranch biology courses (3 days) for University students
 Attendance to Nautic and Diving shows with exhibits (posters, videos, tools, etc.) on
   sharks
 Web site (www.unosqualoperamico.org)
 Quarterly USPA-News circulation
Public response to these activities has been very good and is helping to increase public
awareness regarding shark conservation, so that public opinion may help to drive the Italian
Fishery Department to pass new rules about shark angling.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                 50
                                             6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

14.40
The Longline Shark Excluding Device (LSED): Proposal for a new method
of selectively reducing shark bycatch in longline fisheries.

Boris Z. Frentzel-Beyme
German Elasmobranch Society, Zool. Institut und Zool. Museum der Universität
Martin-Luther-King-Platz 3, D-20146 Hamburg, Germany
(e-mail: Boris_fbeyme@yahoo.com)

In virtually all longline fisheries worldwide sharks are caught as a bycatch, and may even
dominate the overall catch. The resulting mortality is a massive impact on shark populations
on a large scale, further affecting ocean ecology. The need to counteract these
circumstances is increasingly understood by elasmobranch biologists as well as fisheries
managers and reduction of shark bycatch is called for in many national and international
conservation proposals and action plans for shark management and conservation. Various
approaches have been made to develop methods for reducing shark bycatch, however
promising progress has been achieved mainly in demersal and bottom longline fisheries, with
pelagic longlining bycatch reduction methods still working suboptimally.

The present proposal offers a technically more intensive, but ultimately effective principle to
selectively reduce or exclude the shark bycatch in longline fishing as executed anywhere by
applying the Longline Shark Excluding Device (LSED). The LSED is a small, self-sustained
electric device attached to the leader directly above the longline hooks, emitting a distinct
and locally effective pulsed electric field from two spaced electrodes and posing an electric
barrier exclusively for the electrosensitive sharks. The bait is protected from sharks and
accessible for target species (i.e. pelagic tuna and billfish). This is based on the fact that
sharks have electrosensitive capabilities that allow the use of a specific electrical field with
barrier characteristics without affecting the targeted teleost species. The principle is proven
to work in various experimental and commercial applications and is the logical and optimal
approach for reducing bycatch in longline fisheries.

This concept is at a planning stage and partners are sought for co-operation in R&D as well
as production and promotion. The concept includes socio-economic implications and
perspectives, as broad application of LSEDs is necessary to be effective, and support from
national and international conservation institutions will be needed. This could lead to a new
eco-label to certify ocean-friendly caught tuna being established. International co-operation in
the realization of this concept may enable fisheries to reduce fishing effort for the same yield,
reduce overall bycatch as well as costs. Furthermore, overfished shark populations could find
a mid- to longterm recovery window as bycatch mortality is reduced substantially.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                   51
                                           6th Annual European Elasmobranch Association Conference

15.30
How the media portray sharks

Gill, A.B. & Stevens. H.E.,
School of Biological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3GS, UK
(e-mail: A.B.Gill@Liverpool.ac.uk)

Intuitively, public opinion of sharks is most likely to be influenced by their exposure to
information which is available in a variety of formats via the media eg. newspapers, TV, film,
Internet. Opinions based on the media will also depend on the regularity of the information
provided and its content bias. Newspapers provide information on a daily basis in an easily
accessible, often visually arresting and readily available format. We therefore decided to
undertake a study looking at how sharks were portrayed by newspapers. In this pilot study
we concentrated on three broadsheet newspapers owing to the availability of archive material
either on the internet or CD-Rom. We categorised the content, general nature and length of
the article and the species of shark concerned. We then scored each article firstly on their
headline message and then on the basis of positive (eg. conservation topic) or negative (eg.
shark attack) content in the article to allow comparison between the newspapers. We found
that the broadsheet newspapers portrayed sharks in a positive light as much as a negative.
The main species mentioned were the Great White and Basking shark with other species
only occasionally the subject. Following the main study of the newspapers we conducted a
short questionnaire study of a group of students to determine how readers generally perceive
the information given in the newspapers. Interestingly, although the newspaper had a similar
occurrence of stories of positive and negative content only 50% of the group were likely to
read the story about conservation. It appears that although the newspapers are providing
both conservation and shark attack type articles the readers are grabbed by the
sensationalist headlines and therefore are not getting the more important conservation
information. Future research in this area is obviously very important for those of us working
for shark conservation.




6-8th September 2002, Cardiff.                                                                 52
