ular clock




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                  58


Session 7: Dentition, feeding habits and parasites

New data about vascularisation and histology in neoselachian teeth based on computed
tomography

Alba Martín-Lázaro, Martínez-Pérez, C., and Botella, H.

University of Valencia

Based on their internal structure, elasmobranch teeth have been traditionally separated into two
different dental histotypes, orthodond and osteodont. The orthodont histotype is characterised by
teeth with an open pulp cavity surrounded by orthodentine and osteodentine, whereas in the
osteodont histotype the pulp cavity is completely closed and teeth are formed only by
osteodentine. However, this classification has recently been criticised because of its simplification
(Moyer et al., 2015), existing species which teeth histology cannot be classified exactly within any
of the classical described histotypes. To test and evaluate the variation of teeth histology within
the Euselachii phylogeny, here we analysed teeth of several species of current elasmobranch
using Synchrotron X-Ray Tomography Microscopy (SXRTM) to characterise their internal
structure. The tridimensional reconstruction and the topographical analysis of the teeth have
allowed us to identify the classic histotypes, but also describe other intermediate states, with
teeth completely formed by orthodentine, or teeth with several dentine combinations in the cusp.
These different arrangements could be explained by heterochronic processes affecting rates of
the tissues within the teeth. Therefore, our results stand out the idea that the classical histotypes
are a reductionist classification and don't reflect the real variation of this characters. The
application of new methodologies, like microtomography with synchrotron, have demonstrated
being a powerful tool for the study of the histology and the internal structures at submicrometric
resolution.

Histoypes, Orthodont, Osteodont, Synchrotron, Osteodentine, Orthodentine




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                 59


Session 7: Dentition, feeding habits and parasites

Development and evolution of the cutting dentition of dogfish (squaliform) sharks
                     1,2            2                2,3
Charlie J Underwood , Johanson, Z. , Smith, M.M.
1
Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, UK Department of
                                                          2
Earth Sciences, Natural History Museum, London, UK, Department of Earth and Planetary
                                              3
Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, UK, Dental Institute, Craniofacial Development, King’s
College London, London, UK

The dogfish (squaliform) sharks are dominant predators in many cool and deep seas. Most
possess a unique dentition with teeth overlapping and locking together to form a continuous
cutting blade on the jaw margin, either on both jaws or restricted to the lower jaw. This contrasts
with the alternating pattern of teeth in almost all other sharks and rays. CT scanning of the
developing teeth of the Spurdog Squalus acanthias and other squaliforms revealed that the first
teeth in the embryo are arranged as in other sharks, realigning during growth to line up teeth
from adjacent tooth rows. In species with more highly derived dentitions, the blade-like lower
teeth first form in the embryo in a similar arrangement to in the adult of Squalus, wheres the small
upper teeth retail their alternating pattern into adulthood. The possession of a unique cutting
dentition allows squaliforms to feed on large food items (living or dead) when needed, giving
them an evolutionary advantage in low nutrient or cold environments, where they have been
focuses for their entire evolutionary history.

Teeth development, Evolution, Feeding, Squaliforms




    th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                   60


Session 7: Dentition, feeding habits and parasites

Diet composition and trophic position of juvenile Scalloped Hammerhead Sharks in a
nursery area at Viti Levu, Fiji
                1, 2            2            3
Niklas Komoss      , Zimmer, M. , Rico, C.
1                                   2                                      3
 University Bremen, Germany, Leibniz Centre Tropical Marine Ecology, University of the South
Pacific, Suva, Fiji

Nursery areas provide protection from predators and ample food supply for juvenile individuals
of a species, the adults of which spend their lives in different habitats. The Rewa river Delta on Viti
Levu, Fiji, has recently been identified as nursery area for the Scalloped Hammerhead Shark
Sphyrna lewini.

We evaluated the diet composition and the trophic position of neonate and young of the year
(YOY) individuals within this nursery area. The information on the diet of the sharks will provide
insight on whether the nursery area provides abundant food for the sharks.

For this, a combination of stable isotope analysis of shark tissue and DNA-barcoding of gut
contents was used. The analysis of the carbon (δ13C) and nitrogen composition (δ15N) of muscle
tissue revealed a shift in the composition which correlated with the age of the juveniles. The
maternal isotope signal was evident within the muscle tissue of neonates and fades as the sharks
mature.

The results of the DNA barcoding of the stomach content complement the study by identifying
the preferred prey species.

Sphyrna lewini, Diet, Stable isotopes, DNA barcoding




    th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                              61


Session 7: Dentition, feeding habits and parasites

Evolution and development of shark tooth regeneration

Martin, K., Rasch, L., Cooper, R., Metscher, B., Johanson, Z., and Gareth Fraser.

Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield. And the Department of Earth
Sciences, Natural History Museum, London

Sharks and other polyphyodont vertebrates retain the crown gnathostome character of
continuous successional regeneration of oral teeth. How capacity for successional regeneration is
maintained in some lineages but lost from other (e.g. mammals) is currently unknown. We have
shown that a compound and dynamic Sox2+ stem cell population resident in the shark dentition
connects the superficial taste-competent oral epithelium at the taste/tooth-junction with the
deep tooth-forming successional lamina via cells migrating through the lingual margin of the
middle dental epithelium during successional regeneration of teeth. We have shown that both
taste buds and teeth emerge from the odonto-gustatory band, a field of embryonic oral
epithelium equivalent to the odonteogenic band of mammals, and that the Sox2+ stem niches of
the taste/tooth-junction and the successional lamina are derived from the odonto-gustatory
band. We provide evidence for the shark test-bite or taste-bite. We suggest that a novel
collaboration between the generalized odontode gene regulatory network and the taste bud
gene regulatory network specifically in the oropharynx was key to the evolutionary
transformation between dermal odontodes (i.e. placoid scales) and oropharyngeal odontodes (i.e.
teeth). Differential gene expression analyses preformed here with microdissected sub-regions of
recently hatched shark dentition, including the taste/tooth-junction and successional lamina
stem niches in addition to developing early teeth, erupting late teeth, and taste bud epithelium
from the basihyal not associated with teeth offers novel insights into the molecular distinction
between taste, tooth, and dual-competent epithelia via the discovery of shared and differentially
expressed genes.

Tooth regeneration, Dental stem cells, Taste buds, Taste-bite, Skin denticles, Evolution




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                  62


Session 7: Dentition, feeding habits and parasites

The Tooth, the Whole Tooth and Nothing but the Tooth; Ontogenetic Shift Dynamics in the
White Shark

Georgia C.A. French, Stürup, M., Rizutto, S., van Wyk, J.H., Wintner, S.P., Towner, A.V., and Hughes,
W.O.H.

University of Sussex

Ontogenetic dietary shifts are widespread across the animal kingdom, and in many cases involve
associated morphological changes in foraging phenotype. These changes may differ between
sexes or vary between individuals, and are important factors in the ecology of species. While
such factors have received much attention in terrestrial systems, they are much less well
understood in marine taxa. The White Shark Carcharodon carcharias is a marine apex predator
that is generally considered to undergo an ontogenetic dietary shift from piscivory to preying
primarily on marine mammals, with an associated change in tooth morphology from cuspidate
teeth suited to grasping piscivorous prey to broad teeth more capable of effectively handling
large marine mammal prey. Here we integrate a new approach involving photographic analysis of
live sharks, alongside data obtained from a large jaw collection and previously published data, to
investigate the ontogenetic shift in tooth morphology in White Sharks, comparing this for males
and females, and examining inter-individual variation in tooth shape. The results reveal significant
differences between male and female white sharks in the relationship between tooth
morphology and shark length (which approximates to age), and a previously unreported
ontogenetic change in male tooth shape. Males develop broader upper first teeth and increased
medial angle of their upper third teeth as they age, while females do not exhibit a clear
ontogenetic change in tooth morphology. There was substantial individual variation in male
sharks with implications for Pace of Life Syndrome, and potential phenotypic polymorphism in
female sharks. The results suggest that sexual differences and individual variation play major
roles in ontogenetic changes in tooth morphology in White Sharks, with potential implications for
foraging biology.

Ontogenetic shift, White Shark, Polymorphism, Individual variation




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                       63


Session 7: Dentition, feeding habits and parasites

A new method for dietary discrimination in elasmobranchs*

Laura McLennan, and Purnell, M.

University of Leicester and University of Derby

As abundant and widespread apex predators, elasmobranchs play influential roles in food-web
dynamics of marine communities. This has obvious implications for fisheries management and
marine conservation, yet elasmobranch diet is relatively understudied; for the majority of species
little or no quantitative dietary data exist. This reflects the difficulties of traditional methods in the
analysis of diet in wild elasmobranchs; direct observation of feeding and stomach contents
analysis. Traditional methods are particularly unsuitable for those species most at risk and
requiring conservation measures. Additional methods of dietary analysis are thus required. Here,
by quantifying the 3D tooth surface textures that develop as a consequence of feeding, we show
that tooth microwear varies with diet in sharks. 3D microwear texture analyses can be applied to
both small samples and animals with no gut contents, offering a way to reduce the impact on
wild shark populations when analysing their dietary ecology. This is especially relevant in the
conservation of endangered species. Furthermore, because it accumulates over longer periods
of time, analysis of microwear texture overcomes the ‘snapshot bias’ of stomach contents
analysis. This is the first time that 3D microwear texture analyses have been successfully used to
detect dietary differences within sharks, providing a potentially powerful tool for dietary analysis
in living and extinct elasmobranchs.

Dietary discrimination, Elasmobranchs

*Also as poster presentation




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                   64


Session 7: Dentition, feeding habits and parasites

Dogfish Parasite; which factors impact upon this host-parasite interaction?

Jennifer Pearce

Aberystwyth University

Whilst parasites are generally viewed in a negative light, it is possible to use their presence within
their hosts for beneficial research. Using parasites as tags allows their infection to be analysed to
provide information on much of the host species’ ecology such as migration, diet, population
growth, and to monitor the species for overexploitation. Whilst work is being done on using
parasites as tags, comparatively little research effort is going into the parasites themselves and
their interactions with the host species. During this research, the relationship between host
species, age, sex, condition, and parasite prevalence within the Lesser-Spotted and Greater-
Spotted Dogfish are analysed and investigated. The work was carried out over a period of five
years, in Cardigan Bay, Wales; the area from which the dogfish samples were collected. It was
found that there was a significant difference in the parasite loads of the two dogfish species
(p<0.05), whereas for various reasons the other factors measured were not found to be of
significance. This data will help to contribute to further study of parasites and their application as
tags.

Parasites, Lesser-Spotted Dogfish, Greater-Spotted Dogfish, Host-parasite relationship




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                               65


Sunday 30th October

Keynote

                     Daniel Suddaby


                     World Wildlife Fund (WWF)


Tuna tales: using market levers to transform fisheries
management
Over the last five years WWF has had a focus on transforming international management of
tropical tuna species. An example of this has been the work in the Indian Ocean, an area that
supports not only one of the largest industrial tuna fisheries in the world, accounting for 20% of
the global catch in 2014, but also fringed with the highest percentage of developing coastal
states of all tuna management areas. A concerted effort in the region to improve management by
the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) has resulted in an international agreement on
scientifically based catch limits (Harvest Control Rules). One of the successful methods employed
to reach this agreement was nurturing and harnessing the demand for ‘sustainable’ tuna from
consumers. This presentation will give a cursory summary of the general strategy, the case study
in the Indian Ocean and some of the opportunities and challenges of such an approach. This
approach could potentially be used to move shark fisheries onto a more sustainable footing.




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                               66


Session 8: Progress in elasmobranch conservation

Conservation Planning for Flat Sharks

Julia Lawson

IUCN Shark Specialist Group

An estimated one-quarter of the world’s chondrichthyans are threatened with extinction
(classified as Vulnerable, Endangered, or Critically Endangered) on the IUCN Red List for
Threatened Species, 107 of which are rays and 74 are sharks. Julia Lawson, Programme Officer of
the IUCN Shark Specialist Group (SSG), discusses the role that the SSG has played in generating
action to conserve these species of concern. The SSG consists of 171 members in 55 countries
who work to collectively secure the conservation, management and, where necessary, the
recovery of the world's chondrichthyans by mobilizing technical and scientific expertise.
Additionally, the SSG operates under the umbrella of the IUCN Species Survival Commission
(SSC), an organization that first mobilized technical and scientific expertise to generate species
action plans in the late 1980s. The combination of an engaged SSG membership and the senior
expertise of the IUCN SSC has helped guide the development of three conservation strategies
over the past five years: sawfishes (2012), devil and manta rays (2015), and the Angelshark
(currently underway). These conservation strategies have drawn upon well-established
conservation planning strategies, while also considering novel methods to explore the unique
challenges that are faced by chondrichthyans. This talk will describe the process of developing
these strategies and the conservation successes that have been achieved thus far.

Conservation, Marine, IUCN Red List, Mobula Ray, Sawfish, Angelshark




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                          67


Session 8: Progress in elasmobranch conservation

Time for action: opportunities for implementing the CMS Sharks MoU through RFMOs

Sonja V. Fordham

Shark Advocates International

Since 1999, Parties to the Convention on Migratory Species (CMS) have added 29 species of
sharks and rays to the CMS Appendices, bringing obligations for strict protection (Appendix I)
and/or cooperative conservation efforts (Appendix II). As of February 2016, all CMS-listed
elasmobranchs are now also covered under the scope of a 2010 Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU) -- the first intergovernmental agreement dedicated to global shark and ray conservation -- and an
associated 2012 Conservation Plan. These actions have bolstered efforts to safeguard elasmobranchs
through both awareness and action. Listings on the Appendices, in particular, have been a major factor in
numerous domestic protections while also serving to highlight at-risk species for other international fora.
Through the CMS Sharks MoU and associated Conservation Plan, signatories have agreed, inter alia, to
facilitate a better understanding of shark populations and fisheries, set science-based catch limits in an
effort to ensure sustainable fishing, prevent finning, and cooperate toward shark conservation through
international bodies. Four years after adoption of the Conservation Plan, however, concrete actions to fulfill
MoU goals remain insufficient. Considering that overfishing is the primary threat to elasmobranchs, and
that many threatened populations are fished by multiple countries, the world’s Regional Fishery
Management Organizations (RFMOs) provide excellent opportunities for immediate, concrete action that
can go a long way toward fulfilling CMS obligations and safeguarding at-risk species. Suggestions will be
offered for specific courses of action, including ideas for elasmobranch scientists who interested in
facilitating such progress.




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                               68


Session 8: Progress in elasmobranch conservation

Implementing CITES Appendix II for sharks and rays

Sarah Fowler

Save Our Seas Foundation (SOSF)

CITES Appendix II is intended to prevent international trade from depleting species to the extent
that they become threatened with extinction. It regulates, but does not prohibit commercial trade.
Such trade is only permitted if exporting countries can confirm that the products they are trading
with other countries were legally obtained and if they have issued a “Non-detriment Finding”
(NDF). Importing countries must ensure that this paperwork is in order before accepting the
traded items. The presentation explains what an NDF is, and how trade regulation will work for
the sharks and rays that were listed in Appendix II by the 17th Meeting of the Conference of
Parties to CITES, in October 2016.

CITES, Trade, Non-Detriment Findings




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                             69


Session 8: Progress in elasmobranch conservation

A balancing act: protecting Mediterranean sharks

Ali Hood

The Shark Trust

Management of Mediterranean fisheries is a balancing act, incorporating the political, economic,
cultural and environmental objectives of over 20 nations. Since 1952 this has been undertaken
through the General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean (GFCM) whose broad remit
includes the management and conservation of sharks.

The GFCM can adopt binding recommendations for fisheries conservation and management
which must then be implemented by GFCM Parties. In 2005 the GFCM banned fishing activities
below depths of 1000m, reducing pressure on some deep-sea sharks; in 2010 and 2011 it
endorsed recommendations to protect threshers and hammerheads caught as bycatch; the
following year the GFCM prohibited the fishing and retention of the 24 species of threatened
sharks and rays listed on the Barcelona Convention’s Annex II of the Protocol concerning
Specially Protected Areas and Biological Diversity in the Mediterranean – in doing so committing
all Parties to implementing domestic prohibition. On paper these measures are promising. Yet
huge challenges remain surrounding their implementation and enforcement.

In 2016 the Shark Trust became an accredited Observer to the GFCM and is committed to
working with NGO partners and the GFCM Secretariat to assist Parties in meeting outstanding
obligations. The Trust is also working with partners on a ‘European Angelshark Conservation
Strategy’, concentrating on the three Critically Endangered species found in the Mediterranean.
Central to this strategy will be encouraging all GFCM Parties to fully implement
recommendations outlined above.

Mediterranean, GFCM, Barcelona Convention, implementation, elasmobranch




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                           70


Session 8: Progress in elasmobranch conservation

Using non-invasive survey methods to assess the abundance and biodiversity of
elasmobranch species at Tubbataha Reefs Natural Park, Philippines
          1               2             3           1          1          1                            1
Murray, R. , Conales Jr, S. , Pierce, S.J. , Araujo, G. , Labaja, J. , Snow, S. and Alessandro Ponzo
1                                                                   2
Large Marine Vertebrates Research Institute Philippines,             Tubbataha Management Office,
3
Marine Megafauna Foundation

Elasmobranchs are amongst the most threatened group of marine species. Over-fishing, coupled
with their life history characteristics has resulted in sharp decrease in population numbers
worldwide. Identifying the population and species composition of elasmobranch species in areas
of remaining known aggregations is crucial in creating a management plan to help conserve
target species. The use of non-invasive survey techniques is becoming more popular in
elasmobranch research. Baited Remote Underwater Video surveys (BRUV) and Underwater
Visual Surveys (UVS) were applied to assess the biodiversity and relative abundance of
elasmobranch species in Tubbataha Reefs Natural Park (TRNP). A total of 69 successful BRUV
surveys were conducted between March – June 2015 across 3 habitats (Shallow Reef, Deep Fore-
reef, Lagoon) and 2 Zones (North islet, South Islet) within the waters of Tubbataha Reefs Natural
Park (TRNP), located in the middle of the Sulu Sea. A total of 11 species of elasmobranchs were
documented during BRUV surveys. The surveys indicated the highest known CPUE for Whitetip
Reef Shark (0.94) and Grey Reef Shark (1.2) in the world based on available data from Australia, Fiji
and Indonesia. A total of 20 UVS surveys were conducted in TRNP between May 17th - 24th 2015
and June 11th - 20th 2016 showing incredibly high densities of reef sharks (7.26 per/ha-1).

This study highlights the importance of properly managed protected areas for the conservation
of elasmobranchs especially in regions of high exploitation and provides a unique opportunity to
shift back the baseline for these vulnerable and endangered species.

Tubbataha Reefs Natural Park, BRUV, Philippines, World Heritage Site, MPA, Shark




    th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                       71


Session 8: Progress in elasmobranch conservation

1000 Whale Sharks in the Philippines: Reaching a conservation milestone in time of peril
             1           2               3           1           2          1          1           1
Emer McCoy , Burce, R. , Conales Jr, S. , Labaja, J. , David, D. , Murray, R. , Snow, S. , Araujo, G. and
               1
Alessandro, P.
1                                                            2                    3
Large Marine Vertebrates Research Institute Philippines, WWF-Philippines, Tubbataha
Management Office

The Philippines was once a theatre of one of the largest Whale Shark fisheries in South East Asia
though national protection in 1998 allowed the flourishing of several coastal aggregations, now
supporting a growing tourism industry.

Photo identification of the Philippines Whale Shark population was initiated in 1997 by WWF-
Philippines in Donsol, Sorsogon. Since then, four additional aggregations have been studied. As
of July 2016, 468 unique individuals have been identified in Donsol, 255 in Oslob, Cebu, 193 in
Panaon Island, Southern Leyte, 98 in Tubbataha Reefs Natural Park, Palawan and 35 in Honday
Bay, Palawan together with few other minor ephemeral aggregations.

The 1000th Philippines Whale Shark was identified in May 2016 and uploaded on the online
international database Wildbook for Whale Sharks. Data collection has been a combined effort
from dedicated surveys by the Large Marine Vertebrates Research Institute Philippines, the
WWF-Philippines, and citizen science. A network of connectivity between aggregations has been
identified with the Bohol Sea as a major crossroads. Shark P-545 was the first Whale Shark to be
matched internationally in South East Asia, covering the distance between Taiwan and Southern
Leyte (>1600km) in 11 months.

The trans-boundary movements of these giants is of increasing concern for their conservation in
light of the continuous threats from target fisheries in Asia, and the recent listing as Endangered
under IUCN Red List. Increasing fishery enforcement at national level and transnational
cooperation and protection under international agreement like CMS Appendix I is strongly
recommended.

Whale Shark, Philippines, Photo-Identification, Donsol, Oslob, Panaon Island




    th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                       72


Session 8: Progress in elasmobranch conservation

Spatiotemporal distribution of Caribbean Reef Sharks Carcharhinus perezii and Nurse
Sharks Ginglymostoma cirratum in the waters of Saba, Dutch Caribbean.

Guido Leurs, Winter, H.V., de Graaf, M., and Nagelkerke, L.A.J.

IMARES Wageningen UR

For the purpose of this study, the spatiotemporal distribution of Caribbean Reef Sharks
Carcharhinus perezii and Nurse Sharks Ginglymostoma cirratum were described using acoustic
telemetry and a long-term citizen science project. Detection indices ranged from 0.01 to 1.00 for
C. perezii and 0.17 to 0.92 for G. cirratum. Overall results prove high intraspecific variation in spatial
behaviour and detection patterns, especially for C. perezii. Diel detection patterns for this species
suggests different behavioural patterns for some individuals associated with twilight hours.
Detection pattern of G. cirratum corresponds with a nocturnal change in behaviour. The results of
the citizen science program also showed a catch-per-unit-effort for each species suggesting high
residency or site fidelity for both species. Significantly lower presence of C. perezii during the
period January-April coincides with the parturition period known of this species, possibly
suggesting partial migration for this species.

Spatial behaviour, Temporal distribution, Diel activity, Dutch Caribbean, Acoustic telemetry




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                              73


Session 8: Progress in elasmobranch conservation

Facebook, the next frontier – using divers and fishermen's posts in social media to collect
data on sharks and rays distributions

Adi Barash, and Salingré, S.

Haifa University, Israel

Paucity of data is among the fundamental challenges in formulating any conservation effort. This
difficulty is exacerbated when addressing elasmobranch research in the eastern Mediterranean
Sea, where very few studies have been carried out, and historical data is scarce. Citizen science
can be an effective alternative to otherwise complicated and expensive large-scale surveys
aimed to evaluate species occurrence and distribution patterns. We made use of social media
platforms to collect current sightings and records of elasmobranchs along Israeli coasts
(Mediterranean and Red Sea), and to retrieve documentations dating back to 2005.

To date, we collected over 500 records of elasmobranchs, which consisted of 15 species during a
time-span of 12 years. Recorded include species that are critically endangered and/or rarely
reported such as Gymnura altavela and Isurus oxyrinchus. Other reports revealed previously
unrecorded events, such as large schools of Rhinoptera marginata close to shore, and large
guitarfish (Rhinobatos sp.) exhibiting what seems to be mating behaviour.

According to our records, the most common shark in the region Carcharhinus plumbeus shows
clear variation in size throughout the year, as do Dasyatis sp., and Rhinobatos sp.

Data collected from dozens of users provide a first start in creating a regional checklist of
elasmobranchs in the Mediterranean, as well as provide glimpses into seasonal distributions.
Records of rare and endangered species emphasize the potential benefits of record collection
through the social media, as well as the major knowledge gaps of elasmobranch occurrence and
distribution in the Eastern Mediterranean.

Species checklist, Biodiversity, Citizen science




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                               74


Session 8: Progress in elasmobranch conservation

Earth, Wind and Fire – a holistic approach to elasmobranchs conservation

Irene Kingma, and Walker, P.

Nederlandse Elasmobranchen Vereninging / Dutch Elasmobranch Society

Globally there are many campaigns for elasmobranchs conservation, both large and small. The
overriding objective of all these campaigns is to reduce unwanted mortality in sharks and rays,
but in most the focus lies on just one aspect of conservation. In order to create an improved
situation over time a more encompassing approach is needed which includes the right legislation
as a starting point, coordinated management to ensure the laws can be implemented, effective
control and enforcement to dissuade illegal activities and active communication to stakeholders
to leverage support for the new measures.

Scientific work is the basis for this approach and has an important role to play in strengthening
the conservation process by asking the right questions at the onset of a research project. Only by
doing the science you need you can get the policy you want.

We propose a science-based holistic approach to campaigning which encompasses all four
essential elements: legislation, management, control and communication. Using two examples of
a management system currently under development, one for the North Sea the other for the
Dutch Caribbean, we showcase how such a process can be shaped.

Conservation, Management, Integrated approach




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                              75


Session 8: Progress in elasmobranch conservation

Vulnerability of reef-associated sharks connecting one of the world’s largest marine
protected areas
                    1             2               2                2               1           2               2
David M.P. Jacoby , Ferretti, F. , Carlisle, A.B. , Chapple, T.K. , Curnick, D.J. , Dale, J.J. , Schaller, R.J. ,
           2,3               2
Tickler, D. and Block, B.A.
1                                                          2
Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London, Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford University,
3
The UWA Oceans Institute, University of Western Australia.

Remote atolls, such as those found within the Chagos Marine Reserve (CMR), can be connected
by large, often predatory fishes that are capable of ranging between them. But the temporal
patterns and dynamic nature of this connectivity can vary between species that seemingly utilise
similar habitat. In this study, we focus on two species of reef-associated shark, Carcharhinus
amblyrhynchos (Grey Reef) and Carcharhinus albimarginatus (Silvertip) and demonstrate, using
network analyses, that they connect the northern atolls of the CMR in very different ways and that
different mobility patterns have different implications for management and conservation. With
Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing still a significant problem throughout the Indian
Ocean, and historically minimal enforcement capacity to patrol and respond to the threat of IUU
fishing within the CMR, we adopt novel methods that allow us to pinpoint key gateways and
drivers of connectivity based on the movement ecology of these predators. Furthermore, we
employ Bayesian techniques to infer the spatial and temporal shifts in vulnerability as these
species periodically aggregate, all with a view to highlighting the times and places where
enforcement is most needed to protect these species and the subsequent health of the reef
ecosystem.




    th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                               76


Session 8: Progress in elasmobranch conservation

Fishing to extinction? How to assess sharks at risk of overexploitation

Glenn Sant

TRAFFIC the wildlife trade monitoring network

In both fisheries & conservation, the term “shark” is often used to generalise all species as one.
This makes determining species most at risk from overfishing difficult. In collaboration with the
UK government, TRAFFIC developed a method to evaluate commercially-exploited aquatic
species at risk of overexploitation. Life history characteristics of 61 species of sharks were
evaluated to determine a score for intrinsic biological vulnerability for each of these species.
Minimum age at maturity and size produced a useful approach to ranking the relative intrinsic
vulnerability of species to harvesting. To determine the adequacy, or inadequacy, of existing
management measures, a Management-Risk Assessment Method (M-Risk) was developed for
the forty-two shark species identified as being at medium or high risk. A ranking system was
developed against relevant management attributes in order to rate risk, which has the potential to
assist the development of a range of conservation and fishery management measures. This can
be used to support fisheries management bodies to meet obligations under MEAs such as CITES
and CMS.

Sharks, Rays, Risk Method, Overexploitation, Vulnerability




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                       77




                                                 POSTER
                                          PRESENTATIONS




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                78

                                                           rd
The presence of White Sharks Carcharodon           The 3        edition of the European Studbook
carcharias related to environmental factors in     Carcharhinus melanopterus
Guadalupe Island, México
                                                   Chris Brown, Hibbitt, J.D. and Wordley, E.
Edgar Eduardo Becerril-García, Hoyos-
Padilla, E.M., Reyes-Bonilla, H., Martínez-        Merlin Animal Welfare and Development
Rincón, R., Roldán-Wong, N.T., López-              SEA LIFE
Calderón, J.M. and Galván-Magaña, F.
                                                   A studbook is a managed breeding
CICIMAR - IPN                                      programme that tracks the genetics, births,
                                                   mortalities     and     transfers       across
This study describes the presence of White         zoos/aquariums and recommends future
Sharks in relation to environmental factors        goals/objectives for the species. It is also a
during the cage diving season in Guadalupe         point of contact and information on the
Island. The presence of the shark at the           species. SEA LIFE runs the European
surface and the collection of environmental        Association of Zoos and Aquaria (EAZA)
data was recorded aboard tourist boats             studbook    for    Blacktip   Reef     Sharks
during august to November in the years             Carcharhinus melanopterus. This was
2012-2014. Data was analysed according to          established in 2013 and the results are
sex, maturity and total of sightings, for each     presented each year in an annual edition of
month of the season and in relation to nine        the studbook.
environmental       factors:   sea      surface
temperature, tide, moonlight, intensity, and       This is the third edition of the studbook and
the direction of wind and current, cloud           we continue to learn and build upon our
cover and visibility. 6,480 sightings were         experiences with Blacktip Reef Sharks. There
recorded during 98 days. The monthly               are now 55 aquaria participating in this
presence showed that juveniles are equally         studbook which covers the period from
abundant throughout the season; males are          01/01/2015 until the 31/12/2015. The total
particularly numerous in august and females        number of animals has risen to 274
since September, according to their                (124.150.0) compared to 230 (represented in
migration. The effect of the environment on        48 aquaria) in the previous studbook. Since
the presence of sharks was different to that       2007 fifteen aquaria have recorded birthing
reported for other aggregation sites in            events. By documenting and then sharing
continental islands. A higher frequency of         the details of these breeding experiences
sightings was observed during temperatures         we get one step closer to achieving a self-
between 20-23 ° C, low wind (<16 kn), low          sustaining aquarium bred population. The
current (<0.6 kn), and high visibility values (>   studbook is looking for an in-situ
17m). However, it was not possible to              research/conservation partner that also
observe a significant effect on the overall        works with this species to be able to both
presence of the White Shark according to           compare and collaborate on research.
the direction of the wind, current, tidal
phase, moonlight or cloudiness. In general,        Blacktip Reef Sharks, Aquarium, Breeding,
females showed no significant relationship         Studbook
with the environmental factors on the
surface, which could be related to sexual
segregation or their trophic ecology in deep
waters.

Ecology, Lamnidae, Habitat, Occurrence,
Biosphere reserve




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                            79


Monitoring the development and success           The potential for using remote camera-traps
rate of Scyliorhinus stellaris eggcases          to detect changes in the population trends of
                                                 pelagic sharks
              1                2
Tegan Consol , Gordon, C.A. and Hepburn,
   3
J.                                               David J. Curnick, Lucas, T.C.D., Koldewey,
                                                 H.J., Jones, K.E. and Collen, B.
1                        2
Plymouth University,         The Shark Trust,
3
Mewstone Enterprises                             Zoological Society of London

The Nursehound Scyliorhinus stellaris is a       Effective monitoring of pelagic shark
species of catshark that resides in the          populations in the absence of fisheries data,
Northeast Atlantic and Mediterranean Sea.        such as in marine reserves, is a significant
Nursehounds are currently listed as Near         challenge. Remote camera-traps have the
Threatened on the ICUN Red List of               potential to monitor pelagic sharks, but
Threatened Species with no accurate data         remain largely untested.
on population size in the Northeast Atlantic.
Although they are usually found in shallow       Within a simulated environment, we
coastal waters and can be locally abundant,      developed a method that modified existing
research on the species egg laying is            gas models to investigate the number of
generally limited and focused on species         camera-traps needed to detect pelagic
held in captivity.                               shark populations trends over a five-year
                                                 period in both un-baited and baited (divided
Off the south coast of Devon, a site has been    into full- and partial-detection) arrays. We
discovered where Nursehounds have                assessed the accuracy and precision of
continued to deposit eggs for a number of        trend estimates obtained from camera trap
years. The site is in a sheltered channel and    arrays under different scenarios of
since April 2014, monthly snorkels during        population sizes of different spatial and
low spring tides have been conducted to          temporal distributions undergoing varying
monitor eggcases within the channel. Small       levels of population change.
tags are attached to the tendrils of each
eggcase and photographs are taken of each        Our results demonstrated that across un-
side of the capsule. Water temperature, tide     baited and both baited models, scenarios
height and time, significant weather events      with larger starting populations, faster rates
and the impact of biofouling are also            of change, heterogeneous distributions, and
recorded.                                        absence of seasonal variation required
                                                 smaller camera-trap arrays to produce
When an eggcase is newly deposited they          accurate and precise population trend
are    easily     distinguished    by    their   estimates.
transparency. Over time as the embryo
develops, eggcases become biofouled              We concluded that camera-trap arrays
making it difficult to observe the developing    could serve as a useful fisheries-
embryo. The goal of this research is to          independent method to monitor pelagic
monitor the average development period in        sharks. However, unless the population size
order to gain further insight on the species     is large and/or changing at a high rate,
population in the wild and to monitor the        significant numbers of baited camera-traps
development of biofouling on the eggcase.        would be required. Unfortunately, such large
                                                 arrays would come with significant financial
Nursehound,       Development,       Eggcase,    and labour costs and therefore may not be a
Nursery Site, Great Eggcase Hunt                 realistic monitoring option.

                                                 Camera-traps, Fisheries-independent data,
                                                 Gas model, Marine reserves, Pelagic sharks,
                                                 Random encounter model




    th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                             80


The Shark Aggregation Project needs your         Plastic sharks in the Mediterranean Sea
data!
                                                 Eleonora de Sabata and Clò, S.
David J. Curnick, Letessier, T. and Jacoby, D.
                                                 MedSharks
Zoological Society of London
                                                 The Mediterranean is one of the most
The spatial and temporal ecology of many         polluted seas worldwide, with quantities of
shark species is not well known, yet many        floating     particles  comparable       to
shark      species    exhibit     aggregation    accumulation zones in subtropical gyres.
behaviours. We are therefore compiling a         Plastics represents 80% of marine litter
global database on the timings, dynamics         floating, stranded on beaches or on the
and locations of shark aggregations. In doing    seafloor.
so, we hope we can start to answer
questions about the spatial and temporal         A growing series of studies is investigating
distribution of predator biomass, how            the impact of plastics on Mediterranean
aggregations are changing over time and in       marine biota. Entanglement is a serious
response to abiotic and anthropogenic            mortality factor; many species misidentify
drivers, and how they are currently              litter as natural prey, or may ingest it
protected     within   the    existing   MPA     accidentally during feeding and normal
framework.                                       behaviour. Here we present a bibliographic
                                                 review of Mediterranean elasmobranchs -
We have trawled the literature in order to       the most threatened class of marine fishes in
identify published records of shark              Europe, according to the IUCN - known to
aggregations. However, we appreciate that        ingest marine litter.
this is likely to provide an incomplete
picture. Therefore, we are calling upon          Plastic additives (e.g. phthalates) were
fellow shark scientists to help us fill in any   detected in tissues from stranded basking
gaps we may have by providing papers,            sharks collected by MedSharks’ Operazione
anecdotal accounts, or grey literature that      Squalo Elefante, confirming that Cetorhinus
we may not have discovered during our own        maximus (Regional IUCN Red List: VU) is
search.                                          particularly at risk due to the large amount
                                                 of water it filters. Marine litter was reported
Please come and view our poster to find out      in   the    stomach       content    of   other
more about the project and how you could         elasmobranch species such as: Prionace
help.                                            glauca (CR), Squalus blainvillei (DD), Squalus
                                                 acanthias (END), Raja radula (END),
Aggregation, Behaviour, Breeding, Database,      Myliobatis Aquila (VU), Raja clavata (NT),
Feeding                                          Leucoraja naevus (NT), Dipturus oxyrinchus
                                                 (NT), Etmopterus spinax (LC), Galeus
                                                 melastomus (LC), Raja miraletus (LC), Raja
                                                 montagui (LC), Raja polystigma (LC),
                                                 Pteroplatytrygon violacea (LC).

                                                 Although the effects of plastic ingestion on
                                                 elasmobranch are not known, the high
                                                 number of red-listed species affected
                                                 confirms the need to promote effective
                                                 waste management and raise awareness on
                                                 the issue, promoting proper behaviour in the
                                                 public.

                                                 This review was compiled within the Clean
                                                 Sea LIFE project, an awareness project
                                                 targeting marine litter in Italy, co-funded by
                                                 the European Commission through the LIFE
                                                 programme.

                                                 Marine litter, Mediterranean, Elasmobranchs

  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                            81


Is a reinforcement program genetically            The Cabo Verde Elasmobranch Research and
feasible for Thornback Rays Raja clavata in       Conservation Project
the Dutch North Sea?
                                                  Manuel Dureuil
Aleksandra Dragozet
                                                  Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada
WWF-NL and University of Amsterdam
                                                  The island nation of Cabo Verde, West
In the NE Atlantic, trends of ray populations     Africa, holds one of the last remaining
have decreased by 72% in the past 30 years        hotspots for elasmobranchs in the North
(FAO-Fishstat, 2006 & Chevolot, 2006). With       Atlantic and an important refuge for several
declining populations of many threatened          highly threatened and endemic species of
species translocation strategies are being        sharks, skates and rays. However, there is an
used frequently to improve the conservation       increasing exploitation pressure on these
status of many species. A WWF-NL lead             species. The Cabo Verde Elasmobranch
programme is investigating if reinforcement       Research and Conservation Project, initiated
& reintroduction of endangered sharks and         in 2015, aims to support the development of
rays in the North Sea is feasible. Genetic        comprehensive, long-term and effective
consideration is important as it is critical to   science based protections measures for
the success of a population restoration.          Cabo      Verde    elasmobranchs,    through
Within the WWF-NL led program, this               scientific research, governmental, NGO and
research project focused on genetic               community based conservation projects.
diversity of the Thornback Ray Raja clavata:      Therefore, an innovative coalition of various
one of the North Sea Species listed as near       parties has been established. Currently a
threatened on the IUCN Red list, by               major focus is the acoustic tagging of Nurse
comparing      wild     and   captive     bred    and Atlantic Weasel Sharks, a large tagging
populations to see if a reinforcement             program with external marker tags, as well
program would be feasible from a genetic          as    educational      outreach   and     the
standpoint (Ellis,2005).                          collaboration with local communities. We
                                                  will present first achievements and future
This study will act as a pilot study for the      aims of this project.
reintroduction of rarer species in the North
Sea. The aims of this study were to               West Africa, Cape Verde, Protection, Tagging,
determine whether the captive bred                Education
populations displayed evidence of a
population     bottleneck,     high   genetic
diversity, and if the wild and captive bred
populations were genetically similar enough
to avoid outbreeding depression. This was
investigated by genotyping via amplified
fragment length polymorphism polymerase
chain reactions (AFLP-PCR). Captive bred
populations of R. clavata displayed high
genetic diversity (Hj=0.302) and did not show
evidence of a population bottle neck, and
were genetically similar enough to the wild
populations to avoid outbreeding depression
(Fst=0.0418 (p=0.07)). From a genetic
standpoint, the Blue Linked captive bred
population of R. clavata can be used to
reinforce the wild populations in the North
Sea.

Reinforcement, Rays, Genetic diversity, North
Sea, Conservation

*References available upon request




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                   82


Evolution and development of shark tooth           Trace  metals in tissues of Galeus
regeneration                                       melastomus Rafinesque, 1810 from the
                                                   northern Tyrrhenian Sea (NW Mediterranean)
Martin, K., Rasch, L., Cooper, R., Metscher, B.,
Johanson, Z. and Gareth Fraser                     Andrea Gaion, Scuderi,         A.,   Sartori,   D.,
                                                   Pellegrini, D. and Ligas, A.
Department of Animal and Plant Sciences,
University of Sheffield. And the Department        South Devon College
of Earth Sciences, Natural History Museum,
London                                             Decline of coastal waters resources has
                                                   forced expansion of fisheries into deeper
Sharks and other polyphyodont vertebrates          waters. However, while the increase of
retain the crown gnathostome character of          industrial activities makes essential to find
continuous successional regeneration of oral       biological models that can explain pollutants
teeth. How capacity for successional               dynamics, little is still known about
regeneration is maintained in some lineages        pollutants distribution and their possible
but lost from other (e.g. mammals) is              effects     on      deep-water    organisms.
currently unknown. We have shown that a            Concentrations of trace metals (Arsenic, As;
compound and dynamic Sox2+ stem cell               Cadmium, Cd; Copper, Cu; Mercury, Hg;
population resident in the shark dentition         Lead, Pb) in muscle, liver and gonad of
connects the superficial taste-competent           Blackmouth Catshark, Galeus melastomus,
oral epithelium at the taste/tooth-junction        from     Mediterranean     are    presented.
with the deep tooth-forming successional           Significant differences between males and
lamina via cells migrating through the lingual     females were found in the concentrations of
margin of the middle dental epithelium             3 trace elements in gonads. The lower
during successional regeneration of teeth.         concentrations of trace metals observed in
We have shown that both taste buds and             the ovary could be due to the almost
teeth emerge from the odonto-gustatory             continuous vitellogenic activity which could
band, a field of embryonic oral epithelium         transfer    contaminants    to    developing
equivalent to the odonteogenic band of             oocytes. Particularly high values of As and
mammals, and that the Sox2+ stem niches of         Hg were observed, exceeding the European
the      taste/tooth-junction     and      the     Regulatory limits, posing a potential risk for
successional lamina are derived from the           human        consumption.       The      high
odonto-gustatory      band.    We      provide     concentrations of metals found in tissues of
evidence for the shark test-bite or taste-bite.    G. melastomus may represent an issue of
We suggest that a novel collaboration              great concern, and stress the need for
between the generalized odontode gene              further investigations aimed at deepening
regulatory network and the taste bud gene          the knowledge on heavy metals dynamics in
regulatory network specifically in the             deep-water ecosystems.
oropharynx was key to the evolutionary
transformation between dermal odontodes            Bioaccumulation,   Galeus      melastomus,
(i.e. placoid scales) and oropharyngeal            Bycatch   species,    Arsenic,    Mercury,
odontodes (i.e. teeth). Differential gene          Embryogenesis
expression analyses preformed here with
microdissected sub-regions of recently
hatched shark dentition, including the
taste/tooth-junction     and     successional
lamina stem niches in addition to developing
early teeth, erupting late teeth, and taste
bud epithelium from the basihyal not
associated with teeth offers novel insights
into the molecular distinction between taste,
tooth, and dual-competent epithelia via the
discovery of shared and differentially
expressed genes.

Tooth regeneration, Dental stem cells, Taste
buds, Taste-bite, Skin denticles, Evolution


  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                83


Towards traceability systems for CITES-listed     Automated White Shark photo identification:
Manta rays and proposed Mobula rays               towards an international fin-printing database
                1, 2            2, 3                                 1                  2
Jane Hosegood , Fernando, D. , Humble,            Benjamin Hughes , Holmberg, J. , Van Oast,
  2              1           4           1          2               3                 1
E. , de Bruyn, M. , Ogden, R. , Creer, S. and     J. , Burghardt, T. , and Scholl, M.
             1
Carvalho, G.
                                                  1                              2          3
                                                  Save Our Seas Foundation, Wild Me, The
1
 Molecular Ecology and Fisheries Genetics         University of Bristol
Laboratory, Environment Centre Wales,
                   2                3
Bangor University, The Manta Trust, Blue          We present a fully automated photo
            4
Resources,   TRACE Wildlife Forensics             identification system for recognising the fins
Network.                                          of individual great White Sharks. To the best
                                                  of our knowledge, it is the first fully
Implementation of effective species level         automated contour-based animal biometrics
management strategies requires knowledge          system.
of species boundaries, while enforcement of
conservation regulations such as CITES            In order to recognise individuals, we
(Convention on the International Trade in         combine robust fin contour detection with a
Endangered Species) relies on robust              multi-scale         and        combinatorial
identification of species affected by wildlife    representation of fin shape. This enables
trade. Mobulid rays, comprising the two           individual sharks to be recognised efficiently
Manta and nine Mobula species, are under          and accurately, even when images are
pressure from fisheries supplying the             unclear or the view of the fin is partly
international demand for their gill plates. The   blocked.
genus Manta is currently listed on CITES
Appendix II, and a proposal to include            Overall, the photo identification system
Mobula is set to be considered at this year’s     demonstrates promising performance in
CoP. However, two broad issues potentially        recognising individuals with no need for
encumber monitoring and enforcement of            manual labelling and with an average
the current and any future regulations: (1)       compute time of one minute per image. On a
taxonomic ambiguities within the Mobulidae,       test-bed dataset representing 85 individuals,
and (2) challenges in identifying gill plates     up to 82 per cent of images are correctly
and other parts down to species level.            classified, with a further 10 per cent of
                                                  correct matches occurring within the top 10
Species boundaries within the Mobulidae           identities returned.
family are debated, with some evidence to
support synonymy of species, in addition to       The objective for the current phase of the
a possible description of new species.            project is to integrate photo identification
Furthermore, to date, genetic data                and online data management technologies
evaluating the species involved in the gill       to build a scalable and easy-to-use, multi-
plate trade is limited.                           user White Shark fin-printing database. We
                                                  report the progress that has been made on
This ongoing project is exploring the efficacy    this transition from our test-bed system and
of double digest Restriction Site Associated      outline the challenges that lie ahead.
DNA Sequencing (ddRAD) as a method of
delimiting Mobulid species, with the overall      Photo identification, Wildlife data
aim of producing a Global Mobulid Genetic         management
ID kit, to identify a sample down to species
and later, to population level. Here we
present a pilot library of Single Nucleotide
Polymorphism data including 10 of the 11
currently described species and discuss
experimental design for future libraries.




    th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                             84


Patterns of activity in benthic predators: what   A hidden world: parasites in deep-sea
skates get up to, when they think we’re not       elasmobranchs
watching
                                                  Wolf Isbert, Montero, F.E. and Pérez-del-
Nick Humphries, Simpson, S. and Sims, D.          Olmo, A.

The Marine Biological Association                 University of Valencia, Spain

Until the advent of electronic tags the           Even though in the last 20 years the
patterns of activity in free ranging benthic      exploration of the deep-sea benefited
marine predators, such as skates, remained        greatly from recent improvements in
largely unknown as a result of the difficulties   technologies there are still many unresolved
of observing these animals in the wild.           issues which applies also to many
However the timing and pattern of activity        elasmobranchs. Per definition the deep-sea
(and rest) has important ecological               starts below 200 meters depth and exhibits
consequences, as well as conservation             extreme conditions with usually low
implications relating to catchability. Here,      temperatures, high pressures, eternal
using depth time-series data from 89 skates       darkness and compared to shallow waters,
from 4 species (Raja brachyura, R. clavata, R.    food scarcity where deep-water organisms
microocellata and R. montagui) with a total       depend on the biomass which rains
of 12000 days of data we investigate fine         continuously from the productive surface
scale activity patterns determined from           into the deep. As predators elasmobranchs
vertical move step lengths. We find that          are important for the deep-sea food webs
activity in skates is more complex than           and owing to their often opportunistic
expected with significant variation both          feeding     behaviour      they   are   highly
between individuals and species. However,         susceptible to be infected by parasites. As
some clear trends and similarities emerge; in     factors governing the development of
particular we present the first evidence of       parasite communities within a fish host
optimal foraging and searching in skates.         depend on e.g. geographic distribution
Knowing the times of day when skates are          range, habitat use, host size and diet.
most active can be used to restrict fishing       Consequently parasite communities of a
efforts to other times in order to reduce the     same host species can vary considerably
likelihood of these threatened species being      between areas. Hence, the study of parasites
captured.                                         is of special interest to deal with certain
                                                  aspects in the biology and ecology of deep-
Benthic, Predators, Skates, Raja, Activity,       sea elasmobranchs and fin-fishes. Parasites
Patterns                                          can be used as indicators for anthropogenic
                                                  impacts (e.g. pollution, fisheries), and be
                                                  helpful in the implementation of protection
                                                  measures in vulnerable marine ecosystems
                                                  and their key species. Parasite habitats can
                                                  be as small as a thimble, which nevertheless
                                                  can harbour incredible high abundances and
                                                  biodiversity. Here we present some
                                                  highlights of this tiny hidden world and some
                                                  insights to explore the use of parasite
                                                  communities as a tool enhancing the
                                                  ecological knowledge of elasmobranchs
                                                  and their potential use for conservation
                                                  purposes.

                                                  Parasites, Elasmobranchs, Bio-indicators




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                85


Saved and released - successful hatching of        New record of Alopias superciliosus Lowe,
selected oviparous shark species with eggs         1841 in the Western Mediterranean
recovered from dead females
                                                   Luca Lanteri, Garibaldi, F. and Castellano, L.
Lydia Koehler and Nowell, G.D.
                                                   DISTAV – University of Genoa
Sharklab-Malta
                                                   On 9th September 2015 the head of a shark
We present a unique approach to shark              belonging to the genus Alopias, was landed
conservation – the collection of egg               at Camogli harbour in the Ligurian Sea
capsules obtained from dead female sharks,         (North    Western      Mediterranean).    The
hatching and raising them successfully to a        specimen has been caught 16 miles far from
viable size prior to release back into the wild.   the coast (44° 06’ N, 008° 57’ E) as by-catch
The two selected oviparous species,                of the mesopelagic longline swordfish
Scyliorhinus canicula and Scyliorhinus             fishery, but only the head was recovered,
stellaris, are regularly landed on the local       due to the predatory/scavenging activity by
market. The “recovery and release program”,        other shark specimens. The particular
which started 2012, has shown increasing           morphology of the head, with deep dorsal
success in the last 2 years in growing             horizontal groove on each side and the large
numbers of hatchings and releases. A               eyes vertical developed, allowed to
refined method on sensing the presence of          distinguish the species as A. superciliosus an
eggs in 2014 led to a significant increase (x2     highly    migratory      species   worldwide
(1) = 85.671, p< 0.001) in removed eggcases        distributed in tropical and temperate waters
from S. canicula. Egg capsules from S.             listed as “Vulnerable” species by the IUCN
stellaris were collected throughout the year,      Shark Specialist Group. The present record is
without any significant difference between         the northernmost reported for this species in
months (x2 (1) =0.271, p=0.603), similar           the Mediterranean area.
observations were made for S. canicula (x2
(1) =0.290, p=0.590), indicating that both         Alopias superciliosus, Ligurian Sea, North
species breed all year round. Over the past 4      Western Mediterranean, Bycatch
years, 689 eggcases have been collected
from the fish market, 141 S. stellaris and 548
S. canicula. A total number of 184 shark pups
have been released back into the Maltese
waters between March 2013 and March
2016, 147 in 2015 alone, with a number of
shark pups remaining at the aquarium
awaiting their release. The program led to an
“adopt-a-shark”      campaign     initiated   in
October 2014, which shows increasing public
interest with 25 adoptions in 2014 and 103 in
2015.

Scyliorhinus canicula, Scyliorhinus stellaris,
Reproduction, Elasmobranch, Conservation




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                             86


Taste, Teeth, and Trinity: RNA-Seq reveals       Becoming warm before big: regional
shared and unique gene expression profiles       endothermy as trigger for giantism in
between tooth and taste bud progenitors in       otodontids (Otodontidae; Lamniformes)
the shark Scyliorhinus canicula
                                                 Ferrón, H.G., Martínez-Pérez, C., Alba Martín-
Kyle Martin, Johanson, Z. and Fraser, G.         Lázaro and Botella, H.

University of Sheffield                          Palaeontology Area, University of Valencia

Sharks and other polyphyodont vertebrates        Otodontids include some of the largest
retain the crown gnathostome character of        macropredatory sharks that ever lived, being
continuous successional regeneration of oral     the     most       bizarre      case     Otodus
teeth. Why the capacity for successional         (Megaselachus) megalodon. The reasons
regeneration is maintained in some lineages,     underlying their giantism, distribution
but lost from others, is currently unknown.      patterns and extinction have been linked
We show that both taste buds and teeth           with climatic factors and the evolution,
emerge from the odontogustatory band             radiation and migrations of cetaceans during
(OGB), a field of sox2+ embryonic oral           the Paleogene. However, all these previous
epithelium equivalent to the odontogenic         interpretations have been based on the idea
band (OB) of tetrapods.              Later in    of otodontids as ectothermic sharks
development, we show that a compound             regardless of some ecological, energetic
and dynamic sox2+ stem cell population           and body size constraints that this implies.
connects the superficial taste-competent         This     work     proposes       that   regional
oral epithelium at the taste/tooth-junction      endothermy was present in otodontids and
(T/T-J) with the deep tooth-forming              some close related taxa (cretoxyrhinids),
successional lamina (SL) via cells migrating     playing an important role in the reach of
through the lingual margin of the middle         giantic sizes and allowing an active mode of
dental epithelium. We suggest that a novel       live. With this aim, it is provided evidence of
collaboration between the generalized            regional endothermy in these groups from
odontode gene regulatory network (GRN)           three different approaches: (1) testing the
shared by teeth and denticles - and the taste    degree of dependence of their body
bud GRN was key to the evolutionary co-          temperature on that of the surrounding
option of denticles into the mouth and their     water, analysing δ18O differences between
elaboration as teeth. In order to identify       teeth of cretoxyrhinids-otodontids and
candidate members of the GRN from teeth          associated ectotherms; (2) checking whether
or taste buds which participated in this co-     burst swimming speeds of cretoxyrhinids-
option event, we have produced a de novo         otodontids, estimated assuming ectothermy,
oral tissue transcriptome for the lesser         were fast enough for hunting successfully
spotted catshark Scyliorhinus canicula.          on their potential preys; and (3) assessing the
Differential gene expression analysis was        energetic viability of ectothermy in
carried out using RNA libraries produced         cretoxyrhinids, calculating whether their
from microdissected sub-regions of the           costs of swimming were long-term
shark dentition and oral epithelium,             sustainable by their metabolic budget. In
including the T/T-J and SL stem niches in        addition,    this    finding     has   different
addition to developing teeth and taste buds.     multidisciplinary implications, questioning
This revealed > 2000 differentially expressed    some previous Mesozoic paleotemperature
putative protein-coding genes (FC > 4, FDR <     estimates based partially on these taxa,
0.001) which could be further subdivided         entailing important changes on the pre-
into tooth-specific, taste-specific, or shared   existing hypothesis about the evolution of
clusters,    revealing    cryptic    molecular   regional endothermy in fishes and providing
similarities between tooth and taste tissue      key clues for understanding the evolution of
which may reveal how the GRNs of these           giantism in active macropredators.
separate micro-organs became linked.
                                                 Otodontidae,  Cretoxyrhinidae,     Regional
Evolution, Development, Teeth, Stem cells,       endothermy, Macropredators, Giantism
RNA-seq




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                              87


Philippines: a Megamouth hotspot                 Micropredator and parasites: an indicator for
                                                 the status of Angelsharks?
James Montgomery, Yaptinchay A.A., Enolva
N., Araujo G. and Ponzo, A.                      Filip Osaer
                                                               1, 2
                                                                      and Narváez K.
                                                                                       1, 2



Large Marine Vertebrates Research Institute      1
                                                  ELASMOCAN, Asociación Canaria para la
Philippines, Marine Wildlife Watch of the        Investigación y Conservación de los
Philippines, Department of Agriculture-                             2
                                                 Elasmobranquios, Fundación Colombiana
Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources-
Region V                                         para la Investigación y Conservación de
                                                 Tiburones y Rayas, SQUALUS
Megamouth sharks, Megachasma pelagios,
are a rare and elusive species found in          Recently,    novel      associations    were
epipelagic circumtropical waters around the      documented       from    parasites   and   a
globe. One of only three species of              micropredator with elasmobranchs in the
planktivorous sharks, its biology and ecology    Canary Islands, based on long-term
is unknown and only a few records exist          observations in their natural habitat.
worldwide.                                       Elasmobranchs sighted during underwater
                                                 searches in the Canary Islands since 2006
A live specimen was found in a net in Pio        were screened for the presence of
Duran, Sorsogon in the Philippines on            ectoparasites.      The     marine     leech
January 28 2015 and died shortly afterwards.     Stibarobdella macrothela and the isopod
The carcass was stored by the Bureau of          Aegapheles deshaysiana were regularly
Fisheries and Aquatic Resources- Region V,       observed taking blood meals from the
in a nearby freezing facility until a full       Angelshark Squatina squatina, while the
necropsy was performed on February 11.           marine leech Branchellion torpedinis was
Over one hundred detailed morphometric           rarely encountered while preying on S.
measurements were recorded and samples           squatina and the Marbled Electric Ray
collected and preserved for future analysis.     Torpedo marmorata. No noteworthy aspects
The animal was a mature male measuring           were observed in the attachment area, the
441.2cm TL and represents the fifteenth          behaviour, and the apparent fitness of the
report in the Philippines and only the sixty-    hosts and preys.
sixth encounter worldwide. Anatomical and
morphological data have been compiled            These findings not only provide useful
and compared within the Philippines and          information about biologic diversity and the
globally from stranding and fishery data and     relationship of marine leeches and an isopod
presented      here.   Results    show    that   with S. squatina and T. marmorata. They are
Megamouths are found predominantly in the        also relevant for the future conservation
Pacific Ocean favouring northerly latitudes,     management of the mentioned species,
where juveniles (16.2%) and adults (54.4%) are   although detrimental and beneficial effects
found mostly at latitudes between 30°S-30°N      on biodiversity and ecosystem health
and 40°S-40°N respectively. Accurate sizes       related to parasites are poorly understood.
range from 365.0cm to 549.0 cm in the
Philippines (176.7- 620.6cm worldwide) with      Squatina squatina, Aegapheles deshaysiana,
the majority being female. The Philippines       Branchellion    torpedinis,    Stibarobdella
represent a worldwide hotspot for this           macrothela, Isopod, Marine leech
species together with Japan and Taiwan that
had 18 and 11 specimens respectively.
Megamouth #66 is now preserved in
formalin and publicly displayed in Albay Park
and Wildlife, in Legazpi City, Sorsogon.

Megamouth, Philippines, Planktivores, Rare
shark, Necropsy




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                88


Hammerhead Shark Research: Knowledge               A Genetic Exploration in a Last Refuge: The
from the populations in the Canary Islands         Common Angelshark Squatina squatina in the
                                                   Canary Islands
           1,2                    1,2.
Filip Osaer      and Narváez K.
                                                                   1                 1                1,
                                                   Fitzpatrick, C.K. , Finnegan, K.A. , Bernard, A.
1                                                             2, 3,           2,3             1
 ELASMOCAN, Asociación Canaria para la             Filip Osaer Narváez, K. and Shivji, M.
Investigación y Conservación de los
                   2                               1
Elasmobranquios, Fundación Colombiana               Save Our Seas Shark Research Center and
para la Investigación y Conservación de            Guy Harvey Research Institute, Nova
                                                                                 2
Tiburones y Rayas, SQUALUS                         Southeastern    University,    ELASMOCAN
                                                   3
                                                     Fundación Colombiana para la Investigación
Hammerhead Shark Research is a project             y Conservación de Tiburones y Rayas,
that studies Sphyrna spp. in the Canary            SQUALUS
Islands with the aim to generate scientific
base knowledge that contributes to the             The Common Angelshark Squatina squatina
development      of    effective  species          has been extirpated from nearly the entirety
management strategies.                             of its historical eastern North Atlantic and
                                                   Mediterranean range and is listed as
This pioneering initiative, with funding from      ‘Critically Endangered’ by the IUCN Red List
Loro Parque Fundación and ElasmoCan,               of Threatened Species. Currently, only a
responds to the total lack of scientific           single known remnant population of any
information about hammerheads in the               abundance exists, occurring within the
Canarian Archipelago. Species knowledge in         waters surrounding the Canary Islands.
this region is limited to the presence of the      Nothing is known about the genetic
scalloped hammerhead shark S. lewini and           population dynamics of this species. To
the smooth hammerhead shark S. zygaena,            assess the Common Angelshark’s genetic
isolated records about behaviour and scant         connectivity and diversity, tissue samples (n
sighting reports by citizens in social media.      = 414) were collected between 2007-2016
                                                   from three separate islands within the
Tagging and tissue sampling will be                archipelago: Gran Canaria and Tenerife –
combined with biological and fisheries data        which are separated by a deep ocean
collection in 4 of the 7 islands to get insights   channel (~3000 m) which potentially serves
into the population dynamics of these              as a barrier to dispersal for this benthic
migratory species, to identify potential           species, and Lanzarote, located ~200 km
critical habitats and to see how species are       Northeast of Gran Canaria. To data, DNA
connected.        The      professional     and    sequences have been obtained from four
recreational communities are actively              mitochondrial loci [control region (CR) (n =
involved in the study and are, together with       280), cytochrome c oxidase subunit (COI) (n =
citizens, encouraged to report sightings of        30), NADH dehydrogenase subunit 4 (ND4) (n
tagged      individuals    or   report     other   = 40), and NADH subunit 2 (ND2) (n = 30)
information about the species that can lead        revealing exceptionally low genetic diversity
to effective decision making.                      across all regions, as identical haplotypes
                                                   were found in nearly all analysed individuals.
Cornudas, Sphyrna lewini, Sphyrna zygaena,         Additionally, next-generation sequencing
Tagging, Population dynamics, Citizen              has been used to develop a species-specific
collaboration                                      library for novel microsatellites and initial
                                                   screening of 41 markers found only 2 of
                                                   those markers show any evidence of
                                                   polymorphism across 32 individuals. Further
                                                   screening of loci on outgroup individuals and
                                                   complete mitochondrial genome sequencing is
                                                   ongoing. Such potentially low levels of genetic
                                                   diversity may have far reaching implications
                                                   for the persistence of this species and
                                                   ultimately     underscore      the    common
                                                   angelsharks’ highly vulnerable state.

                                                   Population genetics, Conservation, Endangered,
                                                   Mitochondrial DNA, Mitogenome, Microsatellites

    th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                            89


The gastronomy of sharks in south Spain and       Deathly impalement of a Blue Shark Prionace
the work of educational centres to teach          glauca by a Swordfish Xiphias gladius
people to protect sharks
                                                  Jaime Penadés-Suay, García-Salinas,        P.
Paco Pinto de la Rosa                             Tomás, J. and Aznar, F.J.

Museum Alborania Aula Del Mar                     In September, 2016, an adult female Blue
                                                  Shark Prionace glauca 247 cm long stranded
With this work we want to show how sharks         alive on the coast of Valencia (Spain,
are being caught using various fishing            Western Mediterranean) but died shortly
methods in southern Spain. We have a total        afterwards. The necropsy revealed ongoing
of 18 fishing ports in the region, with many      pregnancy, with 65 embryos in early stage of
fishing vessels catching elasmobranchs on a       development, and a healthy condition with
daily basis. Consequently, there are many         no signs of starvation. Two fishing hooks
species experiencing over-exploitation. We        surrounded by scarred tissue were detected
know elasmobranchs have a low fecundity,          in the mandible, indicating previous
slow growth and late sexual maturation, with      interaction with fisheries. In addition, a
many species in serious decline. We show          fragment of the tip of a Swordfish Xiphias
landings data for five fishing ports in           gladius rostrum (length: 18 cm long, width:
southern Spain, as well as total catch of         0.5 cm (distal) and 3 cm (proximal)) was
sharks during this year. We show how sharks       removed from the head. The fragment had
are sold fresh and frozen at markets, as well     pierced the head producing an incision of 3.5
as dried salted shark in restaurants. Around      cm close to the left eye, parallel to the
the world finning continues to be performed       dorsoventral plane, and oriented 30º with
to supply the traditional dish of shark fin       respect to the anteroposterior axis. The
soup. Similarly, tablets of shark cartilage are   fragment crossed the head anterior to the
sold, as well as teeth, jaws and even the         pre-orbital   process      without    causing
whole shark.                                      apparent damage to the olfactory capsule or
                                                  the eye, but penetrated both sides of the
Education, Protect, Sharks                        skull causing extensive lesions in the brain.
                                                  Brain damage was inferred to be the cause
                                                  of death. Allometric analysis suggested that
                                                  the Swordfish was ca. 130 cm long,
                                                  corresponding to a juvenile 1-2 yrs old.
                                                  Swordfish had previously been reported
                                                  driving their rostrum into pelagic sharks,
                                                  allegedly as a defensive strategy, but
                                                  impalement had never been recorded as the
                                                  direct cause of the death in these animals.




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                             90


Efficacy of Marine Protected Areas for shark     Fin Fighters: connecting investigation and our
and ray populations in The Philippines: are      citizen shark science program
they working?
                                                 Lou Ruddell
         1                   2              1
Ryan, M. , Segundo Jr., C. , Georgina, R. ,
           1                      1
Gonzalo, A. and Ponzo Alessandro.                Fin Fighters
1
Large Marine Vertebrates Research Institute      Globally, one of the main limitations to shark
            2
Philippines, Tubbataha Management Office         conservation is data black spots (regionally
                                                 and for specific species) due to a massive
Assessing the abundance and richness of          lack of scientific investment and difficulty in
species in marine protected areas (MPAs) is      acquiring specific samples.
crucial for determining their effectiveness in
conserving biodiversity. We used a non-          Vital science and policy work is currently
invasive survey method, Baited Remote            held back and vulnerable elasmobranch in
Underwater Video (BRUV), to determine the        areas of importance remain at risk.
efficacy of large no-take MPAs in conserving
shark and ray populations in the Philippines,    In a five year study, the Fin Fighters team
as part of a nationwide assessment               working together with volunteers and
supported by Global Fin Print. Between           researchers as part of a new UK Shark
January and June 2016, two MPAs were             Science     Committee,      are   collecting
chosen, Apo Reef Natural Park (ARNP) and         information and genetic data from fishing
Tubbataha Reefs Natural Park and World           ports/ markets in North Africa.
Heritage Site (TRNP) with designated nearby
non-protected control sites in Sablayan and      The results inform research on the impacts
in the Cagayancillo Island Group (CIG),          of shark/ray fishing in this region and
respectively. A total of 50 BRUV were            provide vital scientific samples for various
conducted in both ARNP and Sablayan.             studies on monitoring populations, sexual
ARNP showed significantly higher overall         selection and genetic health.
catch per unit effort (CPUE = 0.33) and
species richness (SR = 10) than Sablayan         In addition, results are the basis for
(CPUE = 0.007, SR = 2). A total of 100 BRUV      generating advisory management reports
surveys were conducted in both TRNP and          and constructing educational programs.
CIG. TRNP (CPUE = 1.03, SR = 14) showed          The Moroccan investigation is part of the
significantly higher overall CPUE but similar    larger Fin Fighters Citizen Shark Science
species richness than Cagayancillo (CPUE =       program – a solution based approach to
0.34, SR = 14). Results clearly show that        data black spots, that has the potential to
Marine Protected Areas are an indispensable      have global impacts through its rapidly
tool for the conservation of elasmobranchs.      growing volunteer participation network and
Moreover, data shows that the CPUE               expanding scientific involvement.
differed greatly between MPAs, underlining
the fundamental importance of proper             By collaborating with Phd's to train teams of
management and enforcement policies.             volunteers and fishermen to collect data; the
                                                 CSS project has become an efficient way to
The CPUE of different species in the four        not only collect much needed information,
areas also suggest that size and location of     but to also produce a number of vital
the protected area play an important role for    scientific papers as well as establish a
species specific conservation success.           network of highly trained volunteers.

Tubbataha Reefs Natural Park, BRUV, Global       Citizen science, Reports, Collaboration, Data,
Fin Print, Philippines, Apo Reef Natural Park,   Education
MPA




    th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                              91


Hook removal from a Bull Huss Scyliorhinus       Home range movements of the Southern
stellaris with a complete oesophagus             Stingray Dasyatis americana in a sub-tropical
perforation                                      island system (Bimini, Bahamas)

Lauren Smith, Matthews, C. and Cliff, A.         Fenella Wood, van Zinniq Bergmann, M.,
                                                 Samuel Gruber, S. and Guttridge, T.
Saltwater Life UK
                                                 Bimini Biological Field Station Foundation
Relatively few studies to date have
examined        recreational    hook-and-line    Southern Stingrays Dasyatis americana are a
capture in elasmobranchs. Those that have        data deficient species, yet occupy a
report physiological and physical injury due     keystone position in ecological communities
to hook retention as well as metabolic           as benthic mesopredators. Due to the
disturbances. This short communication           ecological and economic value of Southern
highlights     the    physiological   injuries   Stingrays it is important to gain a greater
sustained following hook ingestion by a          understanding of the influences driving
small shark and the procedures undertaken        movement patterns, spatial ecology and
to remove it, we believe this may be of          habitat preferences.
particular interest to those in the aquarium
industry that obtain exhibit animals caught      Passive acoustic telemetry was used to
by hook and line.                                determine home range size and quantify
                                                 movements of Southern Stingrays. Eleven
Scyliorhinus stellaris,   Hook   retention,      adults were caught via dipnet method and
Oesophagus perforation, Elasmobranch             acoustic   transmitters   were   surgically
                                                 implanted. All tagged females (n = 7) were
                                                 87-102 cm in disc width (DW), males (n = 4)
                                                 were 52-58 cm DW. Individuals were
                                                 monitored for up to 405 days around the
                                                 Bimini islands using 56 omnidirectional
                                                 hydrophones,     eight   of   which    had
                                                 temperature loggers.

                                                 Centre of activities were calculated per
                                                 individual using 12 hour time intervals.
                                                 Minimum Convex Polygons were created to
                                                 describe home range areas (mean 8862.37 ±
                                                 2248.78 m2). Kernel utilisation distributions
                                                 (KUD) were used to describe the utilisation
                                                 patterns of each home range, with the extent
                                                 of movement calculated by 95% KUD (mean
                                                 8142.94 ± 1213.97 m2) and core use areas by
                                                 50% KUD (mean 1236.47 ± 213.44 m2).

                                                 Sex, DW, time of year and temperature had
                                                 no significant effect on home range size
                                                 (p>0.05). However, there was significant
                                                 relationship between disc width and 50%
                                                 KUD when analysed by month.

                                                 This study contributes important basic
                                                 spatial ecological insight of Southern
                                                 Stingrays in a sub-tropical island system and
                                                 discusses potential influences, focusing on
                                                 sex, temperature and size.

                                                 Acoustic telemetry, Temperature influence,
                                                 Movement ecology, Dasyatis americana,
                                                 Southern Stingray, Home range


  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                       92




                                                            DELEGATE
                                                                 LIST




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                         93


DELEGATE             ORGANISATION                 EMAIL
Dr Stacy
BAEZ                 Pew Charitable Trusts        sbgez@pewtrusts.org
Adi
BARASH               Haifa University, Israel     adibarash@hotmail.com
Joanna               Zoological Society of
BARKER               London                       joanna.barker@zsl.org
Alexandre BARTOLI
VILLANOVA            Submon                       alexbartoli@submon.org
Rebecca
BATES                D'Overbroecks College        toadybates@gmail.com
Edgar Eduardo
BECERRIL-GARCIA      CICIMAR IPN                  bg.ragde@gmail.com
Victoria
BENDALL              CEFAS                        victoria.bendall@cefas.co.uk
Lucien
BESNARD              DRDH                         lucienbesnardo@hotmail.fr
Antonia
BIRCH                                             toniarox@hotmail.com
Christopher
BIRD                 University of Southampton    cb1g13@soton.ac.uk
Rose
BOARDMAN             Cardiff University           rosemiriamboardman@hotmail.co.uk
Ulrich
BÖSING               Biosci.Info                  u.boesing@fu-berlin.de
Cecile               Des Requins et des
BRIGAUDEAU           Hommes                       cecile@desrequinsetdeshommes.org
Chris                Merlin Animal Welfare and
BROWN                Development SEA LIFE         chris.brown@merlinentertainments.biz
Nadia
BRUYNDONCKX          SOSF                         nadia@saveourseas.com
Georgie
BULL                                              georgie.bull@outlook.com
Ian                  The Scottish Shark Tagging
BURRETT              Programme                    ian@ssacn.org
Helen                University of Waikato, New
CADWALLADER          Zealand                      helecad@gmail.com
Katharine            Plymouth University/Shark
CLAYTON              Trust Volunteer              katharine@sharktrust.org
Dr Rui
COELHO               APECE                        rpcoelho@ipma.pt
Tom
COLLINSON            Bristol University           tom-collinson@hotmail.co.uk
Tegan                Plymouth University/Shark
CONSOL               Trust Volunteer              tegan.consol@gmail.com
Paul
COX                  The Shark Trust              paul@sharktrust.org
Dr David             Zoological Society of
CURNICK              London                       david.curnick@zsl.org
Kairan
CURSONS              Cornwall College             k.cursons@hotmail.co.uk
Eleonora
DE SABATA            MedSharks                    ele@medsharks.org
Inês Isabel Gralho
Correia DE SOUSA     University of the Algarve    ynessousa@gmail.com
Felicie              Bimini Biological Field
DHELLEMMES           Station Foundation           felicie.dhellemmes@gmail.com

  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                          94


Aleksandra          WWF-NL University of
DRAGOZET            Amsterdam                    ally.dragozet@mail.utoronto.ca
Zofia               Pole To Pole 360 Shark
DRAPELLA            Project                      zofiadrapella@gmail.com
Manuel
DUREUIL             Dalhousie University         manuel.dureuil@dal.ca
Dr Jim
ELLIS               CEFAS                        jim.ellis@cefas.co.uk
Christina           Ludwig-Maximillians
FLAMMENSBECK        University Munich            christina.flammensbeck@gmx.net
Sonja               Shark Advocates
FORDHAM             International                sonja@sharkadvocates.org
Sarah
FOWLER              SOSF                         sarah@saveourseas.com
Dr Gareth
FRASER              University of Sheffield      g.fraser@sheffield.ac.uk
Mafalda             Marine Biology Station
FREITAS             Funchal                      mafalda.freitas@cm-funchal.pt
Georgia
FRENCH              University of Sussex         g.french@sussex.ac.uk
Dr Andrea
GAION               South Devon College          andrea.gaion@southdevon.ac.uk
Pablo GARCIA-
SALINAS             Universitat de València      garsapa@alumni.uv.es
Gordon
GILMOUR             Marine Dimensions            ggilmour26@gmail.com
Caitlin
GILMOUR             Cardiff University           caitlingilmour@hotmail.com
Dr Alexander
GODNECHT            Shark Foundation             shark@shark.ch
Cat
GORDON              The Shark Trust              cat@sharktrust.org
Sofia
GRACA ARANHA        UALg                         sofia_gacr@hotmail.com
Eleanor
GREENWAY            Bangor University Wales      egreenway57@hotmail.co.uk
Dr Dean             Florida State
GRUBBS              University/AES               dgrubbs@bio.fsu.edu
Jennifer
HARDY               LAMAVE                       jenny_hardy09@yahoo.com
Kanina              University of York/Manta
HARTY               Trust                        kanina@mantatrust.org
Dr Chris
HARVEY-CLARK        Dalhousie University         chrisharveyclark@gmail.com
Glenys
HEAFIELD            The Shark Trust              glenys@sharktrust.org
Farid
HEMIDA              ENSSMAL                      hemidafarid@yahoo.fr
Douglas             Marine Fish Information
HERDSON             Services                     douglas.herdson@btinternet.com
Stuart
HETHERINGTON        CEFAS                        stuart.hetherington@cefas.co.uk
Dr Michelle         Australian Institute Of
HEUPEL              Marine Science               m.heupel@aims.gov.au
Jean-Denis          Merlin Entertainments -
HIBBITT             Sealife                      jean-denis.hibbitt@merlinentertainments.biz
Ali
HOOD                The Shark Trust              ali@sharktrust.org

  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                        95


Samantha
HOOK                University Of Manchester     samantha.hook@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk
Jane                Bangor University/Manta
HOSEGOOD            Trust                        bsp420@bangor.ac.uk
Jordan Aria         University Of Otago,
HOUSIAUX            New Zealand                  jordanariahousiaux@hotmail.com
Dr Benjamin
HUGHES                                           ben@benjaminjhughes.co.uk
Dr Nick             Marine Biological
HUMPHRIES           Association                  nicmph@mba.ac.uk
Laura
HUSSEY                                           lhussey3@rvc.ac.uk
Wolf
ISBERT              University of Valencia       wisbert@gmx.net
Rima
JABADO              Gulf Elasmo Project          rimajabado@hotmail.com
David               Zoological Society of
JACOBY              London                       david.jacoby@ioz.ac.uk
Victoria
JEFFERS             Blue Ventures Conservation   victoria@blueventures.org
Oliver
JEWELL                                           oliverjewell@gmail.com
Dr David JIMENEZ    Ecoaqua/Angel Shark
ALVARADO            Project                      david.jimenezalvarado@gmail.com
Adam
JOHNSTONE           Plymouth University          adam.johnstone@postgrad.plymouth.ac.uk
Armelle
JUNG                DRDH France                  armelle@desrequinsetdeshommes.org
Dr Claudia
JUNGE               Hai Norge/Aqua TT            claudia.junge@hainorge.org
Irene               NEV/Dutch Elasmobranch
KINGMA              Society                      kingma@elasmobranch.nl
Lydia
KOEHLER             Sharklab-Malta               scientificofficer@sharklab-malta.org
Niklas
KOMOSS              Bremen University            n.komoss@hotmail.de
Dr Luca             University of
LANTERI             Genoa/DISTAV                 luca.lanteri@libero.it
Ellen
LAST                JNCC                         ellen.last@jncc.gov.uk
Michael
LATERVEER           Blue Linked BV               m.laterveer@bluelinked.nl
Julia               IUCN Shark Specialist
LAWSON              Group                        jlawson@gmail.com
James
LEA                 Danah Divers                 james@eatonlea.co.uk
Dr Tom              Zoological Society of
LETESSIER           London                       tom.letessier@ioz.ac.uk
Guido
LEURS               Wageningen University        guido.leurs@wur.nl
Jordan Chelsea
LOMAS               Cornwall College             jordanlomas@btinternet.com
Annabelle
LOWE                Newquay Sea Safaris          sharktoursnewquay@gmail.com
Chris
LOWE                Atlantic Diving              chris@atlanticdiver.co.uk
Dr Kyle
MARTIN              University of Sheffield      kyle.john.martin@gmail.com
  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                    96


Alba
MARTIN-LAZARO       Universitat de Valencia      almarla2@alumni.uv.es
Katherine
MASON               LAMAVE                       kitkatz@live.com
Pamela
MASON               Sharklab-Malta               pmason@go.net.mt
Emer
MCCOY               LAMAVE                       e.mccoy@lamave.org
Kirsty
MCGREGOR            DEFRA                        kirsty.mcgregor@defra.gsi.gov.uk
Andrew
MCLEISH             Biotrack                     andrewm@biotrack.co.uk
Laura               University of
MCLENNAN            Leicester/Derby              l.mclennan@derby.ac.uk
Eva                 Zoologisches Forschungs
MEYERS              museum/Angel Shark Project   e.k.m.meyers@gmail.com
Catriona            Marine Conservation
MILLAR              International                catrionamillar@hotmail.co.uk
Daniel
MONTGOMERY          Newcastle University         dw.montgomery@btinternet.com
James
MONTGOMERY          LAMAVE                       monty111191@hotmail.co.uk
Dr Alec             IUCN Shark Specialist
MOORE               Group                        amoore@rsk.co.uk
Michaela
MORAN                                            michaela_moran@hotmail.co.uk
Dr Emma-Louise      Horniman Museum &
NICHOLLS            Gardens                      enicholls@horniman.ac.uk
Julius
NIELSEN             University of Copenhagen     julius.nielsen@bio.ku.dk
Gregory
NOWELL              Sharklab-Malta               greg@sharklab-malta.org
Martin
OPENSHAW            Stardis                      martin@stardis.co.uk
Sheilah
OPENSHAW            Stardis                      sheilah@stardis.co.uk
Olivia
ORCHART             Bristol Aquarium             olivia.orchart@btinternet.com
Dr Rupert           Marine Conservation
ORMOND              International                rupert.ormond.mci@gmail.com
Dr Filip
OSAER               ElasmoCan                    filip@elasmocan.org
Andrea
PAULY               UNEP/CMS                     andrea.pauly@cms.int
Charlotte
PAYNE                                            cpayne1917@gmail.com
Jennifer
PEARCE              Imperial College London      j.l.p333@hotmail.co.uk
Emilie
PEARSON             Sealife Adventure            emilie.pearson101@gmail.com
Jaime
PENADES SUAY        Universitat De Valenica      jaime.penades@uv.es
Nicolas             Catholic University Of
PINTE               Louvain                      nicolas.pinte@uclouvain.be
Paco                Museum Alborania Aula del
PINTO DE LA ROSA    Mar                          pacopintoshark@yahoo.es
Linda               Dutch Elasmobranch
PLANTHOF            Society                      planthof@elasmobranch.nl

  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                       97


Dr Alessandro
PONZO               LAMAVE                       a.ponzo@lamave.org
Joshua
RAMBAHINIARISON     LAMAVE                       joshua.r@lamave.org
Eleanor
RICHARDS            Oceanarium                   tropicalshark@gmail.com
Kirsty              Zoological Society of
RICHARDS            London                       kirsty.richards@zsl.org
John
RICHARDSON          The Shark Trust              john@sharktrust.org
Cristina
RODRIGUEZ-          Spanish Institute of
CABELLO             Oceanography                 c.cabello@st.ieo.es
Toby
ROGERS                                           tobyrogers05@gmail.com
Dr Elizabeth
ROSS                Devon & Severn IFCA          office@devonandsevernifca.gov.uk
Lou
RUDDELL             FinFighters                  info@finfighters.org
Dr Natalie
SANDERS             Naturebureau                 natalie@naturebureau.co.uk
Glenn
SANT                TRAFFIC                      glenn.sant@traffic.org
Mette
SCHIØNNING          Jyllandsakvariet             mschionne@gmail.com
Michael
SCHOLL              SOSF                         michael@saveourseas.com
Dorien              Leiden University/Dutch
SCHRODER            Shark Society                dorienschroder@hotmail.com
Tammy
SCHUH               James Cook University        schuhtammy@gmail.com
Rowland
SHARP               Natural Resources Wales      rowland.sharp@naturalresourceswales.gov.uk
Prof Colin
SIMPFENDORFER       James Cook University        colin.simpfendorfer@jcu.edu.au
Samantha            Marine Biological
SIMPSON             Association                  samsim@mba.ac.uk
Prof David          Marine Biological
SIMS                Association                  dws@mba.ac.uk
Dr Lauren
SMITH               Saltwater Life UK            lauren.saltwaterlifeuk@gmail.com
Matilde
SORT                University of Denmark.       matildesort@gmail.com
Rob
STEWART             Sharkwater                   sharkwater@mac.com
Daniel
SUDDABY             WWF                          daniel.suddaby@wwf.panda.org
Dawn
THOMAS                                           dkthos22@hotmail.co.uk
Aris
THOMASBERGER                                     aris_thomasberger@posteo.de
Dr James
THORBURN            Marine Scotland              j.thorburn@gmx.co.uk
Paulo Goncalves
Miranda Agria       CIBIO/University of the
TORRES              Azores                       biol.paulo@gmail.com
Dr Charlie
UNDERWOOD           Birkbeck College             c.underwood@bbk.ac.uk

  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                 98


Monique             Delaugua/WWF
VAN DE WATER        Netherlands                  mwater@wwf.nl
Tom                 Lebniz Centre For Tropical
VIERUS              Marine Ecology (ZMT)         tom@vierus.de
Eduardo
VILLALOBOS
SEGURA              Birkbeck College             e_loboseg@yahoo.com
Dr Paddy            Dutch Elasmobranch
WALKER              Society                      walker@elasmobranch.nl
Angela
WARRIOR             LAMAVE                       angelawarrior27@gmail.com
David
WATKINS                                          marywatkins67@icloud.com
Dawn
WATSON              MBCC                         dawn-watson@hotmail.co.uk
Leilah              Chessington World Of
WEBB                Adventure                    leilah.webb@chessington.co.uk
Amie                The Scottish Shark Tagging
WILLIAMS            Programme                    amie.williams@ssacn.org
Fenella
WOOD                Cardiff University           fenella.wood@hotmail.co.uk
Heike               Squalus - Conservation &
ZIDOWITZ            Science                      heikezidowitz@web.de




  th
20 Annual Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association (2016)
                                                                                                                         20/10/2016 13:00:14
Bristol City Centre - walking map
1 - Bristol Temple Meads Train Station 2 - Bristol Aquarium 3 - Brasserie Blanc




                                                                                  map courtesy of Bristol City Council




                                                                                                                         inside back cover.indd 1
The Shark Trust                   www.eulasmo.org
4 Creykes Court, The Millfields
Plymouth, PL1 3JB, UK             www.sharktrust.org
