© Lill Haugen




                ABSTRACT
                ABSTRACT   BOOKLET
                         BOOKLET
Poster Presentation Abstracts
    Paul Abaut
Des Requins et Des Hommes

Eco-responsible research vessel : Parsifal

     1.   Lucas Zaccagninni; Des Requins et Des Hommes
     2.   Arthur Ory; Des Requins et Des Hommes
     3.   Armelle Jung; Des Requins et Des Hommes

Against a context of global change, the world is facing new challenges. This is the backdrop to our project to build an eco-
responsible research vessel called the Parsifal. For over 2 years, the members of our team have been renovating this boat with
the aim of making it an ambassador for sharks. The ultimate goal is to navigate all around the world using La Pérouse's route,
while carrying out a range of scientific studies. This boat will enable us to carry out a wide range of projects on sharks in remote
areas, focusing on conservation issues, studies and surveys in isolated areas for example. Shark diving, water sampling and
fisheries data collection will all be part of the programme. Our expeditions will be accompanied by scientific documentaries to
show the reality of shark science to people who are not involved in this field, thus highlighting the different players at sea. The
aim of this eco-responsible vessel is to play an active role in the study and conservation of sharks around the world. Various
scientists from all around the world, studying different aspects of sharks, will be presented and they will be invited to collaborate
with our work to carry out expeditions and take samples throughout the expeditions.

Keywords: Shark; Diving; eDNA; Expeditions; Eco-responsible vessel



    Harriet Allen
The Shark Trust

Monitoring the development of Nursehound Scyliorhinus stellaris (Linnaeus, 1758) (Chondrichthyes:
Scyliorhinidae) eggcases in-situ

     1.   Cat Gordon; The Shark Trust
     2.   Harriet Allen; The Shark Trust
     3.   John Hepburn; Mewstone Enterprises

The Nursehound Scyliorhinus stellaris (Linnaeus, 1758) is a medium-sized catshark that resides in the Northeast Atlantic and
Mediterranean Sea. It is classified as Vulnerable on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species (Near Threatened under the
European and Mediterranean assessments) and although distribution is patchy, they can be locally abundant.
This oviparous species occurs on the continental and insular shelf, generally inhabiting shallow coastal waters where they have
been documented depositing their eggs. The curled tendrils extending from the capsule are used to anchor the eggcase to a
substrate while the embryo develops over an incubation period of approximately 9 – 11 months.
A sheltered channel was discovered in south Devon (southwest England) where Nursehounds were consistently depositing
their eggs, usually attached to the algae Rainbow Wrack Ericaria selaginoides (Linnaeus) Molinari & Guiry, 2020. Accessible by
snorkelling on a low spring tide, this site has been visited on a regular basis (once to twice a month) since April 2014 to monitor
developing eggcases, assess the level of biofouling, and document freshly deposited eggcases. To date, 326 eggcases have
been recorded at this site (average 36 per year), with 159 having been seen consistently from deposition through to hatching,
others have been predated upon or have washed away during storms.
The goal of this citizen science project is to determine the average development period in order to gain further insight on the
species in the wild and gain a greater understanding of egg deposition in this species.

Keywords: Nursehound; oviparous; citizen science; development; eggcase




2
    Harriet Allen
The Shark Trust

20 years of citizen science - the Great Eggcase Hunt

     1.   Harriet Allen; The Shark Trust
     2.   Cat Gordon; The Shark Trust
     3.   Ali Hood; The Shark Trust

The Great Eggcase Hunt is a citizen science initiative that was established by the Shark Trust in 2003. Over the last 20 years,
the project has received ~25,000 submissions from ~13,000 participants, (although this figure represents far greater pool of
participants from group events) totalling over 440,000 eggcases from 46 oviparous elasmobranch species around the world.
Although the majority of data is from the British Isles, where the project was established, the Great Eggcase Hunt receives
submissions from around the world. Multiple identification guides have been created in collaboration with regional organisations
(i.e. Turkey, Portugal and Australia), along with development of a citizen science mobile app.
Analysis of this dataset can be used to pick out temporal and seasonal patterns: It can allow hotpots for eggcases to be
identified – signifying potential egglaying grounds - as well as highlighting locations that are lacking in records and may require
more searching effort. Data submitted from regular reporters allow for a finer scale understanding of seasonality of eggcase
finds, with regular reporters spread across the UK allowing comparison. Data from the Great Eggcase Hunt has led to an
improved understanding of eggcase morphology (e.g., the Common Skate complex) and can even be used to help identify
possible spawning grounds.
As well as species-specific data, a dataset of this size provides a valuable insight into citizen science engagement, including
the growth of the project in terms of both numbers (of participants and eggcase finds) and spread of engagement, along with
the seasonality of reporting.

Keywords: citizen science; eggcase; oviparous; long term data; public engagement



    Josef W. Amin
University of Exeter; Hellenic Agricultural Organization-DIMITRA

Biting off more than we can chew: DNA barcoding reveals patterns of species utilisation, threatened
species and mislabelling in shark products across Europe
     1.   Josef W. Amin
     2.   Andrew M. Griffiths
     3.   Chrysoula Gubili

The global shark trade plays a major role in the exploitation of shark populations. Multiple studies have uncovered fraud in
European shark meat markets, including sales of prohibited and threatened species, and high levels of mislabelling. However,
to date, few have assessed large-scale patterns across multiple countries. Combining samples collected by citizen science
projects and NGOs with data from a systematic meta-analysis, this study investigated a total of 792 shark products identified
using DNA barcoding, across ten countries: Greece, Italy, UK, Spain, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Portugal, Austria and
Iceland; and four retailer types: fish markets, fishmongers, processed products and supermarkets. The blue shark (Prionace
glauca), listed as critically endangered in the Mediterranean, was the most identified species in the study, especially among
Mediterranean countries. Furthermore, the results indicate significant differences in species utilisation across countries,
potentially influenced by geographic proximity to different fisheries. Worryingly, vulnerable species were found on sale in all
countries and retailer types in the study. Mislabelling rates were relatively high (32.4%), potentially driven by the opportunistic
use of threatened species from bycatch. Overall, the study highlights the need for improved implementation of management
and labelling legislation to enable more informed consumer choices and to reduce the overexploitation of shark populations.

Key words: shark meat, DNA barcoding, EU legislation, mislabelling, consumer patterns




    Martina Arpaia
Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn - National Institute of Marine Biology, Ecology and Biotechnology, Italy;
University of Calabria, Italy

Stakeholder engagement as key tool for elasmobranch conservation in the Mediterranean Sea
     1.   Martina Arpaia
     2.   Ilaria Di Lauro
     3.   Mauro Sinopoli
     4.   Sandra Hochscheid
     5.   Fulvio Maffucci
     6.   Andrea Affuso
     7.   Pieraugusto Panzalis
     8.   Bruna Valettini
     9.   Sara Bonanomi


1
     10.   Roberta Teti
     11.   Emilio Sperone
     12.   Diego Mattioli
     13.   Federica Barbera
     14.   Massimiliano Bottaro

In the Mediterranean Sea, more than 40% of the assessed chondrichthyan species are considered threatened.

In addition, there are two other complexity factors that make the conservation challenge more difficult and increase the risk of
extinction of cartilaginous fishes: 1) elasmobranchs pass through multiple jurisdictions with different fishery and environmental
regulations; 2) sharks and their relatives also have different social and economic considerations, serving in some cases as
subsistence for communities.

In this controversial scenario, where common environmental policy actions are really difficult, marine stakeholders can play a key
role to start a concrete conservation of marine biodiversity, especially for organisms still considered dangerous, like sharks and
their relatives.

The LIFE ELIFE project (LIFE18 NAT/IT/000846), co-funded by the EU LIFE programme, includes two conservation actions
focused on the awareness and the engagememt of citizens and stakeholders, in order to increase their attention on the great
vulnerability of these animals.

In this framework, here we report four recent best practice events for the conservation of elasmobranchs, carried out by common
citizens and professional fishers, allowing the survival of 2 manta rays (Mobula mobular), one blue shark (Prionace glauca) and
one angel shark (Squatina sp.).

The success of these initiatives was based on the strong voluntary collaboration among several actors (citizens, scientists, fishers,
authorities, MPAs) and it highlights how their engagement can be the real key tool to carry out concrete actions aimed to
elasmobranch conservation in the Mediterranean Sea, anticipating common political steps.



    George Balchin
Sussex Inshore Fisheries and Conservation Authority

Sussex IFCA Elasmobranch Code of Conduct

     1.    Dr George Balchin
     2.    Nick Rogers
     3.    Erin Lawes

Many species of elasmobranchs are overfished, and populations have declined substantially, both internationally and within UK
waters, including in Sussex. Research indicates that the majority of elasmobranchs landed in trawl fisheries in the English
Channel are below their L50, and therefore likely before they have reproduced. This suggests size-based management, which
aims to increase the proportion of individuals that are harvested post-reproductive age therefore increasing recruitment and
population growth, is appropriate in Sussex.

The conservation challenges faced by elasmobranchs include their tendency to be caught as bycatch, however commercial
fishers are constrained by quota restrictions on skate and ray species (certain species are aggregated into a single term
‘Skates and Rays). Recreational fishers are not always subject to the same restrictions as commercial fishers and are more
likely to be receptive to voluntary measures. Therefore, to promote sustainable fishing practices amongst local anglers, Sussex
Inshore Fisheries and Conservation Authority (IFCA) developed a voluntary code of conduct that details recommended
minimum landing sizes, a welfare guide, and a concise location-specific ID guide. It is also intended to help commercial fishers
engage in more conservation-orientated behaviours regarding how elasmobranch bycatch is processed.

Minimum sizes were selected based on a literature review used to calculate the average size at which 50% of the population
has reached sexual maturity (L50), and the most threatened and least protected species were considered priorities for inclusion
in the code of conduct. Sussex IFCA plan to publish this code of conduct alongside confirmation of broader sized based
management within the district.

Key words: Voluntary fisheries management, Sussex, MLS, L50



   Matteo Barbato
Department of Biology- University of Padova; National Biodiversity Future Center (NFBC)

Multidisciplinary approach to study the interaction and survival of pelagic shark in recreational fisheries
in the Northern Adriatic Sea

     1.    Jacopo, Bernardi; Department of Biology - University of Padova




2
     2.   Luca, Bolognini; National Research Council, Institute for Marine Biological Resources and Biotechnology (CNR-
          IRBIM); National Biodiversity Future Center (NFBC)
     3.   Francesco, Garzon; Hatherly Laboratories, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, Devon,
          United Kingdom
     4.   Lucy A. Hawkes; Hatherly Laboratories, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, Devon,
          United Kingdom
     5.   Matthew J. Witt; Hatherly Laboratories, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, Devon,
          United Kingdom
     6.   Carlotta, Mazzoldi; CoNISMa, National Inter-University Consortium for Marine Sciences, Department of Biology -
          University of Padova;National Biodiversity Future Center (NFBC)


Recreational fisheries in the Northern Adriatic Sea consist of a range of fishing techniques targeting several species (Pranovi et
al., 2016). Drifting is one of the most commnly used methods, employed especially for catch and release (C&R) fishing of
Atlantic bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus).The fishery is also known to accidentally catch pelagic shark species, though the
species composition, seasonality, and potential impact of the fishery on the shark assemblage in the region is poorly
understood. In the last four years, logbook data was collected in collaboration with nearly 20 drifting fishers to assess the by-
catch rate and area of occurrence of three neritic sharks. Among these species, the blue shark (Prionace glauca) is the most
frequently caught, followed by the common thresher shark (Alopias vulpinus) and the sandbar shark (Carcharhinus plumbeus).
Questionnaires were also used to gather local ecological knowledge (LEK) regarding the by-catch rate, area of seasonal
occurrence, age composition, and post-release survival perception for the three species. Finally, post-release survival of these
species is being assessed through the deployment of a combination of conventional (spaghetti tag), acoustic (sentinel array of
18 VR2tX receivers and V13 transmitters by Innovasea) and satellite (sPAT) tagging. This multidisciplinary approach has the
potential to contribute to closing the knowledge gap on the movement ecology of these species in the Northern Adriatic Sea,
while also helping to quantify the potential impact of drifting fishing on shark populations.

Keywords: Recreational fishery; Movement ecology; Neritic shark; Conservation;



     Ewan Camplisson
Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK

Metabolic enzyme activity in Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus) tissue at varying temperatures
and age.
     1.
          Ewan Camplisson
     2.   Daniela Felix
     3.
          Dr Neal Dawson
     4.   Dr Gina Galli
     5.
          Professor John Fleng Steffensen
     6.   Professor Peter Bushnell
     7.
          Dr Daniel Brayson
     8.   Professor Holly Shiels

The Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus) is the longest living vertebrate with a lifespan of multiple centuries. We
investigated the activity of metabolic enzymes related to fatty acid oxidation and anaerobic metabolism in animals 200–434cm
in length (~age range of 60-200 years) to determine variation with age. We investigated red muscle (RM; n=23) and liver
(n=13). Enzyme assays were run in triplicate at two temperatures, 21oC and ∼5oC (mean±SEM). Lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) activity saw no variation with age and was higher in RM when measured under cold conditions (32.08 ± 3.1U/g tissue) in
comparison to warm conditions (10.48 ± 0.74U/g tissue). A similar temperature trend was seen in liver tissue with LDH assayed
at cold temperatures (17.89 ± 1.83U/g tissue/min) being greater than warm temperatures (3.54 ± 0.91U/g tissue). Higher LDH
activity under colder conditions may suggests cold-water adaptations to bolster LDH activity in Greenland sharks, as seen in
some polar fish. 3-Hydroxyacyl CoA dehydrogenase (HOAD) showed no significant variation between cold (4.47 ± 0.68U/g
tissue) and warm (6.25 ± 1.42U/g tissue) assays in the liver of sharks. HOAD activity in RM was lower under cold (3.95 ±
0.47U/g tissue) than in warm assays (13.65 ± 1.68U/g tissue). Greenland shark HOAD activity has an opposing trend to
temperate sharks, which in past literature shows greater HOAD activity in the liver than RM. We have shown that Greenland
shark metabolism displays unique specialisations in comparison to other elasmobranchs and shows possible enzymatic
adaptations to polar environments, which may be associated with their remarkable longevity.

Keywords: Metabolism, enzymes, polar, aging, shark




    Martina Ciprian
iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of the Aquatic Ecosystems

What do you want for dinner? Sharks and Rays’ diets in Amvrakikos Gulf (Greece).

     1.   Martina, Ciprian; iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of the Aquatic Ecosystems.


3
     2.  Gianluca, Pennetta; Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Polytechnic University of Marche, Via Brecce
         Bianche, Ancona, Italy.
     3. Ioannis, Giovos; iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of the Aquatic Ecosystems; Department of
         Fisheries and Aquaculture, University of Patras, 30200 Messolonghi, Greece; Department of Biology, University of
         Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35121 Padova, Italy.
     4. Vasilis, Minasidis; Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture, University of Patras, 30200 Messolonghi, Greece.
     5. Roxani, Naasan Aga-Spyridopoulou; iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of the Aquatic
         Ecosystems.
     6. Aristide, Papale; Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University of Catania, 95124
         Catania, Italy.
     7. Georgios, Rallis; iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of the Aquatic Ecosystems.
     8. Max, Sondermann; Department of Environmental Engineering, RWTH Aachen University, Templergraben 55, 52062
         Aachen, Germany.
     9. Francesco, Tiralongo; Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University of Catania,
         95124 Catania, Italy; Ente Fauna Marina Mediterranea, Scientific Organisation for Research and Conservation of
         Marine Biodiversity, 96012 Avola, Italy.
     10. Emanuela, Fanelli; Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Polytechnic University of Marche, Via Brecce
         Bianche, Ancona, Italy.
     11. Carlotta, Mazzoldi; Department of Biology, University of Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35121 Padova, Italy.
     12. Dimitrios K., Moutopoulos; Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture, University of Patras, 30200 Messolonghi,
         Greece.

Stomach content analysis provides insights into elasmobranchs feeding patterns, food habits, and ecological role. Moreover, it
is fundamental in the development of ecosystem-based management approaches.
This study is using stomach content analysis to understand the feeding ecology of demersal elasmobranchs, in particular 6 rays
and 1 shark. The study area, the Amvrakikos Gulf, is a semi-enclosed embayment of approximately 400 km2 located in the
north-western Greece, characterised by shallow waters, muddy bottom, high freshwater influx and seasonal hypoxia and
anoxia. Only small-scale fishery is operating within the Gulf. In the contest of the By ElasmoCatch Project, a total of 293
stomachs were collected from dead individuals, either bycaught or targeted by the fishing activities. From 2022 up to now
stomach contents of 37 Aetomylaeus bovinus, 146 Dasyatis spp., 37 Gymnura altavela, 36 Mustelus mustelus, 7 Myliobatis
aquila and 30 Torpedo torpedo have been analysed. Specifically, we are investigating: (i) species-specific diet preferences; (ii)
degree of diet overlap among species; (iii) size and sex-related variability in diet. All preys were identified to the lowest
taxonomical level possible. Decapoda, Bivalvia and Clupeidae constituted the main prey items recorded in the stomachs.
Future studies will include metabarcoding of stomach contents of elasmobranchs with non-invasive methods (e.g., anal swabs)
to integrate data coming from stable isotope analyses (biopsies) and traditional stomach content analysis. In addition, higher
sample size is needed to further investigate changes in diets and the spatial coverage of the feeding grounds inside the
Amvrakikos Gulf.

Keywords: Diet composition; Stomach contents; Demersal species; Amvrakikos Gulf;



    Martina Ciprian
iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of the Aquatic Ecosystems

Solving the riddle: insights on species-specific identification for individuals of the family Dasyatidae.

     1.   Martina, Ciprian; iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of the Aquatic Ecosystems.
     2.   Lena, Varvarou; Department of Agriculture, Ichthyology and Aquatic Environment, 38221 Volos, Greece.
     3.   Ioannis, Giovos; iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of Aquatic Ecosystems, 54645 Thessaloniki,
          Greece; Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture, University of Patras, 30200 Messolonghi, Greece; Department of
          Biology, University of Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35121 Padova, Italy.
     4.   Vasilis, Minasidis; Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture, University of Patras, 30200 Messolonghi, Greece.
     5.   Roxani, Naasan Aga-Spyridopoulou; iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of Aquatic Ecosystems,
          54645 Thessaloniki, Greece.
     6.   Georgios, Rallis; iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of Aquatic Ecosystems, 54645 Thessaloniki,
          Greece.
     7.   Carlotta, Mazzoldi; Department of Biology, University of Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35121 Padova, Italy.
     8.   Dimitrios K., Moutopoulos Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture, University of Patras, 30200 Messolonghi,
          Greece.

Species-specific identification is of fundamental importance in determining the quantitative composition of bycatch and
associated mortality. Biological and ecological knowledge is mostly needed at the species level to build effective management
strategies that can improve the poor conservation status of Chondrichthyes in the Mediterranean Sea.
Within the several species of the family Dasyatidae, some are characterised by similar morphological traits, especially in the
juvenile stages. For example, Dasyatis tortonesei has been only recently recognised as different in respect to Dasyatis
pastinaca, based on some differences in colours, morphology, and teeth.
Among the stingrays which are commonly bycaught by the small-scale fishery in Amvrakikos Gulf (Greece), there are
individuals of the family Dasyatidae, in particular 3 species: Bathytoshia lata, D. pastinaca and D. tortonesei. The aim of this
study is to find practical identification keys to classify every specimen at the species level, solving ambiguities in the whole


4
Mediterranean Sea. A total of 310 samples were collected from February 2022 until now. One or two photos (dorsally and
ventrally) were taken respectively in alive (N = 126) and dead animals (N = 184). Morphometric measures were obtained
through ImageJ Software. Moreover, in dead animals, DNA samples were collected to compare morphometry to genetic
identification.
The correct taxonomic identification of the specimens will allow us to better understand the degree of bycatch for each species,
as well as clarify their vulnerability status, with the final aim to ensure their conservation in the study area, as well as in the
Mediterranean Sea.

Keywords: Dasyatidae; Species-specific identification; Amvrakikos Gulf



   Simona Clò
MedSharks

Documenting a unknown Nearshore aggregation area for the Blackchin Guitarfish Glaucostegus
cemiculus in Turkey

          1.   Simona, Clò, MedSharks.
          2.   2 Eleonora de Sabata, MedSharks

In 2005 a guitarfish aggregations in shallow waters was documented in a small bay on the Turkish Aegean coast, Eastern
Mediterranean sea. Visual surveys were conducted, which allowed the documentation of guitarfish presence, estimated total
length 150-170cm, and which was not available from data based on fishery catches. The census took place during 2005 and
2006, and the presence of sharks has been reconfirmed in 2023.
The identification of aggregation areas plays a crucial role in the conservation of species such as the black guitarfish, which
was historically common throughout the Mediterranean Sea but has now disappeared from the northern parts of its range.
Available data suggest that the black guitarfish has suffered a population decline of >80% in the last three generations (45
years) and is considered critically endangered.

Keywords: Guitarfish; Aggregation area; Mediterranean Sea



   Simona Clò
MedSharks

EU Sharks LIFE

     1.   Simona, Clò, MedSharks.
     2.   Eleonora, de Sabata, MedSharks.
     3.   Alen, Soldo, University of Split.
     4.   Antonio, Terlizzi, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn.

LIFE EUSharks (LIFE22-GIE-IT-101114031), is a Project funded by the European Commission's LIFE programme, and for the
next 4 years, it will actively engage European citizens and marine stakeholders in a common effort to preserve sharks and rays
in Italy, France, Croatia, Spain and Slovenia (i.e. in the Mediterranean subregions where has been recorded the largest decline
of elasmobranchs). LIFE EUSharks aims to identify behavioural changes, rather than technical ones, to reduce the
anthropogenic impact on biodiversity: it will remove the knowledge barriers that hinder the implementation of the EU regulations
designed to protect sharks, and it will promote active stakeholder and citizen engagement: EUSharks will give strength to
sustainable commercial and recreational fishing and local seafood consumption. Moreover, it will increase the stakeholders and
public’s understanding of the essential role of these charismatic and endangered species in the Mediterranean ecosystems.
The project's strategy is to address the Mediterranean elasmobranch decline with a participatory approach, promoting
behavioural change and fostering co-responsibility as key drivers. It will initiate and strengthen institutional and professional
relationships and will ensure the engagement of all actors in supporting best practices beyond the project’s lifetime. The
Partnership includes 1 research institute (Stazione Zoologica “Anton Dohrn” as the Coordinator), the Italian Coast Guard, 1
MPA (Cap Corse), 2 Universities (University of Florence and Split), 2 fisheries operators (Shoreline and Centro Controllo
Distrettuale Consortile), the Leghorn Aquarium, 1 shark-related NGO (MedSharks association) and 1 company that operates in
the environmental and wildlife sector (D.R.E.Am. Italia).

Keywords: Sharks; Mediterranean sea; citizen science; Goverance



    Noémie Coulon
Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA) MNHN, CNRS, IRD, SU, UCN,
UA, 38 Rue du Port Blanc , Dinard, France

Bringing up baby: shark young life stages and our warming oceans


5
     1.   Noémie, Coulon, Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA) MNHN, CNRS, IRD,
          SU, UCN, UA, 38 Rue du Port Blanc , Dinard, France
     2.   Stanislas, Pilet, Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA) MNHN, CNRS, IRD,
          SU, UCN, UA, 38 Rue du Port Blanc , Dinard, France
     3.   Thomas, Lacoue-Labarthe, Littoral, Environnement et Sociétés (LIENSs), UMR 7266, CNRS-Université de La
          Rochelle, 2 rue Olympe de Gouges, La Rochelle, France
     4.   Anthony, Sturbois, VivArmor Nature, Réserve Naturelle Nationale de la Baie de Saint-Brieuc; LEMAR; Réserve
          naturelle nationale de la Baie de Saint-Brieuc, France
     5.   Aurèle, Toussaint, Institute of Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Tartu, J. Liivi 2, 50409 Tartu, Estonia.
     6.   Anne, Lizé, Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA) MNHN, CNRS, IRD, SU,
          UCN, UA, 38 Rue du Port Blanc , Dinard, France
     7.   Eric, Feunteun, Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA) MNHN, CNRS, IRD,
          SU, UCN, UA, 38 Rue du Port Blanc , Dinard, France
     8.   Alexandre, Carpentier, Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA) MNHN,
          CNRS, IRD, SU, UCN, UA, Université de Rennes, Rennes, France

While climate change is predicted to have unprecedented impacts on marine fish biological organization, the responses of
elasmobranchs have rarely been studied, despite the threat it may add to direct anthropogenic pressures such as overfishing
and habitat degradation. Here, we assessed the impact of warming and acidification under the climate scenarios SSP2: Middle
of the road and SSP5: Fossil-fueled Development (Taking the Highway) for the 21st century on the growth, survival and
metabolism of embryos and juveniles of a model species for the Northeast Atlantic: the Small-spotted Catshark (Scyliorhinus
canicula). Specifically, as physiological processes are limited by a precise thermal range, we used for the first time monthly
temperature variations rather than an annual average. This experimental set-up revealed the high vulnerability of embryos to
extreme summer temperatures, with hatching success ranging from 82% for the control and SSP2-4.5 treatment to only 15%
for th
e SSP5-8.5 treatment. More specifically, growth trajectories revealed that SSP2-4.5 and SSP5-8.5 embryos progressively
diverged from control embryos, but that only SSP2-4.5 embryos managed to reduce this gap, with SSP5-8.5 embryos dying in
their 5th stage of development. Embryos with the lowest hatching success were distinguished by lower yolk consumption rates,
lower growth rates and higher energy demands. Within 6 months after hatching, we did not observe any additional mortality, but
we detected a higher growth rate in SSP5-8.5 juveniles. Ultimately, we estimated that an intermediate scenario for the 21st
century could lead to a survival rate of young life stages similar to the current rate, while a fossil fuel-based development
scenario could lead to a disruption of population dynamics due to very high embryonic mortality.

Keywords: climate change; sharks; embryo



     Simon Dedman
Florida International University

Movegroup: an R package to calculate and visualise space use and home range for groups of animals

Calculating home ranges is a common task for spatial analysis of sharks, typically producing contours containing 50 and 95%
of their space use, which can inform MPA selection and reveal habitat preferences. Improving on the original Minimum Convex
Polygon approach, the kernel utilization distribution (KUD) approach added the intensity of subarea use, which was itself
bettered by the Brownian bridge movement model (BBMM) approach, which models movements between subsequent
relocations explicitly, translating animal movement speed into between-point variance. Dynamic Brownian bridge movement
models (dBBMM) refine this further by allowing this variance (spatial error) to change along a movement trajectory, improving
performance, especially for irregular tracks (e.g. satellite tag data).

dBBMM space use can be calculated for a single animal using the move package, however this is unsuitable for multiple
individuals, for a few reasons. Firstly, it requires a continuous chronological record, but multiple individuals will likely overlap in
time. Second, individuals’ data are typically unequal in space and time: some tags stay on longer, some individuals travel
further. These sampling imbalances would invalidate group-level space-use calculations. Movegroup allows multiple
individuals, using scaling to ensure biologically accurate results, and unbalanced receiver arrays can be easily accommodated.
Movegroup automates the typical workflow, scaling and reprojecting multiple tracks to the same projection and extent, plotting
rich output maps, and saving space use and variance calculations. The package is well documented, and is available on
GitHub now, and CRAN soon.

Keywords: Home range; space use; dBBMM; KUD; movement




    Peter Delaroche
The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom

Fishing Metallomic Signatures of Extreme Longevity in the Greenland shark
     1.   Pierre Delaroche


6
     2.   Christian Pinali
     3.   Sasha Philbert
     4.   Stephanie Church
     5.   Garth Cooper
     6.   John Fleng Steffensen
     7.   Peter Bushnell
     8.   Diego Bernal
     9.   Holly Shiels

Most metallomics studies focusing on non-model organisms have interpreted metal accumulation within the scope of ecology,
but recent evidence suggests that the metallome can also inform us about other biological aspects of wild species. Metallomics
in relation to physiology is an emerging approach, which enables tissue metal concentrations to be linked to biological
processes, such as ageing. Using inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), we examined the metallomes of
the heart ventricle, heart atrium, red muscle, white muscle, spleen, and liver in the world’s longest-lived vertebrate, the
Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus). As previous studies have shown, we confirm tissue-specific elemental
concentration patterns, and we propose that these differences reflect tissue function. Across tissues, age-dependent metallomic
changes involved a few essential (Ca, Fe, Na, Se, and Zn) and non-essential elements (As, Cd, and Pb). However, bivariate
analysis suggested that these age-associated changes could relate to interactions between essential elements and the
accumulation of heavy metals (especially Pb) rather than an effect of ageing per se. Then, we compared the heart metallome of
the Greenland shark with that of other shorter-lived vertebrate species. We found that heart concentrations of essential
elements (Cu, K, Fe, Mg, Mn, and Mo), especially Cu, and Fe levels were lower in the Greenland shark relative to mouse,
sheep, human, and the small-spotted catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula), which is interesting as these elements are known to be
more concentrated in senescent cells, and might also correlate with metabolic rate. In contrast, cardiac Se and As levels were
higher in the Greenland shark compared with the other vertebrates, perhaps suggesting enhanced antioxidative capabilities.
Together, these data indicate that the metallomic landscape of the Greenland shark is subjected to only minor changes with
age, and that its longevity may benefit from properties associated with mitochondrial function.

Keywords: Metallomics; ICP-MS; Ageing; Longevity; Greenland shark



    Ilaria Di Lauro
Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn - National Institute of Marine Biology, Ecology and Biotechnology, Italy

A field lab for concrete management and conservation of elasmobranchs in the Mediterranean Sea: the
Marine Protected Area of Egadi Islands
     1.  Ilaria Di Lauro
     2.
         Mauro Sinopoli
     3.
         Maria Rita Amico
     4.
         Martina Arpaia
     5. Noemi Gargano
     6.
         Lea J. Magnifico
     7.
         Floriana Trova
     8.
         Andrea Li Vorsi
     9.
         Manfredi Madia
     10.
         Michele Gristina
     11.
         Salvatore Livreri Console
     12.
         Ilaria Rinaudo
     13.
         Sara Bonanomi
     14.
         Emilio Riginella
     15.
         Emilio Sperone
     16. Massimiliano Bottaro

Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) can significantly contribute to the conservation of marine ecosystem by safeguarding habitats,
reducing fishing pressure, promoting population recovery, supporting scientific research, raising public awareness, generating
economic benefits and fostering collaboration among various stakeholders.

Despite their relevance, the benefits that MPAs can bring for sharks and their relatives is still debated and little known, mainly in
the Mediterranean Sea.

Since 2021, a multidisciplanary monitoring programme on elasmobranchs in the largest MPA of the Mediterranean basin, located
in the Egadi islands, has recorded the catch of 200 elasmobranchs of 5 different species. Adult sharks of genus Mustelus are the
most abundant catch: they are regularly landed, representing a remarkable local economic resource.

On the contrary, several releases carried out by fishers of juveniles of Mustelus mustelus, Mustelus punctulatus and Myliobatis
aquila were also recorded.

Interviews based on a focused LEK (Local Ecological Knownledge) protocol were also conducted with local fishers with more
than 25 years of professional experience, which revealed a permanent presence of elasmobranchs in the area, constant in
species composition and with no remarkable decrease.



7
Our preliminary results show that a strong collaboration, dialogue and trust among different stakeholders (officers, fishers,
authorities, scientists) in a MPA can also provide good management and conservation for elasmobranchs, with direct
environmental and socio-economic benefits. In this framework, MPAs can serve as natural filed lab to collect long-term data and
testing new solutions to reduce human impact on cartilaginous fish, like innovative fishing gears.

Keywords: MPAs, LEK, Mediterranean



    Claudia Gérard
University of Rennes, CNRS, ECOBIO (Ecosystèmes, biodiversité, évolution) - UMR 6553, 35000 Rennes,
France

Occurrence of trophically-transmitted nematodes including anisakid larvae in seven species of Rajidae
from English Channel and Celtic Sea

     1.   Claudia Gérard; University of Rennes, CNRS, ECOBIO (Ecosystèmes, biodiversité, évolution) - UMR 6553, 35000
          Rennes, France
     2.   Mélanie Gay; French Agency for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health and Safety (Anses), Laboratory for
          Food Safety, F-62200 Boulogne-sur-Mer, France
     3.   Michel Barbier; French Agency for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health and Safety (Anses), Laboratory for
          Food Safety, F-62200 Boulogne-sur-Mer, France
     4.   Thomas Barreau; Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Service des Stations Marines, Station Marine de Dinard
          (CRESCO), 38 rue du port Blanc 35800 Dinard, France

As part of an overall study on the parasitofauna of elasmobranches in North-East Atlantic, we researched nematodes in 114
skates belonging to seven Rajiidae species (9 Leucoraja fullonica, 15 Leucoraja naevus, 21 Raja brachyura, 20 Raja clavata,
14 Raja microocellata, 21 Raja montagui, and 14 Raja undulata). Among the metazoan parasite taxa found (helminths and
Myxosporea), nematodes were the most prevalent infecting 37% (CL 29-46%) of the skates with mean abundance and intensity
of respectively 1.6  1.2 and 11.5  4.0 worms per skate. Whatever the skate species, its community of metazoan parasites
was always dominated by nematodes. Four species of nematodes were identified through DNA-sequencing: Anisakis simplex
s.s., Proleptus sp., Pseudoterranova arasi and Pseudoterranova krabbei. It was a first record for A. simplex s.s. in L. fullonica,
Proleptus sp. in R. brachyura, and Pseudoterranova spp. in L. fullonica, L. naevus, R. microocellata, R. montagui and R.
undulata. The dominant metazoan parasites were, in decreasing order, Pseudoterranova spp., Proleptus sp. and A. simplex,
each taxon encountered in five of the seven skate species.
Information provided by trophically-transmitted nematodes on skates confirmed their opportunistic diet based on crustaceans
(intermediate hosts) and teleosts (paratenic hosts, also including cephalopods). The occurrence of Pseudoterranova spp. and
A. simplex may confirm the worldwide increase of anisakiasis and raises the question of anisakiasis risk for human
consumption. Further research is needed on the role of Rajidae in the anisakid transmission to mammal definitive hosts (seals
and cetaceans) as only seals are known to prey skates.

Keywords: Skates; Nematodes; Anisakiasis; Pseudoterranova spp.; Host diet



      Romaric Jac
Institute of Marine Research - Norway

Striving for good science - An Early Career Scientists' perspective on animal welfare considerations in
elasmobranch telemetry

     1.   Clara Antonia Klöcker; Institute of Marine Research
     2.   Charlotte Nuyt; Institute of Marine Research

Recent advancements in electronic tracking devices have revolutionized the study of species' movements, behaviour, and
physiology in the past decade. During the same time, countries have enacted regulations to ensure animal welfare within
research, which focuses on laboratory-based research. Field-based research, such as that involved in telemetry studies, has to
adhere to the same regulations. However, we see a gap in how classical principles fundamental to animal welfare in research
can be applied to this field. This poster seeks to present a comprehensive approach to enhance animal welfare and scientific
practices in elasmobranch telemetry studies, guided by the Three R's principles: Replacement, Reduction, and Refinement. It
highlights key considerations within each dimension while critically reflecting on associated issues and opportunities, such as
the potential for collecting complementary data, facilitating data access, and nurturing a culture of data, knowledge, and
capacity sharing across boundaries and generations. Through this, we aim to emphasize the relevance of elasmobranch
welfare within research, encourage a more critical assessment and reflection of the welfare issues involved, and ultimately
strive for better science as a whole as part of the UN Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development.

Keywords: Animal welfare; Perspective; Elasmobranch telemetry; Tagging; Three Rs




8
   Catherine S Jones
School of Biological Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK

Genetic monitoring of the critically endangered flapper skate in a Northeast Atlantic Marine Protected
Area.
     1.
          Catherine S. Jones
     2.
          Tanja N. Schwanck
     3.
          Fenella Wood
     4.
          James Thorburn
     5.
          Jane Dodd
     6.
          Peter J. Wright
     7.
          David W. Donnan
     8.   Leslie R. Noble

Declines in the critically endangered flapper skate (Dipturus intermedius) in the Northeast Atlantic (NEA) prompted designation
of a marine protected area (MPA) ‘Loch Sunart to the Sound of Jura’ (LSSJ) on the Scottish west coast. Tagging studies in this
area had shown high levels of site affinity supporting the move for spatial protection but whether such spatial management would
benefit other NEA populations was unknown. An ideal MPA should sustain a viable population that shows some connectivity,
replenishing others through spillover. Mitochondrial DNA analyses revealed the LSSJ MPA has low genetic diversity and
restricted connectivity compared to other NEA populations, raising fears about potential inbreeding within the most protected
flapper skate population. Here we used >4,800 genome-wide Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) to gain more insight into
nuclear diversity and geneflow between the MPA and other populations. The LSSJ MPA had a reassuring degree of nuclear
genetic diversity but remained significantly genetically differentiated from other populations. Further, high levels of close kin were
observed in the MPA, confirming a generally low dispersal rate, with relatives remaining almost exclusively in a relatively short
distance from each other. Hence, while the LSSJ MPA protects genetic diversity, there is limited outgoing gene flow and a low
number of breeders, implying it is unlikely to replenish less protected populations from spillover. To enable further genetic
monitoring of the MPA and other flapper skate populations, we are establishing reduced SNP panels using rapid real-time PCR
assays to identify individuals though genetic tagging.

Keywords: Genetic monitoring, flapper skate, Marine Protected Area, nuclear genetic diversity, close kin



    Alicia Rodríguez Juncá
Universidad de la Laguna

Are small scale fishers interacting with elasmobranchs in the Canary Islands?

     1.   Alicia, Rodríguez-Juncá; BIOECOMAC, Dept. Animal Biology, Edaphology and Geology, University of La Laguna,
          Tenerife, Canary Islands, SPAIN.
     2.   Carlos J., Pérez-González; Dept. Matemáticas, Estadística e Investigación Operativa, Universidad de La Laguna,
          SPAIN.
     3.   Raquel, de la Cruz-Modino; Instituto Universitario de Investigación Social y Turismo (ISTUR), University of La
          Laguna,Tenerife, Canary Islands, SPAIN.
     4.   Alejandro, Escánez Pérez; Dept. Animal Ecology and Biology, University of Vigo, Pontevedra, Galicia, SPAIN; MARE
          – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, ARDITI, Funchal, Madeira Island, PORTUGAL.
     5.   Pablo, Martín-Sosa; Centro Oceanográfico de Canarias (IEO-CSIC), Santa Cruz de Tenerife, SPAIN.
     6.   Natacha, Aguilar de Soto; BIOECOMAC, Dept. Animal Biology, Edaphology and Geology, University of La Laguna,
          Tenerife, Canary Islands, SPAIN.

Interactions between fauna and fisheries are a worldwide problem, occurring also in the Canary Islands. These islands are
characterised by a multi-specific artisanal fishing fleet that plays a major role in the food security of the archipelago, as well as
being of economic and cultural value. On the other hand, the archipelago holds a rich marine biodiversity, including 93
condrictian species. Elasmobranchs are not a predominant target group of fisheries here, catches being mainly of dogfish and
blue sharks. The range areas of elasmo-branch species overlap with fishing grounds, sharing in some cases the interest in a
com-mon resource. This facilitates the appearance of human-wildlife interactions, which can be positive or negative. Negative
interactions may compromise species conservation (bycatch, intentional killing, changes in distribution and diet) and have a
social and economic impact (capture loss, gear damage, reduction of the CPUE).
The aim of this study is to obtain the first archipelagic characterization of the interactions between the small-scale fisheries and
elasmobranchs in the Canary Islands. A total of 235 interviews were conducted in 25 fishers’ guilds to assess the typology,
intensity, losses, mitigation measures and fishers’ perception. Depredation and gear damage interactions by sharks and rays
were reported by 69.4% and 28.9% of interviewees respectively, involving 21 elasmobranch species. 66% and 67.2% of
interviewees reported having accidentally caught at least one shark or ray during their careers respectively. A better
understanding of the interactions and correct management tools can improve the coexistence and sustainabil-ity of small-scale
fisheries.

Keywords: human-wildlife interactions; fisheries; depredation; bycatch; elasmobranchs




9
    Betty Laglbauer
The Manta Trust
Assessing the impact of regulations on the manta and devil ray gill plate trade

     1.   Betty J.L. Laglbauer, The Manta Trust, Catemwood House, Norwood Lane, Corscombe, Dorset DT2, United
          Kingdom.
     2.   Stan Shea, BLOOM Association Hong Kong, c/o ADMCF, Suite 2406, 24/F, 9 Queen’s Road Central, Hong Kong.
     3.   Daniel Fernando, Blue Resources Trust, 117 Vishnu Kovil Road, Kalkudah 30410, Sri Lanka.
     4.   Paul Hilton, The Manta Trust, Catemwood House, Norwood Lane, Corscombe, Dorset DT2, United Kingdom.
     5.   Eithne Tan, The Manta Trust, Catemwood House, Norwood Lane, Corscombe, Dorset DT2, United Kingdom.
     6.   Guy Stevens, The Manta Trust, Catemwood House, Norwood Lane, Corscombe, Dorset DT2, United Kingdom.


Many populations of manta and devil rays (mobulids) around the world are in steep decline, primarily due to overfishing. Caught
as bycatch in non-selective gear, or purposefully targeted, the primary financial driver for their demise is the trade in their gill
plates. Mobulid gill plates are purported as Traditional Chinese Medicines (TCM). They are traded internationally from source
countries and sent to mainland China primarily as well as other locations despite CITES trade regulations being in place since
2013 (for mantas) and 2016 (for devil rays). Here, we assess the effectiveness of regulating international trade in manta and
devil ray gill plates through listing of these species on Appendix II of CITES, to identify key drivers of this trade at the level of
source, re-export, and sink countries. By collecting and comparing market, online, and official trade data, we determine impacts
of the CITES Appendix II listings and assess their effectiveness. We collected market data in Guangzhou on the quantities of
gill plates sold, their cost, stated country of origin, and the accessibility to customers. Additionally, because the last few years
have seen a growth in online trading, we complement this market data with information on gill plates sold on online markets and
platforms. Finally, we assess trends in the gill plate trade based on surveys conducted over the past decade and discuss
further steps to bring to quantify the mismatch between exports and imports of gills globally.

Keywords: Gill plate, mobulid, market survey, CITES, manta ray, devil ray.



     Daniela G. Félix-López
Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK.

Genetic structure and demographic analysis of the undulate skates Raja undulata from the Northeast
Atlantic Ocean
          1.
              Daniela G. Félix-López
          2.
              Samantha A. Hook
          3.
              Daniel Ripley
          4.
              Martin Openshaw
          5.
              Sheilah Openshaw
          6.
              Alexandra Martin-Geary
          7.
              Matthew Doggett
          8.
              Chris Brown
          9.
              Michael Buckley
          10. Holly A. Shiels

It is crucial to regularly evaluate the genetic diversity and structure of endangered species. This is particularly important in
elasmobranchs given their life strategy, which increases their vulnerability to overexploitation, in order to delineate and improve
their management and conservation. The undulate ray, Raja undulata, is a skate distributed along the northeast coast of the
Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea that exhibits patchy distributions across continental shelves. Currently, undulate rays are
catalogued as Endangered by the IUCN, with a decreasing population trend, rendering it crucial to improve their management.
The aim of this study was to assess the diversity and genetic structure in Northeast Atlantic Ocean populations of Raja undulata.
Samples were collected via non-invasive mucus swabs by qualified scuba divers between 2017 – 2018, with microsatellites from
a total of 137 individuals being successfully amplified from 10 species-specific loci. Global genetic diversity levels were high
among localities (Ho=0.757). Genetic structure analysis suggests panmixia along the coast of the Northeast Atlantic Ocean
(FST=0.029; p>0.05), which may be promoted by the high connectivity between localities. Due to the lack of differentiation among
localities, we calculate a single effective population size (Ne) of 102.7 which, according with the IUCN criteria, it is sufficient to
avoid inbreeding depression but concerning to maintain evolutionary potential. These panmixia findings highlight the significance
of continuing to research migratory patterns in order to clarify the factors that promote population homogenization.

Key words: panmixia, population genetic, skates, microsatellites, genetic diversity




10
    Francesca Mason
Cardiff University; Zoological Society of London

A fisher’s perspective: Utilising 51 years of local ecological knowledge to identify socio-economic,
ecological, and legislative trends influencing angelshark (Squatina squatina) records in Wales

     1.    Francesca, Mason; Cardiff University; Zoological Society of London.
     2.    Jake, Davies; Zoological Society of London; Natural Resources Wales.
     3.    Surshti, Patel; Zoological Society of London.
     4.    Ben, Wray; Natural Resources Wales.
     5.    Rowland, Sharp; Natural Resources Wales.
     6.    Sarah, Davies; Zoological Society of London; Natural Resources Wales
     7.    Alice, Chamberlain; Zoological Society of London
     8.    Charlotte, Pike; Zoological Society of London
     9.    Kathryn, Whittey; Bangor University; Zoological Society of London
     10.   Claire, Collins; Zoological Society of London
     11.   Matthew, Gollock; Zoological Society of London
     12.   Joanna, Barker; Zoological Society of London
     13.   David, Curnick; Zoological Society of London

The evolution of marine fisheries operating within Wales, United Kingdom, has had broad impacts on the ecology, distribution,
and abundance of coastal elasmobranchs, yet, due to the scarcity of historical records, quantifying these interactions remains a
challenge. Local ecological knowledge is an important tool in fisheries research, providing an avenue to regain scarce
information on the ecology of the Critically Endangered angelshark (Squatina squatina). Understanding how fleet-wide
spatiotemporal changes to fishing effort and capacity have influenced historic records and sightings of angelsharks in Wales is
an important consideration for assessing future management priorities and conservation initiatives for the species. Local
ecological knowledge (LEK) was collated from 27 semi-structured interviews with commercial, recreational and charter fishers,
to identify perceived socio-economic, ecological, and legislative factors driving changes in fishing effort for vessels operating
within the ‘Welsh Zone’ between 1968 to 2019. Our findings identify key factors that fishers believe have resulted in fleet-wide
changes to commercial and recreational fisheries. Using these results, we deduce that the probability of fishers encountering
angelsharks over a 51-year period has decreased, and thus recent published estimates of population declines may be
overstated.

Keywords: Fisheries Changes; Local Ecological Knowledge; Squatina squatina; Wales;



   Alexia Mazzini
GenoDREAM, Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University of Bologna

Historical ecology of the mediterranean population of Great White Shark, Carcharodon carcharias, from
museum collections

     1.    Alexia Mazzini; GenoDREAM, Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University of
           Bologna, Ravenna, Italy.
     2.    Jeremy McCormack; Institute of Geosciences, Goethe-University Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
     3.    Federico Lugli; Department of Cultural Heritage, University of Bologna, Ravenna, Italy; Department of Chemical and
           Geological Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
     4.    Maria Vittoria Iacovelli; GenoDREAM, Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University
           of Bologna, Ravenna, Italy.
     5.    Valentina Crobe; GenoDREAM, Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University of
           Bologna, Ravenna, Italy.
     6.    Alessia Cariani; GenoDREAM, Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University of
           Bologna, Ravenna, Italy.
     7.    Fausto Tinti; GenoDREAM, Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University of Bologna,
           Ravenna, Italy.

The Great White Shark, Carcharodon carcharias, is Critically Endangered in the Mediterranean due to its low population
density and the absence of conventional aggregation sites, hampering data collection and reconstruction of the population
behavioral ecology. Historical collections, being a repository of past biodiversity, can overcome these issues for a better
understanding of fundamental processes such as paleo-ecological changes. In this perspective, this work deals with the
historical ecology of the Mediterranean white shark population through a multi-element analysis of stable isotopes (carbon,
nitrogen, zinc, and strontium) of 5 historical remains archived in Italian museums and private collections. Using individual
vertebrae (N = 4), we provide information about the ontogenetic shifts and the trophic ecology by the estimate of the isotopic
composition of carbon, nitrogen, and zinc from the vertebral collagen, and date back one fossil tooth using strontium isotope
composition. The main results show that: 1) isotopic values of nitrogen confirmed the white shark as a top predator, 2) the diet
is based on dolphins and fishes, 3) the zinc analyses revealed a strong difference between the pre-birth and post-birth isotopic
composition 4) the dating of the fossil tooth confirmed the Miocene-Pliocene presence in the Mediterranean. Overall, these
multi-element isotope approaches have the potential to obtain important information on developmental physiology, ecology, and


11
behavior of the poorly studied Mediterranean white shark, highlighting the fundamental role of historical remains for an overall
knowledge of shark life-history, avoiding invasive sampling and analysis.

Keywords: White shark; Mediterranean sea; Stable isotopes



     Martha O’Keefe
Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of Exeter, Penryn, UK

Elasmobranch diversity and distribution in the coastal waters of Cyprus
          1.
                Martha O’Keefe
          2.
                Elizabeth G.T. Bengil
          3.
                Josie L. Palmer
          4.    Damla Beton
          5.
                Çiğdem Çağlar
          6.
                Brendan J. Godley
          7.
                Meryem Özkan
          8.
                Robin T. E. Snape
          9.    Annette C. Broderick


The Mediterranean Sea is considered a hotspot for elasmobranchs but there is currently a lack of data in the eastern basin. We
report elasmobranch species, abundance and distribution from bycatch records in Northern Cyprus over the five-year period
2018 to 2022. Here the small-scale fishing fleet consists of between 300 and 400 vessels, predominantly fishing with gill nets,
trammel nets and longlines, with trawling banned. Thirty-six elasmobranch species were recorded (17 shark, 19 batoid)
representing 41% of all species recorded in the Mediterranean and including 24 new national records. Of the recorded species,
61% were listed as globally threatened by the IUCN (71% of shark, 53% of batoid). The importance of the coastal waters
around Northern Cyprus for a range of elasmobranch species was demonstrated in this study. Most elasmobranchs caught are
retained for bait, subsistence or trade, and although recent fisheries regulations are in place to prohibit trade in all species listed
under the Barcelona Convention, enforcement is a challenge.

Keywords: Shark, Skate, Ray, Mediterranean, Fisheries



    Kristian Parton
University of Exeter, College of Life and Environmental Sciences

Elasmobranch entanglement in anthropoegnic debris & NEW citizen science platform: ShaREN (The
Shark and Ray Entanglement Network)

     1.   Kristian Parton
     2.   Tamara Galloway
     3.   Brendan Godley

Knowledge on the entanglement of sharks and rays around the world is severely underreported in the scientific literature, often
relying on anecdotal reports in research papers. Here we provide data from a literature review conducted in 2019,
supplemented by data collected from social media site Twitter, and present our citizen science platform ShaREN (Shark and
Ray Entanglement Network). Ghost fishing gear is responsible for the vast majority of entanglements in both the scientific
literature (74%) and on Twitter (95%). The threat to sharks and rays likely falls under the category of an animal welfare issue,
as opposed to having wide-ranging conservation implications for the species. ShaREN will aim to collect more data on the
elasmobranch species that are most susceptible to entanglement, and the locations in which this is more prevalent. ShaREN is
accessible to anyone who encounters an entangled shark or ray, whether on land or in the sea, and we encourage everyone to
spread awareness of the project and submit your sightings via the report form today.

Keywords: citizen science, entanglement, literature review, ShaREN



    Jaime Penadés-Suay
Associació LAMNA; Fundación Oceanogràfic; Unitat de Zoologia Marina ICBiBE Universitat de València

Diet of four species of coastal batoids in València (Western Mediterranean) through stomach contents
and isotopic analysis

     1.   Jaime, Penadés-Suay; Associació LAMNA; Fundación Oceanogràfic; Unitat de Zoologia Marina ICBiBE Universitat
          de València
     2.   Carmen, Torres-Rodríguez; Unitat de Zoologia Marina ICBiBE Universitat de València


12
     3.   Raquel, García-Vernet; Departament de Biologia Evolutiva, Ecologia i Ciències Ambientals Universitat de Barcelona
     4.   Alex, Aguilar; Departament de Biologia Evolutiva, Ecologia i Ciències Ambientals Universitat de Barcelona
     5.   Asunción, Borrell; Departament de Biologia Evolutiva, Ecologia i Ciències Ambientals Universitat de Barcelona
     6.   Francisco Javier, Aznar; Unitat de Zoologia Marina ICBiBE Universitat de València

Batoids are active predators of invertebrates and fish, playing an important role in coastal trophic webs. Although the diet of the
most common Mediterranean batoids is roughly well known, there are regions where the information is scarce. In this study we
analyzed the stomach contents and muscle isotopic ratios (13C and 15N values) of 4 species of batoids (Torpedo torpedo,
Torpedo marmorata, Dasyatis pastinaca and Myliobatis aquila), caught accidentally in trammel nets in the Gulf of Valencia. In
total, 120 individuals were analyzed (30 of each species). In addition to providing diet and isotopic data for the first time for
these species in this locality, we compared two piscivorous species (genus Torpedo) with two invertivorous. Overall, 64.2% of
the stomachs analyzed contained prey, although those of T. marmorata were empty except in two cases. The stomachs of
Torpedo spp. contained exclusively teleost remains from at least 4 benthic families and demersals (especially Sparidae), and
also remains and/or whole individuals of a pelagic species, the sardine, Sardina pilchardus, whose origin is intriguing. However,
no teleosts appeared in M. aquila and only in a testimonial in D. pastinaca (10%). The stomachs of both species contained
mainly decapods and polychaeta. The diversity of polychaetes consumed by D. pastinaca was much larger than that of M.
aquila (at least 5 taxa versus 1), but the latter apparently included in its diet a great variety of molluscs (bivalves, scaphopods
and especially gastropods). Isotopic ratios indicated that M. aquila showed the lowest trophic level and T. torpedo the highest,
with a strong overlap between the latter and D. pastinaca.

Keywords: Diet; Batoids; Stomach content; Isotopic analysis;



    Chloe Renn
University of Plymouth

How can MPA design, management and monitoring be optimised for temperate elasmobranch
conservation?

1. Chloe, Renn; University of Plymouth
2. Ben, Ciotti; University of Plymouth
3. Emma, Sheehan; University of Plymouth

Global chondrichthyan populations are experiencing alarming declines, driven by intense targeted and incidental extraction.
Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) represent one potential solution, which has gained traction in recent years. When implemented
effectively, MPAs demonstrate potential to rebuild populations and enable ecosystem recovery. However, their value as an
elasmobranch conservation tool remains contested, particularly in temperate waters due to limited availability of examples. One
essential component of MPA efficacy is the implementation of robust ecological monitoring regimes which allow population
trajectories to be characterised and responded to, in real-time. However, several challenges, inherent to both elasmobranchs
and temperate marine environments, currently impede adequate elasmobranch surveillance inside MPAs. This literature review
addressed these two interlinked components of elasmobranch conservation by 1) exploring the drivers of temperate MPA
success for elasmobranchs and 2) investigating opportunities for elasmobranch monitoring advancements. The review found
that MPAs can be effective for temperate elasmobranch protection under specific conditions, however, success is contingent on
a range of biophysical and social factors, which can interact in each unique context. Meanwhile, several monitoring
opportunities were identified to improve future elasmobranch monitoring in temperate MPAs and overcome current method
limitations. Finally, this review identified 4 key ‘guardrails’ to help optimise the future implementation, monitoring and
management of temperate elasmobranch MPAs. These included: 1) building a detailed prior knowledge base 2) integrating
social and ecological goals 3) striving for legitimate governance and 4) implementing effective monitoring.

Keywords: Elasmobranchs; Marine Conservation; Fishery Management; Monitoring; Marine Protected Areas



    Jack Renwick
Shark Trust

The Shark Trust Commercial Fisheries Advisories: Feedback

Jack, Renwick; Shark Trust

In the Northeast Atlantic, elasmobranchs are encountered by mixed and directed fisheries. The Shark Trust produces
commercial fisheries advisories for use by the fishing industry and enforcement agencies. These advisories are designed to
give rapid access to the current legislative state of sharks, skates, and rays for UK and EU vessels in the Northeast Atlantic.
The enforcement of fisheries legislation is carried out by a variety of different agencies. Engaging with these agencies, and with
the fishing industry, to provide materials and advice, supports and promotes sustainable fisheries. The design of the advisories
has changed over time following user feedback. This poster presents these advisories, their applications, the process of
updating them, and details feedback collected.




13
Keywords: Fisheries; Management; Enforcement



    Álvaro Almagro Rodríguez
Universidad Católica de Valencia (UCV)

Estimación de la población de "Gymnura altavela" (Linnaeus, 1758) en la Playa de la Granadella, Javea,
Alicante, España.

     1.   Álvaro Almagro Rodríguez UCV
     2.   Javier Torres Gavilá UCV
     3.   José Tena Medialdea UCV
     4.   Jose Rafael García March UCV

Gymnura altavela is a species of coastal elasmobranch found in the Mediterranean Sea and Atlantic Ocean. It is critically
endangered in the Mediterranean Sea, with a declining trend in its populations according to the IUCN. In this study, bimonthly
visual surveys were conducted from December 2021 to December 2022 on the sandy bottom of Granadella beach, located in
Javea (Alicante, Spain). A total of 153 sightings of individuals were recorded, distributed across 8 out of 10 systematically
conducted transects. Adult and sub-adult individuals were observed every month except for September and October, with
pregnant adult females observed from February to May. Regarding the undetermined individuals, due to their small size, they
were present in the months of May, June, July, and December, with the highest numbers observed in the first three months.
Additionally, the sizes and sexes were compared with various variables such as water temperature, distance to the shore,
transect location, and presence of people and vessels in the area, revealing significant differences (p-value <0.05) when
compared to temperature and transect values where the individuals were located.

Keywords: Gymnura altavela; Granadella beach; Alicante; Visual census; Population




    Rosario Luque
Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria

Contribution to the knowledge of the ecology and distribution of dogfish (family triakidae and squalidae)
in the Canary Islands

          1.        Rosario Luque Cabrera; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de
                    Gran Canaria.
          2.        David, Jimenez-Alvarado; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas
                    de Gran Canaria.
          3.        Ana, Espino-Ruano; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de
                    Gran Canaria.
          4.        Airam, Guerra-Marrero; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de
                    Gran Canaria.
          5.        Lorena, Couce-Montero; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de
                    Gran Canaria.
          6.        Jose J., Castro; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran
                    Canaria.


Shark fishing is an activity that has been carried out for centuries, as different products obtained from sharks have been found
in archaeological sites. Currently, elasmobranchs (sharks and rays) have highly depleted populations. Seven species of dogfish
(family Triakidae and Squalidae) are found in the Canary Islands, but their actual contribution to the catch is still unknown. 136
surveys were carried out among professional fishermen from all the islands of the archipelago, in which very few fishermen
were able to distinguish all the species, being only three of them the most known and/or caught (common smoothhound
Mustelus mustelus, tope shark Galeorhinus galeus and shortnose spurdog Squalus megalops) and even showing that half of
the fishermen cannot distinguish the sex of these sharks. They are generally not targeted by artisanal fisheries and, although
sometimes landed, most of the catch is usually discarded. They are preferentially distributed down to 200 metres depth, with
higher catches in the eastern and central islands. Although they are caught all year round, the highest peaks occur during the
winter and summer months, possibly coinciding with mating and reproduction. Sharks caught range from 100 to 120 cm in total
length for common smoothhound and tope sharks, while the catch size for shortnose spurdog varies between 50 and 60 cm in
total length.

Keywords: Canary Islands; Dogfishes; Fishermen; Taxonomy; Surverys



    Ana Espino Ruano
IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria

14
Are we siblings?: Dropping a possible parentage between Gymnura altavela from Tenerife and Gran
Canaria islands, Canary Islands.

     1.   Ana, Espino-Ruano; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria.
     2.   Jose J., Castro; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria.
     3.   Airam, Guerra-Marrero; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran
          Canaria.
     4.   Lorena, Couce-Montero; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran
          Canaria.
     5.   Rosario, Luque-Cabrera; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran
          Canaria.
     6.   David, Jimenez-Alvarado; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran
          Canaria.

The Canary Island, as volcanic islands, shows a very narrow or absence coastal shelf, where depth quickly goes from 0 to 200
m, reaching 3000 m in the deepest point between islands. This condition affects tiopographic and hydrographical features of
the coast, and hence the distribution of marine species. Due to this scenario, it is well to assume that populations of bentho-
demersal species like Spiny Butterfly Ray, Gymnura altavela, are not related.
However, molecular genetic approaches provide a tool to investigate the genetic relationships at the individual level through the
populations. Therefore, genetic diversity of two geographical, Gran Canaria and Tenerife, samples of the mantelina, Gymnura
altavela, were analysed. For this purpose, mitochondrial sequences corresponding to the COX1 gene and the control region
(CR) were obtained.
Analysis of mitochondrial sequences indicates low genetic diversity and a total absence of partitioning between the samples
analysed. Mitochondrial data indicate an absence of genetic differentiation between the geographic samples evaluated,
reflecting gene flow that limits differentiation at the level of mitochondrial loci.

Keywords: gene; genetics; mitochondrial; molecular; ray



   Eleonora de Sabata
MedSharks

Photo-identification of sandbar sharks: yes, it is possible!

1. Eleonora de Sabata, MedSharks
2. Simona Clò, MedSharks

A population of sandbar sharks (Carcharhinus plumbeus) congregates in a small bay on the Turkish Aegean coast, Eastern
Mediterranean sea. From 2001 to 2006 MedSharks carried out a study of this population through underwater observations,
photo-identification, dart-and PAT tagging, which was re-launched in 2023.
A dataset of 3,000 photographs and 10 hours of video was created over 6 years. Natural distinctive marks were used for
individual recognition. Photos were manually sorted and individuals identified using at least two independent characteristic
features (e.g. fin shape, pigmentation marks, scars, tags). We were thus able to identify several dozens of different individuals.
Some natural markings were stable for a period of 6 years, providing a reliable way to identify individual sharks over time. Over
30 re-sightings provide evidence of strong site-specific philopatry in this group of sharks, on an annual cycle and up to 8 years.

Keywords: sandbar shark; photoidentification; Mediterranean Sea



    Rafael Tavares
Centre for Shark Research, Venezuela

Tropical remote islands in the Caribbean play a crucial role in enhancing the development and biological
fitness of sharks.
     1.   Rafael Tavares Centre for Shark Research, Venezuela
     2.   Bradley Wetherbee. Department of Biological Sciences, University of Rhode Island, USA.

Tropical islands are characterised by their high marine biodiversity and importance as essential habitats for sharks. The
population structure, growth, and activity space of juvenile lemon sharks (Negaprion brevirostris) within a nursery in the Los
Roques Archipelago were evaluated using tagging and telemetry techniques between 2001 and 2015. Sharks remained in the
primary nursery until reaching a size of approximately 120 cm TL (ages between 0+ and 3+ years). Growth rate based on tag-
recapture measurements averaged 21 cm/year and unexpectedly, growth rate was positively correlated with size/age, reaching
values of approximately 30 cm/year for sharks 3+ years old. Night-time activity appeared to change with size of sharks, possibly
as a strategy to reduce intra-specific competition. Movement data revealed that individuals exhibited a strong site attachment to
the primary nursery and displayed a strong preference for mangrove systems, which provide refuge and food. Home range
estimates (KDE 75%) for juveniles were small, varying between 0.13 and 0.84 km2. High growth rates and rapid development
have also been reported for other species of sharks, such as blacktip (Carcharhinus limbatus) and Caribbean reef (C. perezi) in

15
Los Roques. These findings suggest a reproductive advantage for these sharks that grow rapidly and reach maturity earlier
than lemon sharks in other nursery areas. The factors that could be influencing the rapid growth observed in the study area are
(1) high temperature of the seawater, (2) abundance of prey, (3) healthy marine ecosystems, and (4) low levels of competition
and depredation. Our results suggest that remote tropical islands may provide favourable conditions for the development and
biological fitness of lemon sharks.




16
                                                Presenters and Title
1.    Paul Abaut ..................................................................................................................... 2
Eco-responsible research vessel : Parsifal ............................................................................ 2
2.    Harriet Allen ................................................................................................................... 2
Monitoring the development of Nursehound Scyliorhinus stellaris (Linnaeus, 1758)
(Chondrichthyes: Scyliorhinidae) eggcases in-situ ................................................................ 2
3.    Harriet Allen ................................................................................................................... 1
20 years of citizen science - the Great Eggcase Hunt ........................................................... 1
4.    Josef W. Amin ................................................................................................................ 1
Biting off more than we can chew: DNA barcoding reveals patterns of species utilisation,
threatened species and mislabelling in shark products across Europe .................................. 1
5.    Martina Arpaia ................................................................................................................ 1
Stakeholder engagement as key tool for elasmobranch conservation in the Mediterranean
Sea ....................................................................................................................................... 1
6.    George Balchin .............................................................................................................. 2
Sussex IFCA Elasmobranch Code of Conduct ...................................................................... 2
7.    Matteo Barbato .............................................................................................................. 2
Multidisciplinary approach to study the interaction and survival of pelagic shark in
recreational fisheries in the Northern Adriatic Sea ................................................................ 2
8.    Ewan Camplisson .......................................................................................................... 3
Metabolic enzyme activity in Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus) tissue at varying
temperatures and age. .......................................................................................................... 3
9.    Martina Ciprian .............................................................................................................. 3
What do you want for dinner? Sharks and Rays’ diets in Amvrakikos Gulf (Greece). ............ 3
10.       Martina Ciprian ........................................................................................................... 4
Solving the riddle: insights on species-specific identification for individuals of the family
Dasyatidae. ........................................................................................................................... 4
11.       Simona Clò................................................................................................................. 5
Documenting a unknown Nearshore aggregation area for the Blackchin Guitarfish
Glaucostegus cemiculus in Turkey ........................................................................................ 5
12.       Simona Clò................................................................................................................. 5
EU Sharks LIFE .................................................................................................................... 5
13.       Noémie Coulon........................................................................................................... 5
Bringing up baby: shark young life stages and our warming oceans ..................................... 5
14.       Simon Dedman........................................................................................................... 6
Movegroup: an R package to calculate and visualise space use and home range for groups
of animals ............................................................................................................................. 6
15.       Peter Delaroche ......................................................................................................... 6
Fishing Metallomic Signatures of Extreme Longevity in the Greenland shark........................ 6


17
16.      Ilaria Di Lauro ............................................................................................................. 7
A field lab for concrete management and conservation of elasmobranchs in the
Mediterranean Sea: the Marine Protected Area of Egadi Islands........................................... 7
17.      Claudia Gérard ........................................................................................................... 8
Occurrence of trophically-transmitted nematodes including anisakid larvae in seven species
of Rajidae from English Channel and Celtic Sea ................................................................... 8
18.      Romaric Jac ............................................................................................................... 8
Striving for good science - An Early Career Scientists' perspective on animal welfare
considerations in elasmobranch telemetry ............................................................................ 8
19.      Catherine S Jones ...................................................................................................... 9
Genetic monitoring of the critically endangered flapper skate in a Northeast Atlantic Marine
Protected Area. ..................................................................................................................... 9
20.      Alicia Rodríguez Juncá ............................................................................................... 9
Are small scale fishers interacting with elasmobranchs in the Canary Islands? ..................... 9
21.      Betty Laglbauer ........................................................................................................ 10
Assessing the impact of regulations on the manta and devil ray gill plate trade................... 10
22.      Daniela G. Félix-López ............................................................................................. 10
Genetic structure and demographic analysis of the undulate skates Raja undulata from the
Northeast Atlantic Ocean .................................................................................................... 10
23.      Francesca Mason ..................................................................................................... 11
A fisher’s perspective: Utilising 51 years of local ecological knowledge to identify socio-
economic, ecological, and legislative trends influencing angelshark (Squatina squatina)
records in Wales ................................................................................................................. 11
24.      Alexia Mazzini .......................................................................................................... 11
Historical ecology of the mediterranean population of Great White Shark, Carcharodon
carcharias, from museum collections .................................................................................. 11
25.      Martha O’Keefe ........................................................................................................ 12
Elasmobranch diversity and distribution in the coastal waters of Cyprus ............................. 12
26.      Kristian Parton .......................................................................................................... 12
Elasmobranch entanglement in anthropoegnic debris & NEW citizen science platform:
ShaREN (The Shark and Ray Entanglement Network) ....................................................... 12
27.      Jaime Penadés-Suay ............................................................................................... 12
Diet of four species of coastal batoids in València (Western Mediterranean) through stomach
contents and isotopic analysis............................................................................................. 12
28.      Chloe Renn .............................................................................................................. 13
How can MPA design, management and monitoring be optimised for temperate
elasmobranch conservation? .............................................................................................. 13
29.      Jack Renwick ........................................................................................................... 13
The Shark Trust Commercial Fisheries Advisories: Feedback ............................................. 13
30.      Álvaro Almagro Rodríguez........................................................................................ 14


18
Estimación de la población de "Gymnura altavela" (Linnaeus, 1758) en la Playa de la
Granadella, Javea, Alicante, España................................................................................... 14
31.      Rosario Luque .......................................................................................................... 14
Contribution to the knowledge of the ecology and distribution of dogfish (family triakidae and
squalidae) in the Canary Islands ......................................................................................... 14
32.      Ana Espino Ruano ................................................................................................... 14
Are we siblings?: Dropping a possible parentage between Gymnura altavela from Tenerife
and Gran Canaria islands, Canary Islands. ......................................................................... 15
33.      Eleonora de Sabata .................................................................................................. 15
Photo-identification of sandbar sharks: yes, it is possible! ................................................... 15
34.      Rafael Tavares ......................................................................................................... 15
Tropical remote islands in the Caribbean play a crucial role in enhancing the development
and biological fitness of sharks. .......................................................................................... 15




19
