19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association




                                    Jump to Page 10




                              BOOK OF ABSTRACTS




                                              1
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association




ORGANIZING INSTITUTIONS




  www.apece.pt           www.flyingsharks.eu www.estm.ipleiria.pt www.mare.ipleiria.pt



SPONSORS




    www.visitsealife.com                          www.saveourseas.com




                                              2
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


ORGANIZING AND SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE



João Correia (APECE, MARE-IPLeiria and Flying Sharks)
Nuno Queiroz (APECE)
Nuno Vasco Rodrigues (MARE-IPLeiria and Flying Sharks)
Rui Guedes (Flying Sharks)
Susana Mendes (MARE-IPLeiria)
Marco Lemos (MARE-IPLeiria)
Sara Novais (MARE-IPLeiria)
Luís Alves (APECE and MARE-IPLeiria)
Hugo Morais (MARE-IPLeiria)
Francisco Maurício (Flying Sharks)
Sofia Esteves da Silva (MARE-IPLeiria)
Helena Santos (ESTM-IPLeiria)




                                                3
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


WELCOME TO THE 19th ANNUAL SCIENTIFIC CONFERENCE OF THE EUROPEAN
ELASMOBRANCH ASSOCIATION


The Portuguese Association for the Study and Conservation of Elasmobranchs, MARE – Marine
and Environmental Sciences Centre, the Polytechnic Institute of Leiria and Flying Sharks are the
proud hosts of the 19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association
from the 9th to the 11th of October at the Superior School of Tourism and Maritime Technology, in
Peniche, Portugal.
The conference will provide a platform for those involved in international science and policy and
aims to help coordinate the information necessary for the development and implementation of
management measures for rays and sharks in European waters. EEA 2015 will be of interest to
all those who are involved in the study, management and conservation of chondrichthyans
(sharks, skates, rays and chimaeras).
We are also delighted to welcome the awesome Dr. Samuel Gruber to our meeting as a key-note
speaker!
A kind word of sincere thanks to our wonderful sponsors, Save our Seas Foundation and
Sealife, who have generously donated funds for us to fly Dr. Gruber to Peniche, and also award
10 Student Bursaries for young researchers who are presenting their research at the meeting!
We look forward to welcoming you to Peniche and please do not hesitate to contact us (see
contacts below, precede with +351 for Portugal) if there’s anything we can do to make your stay
more pleasurable.


Kind regards,


The Organizing Committee




                                               4
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


GENERAL INFORMATION


VENUE


The conference is being hosted at the Superior School of Tourism and Maritime Technology (ESTM) in
Peniche, Portugal. The School is one of the Campus of the Polytechnic Institute of Leiria (IPL). Facing the
beautiful Atlantic Ocean, just one hour north of Lisbon. ESTM / IPL is a privileged place to study, with fine
people, Berlengas' natural marine reserve as landscape, sandy beaches as well as many diving and surf
spots in the vicinity. It is located in Santuário de Nossa Senhora dos Remédios, 2520–641 Peniche.
(GPS: 39º 21′ 53” N | 9º 24′ 11” W)


HOW TO GET TO PENICHE


The closest airport to Peniche is in Lisbon, approximately 90 Km south.


By bus:
From Lisbon airport, take the subway to Sete Rios/Jardim Zoológico, where you can catch a bus to
Peniche.


By car:
From Lisbon:
Follow the A8 to Caldas da Rainha until you arrive to IP6. Then follow IP6 directly to Peniche.


From the North:
Follow A1 until Leiria. In Leiria take A8 and head towards Óbidos until you arrive to IP6. Then follow IP6
directly to Peniche


TRANSPORTATION BETWEEN THE HOTEL AND MEETING VENUE (ESTM)


A bus will shuttle conference participants from Hotel Solei to the school every morning and afternoon
during the 30 minutes before and after the meetings. You may walk from Hotel Soleil to the school (north
blue path in the map below) but it is an aproximately 45 minute walk, although the scenery is
breathtaking. Don’t take this walk if the weather is rough, as waves will crash onto the road! Take the “city”
blue path instead (60 min. walk) and enjoy a lovely “Pastel de Nata” in one of the many cafés
(“Pastelaria”).


                                                      5
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


PRESENTATIONS


Oral communications must not go over 12 minutes for presentation and 3 minutes for questions.
All presentations should be given in advance to the congress secretariat. All presenters should check their
presentations ahead of time.
Posters must be placed upon arrival in the poster area (please ask the secretariat where it is). Presenting
authors are asked to remain close to their poster during coffee-breaks to answer any questions from the
participants.


COFFEE-BREAKS AND LUNCHES


Coffee-breaks are free for all attendees and will be served on the first floor, right outside the conference
auditorium. Lunch is available from the school canteen and cafeteria and are paid in the moment. A few
nearby cafés offer other alternatives as well.


GALA DINNER


Satuday, the 10th, is gala dinner time, which will take place in Hotel Soleil Peniche. Be sure to bring your
sharky items, as well as dancing shoes (!), as we will be auctioning shark-related goodies in our traditional
“informal” fashion... (“Informal” might be a bit of an understatement... ;-)
All funds from the auction are used to support student travel to scientific meetings.
Dress code: "casual chick".


LOVELY PENICHE


Peniche is a busy fishing town with a large harbor and some excellent seafood restaurants. The town's
most famous building is an imposing 16th century fortress. It was once used as a prison controlled by
dictator Salazar's secret police to incarcerate political opponents and today houses a museum about local
history. We booked a room for presenter’s who go over their time, though.
There are some fantastic sandy beaches nearby, namely Baleal, and Cabo Carvoeiro stands proudly to
the west, a rugged cape with bizarrely shaped pinnacles and sea caves offering panoramic ocean views
all the way to the islands of Berlengas, a marine protected area and World Natural Heritage where diving
is excelent.
Currently, Peniche is recognized as “Wave Capital”, due to its phenomenal characteristics for surfing and
the world surfing event “Rip Curl Pro”. The most mythical contributor is perhaps Supertubos beach, world
famous for its powerful waves, which many surfers call “The European Pipeline”.

                                                        6
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association




EMERGENCY CONTACTS


João Correia - mob. 91 947 5411
Nuno Vasco Rodrigues – mob. 91 154 7220
Nuno Queiroz – mob. 96 732 7937
Marco Lemos – mob. 91 948 0570
Luís Alves – mob. 91 153 7738
Sofia Silva – mob. 91 906 6119


TAXIS IN PENICHE


262 782 687
967 123 500
262 084 867


PENICHE MAP




                                              7
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


KEYNOTE SPEAKERS


DOCTOR SAMUEL GRUBER


Doc Gruber conducted field studies at marine
stations at Eilat, Israel, Hurghada, Egypt and
Okinawa, Japan. His position was Tenured Full
Professor at the Rosenstiel School of Marine
and Atmospheric Science (RSMAS), University
of Miami; he also serves as Adjunct Professor
of Biology with the University of North Carolina
(Wilmington) and is founder and director of the
Bimini   Biological   Field    Station,   Bimini,
Bahamas. Dr. Gruber was council member of the         Picture: Doc Gruber swimming with a shark in Bimini, Bahamas.

Bahamas
National Trust and board member of the Uni-versity of Southern Mississippi's College of Marine Science.
Dr. Gruber is a recognized authority of shark behavior both as to field studies and in regard to visually
guided behavior, and physiology. He was a longtime member of numerous professional societies and
founded the American Elasmobranch Society in 1983. He founded the World Conservation Union's (IUCN)
Shark Specialist Group and was its Chairperson between 1991 and 1996.
He has presented over 125 meeting and invited lectures on a wide range of topics related to shark biology.
He has mentored over 35 graduate students at UM and elsewhere, worked tirelessly to promote
conservation of sharks, educational opportunities for teachers and minority high school students, provided
professional service as a grant reviewer and has taught advanced courses at UM in animal behavior,
tropical marine biology, and the physiology and behavior of marine organisms.
The National Science Foundation, the Office of Naval Research, the State of Florida, the US-Israel
Binational Science Foundation and many NGOs have funded Dr. Gruber's nearly 50-year research career.
He has been expedition leader and chief scientist on over 50 research cruises around the Atlantic Ocean.
His prolific research career has thus far resulted in about 190 peer-reviewed, scientific publications. These
ranged from works on shark repellants (including natural repellants such as that secreted by the Moses
sole); shark maintenance in the laboratory; the visual, olfactory, and acoustic system of sharks;
bioenergetics, age and growth, productivity, survival and nutrition in sharks; telemetry studies including
habitat selection and homing of lemon sharks and eagle rays; circulating steroid hormones; commensal
behaviors of stingrays and cleaner wrasses; and a number of anatomical studies on sharks. His recent
emphasis has been on the behavior, ecology and conservation biology of sharks.




                                                     8
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


LEWIS COCKS


Despite the young age of 25, Lewis has over 10 years of
Aquatic experience in professional and academic areas
spanning three continents. Landing his first job in an
aquarium store in the UK when he was just 14, he secured a
intern placement at Melbourne Aquarium in Australia at 17
as a part of his studies. Lewis focused his educational goals
around marine studies including a top grade in Ornamental
Fish Management Diploma from Sparsholt College (UK), a
Bachelor of Science (Hons) in Marine Conservation and a
Master of Science in Sustainable Aquaculture Systems from
the University of Plymouth, UK. During his time in Plymouth,        Picture: Lewis Cocks (Left) preparing for a dive
                                                                    with Red Sea dive pioneer Hagan Schmid
Lewis became a fully qualified commercial HSE Part IV Pro
SCUBA diver which enabled him to become involved in many research projects across the South of
England including surveys of seagrass beds and Sepia officinalis egg recruitment for CRESH
(Cephalopod Recruitment from English-Channel Spawning Habitats).
Throughout his Master’s program, Lewis focused his research on conservation related studies of the
European Lobster (Homarus gammarus) with analysis of the lipid nutrition within the diets of juvenile
lobsters with a publication (pending) entitled ‘Enhancement of formulated diets for juvenile European
lobsters (Homarus gammarus) regarding various levels of quality fish oil and fatty acids in conjunction with
the National Lobster Hatchery, Padstow.’
Since 2013, Lewis has worked in Saudi Arabia as a Marine biologist/Senior Aquarist for Issham Aquatics
who are the largest aquarium design, operation and maintenance company based in the Middle East, and
are responsible for some of the most unique and bespoke aquariums in the region. At Issham Aquatics,
Lewis is part of a team of 50 other aquatics staff, where he and Project Manager Alex Shepherd oversee
aquarium husbandry and ensure that it is being carried out to public aquarium standards.
Lewis’s current primary work site is at one of Issham’s oldest projects known as AAA Aquarium. Located
on the central Red Sea coast, this facility is a privately owned site with various aquatic exhibits including
the ‘Shark Lagoons’ which will be detailed in the EEA presentation. This facility has been working with
elasmobranchs and other aquatic species for over 20 years and has proudly had several captive breeding
successes which Lewis is working on documenting and developing further, alongside the facility Director
Jonathan Mee.




                                                     9
     19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


                                                                                                     PROGRAM



                                                                                                         9 October :: Friday
       8:00 - 10:00 EEA Board Meeting (EEA Board members only)
              08:30 Buses start departing from Hotel Soleil to ESTM - Registration opens
              10:30 Welcome address                                                                                                     Vanderperre: essential fish habitat of juve blue sharks
              10:45 Samuel Gruber - War on Ignorance: My 55 year Battle to Understand and Explain Sharks                                model predicts presence & abundance for subsets for small juves
              11:30 Pedro Afonso - Dynamics of whale shark and Chilean devil ray at their north Atlantic fringe habitat                 Less good for abundance. Get his work.
              11:45 Frederic Vandeperre - Essential pelagic habitat of juvenile blue shark (Prionace glauca ) in the North Atlantic
              12:00 Marisa Vedor - Behavioural shift of blue sharks in Oxygen Minimum Zones
              12:15 James Thorburn - Site fidelity, connectivity and distribution of tope (Galeorhinus galeus ) in the North East Atlantic: a multidisciplinary study
              12:30 Eva Meyers - Understanding connectivity and movement patterns of angel sharks (Squatina squatina ) in the Canary Islands
              12:45 Liam Dickson - Does spatial distribution of lemon sharks (Negaprion brevirostris ) in the wild correlate with temperament in semi-captivity?
                                                                                                                               Chatted with James Thorburn on
      13:00 - 14:00 Lunch break
                                                                                                                               email but missed his talk
             14:00 Emilio Sperone - Do the behaviour of white shark change with age and sex of individuals?
             14:15 Robert Bullock - Diary of a shark: Using accelerometry to reveal fine-scale patterns in behaviour and activity
                   Martin Romain - Integrating distribution and behavioral patterns of the juvenile blacktip reef shark ( Carcharhinus melanopterus ) in the framework of the global management lan of Moorea coral
             14:30 reef, French Polynesia                                                                                                                                   Romain: juve EFH in mar. mgt
             14:45 Jeffrey de Pauw - Notes on hatching, rearing and medical treatment of zebra shark (Stegostoma fasciatum ) juveniles
             15:00 Jeffrey de Pauw - Husbandry and transportation of the scalloped hammerhead shark (Sphyrna lewini )
             15:15 Jean-Denis Hibbitt - Managing the genetics of a captive species (Episode 2): Raja undulata                                                                              Jean: SeaLife centre
                                                                                                 "New vole of rice preseident" - Ali.
      15:30 - 16:00 Coffee break
                                                                                                 Irene Kingma & James Thorburn, tagging international idea.
      16:00 - 17:15 Session by PONG-Pesca                                                        Scientific chair: Claudia Junge
      17:15 - 18:00 EEA groups present their delegation and yearly report                        Starter pack for new EEA member groups?
      18:00 - 18:30 General assembly (EEA members only)                                          Connectivity with groups outside europe?
      18:30 - 19:00 APECE General assembly (APECE members only)
                                                                                                 EEA2016: UK, possibly Bristol. 17: France, Apecs, Helene. 18: NLD again?
              19:00 Ice-breaker at the Soleil Hotel
Shark.ch: supporting roockery bay w/ Pat O'Donnell.
Thormoregulation in the dry tortugas.                                                            I proposed sharing templates so organising is easier for everyone
                                                                                                 And connecting with groups outside europe
Germany: new project by shark-references.com                                                     Ideally: name badge with HUGE name both sides, attendees list before
                                                                                                 Registration links name & email & institution & presentation topic & picture,
Ireland: back to life again?                                                                     Populates
                                                                                                       10 attendees list & name badge. Optional plastic tag (0.5)etc
UK: could I get published in Shark Focus?
                                                                                                   Thomas Barreau: blue & flapper skate surveys in Celtic Sea, surveys observer &
                                                                                                   discards data, looking for nurseries etc.
                                                                                                   Could maybe work with him & his data to predict abundance & nurseries in Celtic Sea?
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


                                                                                                    10 October :: Saturday
           09:00 Lewis Cocks - Introduction to the ‘Shark Lagoons’ – a review of a unique elasmobranch and teleost exhibit emphasizing captive breeding successes over 17 years
           09:45 Rui Rosa - Neuro-oxidative damage and aerobic potential loss of sharks under climate change
           10:00 Ana Couto - Seasonal occurrence of basking sharks in the south of Portugal
           10:15 Henriette Grimmel - Abundance and residency patterns of whale sharks (Rhincodon typus ) at a provisioning site in Oslob, Philippines
           10:30 Rui Coelho - Distribution patterns of blue shark in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans
           10:45 Juerg Brunnschweiler - Occurrence of juvenile bull sharks (Carcharhinus leucas ) in the Navua River in Fiji
           11:00 Rui Rosa - ‘Hotspot’ of occurrence of smooth hammerhead (Sphyrna zygaena ) in the temperate NE Atlantic

    11:15 - 11:45 Coffee break

           11:45 Ana Filipa Sobral - Azores seamounts as hotspots of Mobula tarapacana aggregations
           12:00 Hemida Farid - Revised list of the sharks and rays from the Algerian basin
           12:15 Cat Gordon - Searching for Sawfish in the UK: identifying rostra holdings
           12:30 Simone Strandvad - Physiological and behavioural stress response in Scyliorhinus canicula following trawling
           12:45 Paulo Torres - Trophic ecology and bioindicator potential of the North Atlantic tope shark
           13:00 Sara Andreotti - New insights into the genetic structure of South African white sharks, Carcharodon carcharias

    13:15 - 14:15 Lunch break

           14:15 Elena Tamburin - Food preference and size hierarchy in captive sand tiger sharks
           14:30 Pablo Garcia Salinas - An unexpected predation strategy: feeding mechanism on elasmobranch egg cases by the angular rough shark Oxynotus centrina
           14:45 Colombo E.-Montano - Ontogenetic dietary of three species of pelagic sharks: Alopias pelagicus , Carcharhinus falciformis and Prionace glauca in the Marine Reserve Galápagos Island, Ecuador
           15:00 Ana Veríssimo - Biodiversity of dogfishes (genus Squalus ) in the eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean Sea – a molecular perspective
           15:15 Simone Rizzuto - Evaluation of a biopsy system to collect white shark (Carcharodon carcharias, Linnaeus 1758) muscle
           15:30 Alexis Simon - Species delimitation of carcharhinid sharks using next-generation sequencing and its implications for management
           15:45 Claudia Junge - Comparative population genomics of two highly mobile whaler shark species caught in commercial and recreational fisheries

    16:00 - 16:30 Coffee break

           16:30 Ana Ferreira - Breeding and juvenile growth of the ribbontail stingray Taeniura lymma at Oceanário de Lisboa
           16:45 Luís Alves - Assessment of blue shark (Prionace glauca ) and Atlantic waters contamination through biochemical endpoints
           17:00 Juanita Gutierrez - Mercury in muscle and liver of silky shark Carcharhinus falciformis from the Gulf of Tehuantepec, México
           17:15 Jaime Penades Suay - Composition and diversity of helminth fauna of the shortfin mako ( Isurus oxyrinchus ) and the blue shark (Prionace glauca ) in the NE Atlantic
           17:30 Dawn Watson - Colour change in the Small Spotted Catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula )
           17:45 Joana F.-Carvalho - Habitat use of bigeye thresher and smooth hammerhead sharks in the eastern Atlantic Ocean based on satellite electronic tagging
           18:00 Ilena Zanella - Conservation of scalloped hammerhead shark (Sphyrna lewini ) and its critical habitat in Golfo Dulce, Costa Rica               Definition of a shark nursery area:
           18:15 Andres Lopez - Habitat use of bull shark (Carcharhinus leucas ) in Islas Murcilelago, Golfo de Papagayo, Costa Rica                            Heupel et al 2007
                                                                                                                                                              Accoustic receivers @ Golfo Dulce
    20:00 - 23:30 Gala dinner                                                                                                                                 Also Cocos Islands Nat. Pk.
                                                                                                           11                                                 Misión Tiburón w/ David García
                                                                                                                                                              MigraMar project inc UC Davis &
                                                                                                                                                              many others
                                                                                                                                                              She's based @ Praetoma?
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


                                                                                                  11 October :: Sunday
        09:00 Sarah Fowler - Measuring and mitigating extinction risk in European Chondrichthyans
        09:15 João Correia - Can public aquaria help change the World?
        09:30 John Richardson - The Bristol Channel Skate Fishery (ICES Division VIIf): investigating sustainability and responsible consumption
        09:45 Claudia Junge - Combining forces: a multidisciplinary approach to unravel population structure in a heavily bycaught deepwater shark
        10:00 Linda Planthof - Discard survival of European skates: the need for species-specific data
        10:15 Simon Dedman - Spatial management of data-poor elasmobranchs using Boosted Regression Tree modelling
        10:30 Ali Hood - Elasmobranchs & the E.U.: advocating for effective science-based management
        10:45 Pierpaolo Brena - Environmental impact and management perspectives for shark and ray provisioning tourism

 11:00 - 11:30 Coffee break

        11:30 Irene Kingma - Introducing Save our Sharks – a campaign for shark & ray management in the Dutch Caribbean
        11:45 Jorge Fontes - Can Deep Sea Sharks respond to short term protection? Looking into the deep
        12:00 Katherin López - Reproduction of Velez ray (Raja velezi, Chirichigno 1973) in the Mexican Pacific
        12:15 Alba Martin-Lázaro - The study of the relationship between squamation pattern and lifestyle as a potential tool for ecological inferences in deep water sharks
        12:30 Bernardo Cota - Age and growth of the butterfly ray Gymnura marmorata (Cooper, 1864) in the southern occidental coast of Baja California Sur, México
        12:45 Daniela Rosa - Age and growth of the smooth hammerhead shark, Sphyrna zygaena , in the Atlantic Ocean
        13:00 Ana Hacohen-Domené - Seasonal variability in the distribution of giant manta rays Manta cf. birostris in the Mexican Caribbean Sea and evaluation of habitat suitability


 13:15 - 13:30 Closing remarks




                                                                                                        12
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


                                             ABSTRACTS


War on Ignorance: My 55 year Battle to Understand and Explain Sharks

Samuel Gruber1


1Bimini Biological Field Station




Sharks are still as mysterious to me as they were when I first met them in the late 1940s. Yet after 55
years as a marine scientist, I have lived through a great battle to understand sharks and wish to tell this
story as I saw it. As a youngster growing up in New York City in the 1940s I was already exposed to the
marine world through the magic of the American Museum of Natural History. Later When I move to Florida
In 1947 the ocean was at my doorstep. In the intervening years my focus was always on the sea, whether
it be through sports, hobbies or study. With the audience’s indulgence I would like to take them through
this journey of great discovery covering what I saw and did during the interim between then and now.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                    13
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Dynamics of whale shark and Chilean devil ray at their north Atlantic fringe habitat


Pedro Afonso1


1MARE/IMAR, University of the Azores




The highly migratory, large sized, filter feeder elasmobranchs are important yet substantially unknown
components of marine biodiversity worldwide, mostly in tropical and subtropical seas. Their importance is
grounded on the increase in scientific and public concern about the sustainability of their populations and
integrity of their habitats. W hale shark (Rhincodon typus) and Chilean devil ray (Mobula tarapacana) have
become to be two very important species for the emerging ecotourism in the Azores, north Atlantic, which
they visit in the summer, presumably as destination for their annual large scale migrations. Very little is
known of both species in their oceanic habitats. Here, we report findings of long-term monitoring programs
(underwater visual census, fisheries observer, marine tourist operators) and biotelemetric studies
conducted in the Azores. These findings shed new light on the importance of oceanic habitats for both
species, in particular those located at the limit of their distribution range in the north Atlantic.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                        14
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Essential pelagic habitat of juvenile blue shark (Prionace glauca) in the North Atlantic


Frederic Vandeperre1*, Pedro Afonso1, Alex Aires-da-Silva2, Marco Santos1, Alan Bolten3 and Ricardo Serrao Santos1


1 Department of Oceanography and Fisheries, University of the Azores, PT-9901-862 Horta, Portugal

2 Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission, 8604 La Jolla Shores Drive, La Jolla CA 92037-1508, USA

3 Archie Carr Center for Sea Turtle Research, University of Florida, PO BOX 118525 Gainesville, Florida, USA




In the North Atlantic (NA), the accessory capture of blue shark has become a key component of the
longline fisheries traditionally directed at swordfish. Even so, the management and conservation of the
species remains hampered by the poor knowledge of the complex life history of the species. In fact, like
other pelagic sharks, the species is characterized by a dynamic and intricate segregation of sex and life
stages in space and time. Insight in these dynamics is important as survival of particular life stages, in this
case of juveniles, is essential for the sustainability of the population. The objective of this research is to
define the essential pelagic habitat utilized by these juvenile life stages in terms of environmental variables
(environmental space) in order to delineate sensitive areas for management purposes. This is achieved
through the statistical modeling of both fisheries independent, i.e. satellite telemetry, and fisheries
dependent data as both data sources provide complementary information, individual movement patterns
vs. population abundance patterns respectively. The telemetry dataset consisted of tracks (up to 950
days) from 36 blue sharks of different sexes and life stages tagged with satellite transmitters (SPOT, PAT,
mini-PAT) during successive cruises near the Azores archipelago. This area is located near the center of
the blue shark distribution in the NA, i.e. where all life stages overlap, but the blue shark showed extensive
movements, covering large parts of the NA. The fisheries data consist of data from different sources
(research cruises and observers) from the central NA. We will present a novel analysis framework based
on generalized additive mixed models (GAMM) and developed for our particular case study. The results
will be discussed as well as their applicability for management.

Presentation type: Oral




                                                              15
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Behavioural shift of blue sharks in Oxygen Minimum Zones

Marisa Vedor1


1CIBIO-UP




Oxygen Minimum Zones (OMZs) are hypoxic layers delimited vertically by sharp oxyclines present in
several regions of the World’s oceans. Off Cape Verde, in the eastern tropical Atlantic, a resident OMZ is
found between 200 and 700 m depth, reaching minimum core oxygen levels of 40 µmolO2/l. However,
below 90 µmolO2/l many aerobic processes are compromised and with less than 70 µmolO2/l of dissolved
oxygen in the water only few marine organisms are able to survive like cephalopods, for instance.

Blue sharks are active swimmers with an expected high energetic requirement, and thus have a high
oxygen demand. Previous studies on billfishes have described a behavioural shift to shallower, more
oxygenated waters when in the OMZ. In the present study, the movements of satellite tracked blue sharks
within the OMZ show sharks spend up to 40% of their time in depths with less than 90 µmol O2/L of
dissolved oxygen, experiencing hypoxia at a minimum of 50 µmolO2/L. Furthermore, sharks present in the
OMZ shift their behaviour, shoaling more often to less than 500 m depth.

The population of blue sharks has been declining over the past decade due to longline fisheries.
Longliners incidence is high in the OMZ, where 47% of all the fishing effort in the tropical eastern Atlantic
occurs. Future climate change scenarios suggest both vertical and horizontal expansion of the OMZ. A
proposed loss of 20 µmolO2/L by 2100, will cause a shift of nearly 15 m in depth, increasing the overlap
between blue sharks and fishing vessels by a maximum of 35% in the first 100 m. This study aims to draw
effective conservation action plans to mitigate climate change consequences on the vulnerable population
of blue sharks.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                     16
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Site fidelity, connectivity and distribution of tope (Galeorhinus galeus) in the North East Atlantic: a
multidisciplinary study

James Thorburn1


1Aberdeen University




Tope (Galeorhinus galeus) is a common elasmobranch in the North East Atlantic (NEA) where previous
studies on mark and recapture (MR) data have struggled to find consistent movement patterns. Here, we
combine survey and MR data to investigate the distribution of immature tope, and use deployed data
storage tags (DST) to investigate depth distribution and finer scale movement to test those hypotheses
forwarded by previous MR studies. Survey and MR data showed immature tope (less than 40 cm) were
caught exclusively in continental shelf waters less than 45 m deep. Most tope remained within 500 km of
their tagging site, although some mature females had a larger, more southerly range, including
connectivity with the Mediterranean (MED), this connectivity was further evidenced by using molecular
markers to look at population structure within the NEA and MED. Groups of mature males show limited
range overlap while mature females have common ranges. Evidence of site fidelity was found in tope of all
age and sex classes. Data from one DST showed that mature females move off the continental shelf to
depths >800 m in the Bay of Biscay, while other DSTs showed that some tope remained in southern
Scottish waters for several weeks, during which males appeared to synchronize behaviour for several
days, suggesting exploitation of similar habitats. This study lends support to the hypothesis that tope in the
NEA undertake seasonal movements southwards and strengthens the evidence for some regionalization,
but does not support the concept of sex biased use of offshore habitat. There is no evidence that southerly
movements represent a mass event, and it appears some tope remain on the continental shelf all year.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                     17
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Understanding connectivity and movement patterns of angel sharks (Squatina squatina) in the
Canary Islands

Eva Meyers1,2, Joanna Barker3, David Jimenez Alvarado2, Ricardo Haroun2, Dennis Rödder1


1 ZFMK, Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Adenauerallee 160, 53113 Bonn, Germany

2 ULPGC, Universidad Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, 35001 Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain

3 ZSL, Zoological Society of London, Regent´s Park, London, NW1 4RY, UK




The critically endangered angel shark (Squatina squatina) has suffered a vast fragmentation of its former
distribution range, leaving the Canary Islands as a unique “hotspot”. Here, angel sharks are present all
year around, showing a spatial abundance gradient from the easternmost towards the westernmost
islands of the archipelago. Local recreational SCUBA divers have reported seasonal encounters of all life
stages through an online database. However, the movement patterns, connectivity and habitat use of
angel sharks in the Canary Islands are still poorly understood. We have developed an underwater and
land-based tagging and tissue sampling methodology to investigate connectivity and movement patterns
of this species within and between islands. So far, we have successfully tested the underwater tagging
methodology and tagged 54 adult and juvenile angel sharks in 4 islands using colour and numbered coded
T-bar Floy Tags. Most sharks were detected and tagged at night. Tagging efforts have focused on the
main aggregation sites identified in a previous study, particularly in nursery areas. Recaptures in
dedicated surveys and re-sightings of tagged sharks have revealed that some individuals remained in the
area for a period of time. We suggest that angel sharks show a temporal site fidelity to certain sites, e.g.
nursery areas at a certain life stage and then most probably move on the vertical axis to deeper areas.
Understanding movement patterns and connectivity of populations is crucial for the implementation of
conservation strategies for this critically endangered shark species.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                           18
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Does spatial distribution of lemon sharks (Negaprion brevirostris) in the wild correlate with
temperament in semi-captivity?


Liam Dickson1


1Bimini Biological Field Station




Whether through predator-prey dynamics, interactions with conspecifics, or reactions to its environment,
temperament (or behaviour) has a significant effect on the ways in which an individual interacts with its
surroundings, and must be taken into consideration for effective management and conservation of a
species. Behavioural studies in elasmobranchs have received little scientific attention, in part due to the
difficulty of maintaining individuals in captivity, their conservation status, and often their large size. This
study examines behavioural assay results from one of the first novel environment assays of a large-bodied
elasmobranch, the lemon shark (Negaprion brevirostris), and compares these results to spatial distribution
in the wild, using acoustic telemetry techniques. We used passive acoustic telemetry to determine home
range SURs at 95% of total detections. Data from active acoustic telemetry was used to calculate home
range estimates at 50% and 90% using minimum convex polygon (MCP) and fixed kernel estimators. We
found a significant positive correlation between activity score (novel open environment assay) and the total
number of SURs on which a shark was detected. Exploratory behaviour was correlated to number of home
range SURs (95% of total detections). Analysis of active tracking results showed a significant correlation
between activity score and mean distance to shore of tracking points, with a greater distance to shore for
sharks with high activity scores. There was no significant correlation between shark size (PCL) and activity
score, total number of detected SURs, or number of home range SURs. Our sample size was small (n=7
after filtering), and warrants repeated trials with a larger sample, however our mortality matched that of
previous experiments. Through our results, we conclude that the behaviour of lemon sharks during novel
environment tests for exploration are significantly correlated to their spatial use of habitat and their
behaviour in the wild.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                      19
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Do the behaviour of white shark change with age and sex of individuals?

Emilio Sperone1, Gianni Giglio, Giuseppe Camigliano, Giuseppe Rjillo, Francesca Riviello, Mirko Della porta, Sharon Chiriaco,
Laura Bevacqua, Armando Santoro, Marco Minervino, Sandro Tripepi, Primo Micarelli


1University of Calabria, Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences




Ten research expeditions were conducted at Dyer Island Marine Reserve (South Africa) to observe the
surface behaviour of white sharks in the presence of bait. Observations were made from a commercial
cage-diving boat. We observed 220 white sharks that exhibited 9 different types of behaviour: parading,
bait following, visual inspection, breach, tail slap, tail stand, spy hop, repetitive aerial gaping, and head-up
vertical emerging. Breach and tail slap were most often performed by male sharks, and tail slap and tail
stand were more often performed by mature animals. The general ethogram consisted of an average of 20
behavioural units, with a significant transitional pattern from bait follow to parading and from parading to
bait follow. The comparison of the ethograms between males and females did not revealed significant
correlations, but the ethograms of female white sharks were more complex with more transitions between
behavioural units. A significant correlation was observed comparing ethograms of mature and immature
white sharks: young sharks performed more complex ethograms with a higher number of behavioural
units.
The collected data suggested that the individual surface behaviour of white sharks is not a simple
stimulus–response reflex, but rather a complex tactical situation in which animals show plastic responses.
In particular, young sharks showed complex ethograms and this could be related to their low expertise.
Probably, with the grow, white sharks define their individual behaviour and need less behavioural units to
interact with the environment.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                              20
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Diary of a shark: Using accelerometry to reveal fine-scale patterns in behaviour and activity

Robert Bullock1, Cowx I.G., Elliott M., Guttridge T.G. and Gruber S.H.


1Hull International Fisheries Institute




Behaviour and activity in juvenile sharks are influenced by a range of factors including prey acquisition,
predator avoidance and physiological performance. Understanding how sharks behave within a particular
environment is requisite to understanding their requirements from it; however, due to logistical constraints
few studies have investigated the compilation of specific behaviours that influence routine behaviour.
Advancements in compact tagging technology now offers a sophisticated means to collect the quantitative
behavioural data necessary to assign causality to observed patterns of movement and activity. This study
used novel externally mounted tag packages to measure behaviour and activity in juvenile and sub-adult
lemon sharks Negaprion brevirostris, developing quantified maps of space use in a mangrove nursery
habitat. 24 sharks (86-169 LT) were caught and tagged with fin mounted accelerometer/acoustic
transmitter devices (CEFAS G6A accelerometer with Sonotronics PT4 acoustic transmitter).
Accelerometer tags recorded fine-scale acceleration data (30Hz), temperature and depth (1Hz) over a 5
day period. Active and passive acoustic telemetry were used to provide spatial data. Findings
demonstrated highly specialised use of available mangrove nursery habitat by young lemon sharks
whereby tidal phase proved to be a primary driver for both behaviour and activity levels. The study further
gives insight into the behavioural decision making processes of these sharks and considers the relevance
of this research with regard to conservation and management policy.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                                21
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Integrating distribution and behavioral patterns of the juvenile blacktip reef shark (Carcharhinus
melanopterus) in the framework of the global management plan of Moorea coral reef, French
Polynesia

Martin Romain1


1Centre de recherches insulaires et observatoire de l’environnement (CRIOBE)




Global decline in shark populations leads to uncertainty in the future status of many species and
conservation efforts are urgently needed. Marine protected areas are used increasingly as conservation
tools around the world, although their benefits to sharks remain unclear. This study attempted to integrate
the population size, life history (growth rate and mortality) and behavioral patterns (home range and
homing abilities) of juvenile blacktip reef shark (Carcharhinus melanopterus) populations in the framework
of the global management plan of Moorea Island, French Polynesia. From January to May 2012, 141
blacktip reef sharks were caught and tagged (125 juveniles, 5 sub-adults and 11 adults) within 14 sites
spread throughout the island. Using the mark-recapture approach, we provided evidence of a significant
decrease in relative juvenile population abundance throughout the period of study. We identified sites with
higher abundance than others, characterizing nursery areas or occasional foraging areas. Based on
recapture data, we refined growth rate estimate for the blacktip reef shark species; a step forward in the
knowledge of such life stage life history. Sub-sampling within a specific site allowed the first estimation of
juvenile blacktip reef sharks’ home range within the island of Moorea and evidence of home range overlap
with at least another species, the sicklefin lemon shark (Negaprion acutidens), was found. Finally, we
attempted to integrate these results within the current global management plan of Moorea coral reefs.




Presentation type: Oral




                                                             22
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Notes on hatching, rearing and medical treatment of zebra shark (Stegostoma fasciatum) juveniles


Jeffrey de Pauw1


1De Jong Marinelife




We would like to give an oral presentation because of our high amount of information we collected about
the Stegostoma fasciatum juveniles. This information contains water parameters, growth rates (weight &
length), high quality pictures, important tactics to avoid problems, early born neonates, picture of an
embryo, pictures of symptoms caused by a bacterial infection, video of shown behaviour if infected and
much more. All this information will be very useful for other institutions who have Stegostoma fasciatum
juveniles or will have juveniles in the future.
In 2013 De Jong Marinelife imported a large Stegostoma fasciatum female from the Babuyan Channel.
After one week she laid 3 egg capsules in our circular tank of 200.000 litres. A yolk sac was visible inside
of the egg cases. To create perfect circumstances for the development of the neonates we prepared an
incubation tank containing 2000 litres of water and a LSS.
After two months a strange behaviour was observed at some of the juveniles. These individuals were
breathing faster and showing a paler colour. During this behaviour these individuals were still eating
normally. Within 3 days the edges of the pectoral fins were getting inflamed and showing white mucous on
the edges. At this moment 5 individuals were showing these symptoms. A variety of swabs for bacterial
research from the infected group were taken. The swabs were sent to the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
in Utrecht. During the waiting time the symptoms got worse and at some individuals the caudal fin was
showing tissue necrosis on the bottom side. The result of the bacterial research concluded the bacteria:
Photobacterium damselae. The research also gave a list of antibiotics the Photobacterium damselae
should be sensitive to.
Within 13 months all 23 healthy juveniles were transported to other public aquaria throughout Europe.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                    23
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Husbandry and transportation of the scalloped hammerhead shark (Sphyrna lewini)

Jeffrey de Pauw1


1De Jong Marinelife




The Sphyrna lewini is one of the hardiest species during shark husbandry and do not forget about the
transportation. Only 6 institutions throughout Europe are keeping the Sphyrna lewini on display (Survey by
Reef HQ aquarium, June 2014). This makes getting new information about this species in captivity hard
and are mainly behaviourism and observation researches.
First the hammerhead sharks are kept for several months at De Jong Marinelife before they are shipped to
the institution. During this acclimatisation period knowledge has been gathered about their behaviour and
feeding, but sadly also pathology reports from sharks that died. During the presentation these pathology
reports will also be a topic to inform about possible threats which could show up at the Sphyrna lewini.
De Jong Marinelife has supplied the Sphyrna lewini to institutions throughout Europe and Israel. This
results in a lot of expertise and information that has been gathered during the husbandry and
transportation of the Sphyrna lewini. During this presentation information will be shared about the
transportation method used to travel up to 48 hours by truck with the Sphyrna lewini. During these
transports a variety of water parameters were measured. This will show the toleration these sharks can
handle during transportation.
All this information will lead to more insight about this sensitive, but beautiful shark species. This will result
in more information being shared with other institutions who are keeping the Sphyrna lewini or are going to
keep this species in the future.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                       24
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Managing the genetics of a captive species (Episode 2): Raja undulata

Jean-Denis Hibbitt1


1   Merlin Animal Welfare and Developments (SEA LIFE)


Over a number of years, UK aquaria have been collaborating in a managed breeding program for the
endangered and commercially protected undulate ray, Raja undulata.
To further enhance this program, genetic research was undertaken for the first time on this species to
establish the genetic primers and microsatellites needed to allow the development of a concise pedigree
and family tree of the existing population.
At last year’s EEA meeting the reasoning and method behind this research was explained. This year the
result of this work will be presented revealing the relatedness and genetic diversity of the population and
the discussions and conclusions that these results have generated.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                        25
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Introduction to the ‘Shark Lagoons’ – a review of a unique elasmobranch and teleost exhibit
emphasizing captive breeding successes over 17 years

Lewis N. Cocks1, Alex P. Shepherd1, Jonathan K.L. Mee1


1Issham Aquatics/AAA Aquarium Systems, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia




Issham Aquatics is the largest Aquarium Design, Construction and Operation company in the Middle East,
and has been involved in many unique aquarium projects. Often these projects are for residential Clients
who greatly value their privacy. With this proviso, we are pleased to be able to share specifics with this
year’s EEA of one of Issham’s oldest and most successful exhibits: the ‘Shark Lagoons’.
The Shark Lagoons is an artificial, outdoor, essentially-open system which focuses on Red Sea
elasmobranch and teleost species. It is one of the largest private collections of tropical elasmobranchs in
the world, all set within the privacy of the owner’s tropical gardens.
Commissioned in 1998, the system volume is approximately 1.5 million litres and currently has 12
elasmobranch species as well as numerous teleosts, sea turtles, and significant invertebrate fauna. Two
separate lagoon areas allow us to separate different size and temperament exhibit animals. Our
husbandry strategy has been to closely monitor the activity and behaviour of the exhibit animals, and to
minimize invasive handling and husbandry techniques. We believe that this is a primary reason for the
ongoing reproductive success for select elasmobranch species.
The artificial lagoons are constructed of concrete and GFRC which was specifically designed to appear as
natural and similar to the nearby Red Sea biotope as possible. In order to maintain a safe and stable water
temperature in an outdoor environment where air temperatures regularly exceed 35C for months on end
the system utilizes large volumes of natural seawater which goes through single pass sand filters. Over
the years this combination has allowed a natural recruitment of Red Sea corals, other invertebrates, and
even larval reef fish which have formed a unique living reef within the confines of artificial lagoons - that
co-exists with our larger predators – making this exhibit a one of a kind in the Aquarium World.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                         26
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Neuro-oxidative damage and aerobic potential loss of sharks under climate change

Rui Rosa1, Marta Pimentel1, José Ricardo Paula1, Ana R. Lopes1,2, Miguel Baptista1, Vanessa M. Lopes1, Katja Trübenbach1,
Derek Campos2, Vera M.F. Almeida-Val2, Mário Diniz3, Ricardo Calado4, Tiago Repolho1


1MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Laboratório Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de

Lisboa, Av. Nossa Senhora do Cabo, 939, 2750-374 Cascais, Portugal
2Laboratory for Ecophysiology and Molecular Evolution (LEEM), National Institute for Amazonian Research (INPA), Manaus, AM,

Brazil
3REQUIMTE,    Departamento de Química, Centro de Química Fina e Biotecnologia, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Quinta da Torre 2829-516, Caparica, Portugal.
4Departamento de Biologia & CESAM, Universidade de Aveiro, Campus Universitário de Santiago, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal




Sharks occupy high trophic levels in marine habitats and play a key role in the structure and function of
marine communities. Their populations have been declining worldwide by ≥90% and their adaptive
potential to future ocean conditions is believed to be limiting. Here we investigated the combined effects of
tropical ocean warming (+4 °C; 30 °C) and acidification (ΔpH=0.5) on the respiratory, neuronal and
antioxidant enzymatic machinery of recently-hatched bamboo shark (Chiloscyllium punctatum). Thirty days
post hatching, juvenile sharks revealed a significant decrease in brain aerobic potential (citrate synthase
activity) under warm acidified conditions. While brain aerobic potential was highly positively correlated with
shark survival, anaerobic capacity (lactate dehydrogenase) was negatively correlated. Also, an array of
antioxidant enzymes (glutathione S-Transferase, superoxide dismutase activity and catalase) acted in
concert to detoxify ROS, but this significant up-regulation was not enough to minimize the drastic increase
in brain’s peroxidative damage and cholinergic neurotransmission. We argue that the future conditions
may elicit deleterious deficiencies in sharks’ critical biological processes which, at the long-term, may have
detrimental cascading effects at population and ecosystem levels.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                            27
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Seasonal occurrence of basking sharks in the south of Portugal

Ana Couto1


1MARE /CIBIO




Several efforts in describing the seasonal occurrence and distribution of basking sharks have been made
in northern Europe, particularly in UK waters. However, nothing is known regarding the occurrence of this
species in the south of Portugal. Using twenty years observational data (1995 – 2015) collected within a
tuna set-net (TUNIPEX, SA) located in south Portugal (Olhão), we demonstrated that the occurrence of
basking sharks in the area is highly seasonal, with basking sharks occurring mainly in spring months,
which coincides with the beginning of the upwelling season. Data suggests that their presence is related
with lower values of chlorophyll a, sea surface temperature (SST) and three month lagged Atlantic
Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) and Artic Oscillation (AO) as well as with higher values of one month
lagged upwelling index (UI). This suggests that basking sharks are highly associated with the formation of
upwelling filaments that occur after upwelling events, which are characterised by low SST/primary
productivity, but high zooplankton biomass. The influence of AMO and AO in the presence of individuals
seems to be due to their effect on SST (negative AMO and AO – lower SST values) or/and in alterations in
intensity of trade winds which are known to affect upwelling along the coast of Portugal. This study
provides the first long-term investigation on the presence of basking sharks in southern Portugal,
increasing our knowledge on this species’ distribution and habitat use in relation with environmental
variables.
Presentation type: Oral




                                                   28
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Abundance and residency patterns of whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) at a provisioning site in
Oslob, Philippines

Henriette Grimmel1


1Large Marine Vertebrates Project Philippines (LAMAVE)




Shark viewing tourism is a burgeoning global industry. Numerous operations provide sharks with food to
increase sightings yet the effects of provisioning on shark behaviour are often poorly understood. At a
globally unique provisioning site in Oslob, Philippines, we used photo-ID surveys to assess the daily
abundance and site visitation patterns of juvenile whale sharks (Rhincodon typus), which have become
the focus of a largely unregulated, community run tourism operation since 2011. Over three years, we
identified 209 individuals at the site (a 0.065 km2 area located 50 -100 m from shore), with an average of
12.4 (SD = ± 4.8, max = 31) sharks sighted per day. Daily shark abundance increased over time and
showed strong seasonal variation, with annual peaks occurring between May and November. We
documented a spectrum of site visitation patterns ranging from single occurrence (21% of sharks
identified) to year-round residency (5% of sharks identified). For frequently sighted sharks, principal
coordinate analysis based on co-occurrence matrices revealed two primary residency groupings: highly
resident sharks (N = 9), which were seen year-round with few prolonged absences, and seasonal sharks
(N = 20), which were primarily present between May and November. The daily abundance of highly
resident sharks varied non-linearly over time with no clear trend, while the daily abundance of seasonal
sharks showed a clear increase during peak season in each year of the study. By comparing these
residency patterns with data from non-provisioned locations in the Philippines and elsewhere, we provide
insight into the impacts of provisioning on shark movements and inform the debate surrounding the future
of this controversial activity.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                         29
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Distribution patterns of blue shark in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans

Rui Coelho1,2, Jaime Mejuto, Andrés Domingo, Kotaro Yokawa, Kwang-Ming Liu, Enric Cortés, Evgeny Romanov, Charlene da
Silva, Fábio Hazin, Freddy Arocha, Aldrin Masawbi Mwilima, Pascal Bach, Blanca García-Cortés, Ana M. Ramos-Cartelle, Pedro
G. Lino, Rodrigo Forselledo, Federico Mas, Seiji Ohshimo, Wen-Pei Tsai, Philippe Sabarros, Felipe Carvalho, Miguel N. Santos.


1Centre of Marine Sciences of the Algarve (CCMAR)

2Portuguese Institute for the Ocean and Atmosphere (IPMA)




The blue shark, Prionace glauca, is the most captured shark in pelagic longline fisheries targeting tunas
and swordfish. As part of an ongoing cooperative program for fisheries and biological data collection,
information collected by fishery observers, logbooks, scientific projects and surveys from several fishing
nations in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans were compiled and analyzed, including Brazil, France, Japan,
Namibia, Portugal, Spain, South Africa, Taiwan, Uruguay, USA, USSR and Venezuela. Datasets included
information on geographic location, size and sex, in a total of 447,453 blue shark records (370,415 from
the Atlantic and 77,038 from the Indian Ocean), recorded between 1966 and 2014. Sizes ranged from 36
to 394 cm FL (fork length) and considerable variability was observed in the size distribution by region and
season. Larger blue sharks tended to occur in equatorial and tropical regions and smaller specimens in
higher latitudes in more temperate waters, both in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. Some fleets/surveys
showed bimodal size distributions, likely related with those fleets/surveys operating in several locations
throughout those Ocean. Differences in the sex ratios were also detected both spatially and seasonally.
The distributional patterns presented in this study provide a better understanding of different aspects of
blue shark distribution patterns in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans, and are currently being used on ongoing
stock assessments of this species to help promote more informed management and conservation
measures.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                              30
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Occurrence of juvenile bull sharks (Carcharhinus leucas) in the Navua River in Fiji

Diego Cardeñosa1, Juerg M. Brunnschweiler2


1School of Marine and Atmospheric Science & Institute for Ocean Conservation Science, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook,


New York 11794, USA
2Independent Researcher, Gladbachstrasse 60, CH-8044 Zurich, Switzerland




Effective species conservation requires the protection of all stages of its life-cycle. The Shark Reef Marine
Reserve on the southern coast of Viti Levu is a small entrepreneurial marine protected area where large
numbers of adult bull sharks (Carcharhinus leucas) congregate due to food provisioning. At the end of a
calendar year bull sharks leave the area for reproductive activity but nursery grounds are unknown.
Between March 2014 and January 2015 we collected Local Ecological Knowledge and conducted a fishing
survey in order to assess presence and abundance of juvenile bull sharks in the Navua River. Eighty-four
percent of fishers interviewed along the Navua River reported to either see or catch sharks up to 8 km
upriver from the river mouth. They described them as small sharks having a rounded snout and being
grey-brown in colour with a white belly, morphological characteristics that match juvenile bull sharks.
During the fishing survey a total of seven juvenile bull sharks were captured including two that were
recaptured after 108 and 92 days at liberty (recapture rate = 28.6%). Our findings suggest a low
abundance of juvenile bull sharks in the Navua Rivercaused by anthropogenic impacts such as habitat
degradation and overfishing.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                           31
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


‘Hotspot’ of occurrence of smooth hammerhead (Sphyrna zygaena) in the temperate NE Atlantic


Rui Rosa1, Ana Couto1,2, James T. Ketchum3, Miguel Guerreiro1, Miguel Furtado1, Nuno Queiroz2, André
A. Cid4, Joana Castro1,4

1MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Laboratório Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de

Lisboa, Av. Nossa Senhora do Cabo, 939, 2750-374 Cascais, Portugal
2CIBIO/InBIO, Universidade do Porto, Campus Agrário de Vairão, Rua Padre Armando Quintas, 4485-661 Vairão, Portugal

3Biotelemetry laboratory, Department of Wildlife, Fish, and Conservation Biology, University of California, Davis, Ca, USA

4Associação para a Investigação do Meio Marinho, Rua Maestro Frederico de Freitas Nº15, 1º andar, 1500-399 Lisboa, Portugal




Despite having a worldwide distribution, and being listed as ‘vulnerable’, the knowledge on the biology and
ecology of the smooth hammerhead Sphyrna zygaena in the NE Atlantic is very scarce. Here, we reveal
inter- and intra-annual fluctuations in S. zygaena abundance in the Portuguese southwest coast, using
data from a platform of opportunity for five consecutive years (2010-2014). Moreover, we also investigated
how shark abundance related to local environmental conditions and large-scale wind climatology. Besides
the description of the first ‘hotspot’ in the Atlantic region, we show a recurrent pattern of occurrence during
the warmer summer and autumn months (from July to October) near Sagres, around Martinhal bay and
islands. The intra-annual variations suggest shark movements were linked to seasonal changes in sea
surface temperature and not with a central refuging strategy. In other words, hammerheads became more
coastal in the study area during the warmer periods. Although we did not find any association between
hammerhead occurrence and several climate indexes, the inter-annual variations were negatively and
significantly associated with chlorophyll a and were marginally (positive) linked with one month lagged
upwelling index. We argue that the inter-annual differences may be related with changes in the vertical
thermal structure of the water column. Although it has been suggested, without any empirical data, that
this ‘hotspot’ may constitute a nursery ground for S. zygaena, the present data does not allow us to accept
or refute such claim. Future telemetry-based studies should be conducted to fully understand
hammerhead inshore movements and habitat preferences and evaluate the criticalness of this ‘hotspot’ for
these endangered top predators.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                               32
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Azores seamounts as hotspots of Mobula tarapacana aggregations

Ana Filipa Sobral1


1MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, University of the Azores, Dept. of Oceanography and Fisheries, 9901-862


Horta, Açores, Portugal


A lot of questions on the biology and ecology of the mobulid rays remain unanswered, delaying the
identification and implementation of adequate conservation and management measures. Located in the
middle of the Atlantic Ocean, the Azores is one of the few places in the world where large schools of M.
tarapacana are known to aggregate. Obtaining daily data on abundance and behaviour of highly migratory
pelagic species can be very challenging. Regarding these aggregations it is economically and logistically
impossible for researchers to regularly conduct research due to the fact that these aggregations are
usually located in remote places. However, it is possible to enroll divers to collect and report important
data on the occurrence and abundance of these species. In particular, through the submission of photos
which allow to obtain key information (e.g. behaviour, threats, IDs). Multi-year observational records are
relatively easy to collect and can provide vital insights into patterns of occurrence and behaviour of these
species. The aim of this work was to describe the spatial and temporal patterns of mobulid occurrence in
the region, including their aggregation dynamics, and use these data to discuss the ecological significance
of Azorean seamounts as habitats for mobulid rays.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                          33
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Revised list of the sharks and rays from the Algerian basin

Hemida F.1, Touati A.1, Capapé C.2


1Ecole Supérieure des Sciences de la Mer et du Littoral (ENSSMAL)

2 Laboratoire d'Ichtyologie Montpellier II, Sciences et Techniques du Languedoc




A systematic survey of elasmobranchs is still occurring along the Algerian basin, up-dating the list of
sharks and rays observed during marine surveys and regular visits to fish markets. Records were
compared to former lists (Hemida, 1998; Hemida and Labidi, 2001; Hemida et Labidi, 2007) and critically
evaluated by examining and accurately identifying specimens.
Twenty species of sharks (from 12 families) and 15 species of rays (genus Raja, Rostroraja and Dipturus)
have been recorded, using international identification keys (Bauchot and Pras, 1980; Compagno, 1984;
Whitehead & al., 1986; Fisher et al., 1987) and new criteria. A drastic decrease of the number of shark
species is noticed (30 to 20).Personal works on systematic showed that Centrophorus and Mustelus, in
the studied area, are considered as complexes (Hemida & al., 2009; Hemida & al., 2011) and include only
one species each. Requiem sharks may be considered less frequent inhabitants of at least the Algerian
basin, in the last few years: only Carcharhinus brachyurus occurs but rarely. Meanwhile Prionace glauca is
still frequent and abundant alongside the Algerian coast, as Hexanchus griseus, and Alopias vulpinus.
These species are regularly present in the markets and are consumed like the other commercial fishes.
As regards rays, there is no significant change except for Dipturus Rafinesque, 1810. Two species of this
genus occur in the Mediterranean (Fischer et al., 1987): D. oxyrhincus (Linnaeus, 1758) and D. batis
(Linnaeus, 1758). These rays share similar characters and determination remained uncertain for some
specimens. A recent study (Hemida & al., 2015) showed a taxonomic uncertainty regarding the putative
species of this genus. The results demonstrate clearly that Dipturus nidarosiensis (Storm, 1881) occurs in
the Algerian basin. Conversely, Dipturus batis is no more valid in this area.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                               34
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Searching for Sawfish in the UK: identifying rostra holdings

Cat Gordon1


1The Shark Trust




Sawfish are large shark-like rays, characterised by a distinct toothed rostrum (or saw). Sawfish inhabit
shallow coastal waters in tropical and subtropical countries, where they are exposed to coastal fisheries.
The rostra, which can be more than one quarter of the total body length, can easily become entangled in
fishing gear (particularly trawls and gillnets) leading to incidental capture. Rostra are highly prized for
medicinal and cultural purposes, as well as sold as curios in the tourist trade. Subsequently, all five
species of Sawfish are now classified as Endangered or Critically Endangered on the IUCN Red List.
Recent IUCN assessments recognised that sawfish are arguably the most threatened family of marine
fishes.
As a member of the Sawfish Network, the Shark Trust will work in collaboration with Network colleagues,
including the Sawfish Conservation Society (SCS), to deliver on a number of actions listed in the recent
Global Sawfish Conservation Strategy. In particular; increasing awareness, compliance with CITES
regulations and mobilising a coordinated community. The SCS is assisting researchers to establish the
‘See a Saw’ programme with pro-forma datasheets for citizen scientists and researchers feeding a central
database. The Shark Trust will be securing information on the extent of rostra holdings in the UK, including
details of species (using tooth count), social history and where possible, a sample for DNA analysis. The
information collated will contribute to research efforts in international studies and made readily available
for future research – findings will further our understanding of these fishes and thus conservation efforts.
With sawfish non-native to the UK, all rostra specimens are imported artefacts - while some may be
contemporary, purchased since the listing of sawfish on CITES, many artefacts will likely predate CITES
listing.
With a number of grey areas associated with the implications of ownership of pre-listed CITES artefacts,
the Shark Trust is also liaising with relevant authorities to clarify the implications of ownership, particularly
with regards companies/businesses which may be perceived to be indirectly profiting from the display of
such artefacts.



Presentation type: Oral




                                                       35
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Physiological and behavioural stress response in Scyliorhinus canicula following trawling

Simone Strandvad1


1Aarhus University




Small-spotted catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula) are a common bycatch in trawl net, but are discarded due
to low commercial value. Earlier studies show that catshark have a high survival rate to discard, but little is
known about how their behaviour and physiology is affected by being caught in trawl nets. A trawl
simulator was constructed in the lab and adult and juvenile small-spotted catshark were trawled for
4hours. Routine activity and forage activity of both adult and juvenile catshark were monitored 24h before
and after trawl. Behaviour were then expresses as percentage of activity during 24h observation and for
half an hour of foraging. Blood samples were taken from adult catsharks by venal puncture before and
after trawl. Blood samples were used for haematocrit and tested for levels of glucose and lactate. Oxygen
consumption after a trawl were measured on adult catsharks by indirect respirometer. In February 2015
the research vessel Dana went on a bottom trawl survey in the North Sea and for all catsharks caught.
Blood from those catsharks were used to compare with samples taken in the lab. Juvenile catsharks
became significant less active after trawl, whereas there was no significant difference in activity in adult
catsharks. Haematocrit levels increased significantly showing a regulation in oxygen transport to the
muscles. Glucose levels increased after trawl indicating allocation of energy storage. Lactate increased
after trawl showing a certain level of anaerobe metabolism during the trawl. The samples collected on the
research vessel were comparable with those taken in the lab.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                      36
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Trophic ecology and bioindicator potential of the North Atlantic tope shark

Paulo Torres1


1CIBIO, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, InBIO Laboratório Associado, Pólo dos Açores




Sharks are marine top predators vital in maintaining ecosystem health and food web structure. In order to
assess tope shark (Galeorhinus galeus) trophic ecology, stable isotope ratios and trace metal
concentrations in muscle tissue were determined, according to size and gender, for 124 individuals caught
within the Mid-Atlantic region. Data was complemented and analysed according to previous stomach
content information and compared with studies performed in the North East Atlantic. Our results revealed
that tope sharks fed at a low trophic level and within a more pelagic-based food web when compared with
other North Atlantic regions. MixSIR application reflected its piscivorous diet and study area topography,
oligotrophic waters and volcanic nature, suggesting the occurrence of a Mid-Atlantic tope shark
population. Considering a non-anthropogenic volcanic source for observed metal contents, the results
reflect bioaccumulation and suggest biomagnification processes for As and Hg. These metals exceeded
legislated maximum limits for some countries with a maximum of 28.98 ± 1.26 and 0.57 ± 0.01 mg kg-1
wet weight, respectively, increasing significantly with size for both males and females. Conversely, Cr, Rb
and Zn were relatively stable while Cd and Pb were not detected. Hg and Se were strongly correlated,
suggesting a Se toxicity mitigation role. Given tope shark travel capacity and the results obtained, the
species may be used as a Mid-Atlantic bioindicator of environmental quality.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                            37
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


New insights into the genetic structure of South African white sharks, Carcharodon carcharias

Sara Andreotti1, Sophie Von der Heyden1, Romina Henriques1, Michael Rutzen2, Michael Meÿer3, Herman Oosthuizen3, Conrad
A. Matthee1


1Evolutionary Genomics Group, Department of Botany and Zoology, Private Bag X1, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch 7600,

South Africa
2Shark Diving Unlimited, Kleinbaai, Gansbaai, 7220, South Africa

3Department of Environmental Affairs, Branch Oceans and Coasts, Private Bag X2, Roggebaai 8012, South Africa




The white shark (Carcharodon carcharias L.) is one of oldest shark lineages, with an evolutionary history
dating back to ~about 14 Ma. This species has a nearly worldwide distribution, with individual sharks
having the potential for dispersing large distances. The South African coastline represents one of the
major aggregation areas for white sharks in the world and anecdotal evidence suggests that the species
occurs along the entire coastline. However, previous genetic studies indicated that the heterogenic nature
of South African coastline resulted in disjointed genetic patterns of several continuously distributed
species, corresponding to the main biogeographic provinces. In the case of the white shark, both thermal
fronts and female site philopatry have been identified as limiting dispersal in Australia. It is thus a
possibility that the South African aggregation sites also correspond to different genetically identifiable sub-
population units. This study provides new insights into white shark evolution by determining the genetic
structure of the white shark population around the South African coastline. Mitochondrial (839bp) and
microsatellite analyses (14 loci) were performed on 302 free ranging white sharks, sampled between 2010
and 2014, from five known aggregation sites along the coastline. Genetic diversity, local population sub-
structuring analyses and local phylogeographic patterns evidenced a lack of geographic sub-structuring for
both the mtDNA and nuclear DNA data. Although two divergent mtDNA haplogroups were detected, the
data sets show a remarkably low level of intraspecific genetic diversity. The observed South African
mtDNA biogeographic pattern, and low diversity levels, may be a consequence of a severe bottleneck or a
recent colonization event from one or two sources.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                              38
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Food preference and size hierarchy in captive sand tiger sharks

Elena Tamburin1,Dino Scaravelli2, Stefania Puce3


1Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas,   IPN s/n Street, Col. Playa Palo de Santa Rita, 23096, La Paz, Baja California Sur,
  México.
2Department of Veterinary Medical Sciences, Bologna University, 50 Tolara di sopra street, Ozzano Emilia, Bologna, Italy.

3Stefania Puce PhD, Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Polytechnic University of Marche, Brecce Bianche street,

  60131 Ancona, Italy.


Sand tiger sharks (Carchariastaurus) is one of the most frequent species in aquarium exhibitions, however
the IUCN classifyit as vulnerable. This specie is protected in Australia, Africa and South America and it is
in the list of prohibited species by the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), due to the strongly
impact of sport fishery on it.
Observations in aquariums and in the field allow discovering that their diet is mainly based on teleostean
fishes and cephalopods. Individual preferences exist and are probably related to the sharks’ behavior and
social interactions inside the group.
A research was carried out in the Cattolica Aquarium (Italy) during the period 2006-2012 to investigate the
individual feeding preferences and the social interactions in five sand tiger sharks.
The animals, four females and one male, were identified by body marks. The diet data were collected
during the feeding sessions by the aquarium staff and in 2012 were carried out behavioral observations by
focal animal sampling method.
Each shark showed food preferences, also independent from environmental parameters such as
temperature and photoperiod. Sex, age and geographic origin of the specimens resulted factors
conditioning their food choices.
Based on 1350 minutes of behavioral observations, sharks showed a social hierarchy related to size:larger
specimens act as dominant, medium sized try to emerge from the group and the smallest shark try to
reduce interactions with the bigger ones.
Therefore, this investigation puts in evidence that sharks can express food preferences in relation to the
regularity of food offered in captivity and the role of social relationships in the shark group.




Presentation type: Oral




                                                                 39
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


An unexpected predation strategy: feeding mechanism on elasmobranch egg cases by the angular
rough shark Oxynotus centrina

Pablo García-Salinas1, Javier Guallart1


1University of Valencia




The angular rough shark Oxynotus centrina has been considered as a suction feeder predator of worm-
like preys and small crustaceans. However, recent evidences obtained from specimens maintained in
different exhibition aquaria have shown that they can survive and grow healthy over a long period by
feeding exclusively on elasmobranchs eggs content.
The process followed by the shark, making a small hole and sucking its content, leaves specific predation
marks on the egg case. We analyse here predation marks made by three specimens of Oxynotus centrina
kept in two different aquaria on eggs cases belonging to four elasmobranch species: Scyliorhinus
canicula, S. stellaris, Raja undulata and R. microocellata.
A total of 329 predation marks have been studied in order to analyse differences left by Oxynotus centrina
on the egg cases. Each egg case was studied fresh or rehydrated, measuring four parameters in the main
hole and the surrounding teeth marks.
The study of the marks suggests a unique mechanism of suction feeding predation: the upper jaw holds
the egg, while the middle teeth in bottom jaw make an incision. Then a semi-circular hole is created while
the animal sucks the egg content and tears the capsule.
According to our data, depending on weight, size, and roughness of the egg case, the marks are slightly
different. Therefore, marks found in the egg cases of Scyliorhinus spp. tend to be longer and narrower;
while marks over Raja spp. are shorter and wider.
Predation on elasmobranch eggs cases by other zoological groups has been previously documented, but
present study constitutes the first time that a mechanism of these features is described and confirmed for
several specimens of angular rough sharks. In addition, characterization of the marks on stranded and/or
predated eggs, could serve as an indirect evidence of the presence of the shark in some regions.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                     40
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Ontogenetic dietary of three species of pelagic sharks: Alopias pelagicus, Carcharhinus
falciformis and Prionace glauca in the Marine Reserve Galápagos Island, Ecuador

Colombo Estupiñán-Montaño1, Felipe Galván-Magaña1, Diego Páez-Rosas2, Fernando Elorriaga Verplancken1, Alberto Sánchez
González1, Leonardo Abitia-Cárdenas1


1Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas,   IPN s/n Street, Col. Playa Palo de Santa Rita, 23096, La Paz, Baja California Sur,
  México.
2Programa PROMETEO. Secretaria Nacional de Educación Superior, Ciencia, Tecnología e Innovación. Calle Whymper E7-37 y

  Alpallana. Quito, Ecuador


The sharks are top predators, which play an important role in the energy regulation within the trophic web.
Therefore investigate the variability of sharks isotopic niche through time allow us to understand the
dynamic of the ecosystem. Our target is to study the ontogenetic dietary of three species of sharks in the
Marine Reserve Galápagos Island using stables isotopes (δ13C and δ15N). A total of 685 collagen vertebral
powder samples were collected for pelagic thresher shark Alopias pelagicus (n=353), silky shark
Carcharhinus falciformis (n=200) and blue shark Prionace glauca (n=132). The mean isotopic signal for A.
pelagicus was -14.2±0.7‰ δ13C and 9.8±1.4‰ δ15N; in C. falciformis it was of -14.3±0.7‰ δ13C and
11.9±0.9‰ δ15N, and in P. glauca was -14.9±0.6‰ δ13C and 15.5±2.1‰ δ15N. The δ13C in males (-
14.3‰±0.5) and female (-14.1±0.8‰) of A. pelagicus were statically different (p=0.001), in spite of δ15N
that present similar values (male = 9.8±1.3‰; female = 9.7±1.5‰; p = 0.32). The C. falciformis presented
equal values for δ13C (-14.3±0.7‰, p=0.69) for both male and female, but presented different values in
δ15N (male = 11.8±0.9‰; female = 12.2±0.9; p=0.003). For P. glauca the δ13C signals in male (-
15.1±0.6‰) were different from female values (-14.8±0.6‰) (p=0.01) and about δ15N, both males
(15.2±1.2‰) and females (15.8±2.0‰) showed similar values (p=0.09). Isotopic niche analysis defined A.
pelagicus (σ2=1.4) and P. glauca (σ2 =2.6) as opportunistic predator and C. falciformis (σ2=0.9) as
specialist predators. The analysis of δ13C and δ15N enrichment relative showed ontogenetic change in the
feeding habits in the three species, this suggest change in the habitat use and the trophic position through
the growth.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                                 41
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Biodiversity of dogfishes (genus Squalus) in the eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean Sea – a
molecular perspective

Ana Veríssimo1, A. M. Griffiths, D. Zaera-Perez, R. Leslie, S. Iglésias, B. Séret, P. Grigoriou, C. Gubili, J. Navarro, C. Duffy


1CIBIO – University of Porto




The genus Squalus, or dogfishes, includes many coastal shark species commonly caught in commercial
fisheries around the world. Despite their abundance, species diversity within Squalus is still poorly
understood. In fact, recent studies on the Indo-Pacific region have described several new species,
highlighting the need for revisionary taxonomic work clarifying and discriminating the different taxa. Less
attention has been paid to the diversity of Squalus in the Atlantic Ocean sensulato, where only five species
have been reported out of the 27 species currently accepted for the genus, namely S. acanthias, S.
blainville, S. megalops, S. mitsukurii, and S. cubensis. Notwithstanding, species identification across the
region appears to be very inconsistent and there is great taxonomic uncertainty among some of the
Atlantic Squalus, particularly between S. megalops and S. blainville. This situation has contributed to the
present confusion in species identification in the region, thus compromising the effectiveness and
adequacy of any management and conservation efforts. In an initial effort to contribute to a comprehensive
and clear alpha taxonomy of this highly diverse worldwide-distributed genus, we applied molecular genetic
markers (mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase I and NADH-dehydrogenase 2) aiming to evaluate the number
of discrete genetic lineages within Squalus in the eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean Sea. Furthermore,
we compared this regional lineage diversity to that found worldwide, using publicly available data. Our
results confirm the inconsistencies in species identification in the eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean. For
instance, putative S. blainville and S. megalops sampled across the Mediterranean and along the eastern
Atlantic from Portugal to South Africa clustered together in a single clade, sister to the clade of the
Australian S. megalops (i.e. from the type location). Our data also indicate the presence of three highly
divergent genetic lineages of Squalus in the Mediterranean Sea, comprising three distinct species.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                                  42
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Evaluation of a biopsy system to collect white shark (Carcharodon carcharias, Linnaeus 1758)
muscle

Simone Rizzuto1,4, Georgia French2, Marlene Sturüp2, Alison Towner3, Letizia Marsili4, William Hughes2, Johannes H. van Wyk1


1Stellenbosch University, Department of Botany and Zoology, South Africa

2Sussex University, Brighton, UK

3University of Rhodes, Grahamstown, South Africa

4Università degli Studi di Siena, Italy




White sharks are protected in several countries under national legislation through the Convention of
Migratory Species (CMS) and the Convention of the International Trade in Endangered Wild Flora and
Fauna (CITES), considered as vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).
The conservation status of this top predator calls for increased research effort to support effective
management of white shark populations. For this purpose, it is necessary to develop minimally invasive
methods, such as obtaining biopsies, as an alternative to sacrificing animals or relying on naturally
deceased ones, to study physiological, genetic and toxicological endpoints. In 2015, dermis and muscle
tissue biopsies were collected from 32 white sharks (from 2.5 to 4.6 m total length) in the licensed
Gansbaai shark cage diving area (South Africa). We evaluated the success rate of “Finn Larsen Ceta
Darts” sampling probes. Dermis success rate (DSR) and Muscle Success Rate (MSR) is defined as the
percentage of biopsy samples containing the respective tissues. The results showed high DSR (84.61%)
and MSR (79.49%), suggesting that probes (4 cm length and 0.9 cm diameter) are able to penetrate white
shark dermal layer (0.99 ± 0.05 cm) collecting sufficient muscle tissue (1.64 ± 0.11 cm) for a variety of
analyses. We also evaluated the behavioral responses of the sharks to biopsy in addition to the time
period between the biopsy and the moment the shark was sighted again. The most observed behavior
(N=18), was “no reaction”, followed by an increase in speed and/or change of direction (N=14). Of the 32
sampled sharks, 29 were sighted again following the biopsy event in an average of 19 minutes, and the
other 3 were seen again not more than a day later. This study supports the hypothesis that tissue biopsy is
not only a useful method to collect high quality tissue samples (including dermis an muscle tissue), but
also minimally affects the behavior of white sharks.




Presentation type: Oral




                                                             43
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Species delimitation of carcharhinid sharks using next-generation sequencing and its implications
for management

Alexis Simon1,2, Charlie Huveneers3,4, Bronwyn M. Gillanders1,5,Geremy Cliff6, Stephen C. Donnellan7,8, Claudia Junge1,5*


1Southern Seas Ecology Laboratories, School of Biological Sciences, The University of Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia;

2École NormaleSupérieure, 45 rue d’Ulm, 75005, Paris, France;

3South Australian Research and Development Institute (SARDI), Australia;

4School of Biological Sciences, Flinders University, GPO Box 2100, Adelaide, Australia 5001

5The Environment Institute, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia

6 KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board, South Africa

7Australian Centre for Evolutionary Biology and Biodiversity, The University of Adelaide, Australia;

8South Australian Museum, North Terrace, Adelaide, SA 5000, Australia




Species delimitation of vertebrates is difficult when taxa are poorly divergent in morphology. A thorough
statistical analysis based on morphology would require a global scale sampling effort. The development of
next generation sequencing coupled with coalescent methods is a powerful approach to dissect species
complexes in such cases. Many shark species of the genus Carcharhinus are economically important
targets in fisheries around the globe. Their life-history traits make those species vulnerable to overfishing.
Yet, due to their phenotypical similarities, theyare hard to distinguish and often taxonomically confused,
making their management and conservation difficult. Previous morphological variation analyses of copper
sharks Carcharhinus brachyurus did not detect divergent groups whereas mitochondrial DNA variation
suggested potential divergence to sub-species level. This has however never been tested explicitly. Here,
we use restriction-site associated DNA (RAD) sequencing resulting inthousands of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) across the genome to assess the genetic diversity in copper sharks. Our analyses
of >3,000 SNPs as well as mitochondrial markers using i) principal component analysis, ii) coalescent
method, and iii) neighbour network analysis showed a clear divergence between individuals from each
side of the Indian ocean. Based on genetic, ecological and historical phylogeographic data, we propose
the split of the South-African individuals into a new taxon. Management and conservation projects require
accurate phylogenies and this work is a step forward towards a better understanding and delimitation of
conservation units.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                                 44
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Comparative population genomics of two highly mobile whaler shark species caught in
commercial and recreational fisheries

Claudia Junge1,2, Stephen C. Donnellan3,4, Charlie Huveneers5,6, Corey Bradshaw1,2, Alexis Simon1,7, Bronwyn M. Gillanders1,2


1Southern Seas Ecology Laboratories, School of Biological Sciences, University of Adelaide, Australia;

2Environment Institute, University of Adelaide, Australia

3Australian Centre for Evolutionary Biology and Biodiversity, University of Adelaide, Australia;

4South Australian Museum, Australia;

5South Australian Research and Development Institute (SARDI), Australia;

6Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia

7École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France




Many shark species have a high innate risk of overexploitation from fisheries due to their economic value,
slow maturity, and low recruitment compared to teleosts. Severe local population declines have worldwide
motivated many National Plans of Action for the Conservation and Management of elasmobranchs. One
way to optimise sustainable fisheries management is through the application of spatially explicit population
models. However, the required baseline information is severely lacking for many shark species. Important
parameters like population connectivity have been notoriously difficult and time-intensive to estimate. We
here implemented a comprehensive genomic approach using thousands of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) to quantify the population structure of two commercially fished shark species:
bronze whaler (Carcharinus brachyurus) and dusky shark (C. obscurus). Both species are distributed
globally and have the ability to travel several thousand kilometres. In South and Western Australia both
species are fished extensively yet their level of population connectivity remains unresolved throughout
Australasia. We tested i) the accuracy of correct species identification, ii) several genetic connectivity
scenarios and iii) the usefulness of neutral vs. putatively selected loci. We found evidence for panmixia
within Australasia for both species, whereby both types of loci revealed the same lack of population sub-
structure. Our study presents a straightforward and powerful approach to investigate population genetic
connectivity in non-model, fisheries-targeted species. Furthermore, our results imply that these two
carcharhinid sharks must be managed above regional scales, potentially even on a global scale, to ensure
their future persistence. Ultimately, this data will, together with chemistry and life history data, be
incorporated into spatially explicit population models for effective fisheries management.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                                 45
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Breeding and juvenile growth of the ribbontail stingray Taeniura lymma at Oceanário de Lisboa.

Ana Ferreira1


1Oceanário de Lisboa




Elasmobranchs are among the most threatened marine species at a global scale, mostly affected by over-
fishing and habitat loss. It is now recognized the urgent need to adopt effective measures for in situ and ex
situ conservation of these animals. The ribbontail stingray, Taeniura lymma (Forsskål, 1775) is a very
attractive species for public aquariums. It is classified as "near threatened" by the IUCN and considered a
strong candidate for a captive breeding program. In 2007, the European Studbook for T. lymma was
implemented, to monitor the status and trend of the captive population, being coordinated by Oceanário de
Lisboa. This study describes the establishment of a breeding group through monitoring, target feeding and
animal training, for desensitization to clinical exams and biometric data collection. Environmental and
water quality parameters were defined and controlled, to promote the welfare of breeding adults and
juveniles. Successful breeding was achieved and pregnant females were monitored until the end of
gestation. Fifteen rays were born with litters ranging from one to two pups. Gestation period ranged from
128 to 203 days. The neonates were subjected to a feeding and data collection protocol to assess their
growth. No significant differences were found in the birth size and weight, between sexes or litter sizes.
Growth in weight fitted a linear regression model and a growth of 3.25g.day -1 rate was estimated. The
individuals weight increase after thirty, sixty and ninety days was also significantly different however, and it
could not be associated with the juveniles’ gender or litter size. This study intends to be a tool for
replication of such programs in other institutions that keep this species. It will also increase the knowledge
of this species biology and might contribute to the future establishment of effective conservation actions.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                      46
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Assessment of blue shark (Prionace glauca) and Atlantic waters contamination through
biochemical endpoints

Luís Miguel Fonseca Alves1, Margarida Nunes2, Philippe Marchand2, Bruno Le Bizec2, Susana Mendes1, João Correia1, Marco
F.L. Lemos1 & Sara C. Novais1


1MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, ESTM, Instituto Politécnico de Leiria, 2520-641 Peniche, Portugal

2LUNAM Université, Oniris, Laboratoire d’Étude des Résidus et Contaminants dans les Aliments (LABERCA), F-44307 Nantes,


France


Marine ecosystems are constantly being loaded with contaminants like persistent organic pollutants
(POPs) and heavy metals. There is a need to link these measurements with biological endpoints, for
example through the assessment of enzymatic activities. Big pelagic apex predators, like the blue shark
Prionace glauca, are particularly affected by pollution. Their huge distributions, abundance and frequent
capture by commercial fishing boats, make them potentially good species for biomonitoring studies.
This study aimed to assess the potential of P. glauca as a sentinel species for pollution monitoring
surveys, using biochemical biomarkers. Twenty blue sharks were sampled of the coast of Portugal, aboard
a commercial swordfishing boat. Concentrations of both POPs and trace elements, as well the levels of
biochemical parameters related with detoxification, oxidative stress, energy metabolism and neuronal
functions, were assessed. The characterization of the cholinesterases (ChE) present in muscle and brain
tissues of P. glauca was made to evaluate their potential for further biomonitoring studies. The results
suggest that the brain seems to contain atypical ChE, presenting mixed properties of two ChE types
whereas the muscle seems to contain mostly acetylcholinesterase. The brain seems the most suitable for
detection of exposure to low concentrations of anticholinergic compounds in the environment.
Contaminants were present in greater concentrations in liver, when compared to muscle. Positive and
negative correlations were found between physiological parameters and contaminant accumulation levels
and some suitable biomarker candidates were identified. ChE and Dna damage showed strong
correlations with contaminants concentration levels, with the first proving to be a very sensitive and
reliable biomarker of exposure to POPs.
This study highlights the usefulness of biochemical parameters, when combined with pollutant body
burden determinations, to assess effects of contaminants and demonstrates the great potential of P.
glauca to be used as a sentinel of marine pollution, through the use of suitable biomarkers.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                            47
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Mercury in muscle and liver of silky shark Carcharhinus falciformis from the Gulf of Tehuantepec,
México

Juanita Rodríguez-Gutiérrez.1, Galván-Magaña F. and Arreola-Mendoza L.


1Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas.


Aav. Instituto Politécnico Nacional s/n col. Playa Palo de Santa Rita Apdo. Postal 592.
Código postal 23096. La Paz, Baja California Sur, México


High concentrations of mercury (Hg) in the environment is more alarming, because of its properties of
bioaccumulation and biomagnification along the food chain. The food is the main route to absorption into
the body (90%) and the central nervous and endocrine systems are targets affected by this xenobiotic.
Mercury and their organic compounds in the marine environment represent a potential health hazard for
the most vulnerable top predators like sharks and for humans through the seafood, due to accumulated
higher concentrations associated frequently to sharks longevity. A continuing concern is the use of shark
resources, considering that they are top predators and are constantly exploited as a source of food
throughout the year. The presence of Hg in 122 silky sharks caught in the Gulf of Tehuantepec, Mexico
was determined. In this area around of 3300 tons. are caught every year. We analized silky shark tissues
(muscle and liver) to determine if the total Hg is permissible for human consumption (Less than 1 μg/g wet
weight). We do not found correlation between concentration of mercury in both tissues and the total length
of female, males, neonates and juveniles stages. However, there are significant differences between the
mercury concentration in liver and muscle in both sexes (higher in hepatic tissue) and in both stages of
maturity (neonates and juveniles). We found that Hg concentration in muscle remain (0.1526±0.038 μg/g
wet weight) into the limits for human consumption from neonates and juveniles.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                                48
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Composition and diversity of helminth fauna of the shortfin mako (Isurus oxyrinchus) and the blue
shark (Prionace glauca) in the NE Atlantic

Jaime Penadés Suay1


1Universidad de Valencia, Instituto Cavanilles de Biodiversidad y Biología Evolutiva (ICBiBE – Unidad de Zoología Marina)




The present study describes the intestinal parasite community of 29 juvenile and adult specimens of
shortfin mako (Isurus oxyrinchus) and 16 specimens of blue shark (Prionace glauca). The specimens were
captured by longline fishery in the northeast Atlantic Ocean. Adult specimens of 4 species of cestodes
were identified in makos: Molicola sp. (Trypanorhyncha) with prevalence 3.4%, Crossobothrium sp. with
prevalence 17.2% and two species of Rhodobothrium (Tetraphyllidea) with prevalences 82.8% and 10.3%,
respectively. Immature specimens of Nybelinia sp. (Trypanorhyncha, 17.2%) and Dinobothrium sp.
(Tetraphyllidea; 3.4%) were also found. Mean species richness and mean total helminth abundance per
host were 1.34 (± 0.84 SD) and 28.93 (± 56.01 SD), respectively. In the case of blue sharks, 9 cestode
species were identified. Four were identified at species level: Molicolahorridus, Anthobothrium laciniatum,
Platybothrium auriculatum and Prosobothrium armigerum; being their prevalences 18.8%, 62.3%, 62.5%
and 68.8%, respectively. The other five were only identified at genus level. From the order
Phyllobothriidea, Paraorygmatobothrium sp. (6.3%) and two of the same genus, Phyllobothriinae“a” (6.3%)
and “b” (6.3%). Two other genus were identified: Trypanorhyncha sp. (Trypanorhyncha, 6.3%) and
Tetraphyllidea sp. (Tetraphyllidea, 31.3%). Mean species richness was 2.7 (± 1.3 SD) and mean total
helminth abundance per host was 31.9 (± 36.2 SD). In both cases, parasite species composition per host
did not depart from the null hypothesis of independent colonization of each species. Host size and sex
were not significant predictors of the abundance of any cestode species or species richness per host. The
species-poor, randomly assembled helminth communities per host found in these large sharks differ from
those found in coastal, benthic-pelagic elasmobranchs and resemble those described in other large
oceanic predators such as cetaceans, marine turtles and marine birds. We suggest that the vagile
behaviour and opportunistic diet of these predators, coupled with a “dilution” effect on infective stages in
the pelagic realm, could generate poor and unpredictable helminth assemblages, generating a “Pelagic
Predator Syndrome”.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                              49
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Colour change in the Small Spotted Catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula)

Dawn Watson1


1Bangor University




Colour adaption in the animal kingdom is a key part of evolutionary survival which is often overlooked
despite its convergent evolution across many phyla. Colour change in elasmobranchs has been poorly
studied, and it is largely forgotten about when examining the relationship between sharks and their
environment. For benthic sharks, such as the small spotted catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula), being able to
match the local surroundings would enable juveniles, in particular, to avoid detection increasing the
likelihood of survival. The field of morphological colour change in elasmobranchs needs to be updated with
the use of modern analysis techniques. For my Masters project I undertook an investigation to assess the
effect of substrate and light conditions on morphological colour adaption in juvenile Small Spotted Cat
sharks (S. canicula) using modern techniques. The juveniles (n=16) were placed individually into
experimental tanks with a combination of substrate and lighting conditions. The sharks were photographed
daily and these photographs were analysed through techniques developed to measure Skin Brightness,
Skin Saturation, Spot Diameter and Spot Number. Statistical analysis found that substrate has a
significant effect on Spot Diameter and Skin Brightness. Light levels appeared to have an effect, although
not a uniformly significant one over all conditions. The skin saturation data showed a more complex
relationship, as it appeared to interact with the other colour measures to produce differing degrees of
variation within the saturation data. Spot number remained the same throughout the experiment. All
results showed that the juvenile S. canicula were (reacting to the experimental environment) by changing
their colouration and patterning in order to become more cryptic. This is the first study to quantify
morphological colour change in juvenile S. canicula.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                       50
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Habitat use of bigeye thresher and smooth hammerhead sharks in the eastern Atlantic Ocean
based on satellite electronic tagging

Joana Fernandez-Carvalho1,2, Rui Coelho1,2 & Miguel N. Santos1,2


1Centre of Marine Sciences of the Algarve (CCMAR)

2Portuguese Institute for the Ocean and Atmosphere (IPMA)




Pelagic longliners targeting swordfish and tunas in oceanic waters regularly capture several elasmobranch
species as bycatch, including currently protected species as the bigeye thresher (Alopias superciliosus)
and the smooth hammerhead (Sphyrna zygaena). This paper presents results from 15 bigeye threshers
(725 tracking days) and 5 smooth hammerheads (90 tracking days) tagged with pop-up archive satellite
tags in 2012-2014 in the tropical NE Atlantic. State-space models using unscented Kalman filtering were
used to process and analyze the daily geo-location estimates, and follow the sharks’ daily movements. In
terms of depth and temperature preferences, strong diel vertical movement patterns were observed for the
bigeye threshers with the juveniles spending most of the daytime at depths of 360-390m and the nighttime
at 30-60m, while the adults showed a shorter depth range spending most of daytime at 240-270m and the
night at 90-120 m. For the smooth hammerheads no major differences were detected between
day/nighttime periods, with the juveniles occupying mainly the 0-10m depth range and the adults slightly
deeper waters of 30-40m. The operating pelagic longline gear was measured with Minilog Temperature
and Depth Recorders (TDRs), and the overlaps with habitat utilization calculated. The overlaps are higher
for the bigeye thresher juveniles and is taking place mainly during the night. The results shown are part of
several ongoing Projects to study the habitat utilization of those species in the Atlantic. The results
presented can now be used as inputs for Ecological Risk Assessments for sharks captured in oceanic
tuna fisheries, and serve as a basis for efficient management and conservation of these pelagic sharks.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                             51
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Conservation of scalloped hammerhead shark (Sphyrna lewini) and its critical habitat in Golfo
Dulce, Costa Rica


Ilena Zanella1


1Asociación Conservacionista Misión Tiburón




The scalloped hammerhead shark, Sphyrna lewini, is an endangered and emblematic shark species in the
Eastern Tropical Pacific Seascape (ETPS). It is characterized for being migratory. Females give birth to
their young in coastal waters. Here, the young are afforded food and protection while they grow and reach
sexual maturity. When sharks reach their adult stage, they begin large migrations. Aggregation sites for
S.lewini have been identified on several oceanic islands in the ETPS, but little is known about their use of
coastal areas. This study aims to describe S. lewini movements in aggregation sites of Golfo Dulce, South
Pacific of Costa Rica. Fisheries-dependent biological data (size-TL, weight, sex, reproductive status) was
gathered for S. lewini during artisanal fishing trips between May 2010 and May 2011 in Golfo Dulce. Catch
per unit effort (CPUE) throughout the year was also estimated from catch data. We sampled a total of 315
sharks. Mean total length was estimated at 74.3±17.4cm. Both pups and juveniles were reported, which
presented a male: female ratio of 1:1.2 (p>0.05). Total length and relative abundance of S. lewini had
opposite tendencies, with the smallest TL (64cm) recorded during July-August, when CPUE was highest
(0.0075). Temporary closures from June to August are therefore recommended at areas of highest
reported catch. Based on the fisheries dependent data from on board observations, three aggregations
sites were selected to deploy acoustic receivers and tag ten hammerhead sharks.Between June 2011 and
July 2012, the receivers recorded almost 40.000 detections. All the sharks marked were reported by the
receivers, showing daily movements between receivers. Sharks are present on the selected habitats
between 09:00 and 22:00, during this period of time, 90% of the detections occur. Hammerhead sharks
probably move to other places at night and during the early morning to feed.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                    52
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Habitat use of bull shark (Carcharhinus leucas) in Islas Murcilelago, Golfo de Papagayo, Costa
Rica

Andres Lopez1


1Asociación Conservacionista Misión Tiburón




The Guanacaste Conservation Area (GCA) is located in northwester Costa Rica, is an UNESCO
World Heritage Site and has an important Marine Protected Area (MPA) (43,000 ha). In GCA are
located the Islas Murcielagos or “Bat Islands”, which are visited by tourist divers to see the natural
congregations of bull sharks (Carcharhinus leucas). The bull shark has a worldwide distribution; it
is migratory and live in coastal waters, in marine and freshwater ecosystems. In spite of the
critical habitats presents at GCA, the ecology, the behavior and the habitat use of bull sharks are
never study in this MPA. The aim of this project is promote the bull shark conservation toward the
local communities and governmental sector, by the study of its population in GCA. We implement
an acoustic tagging program: between June 2013 and November 2014, eleven bull sharks are
tagged with acoustic transmitters. The information was recorded by on receiver located in San
Pedrillo, Bat Island. The receiver has recorded almost 47,000 detections, mainly during daylight
hours (06:00-18:00). The data showed a strong fidelity of females to the islands; however the
number of detections during the dry season are significantly less than during the rainy season.
Some females demonstrate high fidelity to the site, for example the 30322 transmitted more than
16,000 detections between June 2013 and February 2014. On the other hand, some females
were detected only for a few weeks; the 30321 have transmitted 707 detections and stay at the
site only one month period. The tendency to stay during daylight hours in the island (more that
75%), it probably related to reproductive aspects, since it is common to see females with post-
copula marks. In turn, the absence of detections during the night suggests that bull sharks move
to other surrounding areas to feed.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                 53
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Measuring and mitigating extinction risk in European Chondrichthyans

Rachel Walls1, Sarah Fowler2 and Nicholas Dulvy1


1Simon Fraser University, 8888 University Drive, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canada

21 Admiralty Cottages, Admiralty Road, Plymouth, Devon PL1 3RS, United Kingdom




The International Union for Conservation of Nature’s (IUCN) Red List Assessments contribute to the
motivation and foundation for global and regional biodiversity conservation and fisheries management
efforts. Some of the earliest chondrichthyan fish Red List Assessments were undertaken in Europe,
through workshops for the Mediterranean Sea (2003) and the Northeast Atlantic (2006). The following
decade saw the introduction of several conservation and fisheries management measures for
elasmobranchs in both sea areas. The IUCN Shark Specialist Group has recently reassessed the status of
all chondrichthyans in European waters. This has allowed us to review changes in the Red List Index
since these workshops, compare these with trends in the Red List Indices prepared for other taxonomic
groups, and consider the extent to which conservation and management actions have mitigated the status
of European elasmobranchs. Our comparison revealed striking differences in the overall status of
elasmobranchs since the previous assessments and between regions, and compared with other taxa. The
Red List Index for elasmobranchs is significantly lower (worse) than for any other major taxonomic group
reviewed. Approximately 35% of Northeast Atlantic elasmobranchs are considered “safe”, compared to
only 10% of Mediterranean species. Similarly, 31% of Northeast Atlantic species are threatened with an
elevated risk of extinction, compared to almost 50% in the Mediterranean; the latter has the highest
proportion of threatened species in any region globally. Despite the downlisting of some Northeast Atlantic
species since 2006, the overall Red List Index for chondrichthyans has deteriorated in both sea areas. We
conclude by identifying the biodiversity and fisheries conservation and management measures that have
been proposed; which ones have been adopted; which of the latter have been implemented effectively;
and where improvements are most urgently needed.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                           54
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Can public aquaria help change the World?

João Correia1

1Flying Sharks




Public aquaria and zoos have come a long way from early XXth Century facilities focused exclusively on
displaying live animals to an audience thirsty for novel and interesting sights. As the end of the millennium
approached, zoological institutions took on a role of leadership, steering the public towards a more
enlightened view on the environment, conservation and education. This presentation reports on a myriad
of such examples, ranging from the world famous ‘Sea Food Watch’ card promoted by the Monterey Bay
Aquarium, or even ‘The Great Egg Case’ hunt promoted by Shark Trust and strongly supported, and
disseminated, by Sea Life Centres worldwide. Likewise, the European Association of Zoos and Aquaria
has lead nearly a dozen conservation campaigns, ranging from Apes, to Carnivores, to Bushmeat,
amongst many other environmental issues crying for attention. These campaigns enjoy monumental
support from the millions of visitors that zoos and aquaria welcome through their admission gates every
year and these efforts have raised nearly 4 million euros thus far. These are but a few of multiple
examples where the public aquaria, and zoo, community are spearheading the conservation of the natural
world and education of society.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                     55
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


The Bristol Channel Skate Fishery (ICES Division VIIf): investigating sustainability and responsible
consumption

John Richardson1


1The Shark Trust




The Bristol Channel (ICES Division VIIf) offers a salient example of a UK regional skate fishery in
transition. As the conservative life-history characteristics of skate are now widely recognised, it is clear
many species and populations are intrinsically vulnerable to elevated fishing mortality. In the move
towards sustainable skate fisheries in EU waters, increasingly precautionary management measures
have been introduced for the Celtic Sea Eco-region, including a reduction in the ‘Skate and Ray’ Total
Allowable Catch (TAC). For the Bristol Channel fleet this has resulted in a significant decrease in TAC
available to individual vessels, with direct ramifications for local fishing communities.
In response, the regional fishing industry has questioned the accuracy of stock assessments based on
macro-scale management units (i.e. eco-regions), which they do not believe accurately reflects the
situation in the Bristol Channel.
The Shark Trust is currently working with sectors of the fishing industry and supply chain. Using ICES
Advice as a foundation, the Trust is evaluating a range of additional, complementary data to investigate
the sustainability of the skate fishery, as well as potential support for the responsible consumption of
appropriately managed species and stocks caught in the Bristol Channel. The Trust’s primary focus is to
secure a sustainable future for Bristol Channel skate populations and associated fisheries.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                       56
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Combining forces: a multidisciplinary approach to unravel population structure in a heavily
bycaught deepwater shark

Claudia Junge1,2, Armelle Jung3,Sienna Gray4, Matt McMillan1, Chris Izzo1, Bronwyn Gillanders1, Ole Thomas Albert5, Steve
Pedderson6, Wolf Isbert7, Timon Brueggemann2, Giovanni Romagnoni2, Diana Zaera8, Farid Hemida9, D. Jasper Maaholm10,
Michalis Mihalitsis10, Fabrizia Serena11, Einar Eg Nielsen12


1Southern Seas Ecology Laboratories, School of Biological Sciences, and Environment Institute, University of Adelaide, Australia;

2Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis (CEES), University of Oslo, Norway;

3Les requins et des hommes, France;

4University of Edinburgh;

5Institute for Marine Research (IMR), Trømsø, Norway;

6Bioinformatics Hub, University of Adelaide, Australia;

7Cavanilles Institute of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biology, University of Valencia, Spain;

8Institute for Marine Research (IMR), Bergen, Norway;

9Ecole National e Superieure des Sciences de la Meret de l‘Amenagement du Littoral (ENSSMAL), Algeria;

10University of Copenhagen, Denmark;

11Environmental Protection Agency – Marine Science, Italy;

12National Institute of Aquatic Resources, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark




The velvet belly lantern shark, E. spinaxis a small-sized deepwater shark, which is often captured as by-
catch in commercial deep-water fisheries and discarded due to its low commercial value. A decline has
been observed in some areas attributed to excessive fishing pressure. Despite being a commonly found
shark, there is a lack of knowledge about its population structure, ecology and response to environmental
or anthropogenic changes. Due to its extensive latitudinal distribution, E. spinax could be a useful model
species for understanding the level of connectivity and potential adaptive differences between deep-sea
shark populations, especially with regard to anthropogenic impacts. This knowledge is crucial for the
sustainable management of this species and possibly its habitat. In our multidisciplinary study, we aim to
unravel what constitutes a population in a deepwater shark, using Etmopterus spinax as a model species,
and how these populations differ from each other. We have population genetic data (mitochondrial DNA)
as well as population genomic pilot data from thousands of SNPs across the genome (RAD Seq), and will
discuss findings together with chemistry and pilot parasite data.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                                 57
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Discard survival of European skates: the need for species-specific data

Linda Planthof1


1Dutch Elasmobranch Society




The practice of discarding unwanted catch negatively affects the sustainable exploitation of resources and
financial viability of fisheries. The reformed Common Fisheries Policy has introduced a landing obligation
which will make compulsory the landing of all species that are subject to catch limits, including skates. As
the intrinsic vulnerability of skate species vary, as well as the conditions under which they are fished upon,
the discard survival rate of distinct species is highly variable. It is important to take these species-specific
differences into account in policy decisions and management measures. This presentation will give an
overview of the current knowledge on the discard survival rate of European skate species, and will
discuss the necessary research to underpin future management decisions.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                      58
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Spatial management of data-poor elasmobranchs using Boosted Regression Tree modelling

Simon Dedman1


1Galway-Mayo Institute of Technology




Skates and rays represent one of the most vulnerable components of the fish community in temperate
demersal fisheries such as the Irish Sea. They also tend to be data poor in comparison to commercially
exploited teleost fish. Spatial management has been suggested as an important tool in protecting these
species, but this requires an understanding of the abundance distribution, and its relationship with the
environment at both adult and juvenile life history stages. In this analysis, delta log-normal boosted
regression tree models were used with bottom trawl survey data to derive rays' spatial abundance, and
environmental links. The modelling approach allowed the development of detailed predictive maps of
abundance of four common and rare skate and ray species implicated in the fishery: thornback, spotted,
cuckoo and blonde rays. The distributions were driven by a general preference for sand and courser
substrates, higher salinities, temperatures and currents speeds. The abundance distribution maps were
examined together with maps of skate and ray commercial landings, suggesting that the main hotspots for
the species were away from the main commercial fishing areas. The maps were also compared to
potential MPAs proposed for wider ecosystem protection, and the main hotspots were well covered by the
proposed MPAs. This combination of the main abundance hotspots in areas of low fishing, and wider
potential ecosystem protection, suggests good potential for spatial management measures to protect
these species in the Irish Sea. The methodology has been extended to encompass commercial fishing
and predation by larger fish, as well as to automatically suggest optimal MPAs based on minimising
fishery impact while still maintaining precautionary point biomass, Bpa. This complex methodology is
bundled into an R package that enables environmental scientists and fisheries managers to enjoy the
benefits of these powerful statistical approaches without having to become an R expert.


Presentation type: Oral




                                                   59
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Elasmobranchs & the E.U.: advocating for effective science-based management

Ali Hood1


1The Shark Trust




The vulnerability of elasmobranchs to fisheries pressure is well documented in scientific literature, yet the
application of science-based fisheries management has often lagged behind that of more traditional
commercial target species.
Historically Europe has played a central role in elasmobranch fisheries and despite the adoption in 2009 of
the Community Plan of Action for Sharks1 (CPOA-sharks); the revision2 of the EU shark finning regulation 3
to requires fins-naturally-attached; and closure of fisheries for depleted species, the EU remains a global
fishing power supporting a substantial export and consumer market, ranking highly in global ‘shark’ league
tables for recorded landings, and failing to set catch limits on many of its substantial shark fisheries.
However, concurrently the EU has emerged as an international leader with regards RFMO proposals
demonstrating potential to act as a highly influential global fisheries manager.
In this context we discuss the pivotal role of the EU and the importance of effective implementation of the
EU finning regulation. And, with shark meat now often surpassing fins as the primary driver for retention of
sharks, there is also an increasing need to ensure advocacy efforts and public understanding reaches
beyond shark finning and the fin trade. The No Limits? campaign will be referenced as a route to drawing
both public and political attention to the pressing need for the adoption of science-based catch limits for
those stocks currently devoid of European management.
Particular attention will be paid to the Blue Shark Prionace glauca in light of its dominance in global shark
landings.


Presentation type: Oral




1 COM(2009) 40
2 (EU) No.605/2013
3 (EC) No.1185/2003


                                                     60
19th Annual Scientific Conference of the European Elasmobranch Association


Environmental impact and management perspectives for shark and ray provisioning tourism

Pierpaolo Brena1


1CRIOBE (Centre de Recherches Insulaires et Observatoire de l'Environnement). USR 3278 CNRS-EPHE, BP 1013, 98729


Papetoai, Moorea, French Polynesia.


The use of olfactory stimuli and the provision of food are a common practice to prompt artificial
aggregations of elasmobranch species, and ensure their visibility to tourists. By promoting the non-
extractive value of elasmobranchs and enhancing positive attitudes towards this threatened taxon, shark
and ray provisioning activities are promoted as a conservation tool. However, concerns arise about the