1
2
Presentation programme

 Friday 22nd

 9.15 – 10.00   Registration.

    10.00       Welcome by Shark Trust Chair.

    10.10       Welcome by EEA Chair.
                Current perspectives in the management and conservation of
 Session 1
                elasmobranchs. (Session chair: Jim Ellis).
                Keynote address: John Morrissey, Biology of a new species of gulper
10.20 – 11.00
                shark from the Caribbean Sea.
                Title: Spatial dynamics of white sharks in South Africa.
11.00 – 11.15   Authors: R. Bonfil, S. O’Brien, M. Meÿer, R. Johnson, M. Scholl, H. Oosthuizen, D. Kotze,
                S. Swanson and M. Paterson.
                Title: The implications of 17 years of basking shark volunteer sightings data for basking
11.15 – 11.30   shark conservation in the UK and Ireland.
                Authors: J. I. Doyle, J. Solandt, S. Fanshawe, C. Duncan and G. Saville.
                Title: The role of CITES in shark conservation and management.
11.30 – 11.45   Author: S. Fowler.
                Title: Biodiversity and conservation of North Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean skates and
                rays (Chondrichthyes: Rajidae).
11.45 – 12.00   Authors: P. Pasolini, T. Bakken, M. Bertozzi, F. Hemida, C. Mancusi, J. Palsson, F.
                Serena, C. Turan, N. Ungaro, E. Valsecchi, J. Ellis and F. Tinti
                Title: Identifying critical habitat of basking sharks in the north east Atlantic Ocean: using
12.00 – 12.15   electronic tags, surveys and sightings data.
                Authors: E. J. Southall, D. W. Sims and J. D. Metcalfe.
                Title: Conservation of freshwater elasmobranchs.
12.15 – 12.30   Author: R. A. Martin.

12.30 – 13.30   Lunch and poster session.
                Current perspectives in the management and conservation of
 Session 2
                elasmobranchs. (Session chair: Sarah Fowler).
                Title: Plan of Action for the conservation and management of sharks in UK waters.
13.30 – 13.45   Authors: S. Fowler, C. B. Mogensen and T. Blasdale.
                Title: Conservation genetics of three species of lamniform sharks.
13.45 – 14.00   Authors: C. Jones, J. Sarginson, M. Antsalo, A. Martin,
                D. Sims, J. Metcalfe and L. Noble.
                Title: The traditional shark fisheries of south west Madagascar: a study of two villages in
14.00 – 14.15   the Toliara region.
                Authors: A. R. McVean, R. Walker and E. Fanning.                               CANCELLED
                Title: Long-term changes in the distribution and abundance of two shark species in waters
14.15 – 14.30   around Scotland.
                Authors: K. M. MacKenzie, D. Beare , E. Jones and C. T. Marshall.
                Title: Habitat-specific differences in diel vertical migration of the basking shark and its
14.30 – 14.45   conservation implications.
                Authors: D. W. Sims, E. J. Southall, G.A. Tarling and J. D. Metcalfe.
                Title: Movements and residence times of grey nurse sharks (Carcharias taurus) within
14.45 – 15.00   nominated protected areas.
                Authors: B. Bruce, J. Stevens and N. Otway.

15.00 – 15.30   Afternoon break – poster session.
                Current perspectives in the management and conservation of
 Session 3
                elasmobranchs. (Session chair: John Morrissey).


                                                     3
                Title: Basking shark sightings in Brittany waters (France) from 1997 to 2004.
15.30 – 15.45   Authors: E. Stéphan, A. Jung and S. Blanchard.
                Title: Seasonal migration of thornback rays and implications for closure management.
15.45 – 16.00   Authors: E. Hunter, F. Berry, A. A. Buckley, C. Stewart and J. D. Metcalfe.
                Title: The potential for wildlife tourism to contribute towards elasmobranch conservation:
16.00 – 16.15   A case study of the South African cage-diving industry.
                Author: J. Dobson.
                Title: The release of sharks from public and private aquariums.
16.15 – 16.30   Author: H. Koldewey.
                Title: Conservation status of Mediterranean sharks and rays.
16:30 – 16.45   Authors: R. D. Cavanagh and A. Abdulla.                                    CANCELLED
                Title: Assessing the threat status of UK elasmobranchs.
16:45 – 17.00   Authors: J. Ellis, N. Dulvy, S. Jennings, M. Parker-Humphreys and S. Rogers.

    17.00       CLOSE.



    19.30       Conference dinner.




Saturday 23rd

 9.30 – 10.00   Registration.
                Current perspectives in the management and conservation of
 Session 4
                elasmobranchs. (Session chair: David Sims).
                Keynote address: Bernard Sèret, Shark fisheries and conservation in
10.00 – 10.30
                the Seychelles Island: a case study.
                Title: Habitat distribution of the basking shark (Cetorhinus maximus) in the Mediterranean:
10.30 – 10.45   implications for conservation.
                Authors: A. Mancini and A. Abdulla.
                Title: Elasmobranch captures in the trammel net fishery associated to MPAs in the Balearic
10.45 – 11.00   Islands.
                Authors: G. Morey, J. Moranta and B. Morales-Nin.                         CANCELLED
                Title: EEA in Perspective: past, status quo and future tasks - a steep road ahead?
11.00 – 11.15   Authors: B. Frentzel-Beyme.
                Title: Electrosensitive fish and coastal renewable energy developments in UK waters.
11.15 – 11.30   Author: A. B. Gill.
                Title: Population structure of the thornback ray, Raja clavata L. in southern England waters.
11.30 – 11.45   Authors: M. Chevolot, G. Hoarau, A.D. Rijnsdorp, W.T. Stam and J.L. Olsen.
                Title: Studies of an exceptionally large feeding aggregation of whale sharks (Rhincodon
11.45 – 12.00   typus) off Quintana Roo, Mexico.
                Authors: R. Hueter, G. Cano, F. R. Suarez and J. Tyminski.

12.00 – 13.00   Lunch and poster session.

 Session 5      Elasmobranch biology and ecology. (Session chair: Nick Dulvy).
                Title: Cloning and expression of alpha and beta subunits of the Na, K-ATPase from the
13.00 – 13.15   euryhaline bull shark, Carcharhinus leucas.
                Authors: L. Meischke and G. Cramb.
                Title: Relax immobility in sharks: preliminary results on Caribbean reef sharks.
13.15 – 13.30   Authors: R. S. Avogadri and F. Gioelli.

                                                     4
                Title: Mechanisms underlying sexual segregation in a sexually monomorphic
13.30 – 13.45   elasmobranch.
                Authors: V. J. Wearmouth, D. W. Sims, J. C. Partridge, I. C. Cuthill and J. D. Metcalfe.
                Title: Reproductive biology of the spiny dogfish, Squalus acanthias, in the eastern
13.45 – 14.00   Mediterranean Sea.
                Authors: A. Chatzispyrou and P. Megalofonou.
                Title: Electromagnetic fields generated by marine power cables and their potential impact
14.00 – 14.15   on electrosensitive fish.
                Authors: G. Vella.
                Title: Individual variability in electroreceptive behaviour of a benthic shark, the lesser
14.15 – 14.30   spotted dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula).
                Authors: J. A. Kimber and Andrew B. Gill.
                Title: Age and growth of the blue shark, (Prionace glauca), at western coast of Baja
14.30 – 14.45   California Sur, Mexico.
                Authors: M. del Pilar Blanco-Parra, F. Galván-Magaña and J. F. Márquez-Farias.

14:45 – 15.15   Afternoon break – poster session.

 Session 6      Elasmobranch biology and ecology. (Session chair: Andrew Gill).
                Title: Sharksucker induced behaviour in captive bull sharks.
15.15 – 15.30   Authors: J. M. Brunnschweiler.
                Title: Prey species and size preference of nursery-bound juvenile lemon sharks, Negaprion
15.30 – 15.45   brevirostris.
                Authors: S. P. Newman, S. H. Gruber and R. D. Handy.
                Title: Deepwater sharks most currently found in Canary Islands.
15.45 – 16.00   Authors: A. S. Rafel, A. B. Hernández and P. P. Alayón.
                Title: Foraging excursions of female dogfish to and from ‘home’ refuges.
16.00 – 16.15   Authors: N. Hutchinson, D. W. Sims and D. Morritt.
                Title: In the sharks’ cradle.
16.15 – 16.30   Authors: S. Clò and E. de Sabata.
                Title: Migratory Behaviour of the thornback ray, Raja clavata L., in the southern North sea.
16:30 – 16.45   Authors: E. Hunter, A. A. Buckley, C. Stewart and J. D. Metcalfe.
                Title: Teeth sexual dimorphic development in Raja asterias (De La Roche, 1809):
16:45 – 17.00   ontogenetic and seasonal pattern analysis related to the reproductive biology.
                Authors: A. Colasante, U. Scacco and M. Vacchi.
                Title: Overview of white shark (Carcharodon carcharias) research at Seal Island, South
17.00 – 17.15   Africa.
                Authors: R. A. Martin, N. Hammerschlag and C. Fallows.

   17.15        Close of meeting.




                                                     5
Friday 22nd October

Presentation Abstracts




Abstracts as submitted by authors.




                                     6
10.20 – 11.00
KEYNOTE: Biology of a new species of gulper shark from the Caribbean Sea.

J. F. Morrissey, D. M. McLaughlin, J. A. Olin, R. H. Buch, N. Carroll and C. P. J. Sanford.
Hofstra University Marine Laboratory, 114 Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY 11549-1140, USA.
(Email: john.f.morrissey@hofstra.edu).


Fifty-four specimens of a putative new species of Centrophorus were obtained off the north coast of
Jamaica via horizontal longline between August 2000 and March 2002 from depths of 250-913 m.
Discriminant function analysis was performed on 65 morphometric measurements of 54 museum
specimens and 30 Jamaican specimens. This multivariate analysis supports the validity of C. acus,
C. granulosus, and C. uyato in the NW Atlantic and suggests that our Jamaican form is a new
species, distinguished by the length of its snout, pelvic inner margin, caudal subterminal margin,
and caudal fin. Vertebral counts also separate these four species. Age of the Jamaican
specimens was determined from cross-sectioned dorsal fin spines. Growth curves were
constructed and size and age at maturity determined for all readable samples. In addition, the
retina of this deep-water gulper shark were compared to the retinas of Alopias vulpinus, Isurus
oxyrinchus, and Prionace glauca.

These epipelagic sharks have retinas composed of both rod and cone photoreceptors in ratios of
17:1, 16:1, and 20:1, respectively, whereas our Jamaican Centrophorus, a mesobenthic species,
has a rod-only retina.

Investigations into eight different regions of the retinas, four central and four peripheral, exhibited
no indication of intraretinal variation in terms of photoreceptor abundance, distribution, outer-
segment length, inner-segment length, or width. As expected, interspecific variation in these
characteristics was observed. Last, the reproductive biology of 8 males and 51 females has been
examined.

This species is sexually dimorphic, with females attaining a larger size than males. The smallest
mature male was 81.2 cm total length whereas the smallest mature female was 91.5 cm total
length. Females are aplacentally viviparous with a maximum of two pups per litter and a gestation
period of three years. The pups acquire nutrition via their large external yolk sacs. There was no
evidence of additional maternal contributions to the nourishment of the embryos. Oocytes
continued to develop throughout gestation. Most females carrying developing embryos had two
large (>3.3 cm), equally developed ovarian oocytes, which leads us to believe that they ovulate
soon after parturition. This species seems to exhibit complete sexual segregation during the non-
breeding season, with mature males being completely absent from the study site during the
summer months.




                                                       7
11.00 – 11.15
Spatial Dynamics of White Sharks in South Africa.

R. Bonfil1, S. O’Brien1, M. Meÿer2, R. Johnson3, M. Scholl4, H. Oosthuizen2, D. Kotze2,
S. Swanson2 and M. Paterson2.
1 Wildlife Conservation Society, 2300 Southern Boulevard, Bronx, New York, 10460 USA.

(Email: rbonfil@wcs.org, sobrien@wcs.org).
2 Marine and Coastal Management Branch, Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Private Bag X2,

Roggebaai 8012, Cape Town, Western Cape, South Africa.
(Email: mmeyer@deat.gov.za, Oosthuiz@deat.gov.za, dkotze@deat.gov.za, swanson@deat.gov.za).
3 Department of Zoology and Entomology, University of Pretoria, Pretoria 0002, South Africa.

(Email: Johnson@maxitec.co.za).
4 White Shark Trust, P.O. Box 1258, Strand Street 6, Gansbaai 7220, Western Cape, South Africa, and Department of

Zoology, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch 7700, Western Cape, South Africa
(Email: MScholl@WhiteSharkTrust.org).


Great white sharks (Carcharodon carcharias) have for long been the focus of intense media attention,
however information about their ecology and in particular their movements and migrations is still very
limited. Their populations are vulnerable to mild levels of mortality from commercial fisheries and
trophy hunters as a result of their biological profile. Currently, protection for this species is limited to
jurisdictional waters of only five countries including South Africa. We have used satellite telemetry to
investigate the spatial dynamics of great white sharks off the Western Cape of South Africa. Between
June 2002 and May 2004, white sharks of both sexes ranging in size from 230 to 420 cm TL were
fitted with pop-up archival satellite transmitting (“PAT”) tags (n = 25) and near-real-time satellite tags (n
= 18). Our results show that white sharks make long-distance coastal migrations (>1000 km) to
locations off KwaZulu-Natal and beyond off Mozambique, where they are not protected. They also
make frequent small-scale migrations (<1000 km) to other areas on the Eastern Cape and Western
Cape, and remain in preferred bays for extended periods of time. Results about white sharks’ depth
and temperature preferences are also shown. The implications of these movements and migrations for
the management and conservation of South African white sharks are discussed and the need for more
comprehensive international protection is highlighted.




                                                        8
11.15 – 11.30
The implications of 17 years of basking shark volunteer sightings data for basking shark
conservation in the UK and Ireland.

J. I. Doyle, J. Solandt, S. Fanshawe, C. Duncan and G. Saville.
Marine Conservation Society, Unit 3 Wolf Business Park, Alton Road, Ross-on-Wye, HR9 5NB, UK.
(Email: jo@mcsuk.org).


The Marine Conservation Society (MCS) has analysed 17 years of basking shark sightings data
reported through the Basking Shark Watch Project, a voluntary sightings scheme. The scheme
enables us to compare spatially, and to a certain extent, temporally between areas where sharks
are abundant and those areas where sharks rarely occur. Results from a report published in 2003
indicated ‘hotspots’ where sharks were recorded in considerable abundance. Within these hotspot
regions key areas have been identified on a local scale (10’s of kilometres), which appear to be of
particular importance to basking sharks. Temporal patterns of sightings indicate a shift from south-
west waters in the early part of the summer season (May/June) to northern waters in later summer
(August/September). Reports also include data on shark size, allowing changes in the population’s
size class to be identified over space and time. As there is little accurate historical or present
scientific data on the population numbers and structure of basking sharks in UK and Irish waters
this data, although collected by non-scientific methods, is invaluable. Combining the results of
recent basking shark telemetry studies with MCS sightings data is beginning to help us understand
their movements and behaviour. As such the sightings reports from the general public have
implications for the future conservation and management of this protected species.




                                                      9
11.30 – 11.45
The role of CITES in shark conservation and management.

S. Fowler.
NatureBureau International, 36 Kingfisher Court, Hambridge Road, Newbury, RG14 5SJ UK.
(Email: sarah@naturebureau.co.uk).


The 13th meeting of the Conference of Parties to the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species (CITES) takes place just before the 2004 EEA Conference. CITES Parties will
debate a review of the 2002 Resolution on the Conservation and Management of Sharks and a
proposal to list white shark Carcharodon carcharias on Appendix II of CITES. If adopted, the latter
listing will regulate and ensure the sustainability of international trade in white shark products. Although
the white shark listing proposal has received most attention, the 2004 CITES Conference has the
potential significantly to improve much broader international shark conservation and management
measures worldwide, provided that important draft Decisions recommended by the CITES
Secretariat and Animals Committee are adopted. These include holding an international technical
workshop on shark conservation and management, seeking the development, adoption and
implementation of new international agreements and regional instruments for the conservation of high
seas, pelagic and straddling shark stocks, and requesting that States improve their management of
fisheries and trade in a number of elasmobranch taxa of special concern (these include spiny
dogfish Squalus acanthias, tope shark Galeorhinus galeus, porbeagle shark Lamna nasus,
deepwater gulper sharks Centrophorus spp., freshwater stingrays family Potamotrygonidae,
sawfishes family Pristidae, guitarfishes order Rhinobatiformes, and devil rays family Mobulidae).
This paper will report on the process leading into the Conference, the debates and outcomes of the
meeting, and their implications for the management and conservation of elasmobranchs in Europe
and internationally.




                                                      10
11.45 – 12.00
Biodiversity and conservation of North Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean skates and rays
(Chondrichthyes: Rajidae).

P. P. Pasolini, T. Bakken. M. Bertozzi, F. Hemida, C. Mancusi, J. Palsson, F. Serena, C. Turan, N.
Ungaro, E. Valsecchi, J. Ellis and F. Tinti.
Via Sant'Alberto 163, I-48100 Ravenna (Italy).
(E-mail: ppasolini@ambra.unibo.it).


In the NE Atlantic-Mediterranean region 32 species of skates and rays (Rajidae) are currently
reported and 9 are endemics. Documented population declines and local extirpations make Rajidae
as one of the most vulnerable groups of marine fishes. In spite of this, basic data, such as
taxonomic, biological and demographic information, are scant or lacking for several species.
Throughout the implementation of MED_SKATE - an on-line databank of the biodiversity of NE
Atlantic and Mediterranean Rajidae (http://www.med-skate.unibo.it) - we have investigated the
species diversity of NE Atlantic-Mediterranean skates to fill part of this gap of information in order
to prioritise conservation programs of threatened species.

Data collection was carried out through the network of collaborators and consisted of the
acquisition of biological data; tissue samples and scaled digital pictures of all Mediterranean valid
species from different areas and of several NE Atlantic species. MED_SKATE includes more than
800 individual records and data for 10 geographic local faunas. The comparative analysis of some
biological traits suggested that in the Mediterranean most species could be really threatened by the
intense trawl fisheries. Using species-specific DNA markers we have carried a first extensive
molecular survey that improved the identification, systematic and evolution of rajid species.

Presently, MED_SKATE represents a unique scientific tool where referenced information and
samples of Rajidae can be deposited, aggregated and retrieved. It is also auspicated that more
local collaborators will join the operative network of MED_SKATE, improving the monitoring and
conservation of more local rajid faunas.




                                                 11
12.00 – 12.15
Identifying critical habitat of basking sharks in the north east Atlantic Ocean: using
electronic tags, surveys and sightings data.

E. J. Southall1, D. W. Sims1 and J. D. Metcalfe2.
1 Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, The Laboratory, Citadel Hill, Plymouth PL1 2PB, UK.

(Email: ejso@mba.ac.uk, dws@mba.ac.uk).
2 CEFAS, Lowestoft Laboratory, Pakefield Road, Lowestoft, NR33 0HT, UK.

(Email: j.d.metcalfe@cefas.co.uk).


There is concern that the population levels of basking sharks (Cetorhinus maximus) in the
northeast Atlantic have been reduced by human exploitation and have yet to recover. However, in
the absence of reliable population size estimates based on appropriate scientific data, it remains
difficult to assess the current status of this species. If population size is to be estimated accurately,
surveys must be undertaken in the areas used by the major part of the basking shark population. In
addition, their movements and behaviour between preferred habitat need to be investigated. In this
paper we will describe how electronic tags are being used to track the large-scale movements of
sharks and what this tells us about their habitat selection processes. A new consortium-based
project will also be introduced which aims to identify critical habitat of basking sharks by
incorporating behavioural data with surveys and sightings data.




                                                         12
12.15 – 12.30
Conservation of Freshwater Elasmobranchs.

R. A. Martin.
ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research, P.O. Box 48561, 595 Burrard Street, Vancouver, BC V7X 1A3, Canada.
(E-mail: ram@elasmo-research.org).


Fishery management and biology of freshwater elasmobranchs have received little study. The low
taxonomic and morphological diversity of freshwater elasmobranchs compared with freshwater
bony fishes and marine cartilaginous fishes suggest that fresh water may be a marginal habitat for
elasmobranchs. Most freshwater elasmobranchs occur in tropical riverine and lacustrine
ecosystems of developing countries with enormous, rapidly expanding human populations.
Increasing levels of direct anthropogenic exploitation and habitat modification, degradation, or
destruction threaten many freshwater elasmobranch stocks. Obligate freshwater elasmobranchs
with limited geographic distributions are most at risk, but euryhaline species (some of which breed
in fresh water) are also threatened by increasingly intensive artisanal and small-scale commercial
fisheries, tourist sport fisheries, and coastal development/degradation. Specific threats to
euryhaline and obligate freshwater elasmobranchs are identified and socioeconomic issues
affecting their conservation are discussed. Suggested priorities for research on and management
of freshwater elasmobranchs are offered.




                                                     13
13.30 – 13.45
Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks in UK waters.

S. Fowler1, C. B. Mogensen2 and T. Blasdale3.
1 Naturebureau, 36 Kingfisher Court, Hambridge Road, Newbury, Berkshire, RG14 5SJ, UK.

(Email: sarahfowler@naturebureau.co.uk).
2 WWF European Policy Office, 36 Avenue de Tervuren - B12, 1040 Brussels, Belgium.
3 Joint Nature Conservation Committee, Dunnet House , 7 Thistle Place, Aberdeen , UK.

(Email: tom.blasdale@jncc.gov.uk).


The FAO’s voluntary International Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks
(IPOA-Sharks) calls upon states to prepare Shark Assessment Reports (SARs) and, if they have
fisheries, to develop and implement National Plans of Action (Shark Plans). The term “shark” is
taken to include all chondrichthyans. The EU is developing a shark plan on behalf of Member
States, however, the IPOA calls upon states to take action regardless of actions taken at a regional
level and so it is appropriate for the UK to develop its own Shark Plan. This report includes a brief
description of chondrichthyan fisheries in UK and adjacent waters which could stand as an interim
SAR (although a full SAR should be prepared as soon as possible) and makes recommendations
for the content of a Shark Plan. The UK has commercial and recreational fisheries for sharks
including coastal and shelf fisheries, deep-water fisheries and pelagic fisheries and these are
briefly described. The state of the stocks is described noting the inadequacy of landings data and
consequent lack of reliable stock assessments for most species. Many of the actions required to
manage shark fisheries in UK waters are the exclusive competence of the EU, however, the UK
can impose additional measures within its 12 nautical miles territorial waters and take action to
improve the quality of landings data and scientific advice. Recommended actions include those
which can be implemented at a UK level and should be included in a UK Shark plan as well as
those which are recommended for EU action. Some UK Overseas Territories also have
chondrichthyan fisheries and should be encouraged and assisted in developing Shark Plans of
their own.




                                                       14
13.45 – 14.00
Conservation genetics of three species of Lamniform sharks.

C. Jones1, J. Sarginson1, M. Antsalo1, A. Martin2, D. Sims3, J. Metcalfe4 and L. Noble1.
1 School of Biological Sciences, Zoology building, University of Aberdeen, Tillydrone Avenue, Aberdeen, AB24 2TZ,

UK.
(Email: l.r.noble@abdn.ac.uk).
2 Department of Environmental, Population, and Organismic Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA.
3 Marine Biological Association of the UK, Citadel Hill, Plymouth PL1 2PB, UK.
4 Centre for Environment, Fisheries & Aquaculture Science, Lowestoft Laboratory, Suffolk NR33 0HT, UK.




Continued overexploitation of shark stocks has resulted in the collapse of many large coastal and
oceanic species in the North-West Atlantic; with some reduced by up to 89%. It is well accepted
that the vulnerability of shark species to overfishing is a consequence of their low intrinsic rates of
increase, due to low fecundity and late maturity. However, little account has been taken of a
phenomenon we have recently demonstrated in Great White sharks which makes them potentially
even more vulnerable to area overfishing - that of sex-biased dispersal. Our work has
demonstrated white sharks may be at an increased risk because females remain at their birth
place, or return to pup. We are developing molecular genetic tools to investigate the population
genetic structure and dynamics of the Lamniformes, and to determine how widespread this
phenomenon is in lamnoid sharks because of its immense impact upon conservation measures.
Preliminary data for the Porbeagle (Lamna nasus) suggest that there is long-distance dispersal
between disjunct northern and southern hemisphere populations, as evidenced by the lack of
population differentiation in nuclear genetic markers. However, maternally inherited markers show
a greater degree of population differentiation, suggesting that although females of this species may
migrate more than white sharks, dispersal appears male biased. Investigations are now extending
to the plankton-eating basking shark (Cetorhinus maximus), the world’s second largest fish
species. Little is known about stock structure, annual migration circuits, the relationship between
regional population declines and global trends, and whether populations are discrete.




                                                        15
14.00 – 14.15
The traditional shark fisheries of south west Madagascar: a study of two villages in the
Toliara region.

A. R. McVean, R. Walker and E. Fanning.
Society for Environmental Exploration, 50-52 Rivington Street, EC2A 3QP, London, UK.
(Email: gus_mcvean@yahoo.co.uk).


Traditional shark fisheries in Africa are largely poorly documented. Fisheries management plans for
fisheries targeting chondrichthyan species are typically based on studies with limited spatial
resolution or detail compromising their efficacy and potentially reducing the effectiveness of
national and regional plans. South west Madagsacar is an area which is poorly documented with
regard to many of its marine resources. This study presents a detailed investigation of the directed
shark fisheries of two villages south of Toliara - Soalara and Maromena - presenting a description
of the fishery in these villages and catch data for periods of 12 and 10 months respectively. Results
from a total of 1,164 catch records, including members of at least 13 species, with an estimated
total wet weight of over 123mt are reported with hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna spp.) representing
29% of sharks caught and 24% of the total wet weight. These findings, in conjunction with
anecdotal evidence collected from fishers, indicate a fishery of considerable social and economic
importance that is showing signs of decline, possibly as a result of changing fishing practices
associated with the intervention of outside agencies.

Presentation cancelled.




                                                       16
14.15 – 14.30
Long-term changes in the distribution and abundance of two shark species in waters
around Scotland.

K. M. MacKenzie1, D. Beare2 , E. Jones2 and C. T. Marshall1.
1 University of Aberdeen, King's College, Aberdeen AB24 3FX, UK.

(Email: k_m_mackenzie@hotmail.com).
2 Fisheries Research Service, Aberdeen, UK.




The abundance and geographical distribution of two small species of shark, the lesser-spotted
dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula, and the spurdog, Squalus acanthias, in waters around Scotland
were investigated for the 78-year period from 1925 to 2003. The data originated from the
groundfish trawl surveys carried out by the Fisheries Research Service (FRS), Aberdeen.
Abundance trends (in catch per unit effort) were determined by generalized additive models
(GAMs). Distribution was investigated by plotting annual abundance onto maps of the survey area
using GIS, and comparing years. The lesser-spotted dogfish exhibited an upward trend in
abundance, while the spurdog fluctuated largely without a distinct directional trend over the period.
Both species are more abundant around the West Coast of Scotland, with particular density around
the Outer Hebrides. Lesser-spotted dogfish were also found to be abundant in the Solway Firth and
around the north-west continental shelf edge, with a possible increase in abundance and
distribution around the shelf edge. From analysis of the quarter one surveys carried out only in the
North Sea, both sharks appear to be declining in abundance in this area.
Possible reasons for the observed trends in abundance and distribution are discussed, including
life history traits, interactions with other species, and habitat preferences. It is suggested that lower
levels of exploitation, greater adaptability and comparatively r-selected life history is responsible for
the increase in S. canicula compared with S. acanthias. Further studies are suggested to clarify the
observed trends.




                                                    17
14.30 – 14.45
Habitat-specific differences in diel vertical migration of the basking shark and its
conservation implications.

D. W. Sims1, E. J. Southall1, G. A. Tarling2 and J. D. Metcalfe3.
1 Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, The Laboratory, Citadel Hill, Plymouth PL1 2PB, UK.

(Email: dws@mba.ac.uk, ejso@mba.ac.uk).
2 British Antarctic Survey, Natural Environment Research Council, High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 OET,

UK.
(Email: gant@bas.ac.uk).
3 Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, Lowestoft Laboratory, Pakefield Road, Lowestoft NR33

0HT, UK.
(Email: j.d.metcalfe@cefas.co.uk).


Megaplanktivores such as filter-feeding sharks are at the apex of a very short food chain
(phytoplankton-zooplankton-shark) and have been shown to be sensitive indicators of sea-surface
plankton availability. Their tendency to feed for long periods at the surface has also brought about
their exploitation by harpoon fisheries. Similarly, shipborne and aerial population surveys count the
number of surfacing sharks to assess distribution and abundance. However, no study has yet to
determine whether the probability of sighting sharks at the surface is location-specific within its
geographic range. A key factor likely to control vertical habitat selection of plankton-feeding sharks
is the diel vertical migration (DVM) of zooplankton. Based on the first high-resolution archival data
collected for a plankton-feeding fish species we show that DVM patterns of the basking shark
(Cetorhinus maximus) reflect habitat type and zooplankton behaviour. In deep, well-stratified
waters sharks exhibited normal DVM (nocturnal ascent) by tracking migrating sound-scattering
layers characterised by Calanus and Euphausiids. Sharks occupying shallow, inner-shelf areas
near thermal fronts conducted reverse DVM (nocturnal descent) possibly due to zooplankton
predator-prey interactions that resulted in reverse DVM of Calanus. Hence, the probability of
sighting basking sharks at the surface ranges from 0.01–0.60 depending on habitat. Shipborne
surveys undertaken in each habitat at the same time as trackings reflect these differences. Our
results indicate basking sharks are at greater risk from harpoon fisheries in seasonally persistent
frontal habitat, and that population surveys need to be stratified to account for this habitat-specific
bias.




                                                         18
14.45 – 15.00
Movements and residence times of grey nurse sharks (Carcharias taurus) within nominated
protected areas.

B. Bruce1, J. Stevens1 and N. Otway2.
1 CSIRO Marine Research, GPO Box 1538, Hobart, Tasmania. 7001, Australia.

(Email: Barry.Bruce@csiro.au, John.D.Stevens@csiro.au).
2 Fisheries Research Centre, NSW Fisheries, Private Bag 1, Nelson Bay NSW 2315, Australia.

(Email: Nick.Otway@fisheries.nsw.gov.au).


Grey nurse sharks (Carcharias taurus) have been protected in Australian waters since 1984.
However, despite this protection, their numbers have continued to decline and the east Australian
population is now listed as critically endangered. This continued decline is in part due to their
extremely low fecundity, but also to their behaviour of aggregating in specific areas
(Critical Habitat Sites – CHS) where they remain vulnerable to incidental capture. Protection of
nineteen of these sites has been suggested as a management option to reduce fishing impacts on
the species. However, to ensure the effectiveness of such protection zones, information on both
residence times and the areas around CHS that grey nurse use when they are present is required.
We used direct acoustic tracking and acoustic monitoring stations to determine the frequency and
duration of visits by individuals to several sites and their diel movements around these sites. Grey
nurse were seasonally resident and individuals were continually detected for up to 30 days.
Residency was episodic, with some sharks leaving and returning on an irregular basis. Movement
between CHS up to 700 km apart was recorded for some tagged sharks. Sharks were active both
day and night, moving extensively around and in some cases up to 1200 m from CHS. Although
normally observed swimming within a few metres of the bottom, some tracked sharks swam mid-
water up to 30 m above the bottom and on two occasions sharks swam rapidly to the surface
followed by an equally rapid descent to mid-water or returning to the bottom.




                                                       19
15.30 – 15.45
Basking shark sightings in Brittany waters (France) from 1997 to 2004.

E. Stéphan, A. Jung and S. Blanchard.
APECS, Rue de Liège - BP 51151, 29211 BREST CEDEX 1, FRANCE.
(Email: eric.stephan@asso-apecs.org, armelle.jung@asso-apecs.org, sylvain.blanchard2@caramail.com).


Basking shark sightings in French waters have been related for a long time and a little dedicated
fishery took place in south Brittany from the middle of the 40’s until the end of the 80’s. Despite this
occurrence of the species, very few studies have been conducted in France what led the APECS to
begin a public sightings record scheme in 1997. The aim of this low cost method was to gather
general data on basking shark in French waters, to identify particular localities for more details
investigations and also to raise public awareness. This work presents the data obtained from this
public scheme in Brittany, from 1997 to 2004. Sightings occur mostly during spring and summer
and present a general northerly progression along the Brittany coasts during the season. Some
hotspots for shark sightings have been identified. Although this study only provide a picture of the
spatial and temporal distribution of surface sightings in Brittany waters, a collaboration with other
European organisations would conduct to a European conservation plan of the species and of the
habitats of interest in northeast Atlantic.




                                                      20
15.45 – 16.00
Seasonal migration of thornback rays and implications for closure management.

E. Hunter, F. Berry, A. A. Buckley, C. Stewart and J. D. Metcalfe.
CEFAS, Lowestoft Laboratory, Pakefield Road, Lowestoft, Suffolk, NR33 0HT, UK.
(E-mail: e.hunter@cefas.co.uk).


Previous studies of the thornback ray, Raja clavata L., have suggested that these form local sub-
populations, between which few individuals are thought to transfer. This feature of the biology of
thornback rays coupled with late maturation and low fecundity make these fish highly vulnerable to
localised extinction due to fishery exploitation. A significant decline in the abundance of a range of
commercially exploited elasmobranchs has further highlighted a growing need for sustainable
management strategies.

Although subject to a total allowable catch, there are no additional conservation measures currently
in operation in the North Sea aimed at protecting them. To investigate the potential impacts of
closure management on this fishery, we used data from 75 mature thornback rays, tagged with
electronic data storage tags and released in the Thames Estuary (United Kingdom), to determine
seasonal movements and distribution patterns. The fish were at liberty between 1999-2001, during
which period we also collected commercial fishing catch data.

Geo-spatial analytical techniques were applied to integrate data on the seasonal distribution of the
fish with a spatial and temporal analysis of catch and fishing effort data. The impact of closed areas
in the Thames Estuary is considered firstly in terms of the likely conserving effect on existing ray
stocks, and secondly, the potential benefits to the commercial fishery in terms of increased ray
stock biomass and yield. In addition, we will also examine the potential impact on fisheries for other
commercial species.




                                                      21
16.00 – 16.15
The Potential for Wildlife Tourism to Contribute Towards Elasmobranch Conservation:
A Case Study of the South African Cage-Diving Industry.

J. Dobson.
Welsh School of Hospitality, Tourism and Leisure Management, University of Wales Institute, Cardiff, Colchester
Avenue, Cardiff CF23 9XR, UK.
(E-mail: jdobson@uwic.ac.uk).


Wildlife tourism can contribute towards species conservation through various mechanisms,
including, the education of tourists, assisting in scientific research and proving economic incentives
to conserve species. This paper examines the role in which the cage-diving industry based in the
Western Cape, South Africa is able to contribute towards the conservation of the Great White shark
and other Elasmobranch species. Semi-structured interviews were carried out with cage-dive tour
operators, representatives from the Environment and Tourism Department’s Marine and Coastal
Management section and white shark researchers. Nine observations of cage diving tours were
undertaken in Gansbaai, False Bay and Mossel Bay. Content analysis of brochures and web sites
examined operator representations of white sharks in promotional material. The study found that
there are areas of good practice in relation to shark protection although there are
inherent contradictions in the construction of the tours. Many operators reinforce the ‘Jaws’
stereotype by using aggressive images of Great White sharks in their marketing campaigns, shark
handling and, in certain cases, through the sale of souvenirs. Educational / interpretive information
tended to lack reference to shark conservation issues and information was predominately given
reactively rather than proactively. The government has attempted to regulate the industry via the
use of a permit system and code of conduct. However problems of issuing and enforcing permits
has resulted in a reliance on operator self-regulation and greater emphasis on client satisfaction
rather than shark protection.




                                                         22
16.15 – 16.30
The release of sharks from public and private aquariums.

H. Koldeway.
Zoological Society of London, Regent’s Park, London NW1 4RY, UK.
(Email: heather.koldewey@zsl.org).


Sharks are widely held in zoos and aquariums and, increasingly, education and awareness of the
conservation issues facing these large marine predators is being shared with millions of visitors. In
general, their life history means that these fishes are currently unlikely candidates for captive
breeding and re-introduction programmes. However, an important benefit of captive breeding
programmes is the collection of information about reproductive strategies, growth rates, maturity
and other life history parameters. This information may be used by policy makers, with appropriate
caution, to help formulate elasmobranch conservation management strategies.

The release of captive sharks has occurred historically and continues today. In general, little
thought has been given to the scientific robustness of such activities and in some cases re-
introduction has been used as a means of disposal of unwanted specimens, against the
recommendations of the IUCN Reintroduction Specialist Group and other professional
organisations’ guidelines. One area of increasing concern is the release of sharks from the private
sector, specifically from misguided acquisitions of species that grow large yet are available in the
hobby, such as nurse sharks.

The release of sharks as currently practiced has no obvious conservation benefit, other than data
collection through tagging related research, and raises some significant concerns. It is clear that a
more definitive policy needed to be developed and this is being undertaken by the respective North
American and European Taxon Advisory Groups (AZA, EAZA/EUAC) with the IUCN RSG Fish
Section Chair. Criteria will provide a way of evaluating current practices and may eliminate some of
the current industry collection practices.

This paper will present the outcomes of public aquarium efforts to minimise the negative effects of
shark releases and maximise the conservation benefits of sharks in aquariums. The release of
sharks is not currently part of any conservation management plan, but their use in public education
programmes in aquariums is a vital component of their conservation.




                                                     23
16.30 – 16.45
Conservation Status of Mediterranean Sharks and Rays.

R. D. Cavanagh1 and A. A. Abdulla2.
1 TRAFFIC International, 219a Huntingdon Road, Cambridge, CB3 0DL, UK.

(Email: rachel.cavanagh@ssc-uk.org).
2 Global and Mediterranean Marine Program, IUCN-World Conservation Union, Centre for Mediterranean Cooperation,

Parque Tecnologico de Andalucia, Calle Maria Curie, 35, Campanillas,, Malaga 29590, SPAIN.
(Email: Ameer.Abdulla@iucn.org).


The IUCN Red List of Threatened SpeciesTM is the most comprehensive source of information on
the global conservation status of plants and animals. The IUCN Shark Specialist Group has a
programme to complete Red List assessments for all chondrichthyans through a series of regional
Red List workshops. The results from the Mediterranean Red List workshop are presented here.
The Mediterranean Sea is known to be an important habitat for chondrichthyans, home to 86
species. Case studies will be discussed to illustrate the overall status of chondrichthyans in the
region where almost half are considered threatened (Critically Endangered, Endangered or
Vulnerable). These include Sand Tiger Sharks that aggregate at specific sites and are especially
vulnerable to coastal fisheries. The Common Skate, once common but highly vulnerable to
trawling, has virtually disappeared from the region. Other species of particular concern include
Sawfishes and Angel Sharks. There is limited information for many of the Mediterranean species
with approximately 30% classified as Data Deficient which indicates a lack of scientific and
fisheries data but does not exclude these species from being a conservation concern. Further
research on such populations, including Hammerheads, Guitarfishes and the Speckled Skate, is
urgently needed. The Regional Red List will be published and distributed to governments, research
institutions, and other agencies responsible for marine resource conservation and management.
The Red List will contribute to the UNEP Action Plan for the Conservation of Cartilaginous Fishes
in the Mediterranean, highlighting particular threats and detailing recommendations for action.

Presentation cancelled.




                                                      24
16.45 – 17.00
Assessing the threat status of UK elasmobranchs.

J. Ellis, N. Dulvy, S. Jennings, M. Parker-Humphreys and S. Rogers.
CEFAS Lowestoft Laboratory, Pakefield Road, Lowestoft, Suffolk, NR33 0HT, UK.
(Email: j.r.ellis@cefas.co.uk).


Elasmobranch fishes are susceptible to over-exploitation and many species subject to important
commercial and recreational fisheries and may be of conservation importance. Traditional fisheries
stock assessment methods are not always appropriate for elasmobranch fishes, primarily because
of a lack of species-specific landing data. Hence, other methods of determining the overall status
of elasmobranch fishes are required. For demersal elasmobranchs, the best data sources are
generally life-history information and fishery-independent survey data. We apply a number of
threat criteria (e.g. IUCN, American Fisheries Society and Texel-Faial) to the dominant
elasmobranchs in UK waters with emphasis on comparative life histories and the decline criterion
for abundance and geographic occupancy.




                                                      25
Saturday 23rd October

Presentation Abstracts




                         26
10.00 – 10.30
KEYNOTE: Shark fisheries and conservation in the Seychelles Island : a case study.

B. Séret.
Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Département Systématique et Evolution, Taxonomie & Collections, Case
Postale 26, 43 rue Cuvier, 75231 Paris cedex 05, France.
(Email: seret@mnhn.fr).


In the Seychelles Islands (western Indian Ocean) sharks have been traditionally exploited, but the
recent development of industrial and semi-industrial fisheries has caused a growing concern for the
sharks populations. Concurrently, the Seychelles have developed an important eco-touristic
activities with some of them focused on shark diving. The Seychelles have been one of the first
countries to fully protect the whale shark in its waters. In 2002, the Seychelles Fishing Authority
asked the author to provide an overview of these economic activities related to sharks and to
propose some recommendations for their sustainability in respecting the shark populations and
biodiversity.




                                                       27
10.30 – 10.45
Habitat distribution of the Basking Shark (Cetorhinus maximus) in the Mediterranean:
implications for conservation.

A. Mancini and A. Abdulla.
IUCN Global Marine Program, Centre for Mediterranean Cooperation, Parque Tecnologico de Andalucia, Calle Maria
Curie, 35, Campanillas, Málaga 29590, Spain.
(Email: malaga3@iucn.org, ameer.abdulla@iucn.org).


Cartilaginous fish are known to be a large diversified group occupying a great variety of habitats
and displaying different life strategies. Populations are dynamic and fluctuations may depend on
oceanographic and biological parameters, and commercial exploitation. However, there is a lack of
life-history and habitat distribution data in many areas and this has traditionally impeded
conservation efforts. In this paper we present a regional GIS database that can serve as a useful
tool and model for the identification of hotspots for shark conservation in the Mediterranean. The
pelagic Basking Shark, Cetorhinus maximus, is used as case study as it is globally endangered,
wide-ranging in the Mediterranean, and unlike many other cartilaginous fishes, distribution data for
this species is available. Species distribution was examined in relation to a number of bio-physical
variables such as sea surface temperature, chlorophyll density, and bathymetry. Furthermore,
interactions with fisheries were explored with particular emphasis given to body size at landing,
catch effort, gear type and fishing season. Our synthesis is presented as a series of spatial
overlays showing species distribution in the Mediterranean over a 20-year time series. Specific
areas of overlap between shark occurrence, habitat range, and commercial fishing are identified
and the conservation implications discussed. Our analysis is a first step in providing a decision
support tool for implementing regional and national conservation plans of action, in particular, the
United Nations Mediterranean Action Plan for Cartilaginous Species. This project can be extended
to include other endangered Chondrichtyans in the Mediterranean, specifically those whose
ecology may result in high susceptibility to fishing.




                                                      28
10.45 – 11.00
Elasmobranch captures in the trammel net fishery associated to MPAs in the Balearic
Islands.

G. Morey, J. Moranta and B. Morales-Nin.
CSIC/UIB – Institut Mediterrani d’Estudis Avançats, Miquel Marquès 21, E-07190 Esporles (Illes Balears), SPAIN.
(E-mail: gabriel.morey@uib.es).


The incidence of elasmobranchs in the trammel net fishery operating associated to three marine
reserves in the Balearic Islands was analysed from 14 surveys. Within these three marine reserves
the commercial fishery is allowed but some restrictions have been established referred to effort
(number of nets and hooks, mesh size and close season). Between 2000 and 2004, 684 hauls
(205.2 km of net) were performed over Posidonia oceanica, rocky and bare sand mixed bottoms, at
depths ranging from 8 to 46 meters. 698 elasmobranch specimens were caught, belonging to 12
species (10 batoids and 2 sharks), and they represented 9.9% in abundance and 28.5% in biomass
of the total fish catch. The most abundant species were Dasyatis pastinaca, Raja radula and
Torpedo marmorata, making up 48.3%, 24.6% and 15.3%, respectively, of the elasmobranch
capture. Overall, the abundance of some elasmobranch species presented differences between
inside and outside the marine reserves, and also some seasonal trends were detected.

Presentation cancelled.




                                                        29
11.00 – 11.15
EEA in Perspective: past, status quo and future tasks - a steep road ahead?

B. Z. Frentzel-Beyme.
Biozentrum Grindel & Zool. Museum der Universitdt, Martin-Luther-King-Platz 3, 20146 Hamburg, Germany.
(Email: boris_f-beyme@elasmo.de).


Including a short review of the history of the EEA, a summary of the elasmobranch conservation
status in Europe is presented and the contribution of the EEA to it. With a focus on the recent
developments of elasmobranch conservation in Europe, a projection of necessary actions in the
future and further possibilities are suggested for discussion.




                                                      30
11.15 – 11.30
Electrosensitive fish and coastal renewable energy developments in UK waters.

A. B. Gill.
Institute of Water & Environment, Cranfield University, Silsoe, MK45 2LR, UK.
(Email: a.b.gill@cranfield.ac.uk).


In 2001, 18 consents for the development of offshore windfarms were approved around the coast
of England and Wales. During 2003, a further 15 consents were approved in three strategic areas -
the Thames, Humber and Mersey bays. These 2nd stage developments will have a much larger
environmental footprint owing to their greater number of wind turbines and being located further
offshore. All the windfarms have multiple wind turbines, which are interlinked with electric cables,
and a main cable connection to shore. Because of the extent of the electric cables (both A.C. and
D.C.) and the worrying status of elasmobranch populations within the coastal zone a priority area
for research identified by the UK Collaborative Offshore Wind Research into the Environment
(COWRIE) group was electromagnetic fields (EMF) generated by offshore windfarm power cables
and their possible effect on organisms sensitive to EMFs. Here I discuss findings based on recent
developments in our understanding of electricity production by the offshore windfarms and relate
these to their potential interaction with elasmobranchs. Based on these interactions I also present
a possible route map as an initial template for cooperative initiatives between elasmobranch
conservation management and the offshore renewables industry.




                                                         31
11.30 – 11.45
Population structure of the Thornback ray, Raja clavata L. in Southern England waters.

M. Chevolot1, G. Hoarau1, A.D. Rijnsdorp2, W.T. Stam1 and J.L. Olsen1.
1 Department of Marine Biology, Center for Ecological and Evolutionary Studies, University of Groningen, P.O. Box14,

9750 AA Haren, The Netherlands.
(Email: m.chevolot@biol.rug.nl, g.hoarau@biol.rug.nl, w.t.stam@biol.rug.nl, j.l.olsen@biol.rug.nl).
2 Netherlands Institute for Fisheries Research (RIVO), P.O. Box68, 1970AB IJmuiden, The Netherlands.




Before the 1950’s the skate Raja clavata was common in the central/southern North Sea. Since
then it has become scarce, probably because of mixed fisheries. In the North Sea, it has now
disappeared from the Dutch coasts, and its distribution is restricted to the southeastern English
coasts. The decrease of the stock has led to the question of their sustainability due to their
biological characteristics like high maturity age, large size at birth, slow growth rate, low fecundity
and high juvenile survival rates. Moreover skates are characterized by no larval pelagic stage, and
apparent low dispersal based. Thus, skate populations may be genetically differentiated at a small
geographical scale. In this context, the sustainability of locally discrete or patchy subpopulations
should remain only as long as the subpopulations remain connected.
We investigated the population structure of the thornback ray of 14 locations in Southern England
waters using 5 microsatellite loci. Significant population structure was found with a global FST =
0.013, however, this structure was not correlated with geography nor any obvious environmental
factors. The significance of this population structure will be discussed.




                                                         32
11.45 – 12.00
Studies of an exceptionally large feeding aggregation of whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) off
Quintana Roo, Mexico.

R. Hueter1, J. G. Cano2, F. R. Suarez3 and J. Tyminski1.
1 Center for Shark Research, Mote Marine Laboratory, 1600 Ken Thompson Parkway, Sarasota, FL 34236 USA

(Email: rhueter@mote.org, johnski@mote.org).
2 CONANP-SEMARNAT, Boulevard Kukulcan Km. 4.8 Zona Hotelera C.P. 77500 Cancun, Quintana Roo, Mexico.

(Email: jgonzalez@conanp.gob.mx).
3 Area de Proteccion de Flora y Fauna Yum Balam CONANP-SEMARNAT Boulevard Kukulcan Km. 4.8 Zona Hotelera

C.P. 77500 Cancun, Quintana Roo, Mexico.
(Email: yumbalam@conanp.gob.mx).


Whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) are known to inhabit nearshore waters off Mexico at the transition
between the Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean Sea in the summer, but little research has been
conducted on the sharks in this area. Our U.S.-Mexico collaborative team began preliminary
studies of these sharks off Quintana Roo in summer 2003 and have continued this research
through 2004. Using a combination of aerial and on-water surveys, oceanographic sampling,
tagging and tracking, genetic sampling, and collaborations with local fishermen and guides, we are
investigating the number, distribution, behavior and migration of these whale sharks and their
relationship to conspecifics observed in other parts of the Gulf, Caribbean and other regions. The
sharks begin to appear in the area in May and are found there through September, apparently
feeding on plankton associated with a summer upwelling. Well over 100 sharks, and perhaps
many more, appear to be present in the area each summer. Documented sizes range from
approximately 3.5 to over 10 m in total length with both sexes represented. To date we have
tagged over 130 individuals in the area with conventional external tags, attached satellite PAT tags
to three and acoustic transmitters to five, tracked one animal actively for 4.5 hr, and obtained
genetic tissue samples from 15 sharks. Resightings of tagged animals are being reported. Results
of this research are being used to enact conservation action plans to protect this exceptionally
large and predictable feeding aggregation of whale sharks in Mexican waters.




                                                     33
13.00 – 13.15
Cloning and expression of alpha and beta subunits of the Na, K-ATPase from the euryhaline
bull shark, Carcharhinus leucas.

L. Meischke and G. Cramb.
School of Biology, University of St Andrews, Bute Medical Buildings, St Andrews, Fife, KY16 9TS, UK.
(Email: larameischke@hotmail.com).


Few vertebrates can rival the bull shark when considering salinity tolerance. It is able to survive in
water ranging from 0 to 53 ppt by precisely controlling the composition of their body fluids. This
requires the expression, function and coordination of several ion transporters and channels
including the Na, K-ATPase. In this study, juvenile bull sharks were acclimated to either freshwater
(0 ppt) or seawater (35 ppt). Following the amplification, cloning and sequencing of the entire bull
shark Na, K-ATPase alpha and beta subunits of the gene, nucleic acid probes were used in
Northern blot analyses to quantify messenger RNA expression in the osmoregulatory tissues, the
gill, rectal gland, kidney and intestine. Using antibodies raised to the known sequences of both
subunits, protein expression of Na, K-ATPase alpha and beta subunits have been compared in the
gill, kidney and intestine of FW and SW acclimated sharks.




                                                         34
13.15 – 13.30
Relax Immobility in sharks: preliminary results on Caribbean reef sharks.

R. S. Avogadri and F. Gioelli.
Shark Academy - Onlus, Piazzale Olimpia, 52, 37138 Verona, Italy.
(Email: riccardosturla@sharkacademy.com, fabrizio@sharkacademy.com).


Immobilization of sharks for husbandry, medical cures and research purposes currently relies on
Tonic immobility techniques, that consist in rolling the shark onto his back and are often associated
with use of hooks. A more recent technique, applied for tourist entertainment, allows to immobilize
sharks performing massage on their snout. This manipulation induces in sharks a trance-like state,
thus the name Trance immobility. Both techniques, Tonic and Trance immobility, relies upon shark
feeding and induce in sharks an uncosciousness state, that allows manipulation by researchers. In
the present study a Caribbean reef shark (Carcharhinus perezi) was approached without feeding
and handled without inducing unconsciousness. Several Caribbean reef sharks were approached
in Grand Bahama waters applying a technique named “shark pretending”: the researcher
(“pretender”) standed on the sea bottom and offered food to sharks with a sequence of
predetermined movements, according to shark approach direction. Once a shark was close
enough, the pretender hid food and grabbed shark’s head, performing massage on its snout by
thumb circular movements. Some individuals responded positively and one female showed a very
peculiar behaviour: following the manipulation, the shark became relaxed without losing
consciousness, thus the new name Relax immobility, and let the pretender remove parasites from
its dorsal fin. Suprisingly, after this first experience, the same individual went spontaneously and
repeatedly back to the pretender, without food attraction, and approached the same pretender also
one day later, suggesting memory capacity and learning behaviour. Results obtained in these
preliminary studies encourage further trials on more individuals.




                                                    35
13.30 – 13.45
Mechanisms underlying sexual segregation in a sexually monomorphic elasmobranch.

V. J. Wearmouth1,2, D. W. Sims2, J. C. Partridge2, I. C. Cuthill2 and J. D. Metcalfe3.
1 The Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, The Laboratory, Citadel Hill, Plymouth, PL1 2PB, UK.

(Email: vjw@mba.ac.uk, dws@mba.ac.uk).
2 School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Woodland Road, Bristol BS8 1UG, UK.

(Email: j.c.partridge@bris.ac.uk, i.c.cuthill@bris.ac.uk).
3 CEFAS, Lowestoft Laboratory, Lowestoft NR33 0HT, UK.

(Email: j.d.metcalfe@cefas.co.uk).


Sexual segregation is considered a general characteristic of shark populations, yet its underlying
causes remain poorly understood. Identifying sex differences in behaviour is important for the
successful management of marine fish populations due to the potential for differential exploitation
of the sexes. The lesser spotted dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula, provides a useful model species
with which to investigate sexual segregation as they are not sexually dimorphic with respect to
body size (unlike many viviparous species). Moreover, they can be studied in both the laboratory
and at sea and recent research has revealed that the sexes of this species exhibit alternative
behavioural strategies. Through the application of acoustic telemetry it has been shown that
females, although nocturnally active in deeper water once every one to three days, refuge in
shallow water caves for up to 70% of the time. Male dogfish, however, do not refuge but exhibit
low activity in deep water by day and increase activity as they move into shallow areas at dusk to
feed, before returning to deep water at dawn. Current research explores the role of female
refuging behaviour using an integrative approach of field-based acoustic and archival tracking and
complementary laboratory manipulations. This research will improve our understanding of the
causes underlying sexual segregation not only in sharks, but in animals in general.




                                                         36
13.45 – 14.00
Reproductive biology of the spiny dogfish, Squalus acanthias, in the eastern Mediterranean
Sea.

A. Chatzispyrou and P. Megalofonou.
Department of Biology, Section of Zoology-Marine Biology, University of Athens Panepistimiopolis, Ilissia, Athens
15784 – Greece.
(Email: anta_oldman@hotmail.com, p.megalo@biol.uoa.gr).


The reproductive biology of the spiny dogfish, Squalus acanthias, in the eastern Mediterranean
Sea was studied by examining 141 specimens collected in the South Aegean Sea and Levantine
Basin, from June 2003 to May 2004. Females ranged from 320 to 710 mm in total length (TL) and
their gonadosomatic index (GSI) varied from 0.09 to 10.76, with higher values in August. The
presence of vitellogenic oocytes and developing oviducal glands and uteri indicated that females
begin to mature at 550 mm TL. Males ranged from 350 to 820 mm in TL and their GSI varied from
and 0.06 to 3.85 with higher values recorded in July. GSI values suggested that spermatogenesis
and vitelogenesis begun on February. Hepatosomatic index (HSI) was also variable in both sexes,
ranging from 6.94 to 28.99 (mean 14.1) in females and from 3.60 to 18.65 (mean 11.2) in males.
The maximum HSI values were recorded in August for females and April for males. Twenty
females ranging from 570-710 mm in TL were found to be pregnant, with 1 to 5 embryos in their
uterus. The embryos TL ranged from 72-195 mm, while their body weight ranged from 1.6-30 g. A
positive relationship was found between maternal length and the number of pups per litter.




                                                          37
14.00 – 14.15
Electromagnetic fields generated by marine power cables and their potential impact on
electrosensitive fish.

G. Vella.
RES, Beaufort Court, Egg Farm Lane, Kings Langley, Hertfordshire, WD4 8LR, UK.
(Email: gero.vella@res-ltd.com).


In 2002 the Collaborative Offshore Wind Research into the Environment (COWRIE), a trust fund
set up by the Crown Estate based on the refundable financial deposits made by Round I windfarm
developers, commissioned a preliminary assessment of electromagnetic fields (EMF) generated by
UK offshore windfarm cables. The objectives of this study focused on mathematically modelling the
likely EMF emitted from a sub-sea power cable to help elucidate the potential impacts of EMF
generated by wind farm power cables on marine groups such as the elasmobranchs. The EMF
generated by a 132kV XLPE three-phase submarine cable with an AC current of 350 amps buried
at a depth of 1m was modelled with the 'Maxwell 2D' software program. The results of the model
simulations showed that a power cable with perfect shielding i.e. where conductor sheathes are
grounded, does not generate an electric field directly. However, a magnetic field is generated in the
local environment by the alternating current in the cable. This in turn, generates an induced electric
field close to the cable within the range detectable by electrosensitive fish species; in the model
used, this resulted in a predicted electric field of approximately 91µV/m in seawater above a cable
buried to 1m. An electric field of this strength is on the boundary of electric field emissions that are
expected to attract and/or repel elasmobranchs. Considering the number of offshore wind farms
currently proposed around the UK and the vulnerable status of many benthic elasmobranch
populations, potential mitigation is discussed and recommendations are made for further research
through modelling and more importantly, in-situ observations.




                                                      38
14.15 – 14.30
Individual variability in electroreceptive behaviour of a benthic shark, the lesser spotted
dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula).

J. A. Kimber and A. B. Gill.
Institute of Water & Environment, Cranfield University, Silsoe, MK45 2LR, UK.
(Email: j.a.kimber@cranfield.ac.uk, a.b.gill@cranfield.ac.uk).


All elasmobranchs use electroreception (principally for finding prey and conspecifics). Although we
know each elasmobranch species is able to detect electric fields we have very little knowledge of
how electroreceptive behaviour varies. Any variation will determine in part the ecological success
of an individual who relies on electrosense. We determined the variability in behavioural reponse of
the benthic shark, the lesser spotted dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula) to a range of artificial prey type
electric fields (E-fields based on electric currents: 0, 0.9, 9.0 and 90.0mA). Squid scent was added
to the experimental tanks to stimulate foraging, and a hierarchy of behavioural responses of the
dogfish was recorded: 1- Response to scent; 2- Movement towards source; 3- Turning response to
E-field and 4- Biting of E-field source. Individuals differed significantly in their response to the
scent. Following a response to scent there was significant individual variability in approach, turn
and bite responses to the electrodes emitting the E-field. The results of this work provide the first
determination (to our knowledge) of individual variability in E-field locating behaviour of an
elasmobranch species. This type of research significantly strengthens our ability to predict the
ecological consequences to fish of using electric fields to locate potential food. The research also
enhances our knowledge for interpreting how benthic elasmobranchs may respond to changes in
their electrical environment such as those associated with electricity production by offshore wind
power developments.




                                                         39
14.30 – 14.45
Age and growth of the blue shark, (Prionace glauca), at western coast of Baja California Sur,
Mexico.

M. P. Blanco–Parra1, F. Galván–Magaña2 and J. F. Márquez–Farias1.
1 Instituto Nacional de la Pesca. Centro Regional de Investigación Pesquera de Guaymas. Calle 20 Sur No. 605. Col.

Cantera. CP. 85400. Guaymas, Sonora, México.
(E-mail adress: pblanco@icmyl.unam.mx).
2 Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, IPN. Av. Instituto Politécnico Nacional s/n, Col. Playa Palo de Santa

Rita, La Paz, BCS, 23096, México.
(Email adress: fgalvan@ipn.mx).


The blue shark is widely distributed in the world’s oceans. It is also the most abundant species
captured in the shark fishery on the west coast of Baja California Sur. In the present study, the
growth of the blue shark, Prionace glauca, was investigated based on reading the growth rings in
the vertebrae of 204 sharks using the silver-nitrate staining technique to protrude the growth rings.
Examined size range was 81–270 cm total length (TL) averaging 158 cm LT. Males were more
abundant than females. Sixteen ages were found for males and 12 age groups for females. Age
four (134 cm TL) represent 19% of the sample for males and for females 22% were represented by
age seven (165 cm TL). The von Bertalanffy growth parameters were: L¥ = 299.85 cm LT, K= 0.1,
to = -2.44, for males; L¥ = 237.5 cm LT, K= 0.15, to = -2.15, for females and L¥ = 303.4 cm LT,
K=0.1, to= -2.68, for combined sexes. These parameters were similar to the estimate for this
species in other regions of the North Pacific Ocean.




                                                           40
15.15 – 15.30
Sharksucker induced behaviour in captive bull sharks.

J. M. Brunnschweiler.
University of Zurich, Switzerland.
(Email: jbrunnschweiler@bluewin.ch).


This is the first description of sharksucker induced behaviour in sharks in a captive environment. To
enhance the understanding of the sharksucker / shark interaction, the behaviour of two captive bull
sharks was monitored. Both sharks showed sharksucker induced behaviour patterns previously
described for other free-ranging shark species. Bull sharks showed an increased swimming speed
during sharksucker attachment. With regard to the attachment position, sharksuckers attached to
different body parts on the female and male shark. This paper further supports the hypothesis that
sharksucker attachment irritates hosts and that costs and benefits are unevenly distributed among
the two organisms.




                                                 41
15.30 – 15.45
Prey species and size preference of nursery-bound juvenile lemon sharks, Negaprion
brevirostris.

S. P. Newman1, S. H. Gruber2 and R. D Handy1.
1 Department of Biological Sciences, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, Devon, PL4 8AA, UK.

(Email: SP_Newman@hotmail.com, Rhandy@Plymouth.ac.uk).
2 Rosensteil School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, University of Miami, Miami, USA.

(Email: sgruber@rsmas.miami.edu).


Prey preference was determined by quantitatively comparing the dietary composition of 642
juvenile lemon sharks (averaging 54.7 ± 0.3 cm precaudal length, mean ± S.E., range 43.5 to 90.0
cm), with concurrent sampling of prey communities at Bimini, Bahamas, between March 2000 and
March 2003. Juvenile lemon sharks only preyed upon 49 (29 %) of the 175 species identified within
the nursery, and demonstrated prey preference with proportions of prey families in the diet
significantly different to those found in the environment (÷2, P < 0.001). The most preferred prey of
juvenile lemon sharks (in rank order) were toadfish > barracuda > parrotfish > filefish > mojarra.
Prey sizes were obtained for 350 dietary items, of which 85 % were calculated using regressions
relating bone lengths to total length. Juvenile lemon sharks demonstrated positive size selection,
with an over-representation of the larger prey available in the environment in their diet
(Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, P < 0.001). Mojarra were consumed in proportion to the distribution of
fish lengths in the environment, suggesting that their importance in the diet may be due to preferred
sizes in the environment as well as their ease of capture. Juvenile lemon sharks demonstrated a
preference for slower-moving prey that were easier to capture, while avoiding larger, faster and
harder to catch species. The degree of selection exhibited by juvenile lemon sharks was greatest
when prey were more abundant, suggesting that lemon sharks may conform to the optimal foraging
theory.




                                                        42
15.45 – 16.00
Deepwater sharks most currently found in Canary Islands.

A. S. Rafel, A. B. Hernández and P. P. Alayón.
Departamento de Biología Animal (Ciencias Marinas), Facultad de Biología - Universidad de La Laguna, Calle,
Astrofísico Francisco Sánchez, s/n, 38206 La Laguna – Tenerife, ESPAÑA – SPAIN.
(Email: alsancho@ull.es, abrito@ull.es, ppascual@ull.es).


Due to the closeness of the great sea beds to the coastline of the Canary Islands (27º- 30º N; 19º-
12 W) many deepwater species, and among them many sharks, are wholly integrated in the
dynamic of the ecosystem of the islands; opposing to every continental zone where these species
are to be found far away from the coast. Two factors are essential to analyse the structure of the
Canarian marine ecosystem. On one hand, due to the steepness of the sea depths the dimensions
of the island platforms are small; and on the other hand, the waters surrounding the islands are
oligotrophic and so the biomass or density of population of each species is low and therefore the
global production capacity of this ecosystem is highly limited. In this paper we number a list of
species and we give some data on the abundance, vertical distribution and biology of the most
common sharks (more than 10 records) that live in deep waters (more than 1000 m depth) of the
Canary Islands. There are records from 8 species from the families Dalatiidae (Velvet Dogfishes
and Lantern Sharks) and Centrophoridae (Gulper Sharks and Birdbeak Dogfishes) from the order
Squaliformes (Dogfish Sharks).




                                                        43
16.00 – 16.15
Foraging excursions of female dogfish to and from ‘home’ refuges.

N. Hutchinson1, D. W. Sims1 and D. Morritt2.
1 Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom The Laboratory, Citadel Hill, Plymouth, PL1 2PB, UK.

(Email: neihu@mba.ac.uk, dws@mba.ac.uk).
2 School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham,, Surrey TW20 0EX, UK.

(Email: D.Morritt@rhul.ac.uk).


Technological advances in telemetry systems are allowing behavioural ecologists to examine the
movement of fishes with more accuracy and at finer scales than ever before. Such progress
means that elasmobranch behaviour that has previously been alluded to in the laboratory can now
be tested under natural conditions in the field. In this new study we examine the behaviour of
lesser spotted dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula) females in a semi-enclosed marine lough in the
Republic of Ireland. Individuals tracked using a radio linked acoustic system are shown to carry out
discrete foraging trips in areas of habitat where the abundance of prey species is relatively high.
Foraging excursions consist of distinct commuting periods interspersed with phases of area
restricted foraging activity. Examination of tracks shows that animals exhibit “central place foraging”
behaviour, returning to specific refuges between bouts of foraging.




                                                         44
16.15 – 16.30
In the sharks’ cradle.

S. Clò1 and E. de Sabata2.
1 ICRAM, via di Casalotti 300, 00166 Roma.

(Email: simona.clo@icram.org).
2 MedSharks, via Ruggero Fauro 82, 00197 Roma.

(Email: seastories@virgilio.it).


Each year, as spring turns into summer, dozens of sandbar sharks (Carcharhinus plumbeus) enter
a shallow bay on the Mediterranean coast of Turkey. Over 100 individuals have been photo-
identified since 2001 based on scars and markings on their bodies. Several individuals are re-
sighted every year, and three have been re-sighted over three subsequent years. The large
majority of the bay population is composed of mature females, many of which are very large and
presumably pregnant, but mature males visit the bay as well. In 2004 the birth of a shark was
filmed, and two lifeless newborns wrapped in their placenta were recovered from the sea floor. The
exact length at birth of Mediterranean sandbar sharks was thus established for the first time. The
birth and the stillborns allow us to identify this bay as a nursery area for sandbar sharks, the only
one currently known for the Mediterranean sea.




                                                 45
16.30 – 16.45
Migratory Behaviour of the thornback ray, Raja clavata L., in the southern North sea.

E. Hunter, A. A. Buckley, C. Stewart and J. D. Metcalfe.
CEFAS, Lowestoft Laboratory, Pakefield Road, Lowestoft, Suffolk, NR33 0HT, UK.
(E-mail: e.hunter@cefas.co.uk).


We have studied the seasonal migration patterns of the thornback ray, Raja clavata L., in the
Thames Estuary and Southern Bight of the North Sea (United Kingdom). Although found
throughout the European continental shelf, the relatively high density of thornback rays in the
Thames Estuary make this an important stock centre where local fisheries still seasonally target
these fish. Historical data from conventional tagging studies have suggested that the majority of
rays tagged within the Thames Estuary remain there throughout their lives.

Here we describe the results of experiments in which 197 thornback rays were tagged with
electronic data storage tags and released in October 1999 and 2000. A geolocation method using
tidal data recorded when rays remained on the sea-bed over a full tidal-cycle was used to
reconstruct the movements of the fish throughout their time at liberty. Depth and temperature data
provided further information about the behaviour and location of the fish. Data from these
experiments were compared with the results of conventional tagging experiments.

Our results demonstrate that, contrary to predictions, rays were not restricted to the Thames
Estuary, but moved more widely in the southern North Sea. We observed a seasonal pattern of
migration related to the reproductive cycle. Rays were dispersed in relatively deep water outside
the inner Thames Estuary during the autumn and winter when the fish were feeding, then
aggregated in the inner Thames Estuary during the spring and summer, when reproduction takes
place. The differences between the results of conventional and electronic data storage tagging
programmes are discussed.




                                                      46
16.45 – 17.00
Teeth sexual dimorphic development in Raja asterias (De La Roche, 1809):
ontogenetic and seasonal pattern analysis related to the reproductive biology.

A. Colasante, U. Scacco and M. Vacchi.
I.C.R.A.M., Via di Casalotti 300, 00166 Rome, Italy.
(Email: a.colasante@tiscali.it, u.scacco@icram.org, m.vacchi@unige.it).


Different teeth morphology is a common sexual feature in several species of Rajidae. Present
literature for Raja asterias, the commonest skate in the central Tirrenian Sea, reports few
information about sexual teeth dimorphism. The aim of this work is to investigate the possible
changes in teeth shape with size and with the achievement of maturity in males and females of this
species. A total of 300 individuals of Raja asterias were collected in the central Tirrenian Sea from
bottom otter trawlers and fish markets located in the research area. We present here our results,
obtained using an image acquiring programme, on differences of teeth shape development
between sexes related to the reproductive biology of the species.




                                                         47
17.00 – 17.15
Overview of White Shark (Carcharodon carcharias) research at Seal Island, South Africa.

R. A. Martin, N. Hammerschlag and C. Fallows.
ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research, P.O. Box 48561, 595 Burrard Street, Vancouver, BC V7X 1A3, Canada.
(E-mail: ram@elasmo-research.org, hammersn@bellsouth.net, sharky1@mweb.co.za).


Predatory behaviour, residency patterns, and social organisation of White Sharks were studied at
Seal Island in False Bay, South Africa, from 1997-2003. Of 2088 predatory attacks on Cape Fur
Seals (Arctocephalus pusillus pusillus) recorded during the study period, frequency and success
rate were analysed according to 12 biotic and abiotic factors. Attacks were primarily on lone in-
coming YOY seals, were spatiotemporally clustered at the primary pinniped entry/exit point at the
south terminus of the Island, and occurred almost exclusively during winter (May-September),
mostly within two hours of sunrise. Predatory success rate averaged 47%, but increased to 55%
under scotopic conditions and decreased to 40% under photopic conditions. Certain individual
White Sharks exhibit idiosyncratic predatory behaviour resulting in success rates up to 80%,
suggesting some degree of trial-and-error learning. Using total pigmentation pattern, analysed
according to 68 discrete topographic regions, 262 individual White Sharks were catalogued and
their residency patterns and intraspecific associations discerned from re-sightings data. Individuals
were re-sighted as often as 28 times over the study period, suggesting a high degree of philopatry.
Residence times for individuals ranged from 1-18 days, averaging 2-3 days. Known individuals
appear to travel in loose groups of 2-6. Sixteen categories of overt agonistic behaviour have been
defined and documented, appearing to occur only between individuals of separate groups. Social
hierarchy under baited contexts appears to be largely size-dependent, with individuals as little as
5% longer dominant over smaller conspecifics, but sex and degree of melanism may also be
factors.




                                                     48
Poster Presentations




                       49
Three-dimensional movements of captive Mobulids (Manta birostris and Mobula mobular).

A. Csilla and S. Istvan.
Dept. Of Anatomy, Semmelweis University, Budapest. Hungary,1094, Tuzolto utca 58.
(Email: csari1000@yahoo.com).



The movements and behaviour of elasmobranchs are believed to have an important function in
communication both within and between species. Compared to most other elasmobranchs, the
rays in the Myliobatiformes have an extremely large brain. Areas of the brain that are especially
well developed are those responsible for the coordination of movement. This suggests that the fine
scale control of swimming behaviour may have an important role in their life history and ecology.
We used a three-dimensional computer-based movement analysing and measuring system to
study the characteristic ‘flying-like’ swimming movements of captive Mobulids (a female Manta
birostris, 3.5 m wing-span and a female Mobula mobular, 1.8 m wing-span). With this method, we
analysed the leading edge of the swimming surface. The serial position of the leading wing edges
during swimming formed a three-dimensional surface that could be mathematically described. An
analysis of these surfaces detected significant differences in swimming patterns between the two
genera that were not obvious in visual-based analyses. Our preliminary investigations suggest that
this method may be useful in comparing the swimming behaviour of captive and wild mobulids,
swimming differences between sexes, as well as species-specific responses to environmental
cues.




                                                      50
Preliminary data on the ampullary organs in the rabbit fish Chimaera monstrosa (Linnaeus,
1758).

M. Bottaro1, M. Vacchi1, S. Ferrando2, E. Luchetti3, C. Atkinson4, T. Ferrando2 and
G. Tagliafierro2.
1 ICRAM, c/o MNA, University of Genoa, Italy.

(E-mail: m.bottaro@unige.it).
2 Department of Experimental, Environmental and Applied Biology (DIBISAA), University of Genoa, Italy.
3 Marine Biology Station, National Museum of Natural History (MNHN), Concarneau, France.
4 Fisheries, Recreation and Biodiversity, Environment Agency, Warrington, United Kingdom.




The rabbit fish Chimaera monstrosa (Linnaeus, 1758) is a deep-sea demersal species distributed
in the Mediterranean and in the NE Atlantic. The presence of ampullary structures (functionally and
structurally) homologous to the ampullae of Lorenzini have been shown to exist in Chimaeriformes
but few data are available about these highly specialized electroreceptors in this group. The
present research was undertaken for a better understanding of these sensory organs in C.
monstrosa. Specimens of C. monstrosa were collected in the Gulf of Genoa, Ligurian Sea (NW
Mediterranean Sea), by professional bottom trawlers and after deep anaesthesia by MS 222 and
dissection, samples of ampullae of Lorenzini were fixed in paraformaldehyde and differently
prepared for LM and SEM observation. The renewal of the sensory epithelium and the innervation
of the ampulla were studied by the immunohistochemical method and the TUNEL reaction. In C.
monstrosa the ampullae of Lorenzini are mainly distributed in the rostral cephalic portion, where
their large external pores are evident. As already observed in other species of cartilaginous fishes,
the ampullae showed an enlarged terminal portion subdivided in sensory alveoli filled with a
gelatinous mucopolysaccharide substance. Cell proliferation occurs in well defined areas, such as
at the periphery of the central cap and in the flat epithelium located on the partitions between
alveoli. Nerve fibres enter in the dilated portion of the ampulla, then branch and end beneath
sensory cells. Relationships with taxonomic and ecological features may also occur and need to be
further investigated also in other species of Chimaeriformes.




                                                        51
Length at first maturity for two species of lantern sharks (Etmopterus spinax and E.
pusillus) occurring in south Portugal.

R. Coelho and K. Erzini.
Universidade do Algarve, CCMAR/FCMA, Campus de Gambelas, 8000 Faro, Portugal.
(Email: rpcoelho@ualg.pt, kerzini@ualg.pt).


Elasmobranchs, due to their characteristic slow growth rate, delayed reproductive effort, geared
towards the production of small progeny, and long gestation period, are highly susceptible to
overexploitation. Etmopterus spinax and E. pusillus are two species of lantern sharks that are
captured in large quantities in some deep-water fisheries along the Portuguese coast and are
always discarded. Specimens from these species were collected from February 2003 to May 2004
from deep-water fisheries and classified as mature or immature. Maturity ogives were fitted and
size at first maturity estimated for each sex of each species. Both species are late maturing, with
the maturity sizes varying between 75% and 87% of the maximum observed sizes, depending on
species and sex. For both species, females tended to mature and grow to larger sizes than males.
The maturity sizes as percentage of maximum observed sizes estimated in this study are similar to
the values observed by other authors for other deep-water squalids. The late maturation of these
deep-water shark species makes these populations extremely vulnerable to increasing fishing
mortality.




                                                   52
Dermal and dental sexual dimorphisms in the lesser-spotted catshark (Scyliorhinus
canicula).

N. Crooks and C. P. Waring.
University of Portsmouth, School of Biological Sciences, King Henry Building, King Henry I Street, Portsmouth, PO1
2DY, UK.
(Email: neil.crooks@port.ac.uk, colin.waring@port.ac.uk).


Generally, the reproductive biology of many elasmobranch species is not well understood.
However, reproduction has been widely studied in the lesser-spotted catshark (Scyliorhinus
canicula). The existence of a sexual dimorphism in this species has previously been documented
with regard to head, tooth and jaw length and width. However, the existence of a sexual
dimorphism has not been established with respect to skin thickness or other tooth characteristics.
Sexually mature lesser-spotted catsharks were collected from the Solent and jaw, teeth and skin
samples were removed. The teeth were removed from the jaw and the cusps were manually
counted. Males possessed significantly fewer cusps (P <0.001). The central cusp of each tooth
was measured at the base and the tip. Both dimensions showed a significant difference (P <0.001),
with males possessing wider central cusps. Skin samples taken from the area below the dorsal fin
and above the lateral line were analysed. Both dermal and epidermal thickness was measured. In
each case there was a significant difference with females having thicker dermal and epidermal
layers. (P<0.001). This data shows that males have larger teeth compared to females, but that
females have thicker skin compared to males. Since it has been previously shown that there is no
difference in the diet of male and female catsharks, this suggests that these sexual dimorphisms
may relate to the reproductive biology of the species. We are presently analysing whether these
gender differences occur throughout the year and whether they occur in immature specimens.




                                                         53
Migratory Behaviour of the thornback ray, Raja clavata L., in the southern North sea.

E. Hunter, A. A. Buckley, C. Stewart and J. D. Metcalfe.
CEFAS, Lowestoft Laboratory, Pakefield Road, Lowestoft, Suffolk, NR33 0HT, UK.
(E-mail: e.hunter@cefas.co.uk).


We have studied the seasonal migration patterns of the thornback ray, Raja clavata L., in the
Thames Estuary and Southern Bight of the North Sea (United Kingdom). Although found
throughout the European continental shelf, the relatively high density of thornback rays in the
Thames Estuary make this an important stock centre where local fisheries still seasonally target
these fish. Historical data from conventional tagging studies have suggested that the majority of
rays tagged within the Thames Estuary remain there throughout their lives.

Here we describe the results of experiments in which 197 thornback rays were tagged with
electronic data storage tags and released in October 1999 and 2000. A geolocation method using
tidal data recorded when rays remained on the sea-bed over a full tidal-cycle was used to
reconstruct the movements of the fish throughout their time at liberty. Depth and temperature data
provided further information about the behaviour and location of the fish. Data from these
experiments were compared with the results of conventional tagging experiments.

Our results demonstrate that, contrary to predictions, rays were not restricted to the Thames
Estuary, but moved more widely in the southern North Sea. We observed a seasonal pattern of
migration related to the reproductive cycle. Rays were dispersed in relatively deep water outside
the inner Thames Estuary during the autumn and winter when the fish were feeding, then
aggregated in the inner Thames Estuary during the spring and summer, when reproduction takes
place. The differences between the results of conventional and electronic data storage tagging
programmes are discussed.




NB – This poster is in addition to an oral presentation of the same title.




                                                      54
An investigation into the structure of the olfactory organs of the lesser spotted catshark
(Scyliorhinus canicula).

L. Llewellyn and C. P. Waring.
University of Portsmouth, School of Biological Sciences, King Henry Building, King Henry I Street, Portsmouth, PO1
2DY, UK.
(Email: leanne.llewellyn@port.ac.uk, colin.waring@port.ac.uk).


The sense of olfaction in elasmobranchs is well documented as being highly developed and
sensitive, and is thought to play a role in many aspects of their life history. There has been
speculation that olfaction plays a vital role in courtship and mating via the use of sex pheromones
in some shark species. Investigations into the structure of the olfactory organ of some teleost
species have revealed a sexual dimorphism in the structure of the olfactory system with males
having larger olfactory organs to smell females. The current study investigates the morphometrics
and structure of the olfactory system in order to determine if a sexual dimorphism exists in the
lesser-spotted catshark. Sexually mature males and females (i.e. > 500 mm body length) were
obtained from the Solent region and olfactory organ morphometrics and structure were compared.
There was no significant difference between males and females in the lengths and widths of the
nares and the olfactory organs. The relative weight of the left nostril did not differ, however the right
olfactory organ was significantly heavier in males (P= 0.008) compared to females. Moreover,
males had significantly more olfactory lamellae (P< 0.001) in the left and right organs compared to
females. Since it has been shown that male and female catsharks do not differ in their choice of
prey, the data suggests that the gender differences in olfactory organs may relate to reproduction
and the possible detection by males of sex pheromones released by females.




                                                         55
New record of chimaeroid fish for the North Eastern Atlantic.

E. Luchetti and D. Sellos.
Station de Biologie Marine du MNHN, Place de le Croix, BP 225, 29182 CONCARNEAU Cedex, France.
(E-mail: luchetti@mnhn.fr, sellos@mnhn.fr).


Chimaera monstrosa is actually the only species belonging to the genus Chimaera reported for NE
Atlantic. In this work we noticed the presence of a second species, Chimaera sp., having a
geographical and bathymetrical distibution partially overlapping with C. monstrosa. The two species
have been compared on the basis of morphological and genetic characters. Morphometric
measurements were taken on twenty four specimens, twelve males and twelve females, for each
species, collected at depths ranging from 280-1350 m, along the continental slope from the west of
the British Isles to the west of Brittany. All the specimens were introduced in the collections of the
“Muséum national d’Histoire naturelle”. Chimaera sp. can be distinguished from C. monstrosa by
body, fin and eye coloration as well as by the morphology of the claspers. Other differences are
pointed out from the comparison of morphometric measurements concerning for example the
claspers, the spine and the eye. A tissue sample was taken on four specimens of Chimaera sp.
and one specimen of C. monstrosa and a fragment of about 1500 nucleotides, including the major
part of the 16s rRNA, was amplified and sequenced. Comparison of our sequence of C. monstrosa
with a sequence available in GenBank showed no intraspecific variability. Comparison of the
sequences obtained on the four specimens of Chimaera sp. showed an intraspecific variability of 0
to 0.3%. The interspecific variability between C. monstrosa and Chimaera sp. was found to be 3.8
to 4.1%, supporting the results based on the morphological comparison. The relationships between
all Chimaeroids of the NE Atlantic are under investigation by molecular phylogenetics techniques.




                                                    56
The traditional shark fisheries of south west Madagascar: a study of two villages in the
Toliara region.

A. R. McVean, R. Walker and E. Fanning.
Society for Environmental Exploration, 50-52 Rivington Street, EC2A 3QP, London, UK.
(Email: gus_mcvean@yahoo.co.uk).


Traditional shark fisheries in Africa are largely poorly documented. Fisheries management plans for
fisheries targeting chondrichthyan species are typically based on studies with limited spatial
resolution or detail compromising their efficacy and potentially reducing the effectiveness of
national and regional plans. South west Madagsacar is an area which is poorly documented with
regard to many of its marine resources. This study presents a detailed investigation of the directed
shark fisheries of two villages south of Toliara - Soalara and Maromena - presenting a description
of the fishery in these villages and catch data for periods of 12 and 10 months respectively. Results
from a total of 1,164 catch records, including members of at least 13 species, with an estimated
total wet weight of over 123mt are reported with hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna spp.) representing
29% of sharks caught and 24% of the total wet weight. These findings, in conjunction with
anecdotal evidence collected from fishers, indicate a fishery of considerable social and economic
importance that is showing signs of decline, possibly as a result of changing fishing practices
associated with the intervention of outside agencies.




NB – This poster is in addition to an oral presentation of the same title.




                                                       57
Observations on age and sexual maturity of blue shark, Prionace glauca, in the
Mediterranean Sea.

P. Megalofonou1, D. Damalas1 and G. De Metrio2.
1 Department of Biology, Section of Zoology-Marine Biology, University of Athens Panepistimiopolis, Ilissia, Athens

15784 – Greece.
(Email: p.megalo@biol.uoa.gr, ddamalas@biol.uoa.gr).
2 Department of Animal Production, University of Bari, Via Amendola, 165/a, 70126 Bari, ITALY




During 1998-2000, a total of 579 blue sharks ranging in total length (TL) from 70 to 359 cm were
sampled in the Mediterranean Sea to study their sexual maturity using observations on gonadal
development and clasper morphology and rigidity. Caudal vertebrae were collected from
specimens between 84 and 305.5 cm TL and vertebral ring counts were used to estimate age.
Males were predominant (60,1 %) and sex ratio showed an increase of the males as size
progressed. Gonad observation revealed that females smaller than 120 cm TL had immature
ovaries with invisible eggs while ovaries with visible yolked eggs were present in specimens larger
than 120 cm TL. Ovaries weight varied from 4 to 137 g and maximum oocyte diameter reached
21.1 mm in mature females. All males smaller than 125 cm TL were immature presenting not
calcified claspers that did not reach the posterior end of the pelvic fins. Males larger than 187 cm
were all mature presenting heavy calcified claspers, which extended much more than the posterior
end of the pelvic fins. Total length at first maturity in females ranged from 205 to 215 cm, while the
values for males were from 185 to 195 cm. A significant linear relationship was found between TL
and diameter of caudal centra (r=0.79; P<0.05). Age estimates ranged from 0+ to 8+ yr and age at
first maturity was estimated about 4 yr.




                                                          58
The historical collection of Chondricthyes of the comparative anatomy museum of the
University of Bologna.

D. Minelli, A. Cervone, L. Sabbioni and B. Sabelli.
Dept. of experimental evolutionary biology of the University of Bologna, Via Selmi 3 - 40126 Bologna, Italy.
(Email: dminelli@alma.unibo.it, sabelli@alma.unibo.it).


The comparative anatomy museum of the University of Bologna holds about 4,000 vertebrate
specimens. Most of them come from the historical collection of the museum director Antonio
Alessandrini (1819-1861), others are later preparations of director Sebastiano Richiardi (1871) and
recent acquisitions of specimens we prepared in our laboratory. We undergo a revision of the
specimens dealing on Chondricthyes filing it in a database containing the original description and
number of Alessandrini, the modern nomenclature, the status and kind of conservation, a modern
description, the distribution and ecology of the species and a photo. The exhibition on the anatomy
of Chondricthyes contains about forty skeletons or parts of the skeleton. Of interest is a very large
oral jaw of a white shark fished in 1827 in the Adriatic Sea and exposed for some time in the fish
market of the city. About twenty dried specimens deal with circulatory, respiratory and digestive
systems. Very fine is the preparation of the gills of Hexanchus griseus perfused with colored wax to
emphasize the respiratory vessels. Thirty liquid (alcohol or formalin) preserved specimens show
different apparatuses. Our work deals also on the hystological collections of slides representing
microscopic structures like the electric lobes of the brain of Torpedo and other.




                                                          59
Deepwater sharks most currently found in Canary Islands.

A. S. Rafel, A. B. Hernández and P. P. Alayón.
Departamento de Biología Animal (Ciencias Marinas), Facultad de Biología - Universidad de La Laguna, Calle,
Astrofísico Francisco Sánchez, s/n, 38206 La Laguna – Tenerife, ESPAÑA – SPAIN.
(Email: alsancho@ull.es, abrito@ull.es, ppascual@ull.es).


Due to the closeness of the great sea beds to the coastline of the Canary Islands (27º- 30º N; 19º-
12 W) many deepwater species, and among them many sharks, are wholly integrated in the
dynamic of the ecosystem of the islands; opposing to every continental zone where these species
are to be found far away from the coast. Two factors are essential to analyse the structure of the
Canarian marine ecosystem. On one hand, due to the steepness of the sea depths the dimensions
of the island platforms are small; and on the other hand, the waters surrounding the islands are
oligotrophic and so the biomass or density of population of each species is low and therefore the
global production capacity of this ecosystem is highly limited. In this paper we number a list of
species and we give some data on the abundance, vertical distribution and biology of the most
common sharks (more than 10 records) that live in deep waters (more than 1000 m depth) of the
Canary Islands. There are records from 8 species from the families Dalatiidae (Velvet Dogfishes
and Lantern Sharks) and Centrophoridae (Gulper Sharks and Birdbeak Dogfishes) from the order
Squaliformes (Dogfish Sharks).




NB – This poster is in addition to an oral presentation of the same title.




                                                        60
Prey selectivity by juvenile lemon sharks (Negaprion brevirostris Poey 1868) under semi
natural conditions in a sub tropical lagoon in Bimini, Bahamas.

A. Reeve1, R. Handy1 and S. Gruber2.
1 University of Plymouth, Department of Biological Sciences, Drake Circus, Plymouth, Devon. PL4 8AA, UK.

(Email: areeve81@hotmail.com).
2 Bimini Biological Field Station , 9300 SW 99 Street , Miami, Florida 33176-2050.

(Email: sgruber@rsmas.miami.edu).


The degree of selectivity exhibited by juvenile lemon sharks towards a prey species was
determined by presenting individual sharks with differing relative abundances of two prey species
and recording the prey choice. The majority of studies on elasmobranch diet have reported the
prey items found in the stomach of a number of sharks however, the extent to which an
elasmobranch specialises on one prey type has never been demonstrated. Similarly it is unclear
whether sharks display periodicity when feeding or are asynchronous and consume prey at all
times of the day or night.

Individual sharks were exposed to differing relative abundances of two prey species. An electivity
index (E*) and a chi squared goodness of fit test were used to elucidate the selectivity of the
sharks. Further analysis enabled the sharks’ functional response curve towards the prey items to
be determined and any size selection in prey items identified. Stomach contents of the sharks were
analysed to identify the times that feeding took place.

Results demonstrated that at all abundances of prey the sharks were highly species selective
towards yellowfin mojarra (mean E* 0.326) whilst displaying almost complete negative selection for
grey snapper (mean E* -0.939). A type II functional response curve (r2= 0.9121) supported
evidence that sharks are specialist predators. No size selection of prey items was observed.
Stomach content analysis indicated that sharks are asynchronous feeders.

The selectivity of sharks arises as a result of the behavioural and morphological characteristics of
the prey species.




                                                         61
Conserving endangered basking sharks: population size and critical habitat in northeast
Atlantic waters.

D. W. Sims and E. J. Southall.
Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, The Laboratory, Citadel Hill, Plymouth, Devon. PL1 2PB, UK.
(Email: dws@mba.ac.uk, ejso@mba.ac.uk).


The basking shark (Cetorhinus maximus) is the world’s second largest fish and has been exploited
by humans for at least two hundred years. There is current concern that past fisheries have
reduced populations to low levels and that some stocks still show little signs of recovery. The
basking shark is listed as vulnerable on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, and was
recently included on Appendix II of CITES. To address these concerns, scientific information on the
status of specific populations needs to be collected. However, to date there have been few
attempts to identify preferred habitats of basking sharks, their distribution and movements, and no
reliable estimates of population size have been made.
In response to the urgent need for comprehensive information on this species the Esmée Fairbairn
Foundation funded a project initiated by the Marine Biological Association (MBA) to collate and
combine behavioural, survey and sightings data of basking sharks collected by six UK charities into
a single, unique database. The six consortium partners are the MBA, Marine Conservation Society,
Marine Environmental Research/UK Wildlife Trusts, Hebridean Whale and Dolphin Trust,
International Fund for Animal Welfare, and The Shark Trust. These data will help define their
critical habitat in UK waters, resulting in the first practical information for assessing the
appropriateness of the present UK marine protected area for endangered basking sharks and
whether extension of this zone is required. This information will be vital for identifying population
trends and in establishing future conservation and management plans for this species.




                                                        62
Age and growth estimation of captive specimens of sandbar shark Carcharhinus plumbeus
based on vertebral growth marks.

B. Torres1, G. Morey2 and J. Tomàs2.
1 L’Oceanogràfic. Ciutat de les Arts i de les Ciències. Junta de Murs i Valls, s/n. 46013. Valencia, SPAIN.

(E-mail: borjatorresm@yahoo.es).
2 CSIC/UIB – Institut Mediterrani d’Estudis Avançats, Miquel Marquès 21, E-07190 Esporles (Illes Balears), SPAIN.

(E-mail: gabriel.morey@uib.es, javier.tomas@uib.es).


Vertebral sections of four captive specimens of sandbar shark, Carcharhinus plumbeus, were
analysed. Comparisons were made between different planes of sectioning and different vertebrae.
Two of these specimens were neonates, showing only the birth mark in their vertebral centra, and
they allowed validating the location of the hatching mark. The largest specimen, a female 200cm
TL, lived 5 months in aquaria after being captured, and presented 22 rings in its vertebral centra.
The last specimen, a young female 90.5cm TL, was born in captivity, and presented one clear
annual mark and an additional mark which was interpreted as a stress mark. The measurement of
distances between consecutive marks allowed estimating individual growth rates in the two largest
specimens.




                                                           63
The population biology of the thornback ray, Raja clavata L. in Caernarfon Bay, North
Wales.

J. Whittamore.
(Email: j_whittamore@yahoo.co.uk).


Amid concern about the status of skates and rays in Welsh waters the present work set out to
provide up-to-date information on the population biology of the thornback ray Raja clavata in North
Wales. The von Bertalanffy growth parameters for males were L inf = 100.9cm, k = 0.18yr-1 and t0 = -
0.95yrs, while Linf = 117.6cm, k = 0.16yr-1 and t0 = -0.7yrs for females. Male R. clavata reached
50% maturity at a total length of 58.8cm and 3.9yrs, which was smaller and younger than females
for whom L50 and A50 were 70.5cm and 5.3yrs, respectively. Although previously over-exploited, the
present estimate of total mortality (Z) was 0.48-0.49yr-1 which, in terms of replacement mortality
(calculated as 0.7 yr-1), suggests no immediate prospect of recruitment failure. The potential for the
recovery of a depleted population is discussed in relation to the Allee effect, along with
recommendations for future studies into population genetic structure that could be incorporated into
the development of effective conservation and management strategies.




                                                 64
Basking shark movements and seasonal decadal patterns of zooplankton abundance:
temporal and spatial congruence?

M. Witt1,3.
Supervisors: David Sims1 & Anthony Richardson2.
1 The Marine Biological Association of the UK. The Laboratory, Citadel Hill, Plymouth, Devon. PL1 2PB, UK.
2 Sir Alister Hardy Foundation for Ocean Science, The Laboratory, Citadell Hill, Plymouth, Devon. PL1 2PB. UK.
3 The University of Plymouth, Department of Biological Sciences, Drake Circus, Plymouth, Devon. PL4 8AA. UK.

(Email: matthew.witt@postgrad.plymouth.ac.uk).


Planktivorous free-ranging elasmobranchs, such as Cetorhinus maximus (basking shark), feed in
neritic and pelagic environments circumglobally. Within these environments they can exploit
oceanographic features (e.g.) frontal systems, which aggregate zooplankton prey and support
primary and secondary productivity. Using movement trajectories reconstructed from pop-up
archival tagging, zooplankton abundance data from the Continuous Plankton Recorder Survey and
satellite derived sea surface temperature we investigate basking shark habitat utilisation.

Real-time coincident monitoring and subsequent mapping of forage availability on comparable
temporal and spatial scales to basking sharks is not practicable. However, the CPR Survey
provides a unique data source from which to recreate the most probable prey fields encountered by
these planktivores.

Using a numerical modelling based approach we investigate the prey encountered by these
planktivores. When integrated, forage availability and thermal conditions are most likely to
determine movements on both coarse and fine scales; as such our approach attempts to
understand movement in context with the heterogeneous environment in which these animals live.




                                                         65
Smooth Hammerhead Shark (Sphyrna zygaena) off Angola.

D. Zaera.
Institute of Marine Research, Centre for Development Cooperation in Fisheries, P.O.Box 1870, Nordnes, 5817 Bergen,
Norway.
(Email: diana.zaera-perez@imr.no).


This paper describes the spatial distribution and morphometric characteristics of four specimens of
the smooth hammerhead shark, Sphyrna zygaena, caught in shallow coastal waters, during a
pelagic survey carried out in Angolan waters by R/V 'Dr. Fridtjof Nansen' in July-August 2003. The
individuals were caught in two stations with a bottom trawl. Morphometric measurements were
taken and the determination of stomach content and presence of parasites were made
macroscopically on board the vessel. The preys were identified to the lowest taxa possible. All
specimens were immature males with full stomachs. Morphometric measurements were expressed
as a percentage of total length for each specimen caught. The stomachs contained mostly digested
remains of fish. There is no other published record of S. zygaena from Angolan waters; therefore
this record represents an extension of its distributional range. A comparison is made with previous
descriptions of the species.




                                                       66
 List of delegates who attended the conference
Marco Affronte                                    Miss Olwen Ager
Fondazione Cetacea                                Shark Trust
Via Ascoli Piceno                                 Rope Walk
47900 Riccione (RN)                               Coxside
Italy                                             Plymouth, PL4 0LF, UK
ambientemare@fondazionecetacea.org                enquiries@sharktrust.org

Mr Ricardo Aguilar                                Csilla Ari
Oceana                                            Semmelweis University Budapest
Plaza España                                      Budapest,1108
Leganitos 47 - 6º                                 Lenfono utca 14, 1/7
28013 Madrid, Spain                               Budapest, Hungary
raguilar@oceana.org                               Csari1000@yahoo.com

Riccardo S Avogadri                               Mr Neale Bailey
Shark Academy – ONLUS                             10 Ver Road
Piazzale Olimpia N 52                             St Albans
Verona Italy 37138                                AL4 3QW
riccardosturla@sharkacademy.com                   UK

Mr Marc Baldwin                                   Miss Rachel Ball
26 Station Road                                   University of Liverpool
Horsham                                           101 Westminster Road
West Sussex, RH13 5EY, UK                         Hoole
marcbaldwin@wildlifeonline.me.uk                  Chester, CH2 3AR, UK
                                                  Rachelb@blueplanetaquarium.co.uk

Richard M Ballerand                               Miss Susie Ballerstedt
13 Redburn Street                                 Shark Trust
Chelsea                                           Rope Walk
London, SW3 4DA                                   Coxside
UK                                                Plymouth, PL4 0LF, UK
                                                  enquiries@sharktrust.org

Miss Alexandra Barron                             Mr David Bernvi
15 Mount Pleasant Road                            Lund University Sweden
Brixham                                           Minorgatan 4
TQ5 9RP, UK                                       254 61
alexbarron00@yahoo.co.uk                          Helsingborg, Sweden
                                                  david.bernvi.449@student.lu.se

Fiona Berry                                       Mr Tom Blasdale
University of York                                JNCC
137 Scarborough Road                              Dunnet House
Norton                                            7 Thistle Place
Malton, YO17 8AD, UK                              Aberdeen, AB10 1UZ, UK
f.c.berry@hotmail.com                             tom.blasdale.jncc.gov.uk

Dr Ramón Bonfil                                   Massimiliano Bottaro
Wildlife Conservation Society                     ICRAM
2300 Southern Boulevard                           C/O Museo Nazionale dell'Antartide
Bronx                                             University of Genoa, Viale Benedetto XV,5
New York, NY 10460, USA                           Genoa L-16132, Italy
rbonfil@wcs.org                                   m.bottaro@unige.it

Mr Paul Boyd                                      Mr Christopher Brown
Shark Shop                                        SEALIFE Biological Services
Unit 26 Scott Business Park                       Lodmoor Country Park
Beacon Park Road                                  Green Hill
Plymouth, PL1 2PQ, UK info@creativeparanoia.com   Weymouth, DT4 7SX, UK

                                                   67
Mr Barry Bruce                                      Mlle Michèle Bruni
CSIRO Marine Research                               Musée Océanographicique de Monaco
GPO Box 1538                                        Avenue St Martin
Hobart                                              APECS 10, Av De Liege, Brest
Tasmania 7001, Australia                            Monaco 98000
Barry.Bruce@csiro.au                                France
                                                    m.bruni@oceano.mc

Mr Juerg M Brunnschweiler                           Paula C Puigcerver
Rosengartenstrasse 73                               Universidad de la Laguna
Zurich CH-8037, Switzerland                         Instituto Espanol de Oceanografia
jbrunnschweiler@bluewin.ch                          C/Princesa Guacimara , 14
                                                    Santa Cruz de Tenerife 38008, Spain
                                                    pau_ta_supersolita@hotmail.com

Dr Edward Carapezza                                 Mr Richard Chapman
DARPA                                               102 Lever Street
Advanced Technology Office                          London
3701 North Fairfax Drive                            EC1V 8BF
Arlington, Virginia VA 22203, USA                   UK
ecarapezza@darpa.mil

Miss Archontia Chatzispyrou                         Malia Chevolot
University of Athens                                University of Groningen
Dept Biology, Zoology-Marine University of Athens   PO Box 14
Panepistimiopolis, Llissia                          9750 AA
Athens 15784, Greece                                Haren, Netherlands
anta_oldman@hotmail.com                             m.chevolot@biol.rug.nl

Dr Simona Clò                                       Dr Rui Coelho
ICRAM                                               CCMAR/FCMA
Via di Casalotti 300                                Campus de Gambalas
00166                                               8000- Faro
Rome, Italy                                         Faro, Portugal
simona.clo@icram.org                                rpcoelho@ualg.pt

Mr Alessandro Colasante                             Mr Andy Colls
University of Rome                                  Marine Conservation Society
Via Monte Massico 85                                The Old Chapel
Rome 00139                                          7 Chapel Lane East
Italy                                               Chesterfield, S41 0AJ, UK
a.colasante@tiscali.it

Mr Greg Conn                                        Mr Neil Crooks
27 Brackendale                                      University of Portsmouth
Winchmore Hill                                      School of Biological Sciences
London, N21 3DH                                     King Henry Building, King Henry 1st Street
UK                                                  Portsmouth, PO1 2DY, UK
                                                    neil.crooks@port.ac.uk

Ms Alicia Cruz Martinez                             Mr Andrew Currie
Flat 4 Woodview Apartments                          36 Lee Warner Road
43-50 Rockingham Road                               Swafham
Norwich, NR5 8HZ                                    Norfolk, PE37 7GD, UK
UK                                                  andycurrie@home4968.fsnet.co.uk

Mr Marc Dando                                       Miss Naz Daud
Shark Trust Trustee                                 37 Old Port Road
Darloe                                              Wenvoe
Fore Street, West Looe                              Cardiff, CF5 6AL
Cornwall, PL13 2HA, UK                              UK

Ms Eleonora de Sabata                               Mr Simon Dedman
MedSharks                                           43 Hampton Road
Via Ruggero Fauro 82                                Teddington, TW11 0LA

                                                     68
Rome 00197, Italy                                UK
seastories@virgilio.it                           dez93_2000@yahoo.com

Maria del Pilar Aparicio Rizzo                   Miss Maria del Pilar Blanco-Parra
Universidad de la Laguna                         Universidad Nacional Autonoma Mexico
Urb La Verdella,                                 Calle 20, Sur No 605
Fase 2, bloque 2, no 6                           Col.Cantera CP 85400
La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife 37208, Spain   Guaymas 85400, Mexico
riftvalley_pa@hotmail.com                        pblanco@icmyl.unam.mx

Mr Iain Dickson                                  Mr John Dobson
University of Southampton                        University of Wales Institute
9 Forester Road                                  Colchester Avenue
Portswood                                        Cardiff, UK
Southampton, SO14 6RR, UK                        jdobson@uwic.ac.uk
iain.dickson1@ntlworld.com
Miss Joana Doyle                                 Dr Nick Dulvy
Marine Conservation Society                      CEFAS
Unit 3, Wolf Business Park                       Lowestoft Laboratory
Alton Road                                       Pakefield Road
Ross-on-Wye, HR9 5NB, UK                         Lowestoft, NR33 0HT, UK
jo@mcsuk.org                                     n.k.dulvy@cefas.co.uk

Dr Jim Ellis                                     Ms Sarah Fowler OBE
CEFAS                                            NatureBureau International
Lowestoft Laboratory                             36 Kingfisher Court
Pakefield Road                                   Hambridge Road
Lowestoft, NR33 0HT, UK                          Newbury, RG14 5SJ, UK
j.r.ellis@cefas.co.uk                            sarah@naturebureau.co.uk

Mr Paulo Freitas                                 Boris Frentzel-Beyme
University of Aberdeen                           D.E.G
Rua Cesario Verde no 102                         Juliustrasse 18
Atiba                                            22769
Estoril 2765, Portugal                           Hamburg, Germany
t01pjf3@abdn.ac.uk                               boris_fbeyme@yahoo.com

Irene Fuertes Jerez                              Miss Hélène Gadenne
Universidad de la Laguna                         APECS
Instituto Espanol de Oceanografia                Rue De Liege
C/Teneguia 30, 2'                                BP 51151, Brest 29211, France
La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife 38206, Spain   helenegadenne@yahoo.fr
bionusqui@hotmail.com

Miss Annabel Gardner                             Mr Iain Gatward
Cranbourne Edge                                  University of Stirling
Child Okeford                                    43f Cowane Street
Blandford, UK                                    Stirling, FK8 1JW, UK
a_islagardner76@hotmail.com                      icmg01@students.stir.ac.uk

Dr Andrew Gill                                   Dr Fabrizio Gioelli
Cranfield University                             Shark Academy ONLUS
Institute of Water & Environment                 Via Canton Gregorio 1
Silsoe, MK45 4DT, UK                             Ivrea (TO) 10015, Italy
a.b.gill@cranfield.ac.uk                         fabrizio@sharkacademy.com

Miss Chryssoula Gkoumpili                        Mr Scott Gleed
University of Aberdeen                           Shark Shop
33 Nelson Court & King Street                    Unit 26 Scott Business Park
Aberdeen, AB24 5BF, UK                           Beacon Park Road
c_gubili@yahoo.co.uk                             Plymouth, PL1 2PQ, UK
                                                 info@creativeparanoia.com

Dr Mauvis Gore                                   Mr Mark Gray
Marine Biological Station Millport               CCW

                                                  69
Millport                                    Plas Penrhos
Isle of Cumbrae                             Ffordd Penrhos
KA28 0EA, UK                                Bangor, LL57 2LQ, UK
mauvis.gore@millport.gla.ac.uk              m.gray@ccw.gov.uk

Mr Simon Gulak                              Mr Joshua Hawker
Winley Farm                                 8 Wren Close
Tedstone Delamere                           Hightown
Bromyard, HR7 4PR, UK                       BH24 3RF
gulak27@hotmail.com                         UK

Mrs Glenys Heafield                         Miss Corinne Heasman
Shark Trust                                 55 Ashdown Drive
Rope Walk                                   Tilgate
Coxside                                     Crawley, RH10 5ED, UK
Plymouth, PL4 0LF, UK                       corinne.heasman@unilever.com
glenys@sharktrust.org

Mr Joe Herber                               Miss Kathryn Hodgson
65 Route de Arlon                           9 Millenium Gardens
L-8009                                      Shrewsbury UK SY2 5BZ
Strassen                                    kathrynamt1@hotmail.com
Luxembourg

Miss Ali Hood                               Mr Peter Howlett
Shark Trust                                 National Museums and Galleries of Wales
Rope Walk                                   Dept of Biodiversity & Systematic Biology
Coxside                                     Cathays Park
Plymouth UK PL4 0LF                         Cardiff, CF10 3NP, UK
ali@sharktrust.org                          peter.howlett@nmgw.ac.uk

Dr Robert Hueter                            Dr Ewan Hunter
Mote Marine Laboratory                      CEFAS
1600 Ken Thompson Parkway                   Lowestoft Laboratory
Sarasota                                    Pakefield Road
Florida FL 34236, USA                       Lowestoft, NR33 0HT, UK
rhueter@mote.org                            e.hunter@cefas.co.uk

Mr Nigel Hussey                             Dr Neil Hutchinson
University of Wales Bangor                  MBA
4 Penrhos Terrace                           The Laboratory
Brynsiencyn                                 Citadel Hill
Llanfairpwll, Anglesey, LL61 6NX, UK        Plymouth, PL1 2PB, UK
nigehuss72@aol.com                          neihu@mba.ac.uk

Miss Ingrid Iredale                         Mr Emmet Jackson
North Western & North Wales Sea Fisheries   Irish Elasmobranch Group
Committee                                   B.I.M. Crofton Road
Lancaster University                        Dun Laoughaire
Bailrigg                                    County Dublin, Ireland
Lancaster                                   jackson@bim.ie
LA1 4YY, UK
l.iredale@lancaster.ac.uk

Emily Jacques                               Mr Robin James
16 Harthall Lane                            SEALIFE Biological Services
Kings Langley                               Lodmoor Country Park
Watford, WD4 8JH                            Green Hill
UK                                          Weymouth, DT4 7SX, UK

Miss Louise Johnson                         Dr Catherine Jones
Falmouth Marine School                      University of Aberdeen
Killigrew Street                            School of Biological Sciences
Falmouth, TR11 3QS                          Tillydrone Avenue
UK                                          Aberdeen, AB24 2TZ, UK

                                             70
                                         c.s.jones@abdn.ac.uk

Dr Emma Jones                            Mme Armelle Jung
FRS Marine Laboratory                    APECS
PO Box 101                               Rue de Liège
Victoria Road                            BP 51151, 29211 Brest Cedex
Aberdeen, AB11 9DB, UK                   France
jonese@marlab.ac.uk                      armelle.jung@asso-apecs.org

Miss Claudia Junge                       Mr Jerry Kemp
Universitat Rostock Germany              27 Norman Street
Patriotischer Weg 124                    York
Rostock 18057                            YO10 3LH
Germany                                  UK
claudia.junge@stud.uni-rostock.de

Mr Thomas Kennard                        Mr Steven Kessel
University of Plymouth                   71 Cranbourne Road
35 Belgrave Road                         Northwood Hills
Mutley                                   Middlesex, HA6 1JZ
Plymouth, PL4 7DP, UK                    UK
thomas.kennard@students.plymouth.ac.uk

Mr Joel Kimber                           Miss Irene Kingma
Cranfield University                     Coral Reef Care
Institute of Water & Environment         Wittgensteinlaan 256
Silsoe, MK45 4DT, UK                     1062KG
j.a.kimber@cranfield.ac.uk               Amsterdam
                                         ikingma@tiscali.nl

Dr Heather Koldeway                      Mr Piers Langhelt
ZSL                                      National Galleries & Museums of Wales
Senior Curator, Aquarium                 Department of Biodiversity & Systematic Biology
Regents Park                             Cathays Park
London, NW1 4RY, UK                      Cardiff, CF10 3NP, UK
                                         piers.langhelt@nmgw.ac.uk

Mr Aris Leandri                          Ms Leanne Llewellyn
Corso Mazzini 8                          University of Portsmouth
60100 Ancona                             School of Biological Sciences, King Henry Building
Italy                                    King Henry 1st Street
aris75@freeserve.ch                      Portsmouth, PO1 2DY, UK
                                         leanne.llewellyn@port.ac.uk

Ms Tamara Lodge                          Elena Luchetti
55 Avon Road                             Museum National d'Historie Naturelle
Charminster                              Station de Biologie Marine MNHN
Bournemouth, BH8 9BG                     Place de la Croix B P 225
UK                                       Concarneau 29900, France
                                         luchetti@mnhn.fr

Miss Kirsteen Mackenzie                  Agnese Mancini
University of Aberdeen                   University of Perpignan
36 Albany Road                           IUCN Centre for Mediterranean Co-Operation
Harrogate, HG1 4NS, UK                   Calle Maria Curie 35, Campanillas
kirsteen.mackenzie@abdn.ac.uk            Malaga 29590, Spain
                                         malaga3@iucn.org

Mrs Cecilia Mancusi                      Mr R Aidan Martin
ARPAT                                    ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research
Via Marradi ,114                         PO Box 48561
57126                                    595 Burrard Street
Livorno, Italy                           Vancouver BC V7X 1A3, Canada
cecilia.mancusi@inwind.it                RAM@elasmo-research.org


                                          71
Mrs Persefoni Megalofonou                          Miss Lara Meischke
University of Athens                               University of St Andrews
Department of Biology, Section of Zoology-Marine   School of Biology
University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis            Bute Medical Buildings
Llissia, Athens 15784, Greece                      St Andrews, KY16 9TS, UK
p.megalo@biol.uoa.gr                               larameischke@hotmail.com

Miss Daniela Minelli                               Charlotte Mogensen
Museo di Autonomie                                 WWF Fisheries Policy Officer
Via Selmi 3, Dep di Biologia                       European Policy Office
Bologna                                            36 Avenue de Tervuren B12
60126, Italy                                       Brussels 1040, Belgium

Dr John Morrissey                                  Fiona Nelson
Hofstra University                                 Half Mile House
Biology Department                                 97 Summerseat Lane
11y Hofstra University                             Ramsbottom, Bury, BL0 9TR, UK
Hempstead, New York 11549, USA                     fnelson1@hotmail.com
biojfm@hofstra.edu

Dr Steven Newman                                   Mr Stuart Nicholls
Hofstra University                                 82a St Marks Road
c/o 9 Beacon Close                                 Enfield
Stone                                              Middlesex, EN1 1BB, UK
Aylesbury, HP17 8DL, UK                            bushhillparkman@blueyonder.co.uk
sp_newman@hotmail.com

Miss Cheryl Nicholson                              Dr Les Noble
University of Hull                                 University of Aberdeen
21 Lambton Gardens                                 Department of Zoology
Burnopfield                                        Tillydrone Avenue
Newcastle upon Tyne, NE16 6JY, UK                  Aberdeen UK AB24 2TZ
                                                   l.r.noble@abdn.ac.uk

Kim O'Connor                                       Dr Ziggy Otto
Kingston University                                Pembrokeshire College
6 Avenue Approach                                  Haverford West
Kings Langley                                      SA61 1SZ
Hertfordshire, WD4 8DW, UK

Mrs T Page                                         Mr Tony Page
6 Raleigh Mews                                     6 Raleigh Mews
Orpington                                          Orpington
Kent, BR6 6NR                                      Kent, BR6 6NR
UK                                                 UK

Paola Pasolini                                     Dr Mike Pawson
University of Bologna                              CEFAS
Biodiversity Elasmobranch Group                    Lowestoft Laboratory
Via Sant'Alberto, 163                              Pakefield Road
Ravenna 48100, Italy                               Lowestoft, NR33 0HT, UK
ppasolini@ambra.unibo.it                           m.g.pawson@cefas.co.uk

Mr Richard Peirce                                  Miss Sylvette Peplowski
Shark Trust Chairman                               WWF
Dulverton House,                                   Panda House
8 Crooklets                                        Weyside Park
Bude, EX23 8NE, UK                                 Godalming, GU7 1XR, UK
rpaconsult@ukonline.co.uk

Mrs Celene Pickard                                 Mr Alejandro S Rafel
Honeysuckle Cottage                                Universidad de la Laguna
27 North Road                                      C/Carlos J R Hamilton, 14-6
Stevenage, SG1 4BD, UK                             Santa Cruz De Tenerife
                                                   Spain 38001

                                                    72
                                      alsancho@ull.es

Chiara Ragazzini                      Mr Alan Reeve
Biodiversity Elasmobranch Group       39 Citadel Road
Via Sant'Alberto 163                  West Hoe
Ravenna 48100, Italy                  Plymouth, PL1 3BG, UK
chiara_ragazzini@yahoo.it             areeve81@hotmail.com

Miss Katy Rigby                       Mr Raymond Risler
Tower Street                          Gerechtigkeitsgasse 14
Hull, HU1 4DP, UK                     Zurich 8002, Switzerland
katy.rigby@thedeep.co.uk              raymond.risler@swissonline.ch

Mr Juan Romero                        Prof Bruno Sabelli
Shark Trust Trustee                   University of Bologna
National Marine Aquarium, Rope Walk   Department Experimental Evolutionary Biology
Coxside                               Via Selmi 3
Plymouth, PL4 0LF, UK                 Bologna 40126, Italy
jar@national-aquarium.co.uk           sabelli@alma.unibo.it

Dr Jane Sarginson                     Bernard Seret
University of Aberdeen                Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle
Zoology Building                      Laboratoire d'Ichtyologie
Tillydrone Avenue                     43 Rue Cuvier -Case Postale n'26
Aberdeen, AB24 2TZ, UK                Paris Cedex 05, 75231, France
nhy253@abdn.ac.uk                     seret@mnhn.fr

Mr Geoff Shaxton                      Igbal Sidahmed Elhassan
49 Green Lanes                        University of Juba Sudan
West Ewell                            College of Natural Resources
Surrey, KT19 9TW, UK                  PO Box 321/1
gshaxton@cbiepc.com                   Khartoum, Sudan
                                      igbal20@hotmail.com

Dr David Sims                         Dr Jean-Luc Solandt
MBA                                   Marine Conservation Society
The Laboratory                        Unit 3, Wolf Business Park
Citadel Hill                          Alton Road
Plymouth, PL1 2PB, UK                 Ross-on-Wye, HR9 5NB, UK
dws@mba.ac.uk                         jls@mcsuk.org

Dr Emily Southall                     Mr Colin Speedie
MBA                                   Shark Trust Trustee
The Laboratory                        Falmouth Marine School
Citadel Hill                          Killigrew Street
Plymouth, PL1 2PB, UK                 Falmouth, TR11 3QS, UK
ejso@mba.ac.uk                        cds@mer.eclipse.co.uk

Mr Jeremy Stafford-Deitsch            Mr Eric Stéphan
Shark Trust Trustee                   APECS
Flat 8                                Rue De Liège - BP51151
24/25 Ormonde Gate                    29211 Brest Cedex 1
London, SW3 4EX, UK                   France
jeremyasd@aol.com                     eric.stephan@asso-apecs.org
Ms Christie Stewart                   Mr Daniel Suddaby
CEFAS                                 English Nature
Lowestoft Laboratory                  Northminster House
Pakefield Road                        Peterborough, PE1 1UA, UK
Lowestoft, NR33 0HT, UK               d.suddaby@english-nature.org.uk
c.stewart@cefas.co.uk

Borja T Martinez                      Mr Tim Theobalds
L'Oceanografic Valencia               37 Old Port Road
C/ Rio Jalon no 3                     Wenvoe
Puerta 1                              Cardiff, CF5 6AL

                                       73
Valencia 46022, Spain                                   UK
borjatorresm@yahoo.es

Fausto Tinti                                            Mr Gero Vella
University of Bologna                                   Renewable Energy Systems Ltd
Biodiversity Elasmobranch Group                         Beaufort Court
Via Sant'Alberto, 163                                   Egg Farm Lane
Ravenna 48100, Italy                                    Kings Langley, WD4 8LR, UK
fausto.tinti@unibo.it                                   gero.vella@res-ltd.com

Dr Colin Waring                                         Miss Victoria Wearmouth
University of Portsmouth                                MBA
School of Biological Sciences, King Henry Building      The Laboratory
King Henry 1st Street                                   Citadel Hill
Portsmouth, PO1 2DY, UK                                 Plymouth, PL1 2PB, UK
colin.waring@port.ac.uk                                 vjw@mba.ac.uk

Jonathan Whittamore                                     Mr Matthew Witt
University of Exeter                                    MBA
18 Village Street                                       The Laboratory
Derby                                                   Citadel Hill
UK                                                      Plymouth, PL1 2PB, UK
j_whittamore@yahoo.co.uk                                matthew.witt@postgrad.plymouth.ac.uk

Ms Diana Zaera-Perez                                    Ms Heike Zidowitz
Institute of Marine Research- Bergen                    D.E.G
PO Box 1870 Nordnes                                     Biozentrum Grindel und Zoologisches Muesum
Bergen                                                  Martin Luther King Platz 3
Norway, 5817                                            Hamburg 20146, Germany
diana.zaera-perez@imr.no                                heikezidowitz@web.de




 Acronyms
 APECS – Association Pour l'Etude et la Conservation des Sélaciens
 ARPAT – Agenzia Regionale per la Protezione Ambientale della Toscana
 CCMAR – Centre of Marine Sciences
 CEFAS – Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science
 CSIRO – Commonwealth Science and Industrial Research Organisation
 CCW – Countryside Council for Wales
 DARPA – Defence Advances Research Projects Agency
 D.E.G – Deutsche Elasmobranchier Gesellschaft
 FRS – Fisheries Research Service
 ICRAM – Instituto Centrale per la Ricerca scientifica e tecnologica Applicata al Mare
 IMEDEA – Mediterranean Institute for Advanced Studies
 IUCN – The World Conservation Union
 JNCC – Joint Nature Conservation Committee
 MBA – Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom
 NMA – National Marine Aquarium
 ZSL – Zoological Society of London




                                                          74
75
