© Lill Haugen




                ABSTRACT
                ABSTRACT   BOOKLET
                         BOOKLET
Wednesday 18th October 2023
Theme Topic: Spatial Management as a tool for protecting elasmobranchs

Ryan Charles
IUCN Shark Specialist Group - ISRA Project

Important Shark and Ray Areas: Mapping Critical Habitat for Sharks, Rays, and Chimaeras Globally

     1.         Ryan Charles, International Union for Conservation of Nature Species Survival Commission Shark Specialist
                Group, Dubai, United Arab Emirates
     2.         Asia O. Armstrong, International Union for Conservation of Nature Species Survival Commission Shark
                Specialist Group, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, School of Science, Technology and Engineering, University of
                the Sunshine Coast, Hervey Bay, Qld 4655, Australia
     3.         Amanda Batlle Morera, International Union for Conservation of Nature Species Survival Commission Shark
                Specialist Group, Dubai, United Arab Emirates
     4.         Jenny Bortoluzzi, International Union for Conservation of Nature Species Survival Commission Shark Specialist
                Group, Dubai, United Arab Emirates
     5.         Emiliano García-Rodríguez, International Union for Conservation of Nature Species Survival Commission Shark
                Specialist Group, Dubai, United Arab Emirates
     6.         Adriana Gonzalez Pestana, International Union for Conservation of Nature Species Survival Commission Shark
                Specialist Group, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, Carrera de Biología Marina, Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias y
                Biológicas, Universidad Científica del Sur, Panamericana Sur, Km 19, Lima, Peru
     7.         Peter M. Kyne, International Union for Conservation of Nature Species Survival Commission Shark Specialist
                Group, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, Research Institute for the Environment and Livelihoods, Charles Darwin
                University, Darwin, NT 0909, Australia
     8.         Théophile L. Mouton, International Union for Conservation of Nature Species Survival Commission Shark
                Specialist Group, Dubai, United Arab Emirates
     9.         Giuseppe Notarbartolo di Sciara, International Union for Conservation of Nature Species Survival Commission
                Shark Specialist Group, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, Tethys Research Institute, 20121 Milano, Italy
     10.        Christoph A. Rohner, International Union for Conservation of Nature Species Survival Commission Shark
                Specialist Group, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, Marine Megafauna Foundation, West Palm Beach, USA
     11.        Rima W. Jabado, International Union for Conservation of Nature Species Survival Commission Shark Specialist
                Group, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, College of Science and Engineering, James Cook University, Townsville,
                Qld 4811, Australia

Sharks, rays, and chimaeras (hereafter ‘sharks’) are often overlooked in spatial planning for biodiversity conservation. The
Important Shark and Ray Area (ISRA) project, launched by the IUCN Species Survival Commission Shark Specialist Group in
2022, provides a tool to address this globally. The initiative identifies three-dimensional portions of habitat that are important for
one or more shark species and have the potential to be managed for conservation. A set of science-based criteria are used to
delineate these areas and consider species vulnerability, range restriction, life-history (reproduction, feeding, resting,
movement, undefined aggregations), and special attributes (distinctiveness, diversity). These criteria are being applied to all
environments where sharks occur across 13 ISRA regions covering the entire globe. Collaboration is paramount with experts
convening at regional workshops to share information and propose important areas. Sixty five ISRAs have been delineated in
the Central and South American Pacific and 75 proposals are undergoing review for the Mediterranean and Black Seas. Areas
are also currently being evaluated for the Western Indian Ocean and other regions will follow. Peer-reviewed and approved
ISRAs are mapped and added to a publicly available eAtlas (www.sharkrayareas.org). By centralising key information on shark
habitat use and behaviour, ISRAs provide a foundation to ensure sharks are included in area-based management. This assists
governments and policymakers in meeting global biodiversity and conservation targets, especially when such areas are
overlapped with other approaches such as Important Marine Mammal Areas (IMMAs). Results from the ISRA initiative will
support shark conservation by increasing information available when considering spatial management of these highly
threatened species.

Keywords: Important Shark and Ray Areas; Mediterranean Sea; Spatial planning; Area-based management; Shark
conservation




1
Session 1: Insights into the spatial ecology of elasmobranch fish
Youri Ivann MVOMO MINKO
Université de Bretagne Occidentale

Functional role of Gabon's coastal waters for two shark species, Sphyrna lewini (Griffith & Smith, 1834)
and Carcharhinus limbatus (Müller & Henle, 1839).

     1.   MVOMO MINKO, Youri I.; Université de Bretagne Occidentale
     2.   LE LOC'H, François; Institut de Recherche au Développement
     3.   SCHAAL, Gauthier; Université de Bretagne Occidentale

Large sharks are important predators in marine ecosystems, influencing the overall functioning of ecosystems and the trophic
connectivity between different regions (Heithaus et al., 2008; Estes et al., 2011). However, they face intense fishing pressure,
particularly in coastal areas that serve as nurseries for many juvenile sharks (Fowler et al., 2005; Heupel et al., 2007).
Understanding the spatial and temporal ecology of sharks in interaction with fisheries, especially in coastal ecosystems such as
estuaries and lagoons, is crucial for their conservation. Many shark species, including Sphyrna lewini (scalloped hammerhead
shark) and Carcharhinus limbatus (blacktip shark), are considered threatened with extinction (Dulvy et al., 2014).
Recent observations in artisanal fishing in Gabon have revealed an abundance of juvenile sharks belonging to these two
species, suggesting the presence of undocumented nurseries. The southern coast of Gabon, with its lagoon complexes and
mangrove habitats, could play a key role in maintaining shark populations in the equatorial Atlantic (Cadenat et al., 1955;
Mourier et al., 2013).
This study aims to demonstrate the existence of nurseries for Sphyrna lewini and Carcharhinus limbatus in Gabon by studying
captures, the maturity of captured individuals, and their trophic ecology.

Keywords: shark; fisheries; nursery; ecology; conservation



Bríd O'Connor
Marine Institute of Ireland and University College Cork

Sensitivity analysis and spatial distribution of elasmobranchs in Irish waters

     1.   Bríd, O'Connor; Marine Institute of Ireland and University College Cork
     2.   Paul, Holloway; University College Cork
     3.   Emer, Rogan; University College Cork
     4.   David, Reid; Marine Institute of Ireland
     5.   Tom, Reed; University College Cork
     6.   Julia, Calderwood; Marine Institute of Ireland

Over one third of elasmobranch species are threatened with extinction with nearly all species impacted by fisheries, typically
from bycatch. While much research has been conducted on the impacts of certain threats on elasmobranchs, i.e., fishing,
climate, discarding, and finning, there is a gap in the knowledge of how elasmobranch distributions might respond to population
decline as a result of these threats. Furthermore, not all species will recover at the same rate, as some species are intrinsically
more sensitive than others. Our goal was to determine the sensitivity of local elasmobranch species and highlight areas where
these species and threats consistently overlap.
Here we have determined the biological sensitivity of 44 species of elasmobranch found in Irish waters using the metric rmax,
the maximum intrinsic rate of population increase. Oviparous species were found to have higher rmax than than ovoviviparous
species in general, and the deep sea species had the lowest rmax, determining these species to be the most sensitive.
Next we applied a species distribution modelling (SDM) approach to predict the distribution of 3 sensitive elasmobranch
species found in Irish waters, as determined by rmax. Projections identified a change in the spatial distribution and extent of
several species, with the results used to identify potential ‘hotspots’ of sensitive elasmobranchs in Irish waters based on
intrinsic and extrinsic factors.
Outputs of this work will help to improve the understanding of the local variability of elasmobranch species and provide support
to expand and improve the management of protected areas and species.

Keywords: Sensitivity; Species distribution models; rmax; Elasmobranchs; Fisheries



Harriet Allen
The Shark Trust

The distribution of juvenile stages and eggcases of skates (Rajidae) around the British Isles

     1.   Jim Ellis; Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science
     2.   Cat Gordon; The Shark Trust
     3.   Harriet Allen; The Shark Trust

2
     4.   Joana Silva; Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science
     5.   Christopher Bird; Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science
     6.   Sophy Mccully Phillips; Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science
     7.   Ali Hood; The Shark Trust

Skates (Rajidae) are important commercial species around the British Isles, yet there is currently limited information to aid the
identification of potentially important habitats, such as spawning and nursery grounds. The neonates and juveniles of skate
species have been recorded in scientific trawl surveys, with juveniles of most species proportionally more frequent in beam
trawl surveys than in otter trawl surveys. The Great Eggcase Hunt is a long-standing (2003 to present) citizen science recording
project that collates georeferenced data for elasmobranch eggcases, primarily from around the British Isles. This provided
verified species-specific data for a total of 227,407 specimens from 11 skate species. Purse Search Ireland provided a further
2,491 records of 10 skate species.
Eggcases from the genus Raja were the most frequently observed skate eggcases from much of the British coastline, and
juveniles were captured in inshore waters of England and Wales. The juveniles of Raja microocellata were most common in
shallow water, and the limited data available for R. undulata also indicates that any nursery grounds for this species would also
be in shallow water.
Juveniles of the genus Leucoraja occurred further offshore, although only the eggcases of L. naevus were recorded regularly
on trawl surveys (with an L. fullonica eggcase recorded just once). The earliest free-living stages also occurred offshore.
An improved knowledge of spawning and nursery grounds can be used to aid fisheries management and marine spatial
planning, and may also inform the emerging interest in Important Shark and Ray Areas (ISRAs).


Keywords: citizen science; essential fish habitat; northeast Atlantic; Rajiformes; trawl surveys



Leigh Livne
Morris Kahn Marine Research Station

First evidence of dusky shark (Carcharhinus obscurus) gestation in eastern Mediterranean Sea.

     1.   Leigh, Livne, University of Haifa
     2.   Aviad, Scheinin, University of Haifa
     3.   James, Sulikowski, Oregon State University


All elasmobranchs are fully protected from fishing practices in Israel. In this ‘safe haven’, research led by the Morris Kahn
Marine Research Station’s Marine Apex Predator Laboratory has shown that dusky sharks (Carcharhinus obscurus) and
sandbar sharks (C. plumbeus) return to aggregate in the winter months (November-May) along the Israeli coastline (1-20 m
depth; est. 80-100 individuals). We expect that they inhabit these areas due to the warm water discharge relative to the ambient
winter temperatures (22-25°C from the power plant; ambient 16-18°C). Ours is the only long-term catch-and-release
programme in the Mediterranean Basin. Currently, both species belong to Annex III of the Barcelona Convention and are
evaluated as ‘Data Deficient and ‘Endangered’ on the IUCN Mediterranean Red List, respectively. Female sandbar sharks are
increasingly observed with each tagging season in Israel and since 2018, we have proof that the dusky sharks are inhabiting
this space during some stage of their gestation, yet we still do not know where their parturition grounds are. To answer this, we
collaborated with Dr James Sulikowski, leading expert of shark reproductive biology, and co-developer of the innovative Birth-
Alert Tag with Lotek Wireless. With funding from National Geographic, this state-of-the-art intrauterine satellite tag was
deployed in one gravid dusky shark in April 2023 after confirmation of pregnancy via ultrasonogram, with further samples taken
for physiological analyses. Further detections of this shark via acoustic transmitter were made until late May, which is unusual
for this species. We present this suite of information relating to non-invasive methods.

Keywords: eastern Mediterranean Sea; dusky shark; reproductive physiology; intrauterine tag; habitat usage



Eleanor Greenway
Wageningen University and Research; Wageningen Marine Research

Diel vertical migrations of the blonde skate (Raja brachyura) and the spotted skate (R. montagui) in the
Northeast Atlantic

     1.   Eleanor, Greenway; Wageningen University and Research
     2.   Jurgen, Batsleer; Wageningen Marine Research.
     3.   Jan Jaap, Poos; Wageningen University and Research

Horizontal and vertical movements of marine organisms are reflective of habitat preference and behavioural patterns in activity.
Since the development of electronic monitoring devices, studies into the migrations and movements of many marine species
are increasing. However, such studies into the vertical movements of benthic predators remain understudied. In this study,
blonde skates, Raja brachyura, and spotted skates, R. montagui, were tagged with ‘pop-off’ data storage tags in the North Sea


3
and English Channel. Diel vertical migrations, time-at-depth profiles and activity budgets were used to determine space-use
patterns and preferences concerned with depth and temperature for mature individuals. The outcomes of this research will
contribute a deeper understanding of the underlying processes that drive fish movements and distribution

Keywords: Diel vertical migration; Tagging; Rajidae; Northeast Atlantic; Behaviour




Jenny R. Bortoluzzi
Trinity College Dublin

Rapid transboundary movements of vulnerable porbeagle sharks support need for continued cooperative
research and management approaches

     1.    Jenny R. Bortoluzzi; Trinity College Dublin
     2.    Grace E. McNicholas; Trinity College Dublin
     3.    Andrew L. Jackson; Trinity College Dublin
     4.    C. Antonia Klöcker; Havforskningsinstituttet (Institute of Marine Research, IMR)
     5.    Claudia Junge; Havforskningsinstituttet (Institute of Marine Research, IMR)
     6.    Keno Ferter; Havforskningsinstituttet (Institute of Marine Research, IMR)
     7.    Otte Bjelland; Havforskningsinstituttet (Institute of Marine Research, IMR)
     8.    Adam Barnett; James Cook University
     9.    Austin J. Gallagher; Beneath the Waves
     10.   Neil Hammerschlag; University of Miami
     11.   William K. Roche; Inland Fisheries Ireland
     12.   Nicholas L. Payne; Trinity College Dublin

Distribution of species across regulatory and physical boundaries poses a recognised challenge to effective management and
research, and these transboundary species tend to suffer more-severe population declines. Large pelagic sharks like the
porbeagle, Lamna nasus, are particularly vulnerable due to their life history characteristics including their highly migratory
behaviour, whereby the latter is particularly challenging for management in European waters where management jurisdictions
change over small spatial scales. We used high-resolution satellite tags to demonstrate that individual porbeagles in the region
display high inter-individual variation in behaviour, undertaking very rapid movements (up to 100 km per day) through multiple
EEZs and physical habitats, transiting different management zones in a matter of days along different paths. These data
highlight the value of existing and the urgent need for continued regional collaboration and cross-border funding mechanisms to
maximise research impact to fill knowledge gaps and improve conservation outcomes for vulnerable and highly mobile shark
species.

Keywords: Lamna nasus; telemetry; biologging; management; conservation




4
Session 2: Citizen science I: The utility of social media and Local Ecological
Knowledge
Rachel Mawer
(affiliation at time of research) University of Glasgow; NatureScot

A non-invasive approach to estimate reproductive timing of elasmobranchs using photographs and
citizen science

     1.   Rachel, Mawer; University of Glasgow; NatureScot
     2.   Jane, Dodd; NatureScot
     3.   Neil, Burns; Scotland's Rural College
     4.   James, Thorburn; University of St Andrews
     5.   David, Bailey; University of Glasgow

Identifying the timing of key life history events, such as mating, is important for conserving endangered species. Yet, for many
elasmobranchs, there is a paucity of data on reproductive timings. Developing low-cost and non-invasive methods for
estimating elasmobranch reproductive timings could assist in closing the knowledge gap and aid collecting reproductive
information on more species. The flapper skate (Dipturus intermedius) is a critically endangered elasmobranch and the largest
skate found in European waters. A large flapper skate photo-ID database exists, featuring photographs taken throughout the
year provided by members of the public. Here, we present novel work making opportunistic use of the flapper skate photo-ID
database to estimate flapper skate reproductive timing. A methodology was developed to identify the occurrence of three
indicators of reproductive activity visible in photographs: pelvic swelling, bite wounds, and scratch wounds. Over 2000 images
were examined for presence of each indicator and the seasonality of their occurrence was analysed via generalised additive
models. Results suggest flapper skate mate over winter and lay eggs in winter and spring. The findings are corroborated by
existing literature, supporting the approach as a valid method for estimating elasmobranch reproductive timing. The developed
approach for analysing images could be applied to other species and make use of citizen science, providing another route for
understanding reproduction in elusive elasmobranchs.

Keywords: flapper skate; reproductive cycle; citizen science; photo ID; rajidae



Re'em Neri
Sharks in Israel; Ben Gurion University of the Negev;Interuniversity Institute for Marine Sciences in Eilat

Mining social media for vital Elasmobranch information in data poor regions and conflict zones: The
Gaza strip as a case study

     1.   Re'em, Neri; Sharks in Israel; Ben Gurion University of the Negev;Interuniversity Institute for Marine Sciences in Eilat.
     2.   Adi, Barash; Sharks in Israel.
     3.   Uri, Neri; Tel Aviv University.
     4.   Nadav Sh,ashar; Ben Gurion University of the Negev.

A huge gap in environmental information exists in conflict regions where access to scientists ranges from unsafe to impossible.
Previously unknown knowledge of Elasmobranchii presence, composition, and distribution can provide valuable fisheries
information regarding the exploitation of elasmobranch species and for creating comprehensive conservation strategies.
However, the diversity, ecology, behavior, and many other characteristics of these species in conflict zones remain virtually
unknown, which is a major cause for concern.
Traditional species assessments rely on in-situ observations, market surveys, and regulatory authorities forcing fisheries to self-
report their catch. Conflict areas present a unique challenge, lacking formal regulation or scientific access.
Here, we report the first use of social media monitoring for the extent of the Elasmobranch fishery in the Gaza Strip (east
Mediterranean), a conflict region previously lacking any information.
Our database consists of 3 years of daily reported catch from 16 fish stores and social media fishery-related influencers in the
Gaza Strip. We collected 1530 data points belonging to 4619 individuals of 20 species. The analysis of the data sheds light on
previously unknown temporal, spatial, and seasonal trends in elasmobranch catch distribution and relations to changes in the
access to maritime areas due to local conflict escalations.
We demonstrate this approach as a relatively accurate and inexpensive data mining procedure, allowing the quantification and
normalization of multiple observations of caught and targeted fish into a uniformed geo-spatial-temporal system- making it a
prime candidate for future endeavors in other data-poor regions and conflict zones in coastal areas.

Keywords: Elasmobranch fishery; overfishing; iEcology; social media; Mediterranean




5
Joanna Barker
Zoological Society of London / Project SIARC / Angel Shark Project

Enabling a wider range of people to engage with marine conservation using elasmobranchs in Wales

     1.   Kathryn Whittey; Zoological Society of London / Bangor University
     2.   Surshti Patel; Zoological Society of London
     3.   Joanna Barker; Zoological Society of London
     4.   Alice Chamberlain; Zoological Society of London
     5.   Jake Davies; Zoological Society of London / Natural Resources Wales
     6.   Sarah Davies; Zoological Society of London / Natural Resources Wales
     7.   Ben Wray; Natural Resources Wales
     8.   Charlotte Pike; Zoological Society of London
     9.   Matt Gollock; Zoological Society of London

The environment sector, including organisations working to protect the marine environment, is the second-least diverse in the
UK. There is an urgent need to address barriers to participation and diversify opportunities for involvement in conservation and
research, as the marine environment has a vital role in natural, cultural, social and economic heritage for all communities.
Project SIARC (Sharks Inspiring Action and Research with Communities) uses flagship elasmobranchs in Wales (angelshark,
blue skate, common stingray, flapper skate, spurdog, and tope) to bring together local communities, fishers, researchers and
government to cultivate a new appreciation and open-up access to the underwater environment in Wales. A major part of our
work is to identify approaches that enable a wider range of people to engage with marine conservation in Wales and tackle the
lack of diversity and inclusion within Project SIARC, thereby contributing to wider systemic change.
We are on the start of our journey and to-date have focused on Project SIARC’s community initiatives in North Wales.
Meetings, interviews and discussions with local communities allowed us to listen and learn from personal experiences,
gathering information to produce a draft ‘Equity, Diversity and Inclusion Strategy’. This presentation will share the approach we
have taken to date and some of the key learnings
Project SIARC is a collaboration led by the Zoological Society of London and Natural Resources Wales, with six partners and
several collaborators. It is made possible thanks to Welsh Government’s Nature Networks Fund, National Lottery Heritage
Fund and On the EDGE Conservation.

Keywords: Diversity; Inclusion; Elasmobranchs; Wales; Communities



Lorenzo Minoia
Department of Integrative Marine Ecology, Genoa Marine Centre, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn - Italian
National Institute of Marine Biology, Ecology and Biotechnology, Villa del Principe, Piazza del Principe 4, 16126
Genoa, Italy

First toxicological study in two commercial shark species from a Mediterranean Marine Protected Area

     1.   Lorenzo, Minoia; Department of Integrative Marine Ecology, Genoa Marine Centre, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn -
          Italian National Institute of Marine Biology, Ecology and Biotechnology, Villa del Principe, Piazza del Principe 4,
          16126 Genoa, Italy; Department of Physical, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Siena, Via Mattioli, 4,
          53100 Siena, Italy.
     2.   Massimiliano, Bottaro; Department of Integrative Marine Ecology, Genoa Marine Centre, Stazione Zoologica Anton
          Dohrn - Italian National Institute of Marine Biology, Ecology and Biotechnology, Villa del Principe, Piazza del Principe
          4, 16126 Genoa, Italy.
     3.   Mauro, Sinopoli; Department of Integrative Marine Ecology, Sicily Marine Centre, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn -
          Italian National Institute for Marine Biology, Ecology and Biotechnology, Lungomare Cristoforo Colombo n. 4521 (Ex
          Complesso Roosevelt) - Località Addaura, 90149 Palermo, Italy.
     4.   Sara, Bonanomi; National Research Council (CNR), Institute of Marine Biological Resources and Biotechnologies
          (IRBIM), Largo Fiera della Pesca 1, 60125 Ancona, Italy.
     5.   Emilio, Sperone; Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Via P. Bucci, 87036
          Rende, Italy.
     6.   Emilio Riginella; Department of Integrative Marine Ecology, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn - Italian National
          Institute of Marine Biology, Ecology and Biotechnology, Villa Comunale, 80121 Naples, Italy.
     7.   Letizia Marsili; Department of Physical, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Siena, Via Mattioli, 4, 53100
          Siena, Italy; Centro Interuniversitario per la Ricerca sui Cetacei (CIRCE), Department of Physical, Earth and
          Environmental Sciences, University of Siena, Strada Laterina 8, 53100 Siena, Italy.

Large urban and industrial settlements, and the intense maritime traffic make the Mediterranean one of the most polluted areas
in the world. This basin hosts considerable marine biodiversity, including many elasmobranchs, which are extremely vulnerable
to environmental contamination due their life history traits. The impact of this threat on the cartilaginous fishes is still poorly
studied, as well as the possible consequences for human health, in case of consumption of sharks, are uncertain. To fill this
knowledge gap, quantitative and qualitative assessments of three groups of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) were carried
out in the muscle and liver of two shark species, Mustelus punctulatus and Mustelus mustelus, caught in the Marine Protected
Area (MPA) of Egadi Islands (South-Central Mediterranean Sea) between 2021 and 2023. As sharks are one of the top


6
predators inhabiting the MPA, they can be considered a bioindicator of the local environmental status. Paradoxically, although
M. punctulatus and M. mustelus have considerable commercial value for human consumption in the MPA, they are listed as
Vulnerable by the IUCN in the Mediterranean. Regarding POPs levels, the results showed a trend of PCBs > DDTs >> HCB in
liver and muscle for both species. Our results can significantly contribute to clarify the toxicological status of these species,
allowing a first evaluation of the real risks both for the local marine life and for human health.

Keywords: Elasmobranchs; Conservation; Toxicology; Mediterranean Sea; MPA



Eleonora de Sabata
MedSharks

Citizen science in the Mediterranean Sea reveals aspects of the ecology of the nursehound shark,
Scyliorhinus stellaris

Simona Clò, MedSharks

Very little is known about the biology and ecology of the nursehound shark Scyliorhinus stellaris (Linnaeus, 1758), a medium-
sized catshark in severe decline in the Mediterranean Sea, assessed as Near Threatened (Vulnerable in the Atlantic) by the
IUCN.
Here we present results emerging from the first 10 years of the Stellaris project (2013-2023), an underwater field monitoring
project in the largest egg-case nursery area known in Italian waters, the Santa Croce Bank (Gulf of Naples, Central Tyrrhenian
Sea).
This ongoing citizen science project provides insights on basic reproductive information on this species in the wild, such as:
seasonality, development, predation and natural mortality rates, and indications that this nursery area is in decline. Photo-
identification reveals that this area is also a resting area for adults of both sexes, which is used year-round and over multiple
years.
This nursery area is a no-fishing zone and falls within a Natura 2000 site. In spite of its protected status, illegal fishing occurs as
the whole Gulf is subject to intense artisanal and recreational fishing pressure.
Results of the Stellaris project allowed the Santa Croce Bank to be identified by the IUCN as an ISRA, an Important Shark and
Ray Area, highlighting the importance of this refuge and the need for increased management and conservation actions for this
neglected species. These results also highlight the value of citizen science in making tangible conservation contribution.

Keywords: nursehound; citizen science; reproduction; photo-identfiication;



Adi Barash
Sharks in Israel, Environmental Organization for the protection of sharks and rays, Israel

New findings on the understudied population of sharks and rays in the Red Sea from data collected
through social media

     1.   Adi, Barash; Sharks in Israel, Environmental Organization for the protection of sharks and rays, Israel.
     2.   Ya’ara, Grossmark; Sharks in Israel, Environmental Organization for the protection of sharks and rays, Israel. Faculty
          of Architecture and Town Planning, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
     3.   Sarai, Burman; Sharks in Israel, Environmental Organization for the protection of sharks and rays, Israel.
     4.   Noa, Gilad; Sharks in Israel, Environmental Organization for the protection of sharks and rays, Israel.
     5.   Inbal, Kahan; Sharks in Israel, Environmental Organization for the protection of sharks and rays, Israel.
     6.   Re’em, Neri; Sharks in Israel, Environmental Organization for the protection of sharks and rays. Israel, Eilat Campus,
          Department of Life Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Israel. Interuniversity Institute for Marine Sciences
          in Eilat, Israel.
     7.   Shevy Bat-Sheva, Rothman; Sharks in Israel, Environmental Organization for the protection of sharks and rays,
          Israel. The Steinhardt Museum of Natural History, Tel Aviv, Israel.
     8.   Sergey V., Bogorodsky; Senckenberg Research Institute and Natural History Museum Frankfurt, Senckenberganlage
          25, 60325 Frankfurt a.M., Germany. Station of Naturalists, Omsk, Russia.


Sharks and rays in the Red Sea region are under intense fishing pressure, heavy development, and extensive tourism load.
The IUCN report on the status of sharks and rays in the Arabian Sea and adjacent waters from 2017 found that at least half of
the species are endangered. Based on these species assessments, in the Red Sea alone the number of endangered species is
alarmingly higher, presenting a state of danger to almost all cartilaginous fish species that live in it. Research, conservation,
and enforcement are scarce in the region.
We have established a citizen science project SRS (sharks and rays in the Red Sea), based on the MECO Protocol, collecting
observations from the public through social networks with the aim of gathering up-to-date basic biological and ecological
information.
Over 2,500 observations have been collected to date, mostly from the Gulf of Aqaba. Observations include 18 species of
batoids and 14 species of sharks (82% and 18%, respectively).


7
Our collected data has added new species records to the Gulf of Aqaba region and revealed information about their
seasonality, reproduction, and distribution.
These data provide essential ecological information in a region that is largely understudied and is crucial for planning
conservation and management in the future.

Keywords: Red Sea; Citizen science; Social Media; Sharks and Rays; Distribution pattern



Hector Toledo-Padilla
Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands

The value of scientific data, citizen science, and collaboration with stakeholders in developing a
Recovery Plan

     1.   Hector, Toledo-Padilla; Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
     2.   Eva, Meyers; Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig & Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
     3.   Joanna, Barker; Zoological Society of London & Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
     4.   David, Jiménez-Alvarado; Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria & Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
     5.   Charlotte, Pike; Zoological Society of London & Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
     6.   Michael, Sealey; Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
     7.   Belén, Caro; Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands


Angelsharks, Squatina squatina, can be seen relatively frequently by divers and fishers in the Canary Islands, a unique
stronghold for the species. Due to their benthic ecology and coastal location, angelsharks are particularly susceptible to
accidental capture in fisheries and habitat degradation. As a result of this, angelsharks are now listed as Critically Endangered
on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species.
In 2019, angelsharks were listed under the Spanish Endangered Species List for Canary Island waters as "In danger of
extinction", the highest level of protection within this legislation. Following this listing, the development of a Recovery Plan was
mandated, which sets out suitable measures for the management and conservation of angelsharks.
Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands (ASP:CI) conducted a comprehensive series of in-person and online surveys to compile
crucial information regarding angelshark interactions, perceptions, and potential protective measures, involving three primary
interaction groups: divers, recreational fishers, and commercial fishers. This information, combined with ASP:CI scientific
research, was augmented by a collaborative workshop, which engaged stakeholders representing various interests. Together,
these efforts facilitated the identification of conservation areas and the co-designing of specific measures to ensure the future
preservation of Angelsharks within their expansive stronghold. This presentation will delineate the key findings derived from this
work, emphasizing the importance of employing a participatory approach in designing conservation strategies for this Critically
Endangered species. This work, led by ASP:CI, was funded by Shark Conservation Fund and through a contract with the
Canary Islands Government, co-financed by the FEDER 2014-2020 Operational Program.

Keywords: Angelshark; Canary Islands; Recovery Plan; Critical Areas; Conservation Measures




8
Session 3: Spotlight on Spurdog
Jack Renwick
Shark Trust

The History and Current Management of the NE Atlantic Spurdog Fishery

Jack, Renwick; Shark Trust

Spurdog (Squalus acanthias), otherwise known as Spiny or Picked Dogfish, are members of the dogfish (Squalidae) family.
They are distinguished by the presence of a spine in front of each dorsal fin. They have a wide distribution, mainly inhabiting
temperate waters. This species was originally listed on the IUCN Red List as Critically Endangered, but through a non-genuine
change in 2015, Spurdog was changed to Endangered in Europe (IUCN, 2015). In the Northeast Atlantic, there has been a
fishery for Spurdog since the early 20th century. This population was overexploited which led to population decline. Various
management measures have been put in place to aid recovery of this population, including placing Spurdog on the Prohibited
species list. In 2022, ICES gave advice that the population could support a fishery for 2023 and 2024. In 2023, the fishery was
reopened with a TAC of 17,353 tonnes (t) across the region. The UK has a quota of 4,825 t in Western waters and 2,781 t in
the North Sea. As of October 2023, 194.0 t (4.0%) and 95.0 t (4.6%) of these quotas have been landed respectively. This
presentation discusses the management history of Spurdog and the possible dangers of reopening a fishery on tentative signs
of recovery.

Keywords: Spurdog; Fisheries; Management



Charlotte Nuyt
Institute of Marine Research

Unraveling the population structure of Northeast Atlantic spurdog (Squalus acanthias) stock: insights
from mitochondrial DNA to genome-wide data

     1.   Charlotte, Nuyt; Institute of Marine Research.
     2.   Claudia, Junge; Institute of Marine Research.

The spurdog (Squalus acanthias Linnaeus, 1758) Northeast Atlantic stock is managed as a single unit and has undergone a
long period of overfishing, especially in the 1950s/1960s, which has caused its population to collapse. There are now signs of
population growth but it remains listed as “Endangered” and overexploitation may have had an impact on its genetic
composition. Limited data are available on the stocks genetic structure and properly delineating a stock unit for fisheries
management is crucial to allow sustainability of the exploited population. Population genetics provides valuable insights into
connectivity and genetic distinctions among individuals from different areas. Looking at genetic diversity within and between
populations is also important in terms of population resilience in the face of climate change or other pressures such as
overexploitation.
A first assessment of the population structure was done using the NADH dehydrogenase subunit 2 (ND2) mitochondrial marker
sequenced from 48 spurdogs sampled along the Norwegian part of the Northeast Atlantic. 25 unique haplotypes were
distinguished, showing high genetic diversity in Norwegian waters, but no genetic distinction between sampling locations. To
provide more accurate population level data, over 89 individuals from identical locations were used for genome-wide analysis,
involving 53492 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) derived from Restriction-site associated DNA sequencing (RAD-seq).
Clustering analysis revealed subpopulations along Norwegian waters. This study presents this population structure and
discusses their relevance for regional fishery management purposes.

Keywords: Population genomics; Spurdog; Conservation genetics



James Thorburn
Edinburgh Napier University

Do sharks shiver when it gets warmer?

     1.   James Thorburn; Edinburgh Napier University
     2.   Émilie Gagnon; University of Ottawa
     3.   Julien Martin; University of Ottawa
     4.   Jane Dodd; NatureScot
     5.   Lea-Anne Henry; University of Edinburgh
     6.   Peter Wright; Marine Scotland
     7.   Francis Neat; World Maritime University

In the ocean, mobile species exhibit diverse movements across different spatial and temporal scales. Understanding the drivers
behind these movements is essential for effective management and predicting responses to a changing ocean environment. A

9
multitude of environmental cues, such as temperature and salinity, have been shown to affect the movements of elasmobranch
species. However, it is increasingly recognized that social drivers may also influence movement. We conducted an acoustic
telemetry study in a partially enclosed sea loch on the west coast of Scotland to investigate the movements and habitat
selection of spurdog (Squalus acanthias). Spurdog segregate based on size and sex, and these subgroups display a high
range of movements, from transatlantic movements to coastal residency. Some subgroups also display high levels of
relatedness, suggesting kinship bonds within subgroups. Our findings revealed that spurdog exhibited a high level of year-
round residency within the loch and that temperature plays a pivotal role in their habitat selection. Additionally, subgroups within
the population display different habitat choices, which may be caused by underlying population social processes. This study
underscores the importance of understanding all drivers of animal movement. Identifying sites that promote residential
behaviour can aid in developing effective management strategies for species, like the spurdog. However, it is equally crucial to
comprehend the social drivers of movement, as they can significantly influence habitat choices. By considering the interplay
between environmental and social factors, we can gain a more comprehensive understanding of animal movements and
enhance conservation efforts for these mobile ocean species.

Keywords: residency; Movement drivers; spurdog; Squalus acanthias; acoustic telemetry



Lotte Svengård Dahlmo
NORCE & UiB

Spiny dogfish behaviour in Norwegian fjords

     1.   Lotte, Dahlmo; NORCE & UiB
     2.   Robert, Lennox; Ocean Tracking Network, Dalhousie University, & NORCE
     3.   Keno, Ferter; Institute of Marine Research
     4.   Claudia, Junge; Institute of Marine Research
     5.   Dean,s Grubbs; Florida State University
     6.   Steven J., Cooke; Carleton Universityd
     7.   Trond Einar, Isaksen; NORCE
     8.   Gaute, Velle; NORCE & UiB
     9.   Knut Wiik, Vollset; NORCE

Spiny dogfish (Squalus acanthias) is an Endangered top predator with an antitropical distribution, including extensive use of the
fjords in southern and western Norway. Increasingly, these fjords are subjected to warming surface water temperatures and
hypoxic bottom water. Habitat compression of spiny dogfish is predicted to instigate increased conflict between the sharks and
the fisheries and aquaculture industries. To investigate if varying oxygen levels affect their depth use, we tagged more than 80
spiny dogfish with acoustic transmitters instrumented with depth, acceleration, and temperature sensors to reveal any
spatiotemporal depth patterns. Furthermore, spiny dogfish swim in groups based on sex and/or size, thus a social network
analysis was performed to check whether the tagged individuals exhibited interactions across time or space. Preliminary results
indicate that the spiny dogfish utilize an extensive part of the water column, and most tagged individuals interact with several
other spiny dogfish.

Keywords: Squalus acanthias; Deoxygenation; Acoustic telemetry; Social network analysis; Behaviour



Matteo Barbato
Department of Biology- University of Padova; National Biodiversity Future Center (NFBC)

Use of space from the population to the individual level of commercial relevant shark species (Mustelus
spp. and Squalus acanthias) in the Northern Adriatic Sea using a multidisciplinary approach

          1.    Enrico, Arneri; Institute for Marine Biological Resources and Biotechnologies (IRBIM) - Italian National Research
                Council (CNR)
          2.    Camilla, Antonini; Italian National Institute for Protection and Research (ISPRA)
          3.    Jacopo, Bernardi; Department of Biology - University of Padova
          4.    Gabriele, Boscolo Palo; Department of comparative biomedicine and food science - University of Padova
          5.    Giulia, Bressan; CoNISMa, National Inter-University Consortium for Marine Sciences, Department of Biology -
                University of Padova
          6.    Federico, Calì; Department of Biology - University of Padova; Institute for Marine Biological Resources and
                Biotechnolo.gies (IRBIM)-Italian National Research Council (CNR); University of Bologna
          7.    Licia, Finotto; Department of Biology - University of Padova
          8.    Simone, Niedermuller; World WideFund for Nature (WWF-Mediterranean Marine Initiative)
          9.    Maria Grazia, Pennino; Instituto Español de Oceanografía Centro Oceanográfico de Vigo (IEO)
          10.   Giulia, Prato; Italy World Wildlife Fund (WWF)
          11.   Saša, Raicevich; Italian National Institute for Protection and Research (ISPRA)
          12.   Tommaso, Russo; Department of Biology - University of Rome Tor Vergata
          13.   Alberto, Santojanni; Institute for Marine Biological Resources and Biotechnologies (IRBIM)- Italian National
                Research Council (CNR)

10
          14. Alice, Sbrana; Department of Biology - University of Rome Tor Vergata
          15. Carlo, Zampieri; Department of Biology - University of Padova
          16. Carlotta, Mazzoldi; CoNISMa, National Inter-University Consortium for Marine Sciences, Department of Biology,
              University of Padova; National Biodiversity Future Center (NFBC)

In the Northern Adriatic Sea (FAO-GSA 17), fishery exploitation of marine resources influenced communities and the
ecosystem (Sguotti et al., 2022). In the last decades, elasmobranch species, characterized by slow growth rate and low
fecundity, have been depleted due to fishing activities (Barausse et al., 2014; Ferretti et al., 2013). Despite being landed as by-
catch or seasonal target catch, first evidence of population increase in abundance is highlighted for the smooth hounds
(Mustelus spp.), while the spiny dogfish (Squalus acanthias) continues to decline (Maioli et al., 2023). Since several
approaches suggested the occurrence of seasonal movements of these species (Manfredi et al., 2010; Bonanomi et al., 2018;
Barbato et al., 2021), this study aims at identifying: (i) seasonal use of space of these species using fishery-dependent data
from bottom otter trawls (OTB) collected within the European Data Collection Framework; (ii) spatial hotspots of observed
landing per unit effort (LPUE) from coupled VMS and logbook OTB data; (iii) preliminary movement ecology aspects using
conventional tagging (2017-2023) and acoustic telemetry (2022-2023) at individual-level. The first objectives allowed to identify
a different seasonal use of space between the smooth hounds and the spiny dogfish, seasonal hotspot of LPUE and refined
identification of areas where young-of-the-year, juveniles and adults occur. In addition, preliminary results of movement ecology
highlighted site fidelity, residency and transboundary movement at individual level. Given the lack of management measures for
such species, the combination of these approaches can provide essential information to set effective spatial management
measures for these species.

Keywords: spatial management; fishery; Triakidae; Squalidae; Use of space



Claudia Junge
Havforskningsinstituttet (Institute of Marine Research, IMR), Norway
AQUA, University of Oslo (UiO), Norway

Spurdog all the way

     1. Claudia Junge; Institute of Marine Research (IMR), Norway.
     2. Ole Thomas Albert; IMR.
     3. Hector Andrade; IMR.
     4. Antonia Klöcker; IMR.
     5. Keno Ferter; IMR.
     6. Jon Albretsen; IMR.
     7. Sophia Lind; AQUA, University of Oslo (UiO).
     8. Otte Bjelland; IMR.
     9. Romaric Jac; IMR.
     10. Mikko Vihtakari; IMR.
     11. Ingrid Bruvold; IMR.
     12. Penny Liebig; IMR.
     13. Sofie Gundersen; IMR.
     14. Charlotte Nuyt; IMR.
     15. Øystein Langangen; UiO.
     16. Joel Durant; UiO.
     17. Caroline A. Tranang; IMR.

Mobile sharks are more at risk of encountering human activities such as fisheries, putting high bycatch pressure
on shark populations. Spurdog (Squalus acanthias) was historically exploited by a well-documented fishery,
however, relatively little is known about their large-scale movements, habitat preferences, and population dynamics
after the stock collapse in the late 1990s. Over the past years, we used a variety of data types and methods, like
trawl and longline surveys, fishery bycatch and environmental data, dissections, satellite tagging and spatial
mapping, to decipher the spatial distribution, movement patterns, diet and life history composition of spurdog in
Norwegian and northern Northeast Atlantic (NEA) waters. We found that they prefer relatively warm and shallow
waters (<150 m) and stay close within coastal waters while exhibiting diel vertical migrations. The latter could imply
them following their prey, which we identified as mainly bony fishes based on >500 analysed stomachs. Based on
overall 5,000 dissected individuals mainly from fisheries bycatch, we found that the recruitment may have increased
considerably faster in the recent two decades than previously projected, which resulted in a gradually younger
population of gravid females (50% maturity at 9.3 years). This faster population recovery is reflected in the new
assessment of the NEA spurdog stock by the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea. The resulting
fishing quota for the first time since 2009, makes close monitoring and efforts to increase our understanding of its
dynamics, population structure, and responses to changing environmental conditions even more important.




11
Session 4: Shark and ray conservation

Sonja Fordham
Shark Advocates International c/o The Ocean Foundation
1320 19th Street, NW, Fifth Floor, Washington, DC 20036

Bridging the gaps that hidder elasmobranch conservation: Key findings of a CITES and ICCAT-focused
policy analysis

The success of international conservation agreements relies on proper implementation at the national level. Because
elasmobranchs are considered both commodities and wildlife, governments’ approaches to associated fisheries and environment
treaty obligations are often misaligned. Scrutiny of this performance is lacking and represents a core yet surmountable challenge
to effective policies and ultimate population rebuilding.

The Shark League (a coalition including Shark Trust, Ecology Action Centre, and Shark Advocates International) will soon release
a gap analysis that examines the effects of Atlantic shark and ray protection measures under various treaties, primarily the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) and the International Commission for Conservation of Atlantic
Tunas (ICCAT). Based on an evaluation of the performance of ICCAT Parties and Cooperators with respect to various obligations
for CITES-listed elasmobranchs, we highlight key gaps between concrete restrictions and conservation needs. Recommendations
for priority improvements at national and international levels extend beyond government action to include specific suggestions
for elasmobranch conservationists and interested scientists. Aims focus on better integration of fisheries and environmental
agency activities to fulfill elasmobranch policy commitments across treaties, but also include improved fisheries and trade
information, more rigorous conservation standards, and expanded assistance, as well as new safeguards for under-protected
species. Because overfishing is the primary driver of shark and ray depletion, bridging these divides is critical to securing a
brighter outlook for elasmobranchs in the Atlantic and beyond.

Keywords: fisheries; trade; policy; CITES; ICCAT




Lydia Koehler
University of Plymouth

What the EU’s Marine Strategy Framework Directive did and did not change for sharks and rays

     1.        Lydia Koehler; University of Plymouth.
     2.        Paddy Walker; Nederlandse Elasmobranchen Vereniging.
     3.        Irene Kingma; Nederlandse Elasmobranchen Vereniging.
     4.        Jason Lowther; University of Plymouth.

The evaluation of policy effectiveness and impact is a crucial step in the policy cycle, to see if the agreed targets are met and to
give guidance for improving future policies and legislation. One of the fundamental European Union (EU) Directives for Nature
Conservation, the Habitats Directive, did not include conservation of elasmobranchs at the time it was drafted in 1992 and has
not been updated to address this gap in the 30 years since. This means that elasmobranchs do not feature in Nature2000,
which forms the basis for protected areas. However, the Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD) from 2008, opened a
window of opportunity for elasmobranch- related measures both in spatial protection and fisheries management, but has it
delivered? Here, we assessed EU Member States’ (EU MS) efforts to integrate elasmobranchs in their national monitoring and
programmes of measures under the MSFD, and if these filled in the gaps between EU policies. Results are mixed: whilst some
EU MS, such as the Netherlands and Italy, report shark-specific measures under the MSFD, others generally refer to existing
obligations in relation to monitoring and conservation under EU, international, and regional legal frameworks. There are no
Marine Protected Areas set up under the MSFD that aim to protect elasmobranchs specifically in any EU MS. Based on the
review of EU MS reporting under the MSFD, we provide advice on furthering shark conservation at EU level and how this
relates to contemporary legal and policy developments in the EU and at international level.

Keywords: Marine policy; Implementation; Shark conservation; European Union; Fisheries management



Lucas Zaccagnini
DRDH, 15 rue Dumont d'Urville, BLP Technoopole Brest-Iroise, 29280 Plouzane

Synthesis of ten years of illegal trade of Elasmobranch products in the French online market

     1.   Simon Lassale, DRDH, 15 rue Dumont d'Urville, BLP Technoopole Brest-Iroise, 29280 Plouzane
     2.   Lucas Zaccagnini, DRDH, 15 rue Dumont d'Urville, BLP Technoopole Brest-Iroise, 29280 Plouzane
     3.   Lena Pouliquen, DRDH, 15 rue Dumont d'Urville, BLP Technoopole Brest-Iroise, 29280 Plouzane
     4.   Paul Abaut, DRDH, 15 rue Dumont d'Urville, BLP Technoopole Brest-Iroise, 29280 Plouzane


12
     5.   Antoine Gatet, DRDH, 15 rue Dumont d'Urville, BLP Technoopole Brest-Iroise, 29280 Plouzane
     6.   Cecile Brigaudeau, DRDH, 15 rue Dumont d'Urville, BLP Technoopole Brest-Iroise, 29280 Plouzane
     7.   Armelle Jung, DRDH, 15 rue Dumont d'Urville, BLP Technoopole Brest-Iroise, 29280 Plouzane

The illegal wildlife trade is recognized to be the fourth most lucrative transnational crime after drugs, arms and human
trafficking. Marine species are subject to a vast range of commercial exchange despite their listing under Washington
Convention (CITES).
DRDH started an online survey about products of elasmobranch sold on Internet. The study primarily focused on sawfish
rostrum which represented more than 3000 cases. In 2021, the work was extended to shark jaws and heads, but also reptiles
such as marine turtles, crocodiles or protected marine mammals.
A synthesis of 10 years of follow up was produced giving elements on the estimation of amount of money the diversity of
species and geographic origins of the different pieces.
The results the juridical victories are discussed in the context of global urgency for marine biodiversity worldwide.

Keywords: Illegal Trade; Sawfish; Juridic; Marine species; CITES



Paddy Walker
Dutch Elasmobranch Society

The Netherlands Shark and Ray Action Plan: a case study in international cooperation

     1.   Paddy, Walker; Dutch Elasmobranch Society
     2.   Irene,Kingma; Dutch Elasmobranch Society

The Netherlands Shark and Ray Action Plan (SARAP) dates from 2017. It was reviewed in 2021 and there is currently a new
action plan which will run until 2027. The objectives of the SARAP fall under Descriptor 1 of the Marine Strategy Framework
Directive (MSFD) ‘Biodiversity’ and aim to improve the population size, distribution and condition of sharks and rays in Dutch
waters. Nine of the 15 actions in the plan address European Regulations, Frameworks and Directives, as well as international
conventions. All require international cooperation. These actions are not new and have been on the European agenda for a
number of years. Since 2017 the EU STECF (Scientific, Technical, Economic Commission for Fisheries) has initiated three
expert working groups specifically on elasmobranchs, covering skate and ray management, the implementation of the EU
regulation on finning and assessment of the impact of the 2009 European Community Shark Action Plan. These meetings
resulted in recommendations to advance the management and conservation of the species. Concurrently, the ICES Working
Group Elasmobranch Fishes provides the science to improve stock assessments and to advise on fishing opportunities. In the
past years new species have been listed on CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora
and Fauna) and CMS (Convention on Migratory Species), leading to obligations from the contracting parties. Although some
progress is being made, real change has yet to take place. This paper will present the Netherlands Shark and Ray Action Plan
as a case study in international cooperation.

Keywords: Action Plan; international cooperation; management; conservation; EU legislation



Licia Finotto
University of Padova

Stakeholders' perception of sharks and rays: is there space for conservation?

     1.   Licia Finotto; Department of Biology, University of Padova.
     2.   Massimiliano Bottaro; Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Italian National Institute for Marine Biology, Ecology and
          Biotechnology.
     3.   Ioannis Giovos; Marine & Environmental Research (MER) Lab Ltd.
     4.   Periklis Kleitou; Marine & Environmental Research (MER) Lab Ltd.
     5.   Paolo Pelusi; Consorzio Mediterraneo.
     6.   Bruna Valettini; Costa edutainment S.p.A.
     7.   Carlotta Mazzoldi; Department of Biology, University of Padova.

Effective conservation measures are urgently needed for elasmobranchs. People possess significant power in driving
conservation efforts, but elasmobranchs, known for historically evoking irrational attitudes, have been overlooked. Educational
events improving peoples’ perception might aid conservation action. Fishery management measures are also necessary, but
fishers’ willingness to adopt them must be assessed. To investigate propensity for conservation, the LIFE ELIFE project
(Elasmobranchs Low-Impact Fishing Experience LIFE18 NAT/IT/000846) aims at evaluating stakeholders’ attitude and the
impact of educational events using questionnaires/interviews.
Participating to educational events improved people’s attitude towards elasmobranchs. Respondents indicating fear and danger
as the main feelings decreased from 22.0% and 29.8% in the group not experiencing educational events (N=542) to 11.2% and
14.6% in the group that experienced them (N=121). Moreover, the percentage of respondents thinking that elasmobranchs are




13
endangered (76.8% versus 84.8%), that more species should be protected (77.3% versus 88.9%), and of those willing to
change their behaviours to aid elasmobranchs’ conservation (92.9% versus 100%) increased.
Regarding fishers (N=136), only 16.0% reported a perception of decrease in elasmobranch abundances; however, fishers
stated that their category should contribute to elasmobranchs’ conservation (70.4%) and that some species should be protected
(50.7%). Despite 56.3% of fishers were not aware of potential fishery management measures (i.e., gear modifications), when
informed, 60.9% declared they would adopt them.
These preliminary results are promising; people’s positive attitude can be used to urge decision makers to adopt concrete
conservation initiatives, which are likely to be more easily accepted by fishers given their willingness to collaborate.

Keywords: conservation; social science; stakeholder; fishers; general public



Irene Kingma
Dutch Elasmobranch Society

A gap analysis on shark and ray research and conservation in the Caribbean

     1.   Kingma, Irene; Dutch Elasmobranch Society
     2.   Bervoets, Tadzio; Caribbean Shark Coalition
     3.   Walker, Paddy; Dutch Elasmobranch Society
     4.   Leurs, Guido; Groningen University

We present the results of a Gap analysis carried out in the summer of 2023 on the elasmobranchs of the Southeastern
Caribbean. The geographical scope of this project concerns the whole of the Lesser Antilles, as well as the Dominican
Republic, Haiti and Jamaica to the west, and the exclusive economic zones of the countries and territories of the Guiana
plateau to the southeast. As most of this area encompasses the waters of Small Island Developing States (SIDS) and other
small autonomous nations the marine life in general has not been extensively studied.
Our approach was threefold, firstly we focussed on establishing an overview of the species present in the area and the
research effort that had gone in to them, secondly we made an overview of the research conducted in the waters of all
countries in our area of interest and lastly we made an overview of existing conservation and management measures and the
level to which these were implemented. We based our findings on information gathered through a literature review as well as
from interviews with regional and local experts.
The research is part of the CAMAC project, for CAribbean marine Megafauna and anthropogenic Activities led by the SPAW
Regional Activities Centre. The CAMAC project works to improve knowledge Caribbean mega fauna (mammals, sharks & rays
and turtles) and strengthen regional collaboration. The aim is to provide recommendations and tools to reduce the negative
impacts of interactions between marine megafauna and human activities.

Keywords: review; Caribbean; gap analysis; SIDS




14
Thursday 19th October 2023
Theme Topic: CITES: new listings; identification in Trade, and the Non-Detriment
Finding (NDF) process

Session 5: Threatened elasmobranchs in coastal waters (Part 1)

Ana Espino Ruano
IU ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria

Where is the Spiny butterfly ray, Gymnura altavela?: aggregative behaviour in the shallow coastal zones.

     1.   Ana, Espino-Ruano; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria.
     2.   Jose J., Castro; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria.
     3.   Airam, Guerra-Marrero; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran
          Canaria.
     4.   Lorena, Couce-Montero; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran
          Canaria.
     5.   David, Jimenez-Alvarado; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran
          Canaria.

The presence of spiny butterfly rays, Gymnura altavela, in waters less than 20 m deep off the Canary Islands shows marked
seasonality, with relatively high abundances in the summer and autumn. Large aggregations of sometimes hundreds of
individuals, primarily females, appear in specific shallow areas of the archipelago and seem to be associated with the seasonal
variation in water temperature. This seasonal pattern of presence or absence in shallow areas suggests that spiny butterfly rays
migrate into deeper waters or other unknown areas during the rest of the year. G. altavela shows sexual dimorphism; in our
study, females were larger and more abundant than males, with a sex ratio of 1:18.9. The species’ estimated asymptotic length,
L∞, was 183.75 cm and thus close to the common length reported for the species (200 cm). The von Bertalanffy growth
constant (k) oscillated between 0.210 and 0.310 year−1 , as similarly described for the species in the Western North Atlantic off
the U.S. coast. From June to November, the seawater temperature oscillated between 19 and 24 ◦C, and massive aggregations
of females occurred at 22–24 ◦C and in a few specific sandy beaches on the islands. Spiny butterfly rays, mostly females, show
a preference for aggregating in shallow waters during summertime, probably conditionate to mating or breeding behaviour.

Keywords: Behaviour; biodiversity; conservation; movement;



Maria Pozo-Montoro
Universidad de Murcia

First insights into the last known population of guitarfishes in the Western Mediterranean. A critical area
for these and other endangered species of batoids in Spain?

     1.   Maria, Pozo-Montoro; Universidad de Murcia.
     2.   David, Jimenez-Alvarado; Universidad de las Palmas de Gran Canaria.
     3.   Johann, Mourier; University of Montpellier.
     4.   Jose Antonio, Garcia-Charton; Universidad de Murcia.

The Cabo de Palos-Islas Hormigas marine reserve in Southeast Spain stands as an outstanding conservation model, boasting
one of the highest fish biomasses among Mediterranean Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). However, just beyond its boundaries,
populations of highly threatened elasmobranchs appear to critically rely on this area unnoticed and unprotected. Since March
2023, over a hundred photographs from divers, snorkelers, and fishers have been collected and analysed, revealing the area´s
potential significance for the Common Guitarfish (Rhinobatos rhinobatos), the Spiny Butterfly Ray (Gymnura altavela), the
Common Stingray (Dasyatis pastinaca) and the Common Eagle Ray (Myliobatis aquila).
Remarkably, these records indicate the annual presence of the once-though-extinct in the Western Mediterranean Common
Guitarfish, with potentially pregnant females appearing in June and newborns in September. Additionally, further evidence is
needed to confirm the occurrence of the Giant Guitarfish (Glaucostegus cemiculus) according to some reported pictures due to
identification issues. These photographs suggest fisheries-induced mortality due to illegal retention and inadequate handling
techniques is occurring to an unknown extent.
Also, pregnant individuals and newborns of Spiny Butterfly Ray can be seen yearly throughout the summer, as well as potential
aggregations of likely young-of-the-year of Common Stingray. Opportunistic scientific expeditions have further allowed us to
document annual aggregations of 15-40 individuals of Common Eagle Ray with unknown function.
These preliminary findings highlight the Murcia Eastern Coast as a potential conservation realm for highly endangered
elasmobranch species. However, further research efforts are needed and warranted to inform effective management actions to
ensure their survival.

Keywords: Citizen science; ISRA; ROV; Rhinopristiformes; Rhino rays


15
Lucy Mead
Zoological Society of London; Queen Mary University of London

Spatiotemporal distribution and sexual segregation in the Critically Endangered angelshark Squatina
squatina in Spain’s largest marine reserve

          1.    Lucy Mead; Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London
          2.    David Jiménez Alvarado; Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria
          3.    Eva Meyers; Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig
          4.    Joanna Barker; Zoological Society of London
          5.    Michael Sealey; Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
          6.    Maria Belén Caro; Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
          7.    Hector Toledo; Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
          8.    Charlotte Pike; Zoological Society of London
          9.    Matthew Gollock; Zoological Society of London
          10.   Adam Piper; Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London
          11.   Gail Schofield; Queen Mary University of London
          12.   Edy Herraiz; La Graciosa Divers
          13.   David M.P. Jacoby; Lancaster University


Establishing how threatened wildlife are distributed spatially and temporally is essential for effective conservation and
management planning. While many shark species are threatened globally, knowledge on sex-specific differences in behaviour
and fine-scale habitat use remains limited, hindering the implementation of appropriate conservation actions. Here, acoustic
telemetry was used to investigate sex-specific space use in the Critically Endangered angelshark Squatina squatina in the
Canary Islands (Atlantic Ocean), a key stronghold for the species. We collected data on space use, residency and movement of
adult males (n = 32) and females (n = 72) in Spain’s largest marine reserve (La Graciosa Marine Reserve) over 4 yr
(2018−2022). Presence in offshore sites (>80 m depth) indicated long-term utilisation of deep-water habitat, not previously
observed in this species. Males were more likely to be detected in deep water and displayed significantly greater levels of
activity and roaming behaviour than females. Patterns of behaviour in shallow waters indicated both social and habitat sexual
segregation. Diel variability was also recorded, with greater activity occurring nocturnally. This study demonstrates the
importance of considering the spatiotemporal distribution of both sexes, horizontally and vertically, when designing effective
conservation measures.

Keywords: Acoustic telemetry; Angelshark; Conservation; Distribution; Spatial ecology



Aylin Ulman
Mersea Marine Consulting, The Shark Trust UK, Sea Around Us

First records of critically endangered smoothback angel shark Squatina oculata Bonaparte 1840 and
angelshark Squatina squatina (Linnaeus 1758) reproductive habitats in Türkiye, and over 50 new records
demonstrating three Critical Angel Shark Areas (CASA’s)

     1.   Aylin Ulman, Mersea Marine Consulting.
     2.   Cat Gordon, The Shark Trust UK.
     3.   Ali Hood, The Shark Trust UK.
     4.   Daniel Pauly, Sea Around Us, University of British Columbia

In 2023, three records of angelshark stress-induced births onboard fishing vessels in Türkiye were recorded. The first record
was from Fethiye Bay in January 2023, in which three Squatina oculata pups were aborted on the vessel, with one external yolk
sac still attached, with the pups deceased pups. The second account was of five Squatina squatina pups aborted onboard a
fishing vessel from the Dardanelles, in which all pups survived, and the last account was also from Fethiye Bay in March, 2023,
this time in which three pups survived. This last account provides the only recent account on Squatina oculata reproduction
from the last two decades. The pups were approximately 19.5 cm, 21.5 cm and 23 cm total length, with an internal yolk sac
which could be seen iridescently through the body, estimated at about 3-4 cm in width. These records also provide important
details of reproductive habitats, spawning grounds and spawning seasons, which seems to ocur in spring in Turkey. The data
presents a new much smaller minimum maturity size for S. oculata. Also, data were summarized from citizen science records
for Turkish sharks and rays along with other records directly from fishers providing a total of 51 previously unpublished angel
shark records for Turkey, and highlighting three potential Critical Angel Shark Areas (CASAs) in Turkey; Fethiye Bay,
Çanakkale Strait and Antalya Bay. We stress the need for better protection of these areas, along with scientific monitoring of
these sites to learn more about these species.

Keywords: Squatinidae; reproduction; Critical Angel Shark Areas (CASA's); Eastern Mediterranean Sea; length at first maturity




16
Stephan Bruns
Biology Department, College of Science, UAE University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates

Archival tagging reveals new insights in the horizontal and vertical movements of a critically endangered
wedgefish

          1.   Stephan, Bruns; Biology Department, College of Science, UAE University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates
          2.   Shamsa, Al Hameli ; Biology Department, College of Science, UAE University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates
          3.   Erik, Sulanke ; Thuenen Institute of Sea Fisheries, Research unit for economic analysis, Bremerhaven,
               Germany
          4.   Aaron, Henderson; Biology Department, College of Science, UAE University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates

The smoothnose wedgefish (Rhynchobatus laevis) is a critically endangered shark-like ray that has received limited research
attention. To address knowledge gaps in its behaviour and movement patterns, this study utilized satellite tagging over a 51-
day period in the Arabian Gulf.
Based on the resulting movement track, the specimen covered a minimum distance of 712 km, traversing the exclusive
economic zones of three different countries. Its track began in the United Arab Emirates, from where it headed north, entering
Iranian waters where it spent the majority of its time, before continuing westward across the Arabian Gulf and eventually
reaching Qatari waters.
Novel insights in its behaviour recorded a pattern of rapid ascent over the study period. Even though these ascents these
ascents were observed both diurnal and nocturnal, they occurred predominately in the latter.
Contrary to the prevailing belief that wedgefish are bottom-associated, the study animal spent a considerable amount of its time
in the water column. Its use of a variety of depths in both nearshore and offshore waters highlights a potential susceptibility to
multiple fishing year types. This underscores the need for an international, cooperative approach to the management and
conservation of shark-like rays in the Arabian Gulf.

Keywords: Satellite tagging; Conservation Biology; Shark-like rays; Movement ecology;



David Jimenez-Alvarado
Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria; IU-ECOAQUA; Angel Shark Project

Cazón Project: Research to determine the true status of dogfish sharks in the Canary Islands.

     1.   David, Jimenez-Alvarado; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran
          Canaria.
     2.   Ana, Espino-Ruano; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria.
     3.   Rosario Luque-Cabrera; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran
          Canaria.
     4.   Airam, Guerra-Marrero; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran
          Canaria.
     5.   Lorena, Couce-Montero; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran
          Canaria.
     6.   José J., Castro; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria.

The Canary Islands, located in the Atlantic Ocean off the northwest coast of Africa, have quickly become an idyllic place for
elasmobranch species that inhabit their waters, primarily due to the absence of industrial fishing and the use of harmful fishing
methods such as trawling. In the Canary Islands, fishing activities consist mainly of small-scale artisanal fishing and
recreational fishing, which is gaining popularity and attracting more enthusiasts each year. However, sharks and rays are
generally not targeted species in these fishing activities. Only dogfish sharks and various species within this family are
intentionally fished or captured as bycatch in the islands. This is primarily due to the use of their meat for human consumption
as "tollos", a typical food of the archipelago made with the dehydrated meat of these sharks.
Currently, our knowledge of these species is limited to data derived from artisanal fishermen and their captures, which, as often
is the case in many parts of the world, are underestimated due to poor or non-existent proper identification of each species.
Including biological data (species, sexes) and/or ecological data (preferred areas, depths, or seasons), severely limiting their
proper assessment or manage. In this study, the current status of these species in the Canary Islands is evaluated, aiming to
identify the situation of each species as accurately as possible.

Keywords: Elasmobranch; Fisheries; Endangered species; Archipelago;




17
Eva Meyers
Leibniz Institute for the Analysis of Biodiversity Change / Angel Shark Project

Coordinated Action for the Conservation of Critically Endangered Angel Sharks

     1.    Joanna Barker; Zoological Society of London
     2.    David Jiménez Alvarado; Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria
     3.    Hector Toledo; Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
     4.    Charlotte Pike; Zoological Society of London
     5.    Michael Sealey; Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
     6.    Tomas Bañeras; Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
     7.    Kevin Feldheim; Field Museum - Pritzker Laboratory
     8.    Lucy Mead; Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London
     9.    David M.P. Jacoby; Lancaster University
     10.   Sara A.A Al Mabruk; Marine Biology Libya
     11.   Ioannis Giovos; iSea
     12.   Roxani Naasan Aga Spyridopoulou, iSea
     13.   Patrick Krstinic; WWF Adria
     14.   Simone Niedermueller, WWF
     15.   Caroline Bousquet; University of Corsica
     16.   Eric Durieux, University of Corsica
     17.   Johann Mourier, University of Montpellier
     18.   Louise Overy; Irish Elasmobranch Group
     19.   Jake Davies; Natural Resources Wales; Zoological Society of London
     20.   Ben Wray; Natural Resources Wales
     21.   Cat Gordon; Shark Trust
     22.   Ali Hood; Shark Trust

The Angel Shark Project was established with the aim of securing the future of Critically Endangered angel sharks (Squatina
squatina, S. aculeata and S. oculata) across the range. Among other regions, the Canary Islands, Wales, Libya, Greece,
Corsica, Croatia and Ireland were identified as important and unique areas for at least one of the three angel shark species.
The data gathered in these regions has contributed to the implementation of targeted conservation measures across the
Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean Sea and to deliver priority policy outcomes across six countries. This two-way exchange of
information between partners across the angel shark species’ ranges has been vital to better coordinate conservation action.
This presentation will highlight some of the key milestones from the different regions, including enhancing legal protection in
priority countries, co-developing regional action plans to minimise threats and promoting the sustainability of shark and ray
fishing.

Keywords: angelsharks; conservation; policy; squatina; ecology




18
Session 6: Threatened elasmobranchs in coastal waters (Part 2)

Charlotte Pike
Zoological Society of London

Re-launch of the Angel Shark Conservation Network: A community working to better protect angel
sharks

     1.   Charlotte Pike; Zoological Society of London
     2.   Joanna Barker; Zoological Society of London
     3.   Eva Meyers; Leibniz Institute for the Analysis of Biodiversity Change
     4.   David Jimenez Alvarado; University of Las Palmas Gran Canaria
     5.   Cat Gordon; The Shark Trust
     6.   Ali Hood; The Shark Trust
     7.   Àlex Bartolí; Submon
     8.   Nick Dulvy; IUCN Species Survival Commission Shark Specialist Group

The Angel Shark Conservation Network (ASCN) was established by the authors in 2016, to empower action to restore and
safeguard angel shark populations throughout their natural range. To date, focusing on the Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean
Sea, which encompasses the range of three Critically Endangered angel shark species: Squatina aculeata, S. oculata, and S.
squatina.
The ASCN aims to facilitate dialogue and information sharing on angel shark conservation efforts and provides a mechanism
for developing strategic conservation planning documents at different geographic scales. A number of Action Plans have been
developed via multidisciplinary workshops, sitting underneath the Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean Angel Shark
Conservation Strategy. These documents aim to identify the key actions needed to overcome major threats to angel sharks in
each specific region to guide future research, management, policy, and conservation. Progress towards actions outlined in
these documents will be discussed, highlighting how far we have come and what we have left to achieve.
The ASCN actively encourages individuals and organisations to deliver actions outlined in the angel shark conservation
planning documents, facilitating a collaborative approach, and working in partnership to support and deliver angel shark
conservation. Various levels of ASCN membership exist, and recent work has been undertaken to better formalise this process.
This presentation will outline the ASCN’s re-launch, with clearer guidance on how to get involved and hopes to expand the
network to enable further action for angel sharks across their range.
This work is funded by Shark Conservation Fund.

Keywords: Network; Conservation; Collaboration; Angel sharks;



Yaara Grossmark
Faculty of Architecture and Town Planning, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel; Sharks in
Israel, Environmental Organization for the protection of sharks and rays, Israel

Utilizing human-wildlife Interaction data: A game-changer for guitarfish conservation

     1.   Yaara Grossmark, Faculty of Architecture and Town Planning, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
          Israel; Sharks in Israel, Environmental Organization for the protection of sharks and rays, Israel
     2.   Adi Barash, Sharks in Israel, Environmental Organization for the protection of sharks and rays, Israel.
     3.   Barak Azrieli-Zohar, Sharks in Israel, Environmental Organization for the protection of sharks and rays, Israel.
     4.   Michelle E. Portman, Faculty of Architecture and Town Planning, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
          Israel

Human-wildlife interactions are crucial in shaping our understanding of nature and can significantly impact efforts to conserve
endangered species and their habitats. As human activities continue to expand in the marine environment, encounters between
humans and marine wildlife are expected to rise. Addressing and incorporating these interactions into conservation plans can
provide valuable insights and bolster conservation efforts.
In this study, we utilized the Marxan software to analyze data from the MECO citizen science project, focusing on two guitarfish
species, the blackchin guitarfish (Glaucostegus cemiculus) and the common guitarfish (Rhinobatos rhinobatos), along the
Mediterranean coast of Israel. Our objective was to identify areas of high probability for human encounters with guitarfish
species while considering the specific activities conducted during these interactions.
Our findings revealed that human activities varied across different areas during guitarfish encounters. By incorporating human
activities as conservation targets in the Marxan analysis, in addition to guitarfish distribution data, we observed no significant
shifts in the location of areas marked for conservation. However, the total area of these conservation zones increased
significantly. This approach demonstrates how incorporating data on human-wildlife interactions can enhance conservation
modeling efforts.
Moreover, our study highlights the significance of including a social dimension in conservation planning, offering a fresh
perspective on the process. By integrating human-wildlife interaction data, conservation strategies can be better tailored to
specific locations and activities, facilitating more effective protection for guitarfish species and their habitats.
Keywords: Human-wildlife interactions; Guitarfish; Conservation planning; Citizen science; Marxan


19
Jaime Penadés-Suay
Associació LAMNA; Fundación Oceanogràfic

First campaign for the study of blackchin guitarfish (Glaucostegus cemiculus) in waters of Doñana
National Park (Spain, North East Atlantic)

     1.    Jaime, Penadés-Suay; Associació LAMNA, Fundación Oceanogràfic
     2.    Ángel, Benítez; Associació LAMNA
     3.    Ana, Pérez de Ayala; Espacio Natural de Doñana, Junta de Andalucía
     4.    Pep, Amengual; Servicio de Investigación del Organismo Autónomo Parques Nacionales
     5.    María Dolores, Cobo; Espacio Natural de Doñana, Junta de Andalucía
     6.    Pablo, García-Salinas; Associació LAMNA, Fundación Oceanogràfic

In June 2022, an initial expedition comprising members from the Fundación Oceanogràfic, Seville Aquarium, and LAMNA
Association certified the presence of juvenile and adult 'guitarrón' or blackchin guitarfish (Glaucostegus cemiculus) within the
protected waters of Doñana National Park in Huelva, Spain. These records confirmed previous non-published reports by
researchers and data collected through the Mediterranean Elasmobranchs Citizen Observations (MECO) project. This could be
the first indication of a stable population and a possible nursery area. Sampling was carried out on foot from Matalascañas to
Guadalquivir river’s mouth (Sanlúcar de Barrameda) over a five-day period. A total of 14 specimens were observed, with
estimations revealing 5 juveniles and 9 adults or subadults. Furthermore, suspicions about accidental catches by recreational
and professional fishermen were also confirmed, through interviews with individuals on the beach who provided photos of these
cases. More serious was the confirmation of the consumption of this protected species by the local population, a fact
demonstrated through the interviews but also with the discovery of four severed heads on the beach itself, evidencing cases of
poaching within Doñana’s marine protected area. The results of this expedition have provided hope for a larger study of the
area, to be conducted during the years 2023-2026, allowing for the creation of a catch and release program and the obtention
of DNA samples. Further collaborations on these efforts are welcomed.

Keywords: Glaucostegidae; Glaucostegus cemiculus; Habitat; Poaching; Protected areas



Sarah Davies
Zoological Society of London / Natural Resources Wales

Detecting the presence of elasmobranchs in Wales using environmental DNA

     1.    Nick Dunn; Zoological Society of London / Natural England,
     2.    Sophie Ward; Bangor University,
     3.    Jake Davies; Zoological Society of London / Natural Resources Wales,
     4.    Sarah Davies; Zoological Society of London / Natural Resources Wales,
     5.    Peter Robins; Bangor University,
     6.    Isabelle Apetroaie; Zoological Society of London,
     7.    Jake Williams; Zoological Society of London,
     8.    Ben Wray; Natural Resources Wales,
     9.    Alice Chamberlain; Zoological Society of London,
     10.   Charlotte Pike; Zoological Society of London,
     11.   Kathryn Whittey; Zoological Society of London / Bangor University,
     12.   Francesca Mason; Zoological Society of London / Cardiff University,
     13.   David Curnick; Zoological Society of London,
     14.   Joanna Barker; Zoological Society of London

Environmental DNA (eDNA) methodologies allow us to assess biodiversity by taking samples from the environment (e.g water,
sediment or air) and extracting DNA from the samples to identify the presence of species.
We designed an eDNA survey to gather information on elasmobranch presence in the Carmarthen Bay and Estuaries (CBAE)
Special Area of Conservation (SAC) in South Wales. Sampling sites were informed using hydrodynamic and tracer modelling
based on residual patterns, led by Bangor University. Water samples were taken from 10 sites across CBAE SAC each month,
for 12 months. These data were brought together with samples taken in 2020/2021 by Angel Shark Project: Wales, which
covered 10 sites across 12 months in the Pen Llyn A’r Sarnau (PLAS) SAC in North Wales. Further samples were taken and
analysed concurrently with BRUVS surveys in the PLAS SAC.
A total of eleven elasmobranch species were detected across the two SACs, including all four Project SIARC focal species –
angelshark, common stingray, spurdog and tope. This presentation will highlight the key findings from these surveys.
Project SIARC is a collaboration between the Zoological Society of London, Natural Resources Wales and six partners and
made possible thanks to the National Lottery Heritage Fund, Welsh Government’s Nature Networks Fund and On the EDGE
Conservation.

Keywords: eDNA; Wales; Elasmobranch




20
Valentina Crobe
GenoDREAM, Department of Biological, Geological & Environmental Sciences (BiGeA), University of Bologna,
Ravenna, Italy

The cradle of diversity: Central Atlantic Ocean hides a mosaic of skate species (Rajiformes)

     1.   Valentina Crobe; GenoDREAM, Department of Biological, Geological & Environmental Sciences (BiGeA), University
          of Bologna, Ravenna, Italy
     2.   Alice Ferrari; GenoDREAM, Department of Biological, Geological & Environmental Sciences (BiGeA), University of
          Bologna, Ravenna, Italy
     3.   Fausto Tinti; GenoDREAM, Department of Biological, Geological & Environmental Sciences (BiGeA), University of
          Bologna, Ravenna, Italy
     4.   Alessia Cariani; GenoDREAM, Department of Biological, Geological & Environmental Sciences (BiGeA), University of
          Bologna, Ravenna, Italy

Skates (Rajiformes) represent one of the most intriguing cases of high species richness coupled with extremely conservative
morphological and ecological traits. Small differences are described within and between species and increasing cases of cryptic
speciation have been recorded among sister and non-sister taxa. More interestingly, this condition has been frequently
observed in Central Atlantic Ocean (CAO), along the coasts of Western Africa, between Angola and Senegal, where
oceanographic heterogeneities such as current systems, may play a key role for ecological speciation in skates. The use of
multiple mtDNA loci and its integration with nuDNA microsatellite has been successfully applied to estimate the genetic
variation in skate species inhabiting the CAO. Phylogenetic reconstructions, phylogeographic patterns and genetic connectivity
estimates were applied to test the hypothesis that restricted gene flow and genetic divergence within Raja species reflect
known climate and bio-oceanographic discontinuities. The widely distributed Raja miraletus species complex counts five deeply
distinct lineages three of which co-occur in CAO: the Angolan Raja cf. miraletus, the Senegalese and sympatric R. parva and
Raja cf. miraletus. In addition, an ancient, hidden lineage nesting in the clade Raja straeleni/R. clavata/R. maderensis was
identified in Angola. The complexity of oceanographic system acting in the CAO (i.e., the Benguela Current region and the
intertropical Canary current inflowing from the northeast) may have influenced the diversification of the Angolan and
Senegalese taxa, boosting the biodiversity of the area, in an unprecedented anthology of species-specific evolutionary
histories.

Keywords: cryptic species; hidden lineages; Raja; mtDNA; nuDNA



Chris Taklis
BiodiversityGR

Common stingray's (Dasyatis pastinaca) first recorded and studied nursery area in Greece.

Chris Taklis, BiodiversityGR

Elasmobranchs, including the common stingray, are pivotal components of marine ecosystems, yet much remains to be
understood about their habitat requirements and life history characteristics. The identification and investigation of nursery areas
are critical for effective conservation and management, as these areas offer essential resources for the early life stages,
contributing significantly to population sustainability.
A nursery area of Common stingrays has been discovered in Liri Beach in 2018, on the eastern coast of central Greece. Adults
and juveniles have been recorded at depths of 3 to 6 meters depth on a sandy soil bed.
By employing field surveys, we have explored the presence and attributes of the common stingray's nursery area in the region.
Our findings unveil a shallow, nearshore region that provides optimal environmental conditions for the growth and development
of juvenile stingrays. These habitats afford protection against predation and facilitate access to abundant food resources,
ensuring the successful survival and subsequent recruitment of young individuals into the adult population.
Furthermore, we have examined the ecological interactions and connectivity between the identified nursery area in Central
Greece and the surrounding habitats, underscoring the significance of considering broader ecological networks for effective
conservation planning. By comprehending the spatial dynamics and connectivity patterns, we can devise strategies to
safeguard and manage these critical areas, securing the long-term viability of the common stingray population.

Keywords: Common stingray; Dasyatis pastinaca; Nursery area



Tomas Bañeras Bosch
Área de Toxicología, Universidad de La Laguna; Angel Shark Project

Geographical distribution influences the accumulation of metals in the liver and muscle of Squatina
squatina

     1.   Tomàs, Bañeras-Bosch; Área de Toxicología, Universidad de La Laguna, Angel Shark Project
     2.   Michael J., Sealey; Oceana


21
     3.    Eva, Meyers; Angel Shark Project
     4.    Joanna, Barker; Zoological Society of London, Angel Shark Project
     5.    Héctor, Toledo-Padilla; Angel Shark Project
     6.    Ana, Espino-Ruano; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria.
     7.    Airam, Guerra-Marrero; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran
           Canaria.
     8.    David, Jimenez-Alvarado; Biodiversity and Conservation group, IU-ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran
           Canaria; Angel Shark Project
     9.    Dailos, González-Weller; Área de Toxicología, Universidad de La Laguna
     10.   Soraya, Paz; Área de Toxicología, Universidad de La Laguna
     11.   Arturo, Hardisson; Área de Toxicología, Universidad de La Laguna
     12.   Carmen, Rubio; Área de Toxicología, Universidad de La Laguna
     13.   María José, Caballero; Instituto Universitario de Sanidad Animal y Seguridad Alimentaria (IUSA), Universidad de las
           palmas de de Gran Canaria.
     1.    (Instituto Universitario de Sanidad Animal y Seguridad Alimentaria)
     14.   Angel J., Gutiérrez; Área de Toxicología, Universidad de La Laguna

The Canary Islands was identified as a unique stronghold for the Angel shark (Squatina squatina), a species considered
Critically Endangered according to the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Angelsharks inhabit coastal and shallow areas,
being exposed to the effects of anthropogenic pollution, such as the accumulation of heavy metals. In this study, we analysed
the concentration of twenty-one metals and trace elements in liver and muscle samples from dead specimens, nine from the
Canary Islands and five from the Celtic Seas region (Wales and Ireland), using optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES), cold
vapor atomic absorption spectroscopy (CV-AAS), and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). The results did
not show sex as an influential factor in the concentration of heavy metals in the Canarian population. However, the size and
weight of individuals were negatively correlated with Hg, Mo, B, and Cr in muscle, and positively correlated with Co, Fe, V, Mn,
and Cr in the liver. These differences were more pronounced in a prenatal individual. The results indicate that growth may play
a crucial role in the bioaccumulation and biomagnification of metals in organs. In terms of geographical distribution, we
observed significant differences between the individuals from the Canary Islands and the Celtic Seas regarding the
concentration of Hg, Cd, and Cr, which were higher in the Canary Islands, and Zn and Mn, which were higher in the Celtic
Seas, likely due to differences in pollution levels between the two areas.

Keywords: Squatina squatina; Heavy metals; Bioaccumulation; Muscle; Liver




22
Session 7: Other anthropogenic pressures - contaminants, climate change and
recreation (Part 1)

Lorenzo Jacopo De Santis
CNR IRBIM

Evaluating the historical abundance trends of large sharks in the Pelagie Archipelago using Local
Ecological Knowledge (LEK)

     1.   Lorenzo Jacopo, De Santis; CNR-IRBIM
     2.   Sara, Bonanomi; CNR-IRBIM
     3.   Mauro, Sinopoli; SZN
     4.   Alessandro, Lucchetti; CNR-IRBIM
     5.   Massimiliano, Bottaro; SZN

According to the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), around 50% of shark and ray species are facing
high risk of extinction in the Mediterranean Sea. To date, the knowledge of elasmobranchs is fragmented and focused for
certain species and areas of the basin with poor population assessment, especially in remote sites. The Pelagie Archipleago
(Pelagie islands), is considered one of the most important hot-spot for sharks in the Mediterranean Sea. This area hosts a wide
range of species potentially threatened by historical fishing pressure and habitat loss, especially large-bodied sharks, whose
spatiotemporal patterns of abundance and distribution are poorly known. Evaluating historical dynamics of cartilaginous fish in
the Pelagie archipelago can be very challenging and it can be crucial to understand their current population status. In the
present study, we used LEK (Local Ecological Knowledge) through the historical memory and experience of fishers to collect
information about the elasmobranch species inhabiting the Pelagie islands, with a particular focus of large-bodied sharks.
Based on fishers’ perception, we recorded a dramatic reduction of large pelagic sharks over 60 years, mainly hammerheads
(Sphyrna spp.) and sandbar sharks (Carcharhinus plumbeus). We also reconstructed the historical abundance of several
elasmobranchs inhabiting the area. Our results provide important insights that can be used as a baseline for conservation
initiatives in a shark data-poor region such as the Pelagie Archipelago.

Keywords: conservation; elasmobranchs; fishery; LEK; Pelagie Archipelago



Pol Carrasco Puig
Universitat de València, Paterna, Spain; CATSHARKS, Association for the Study and Conservation of
Elasmobranchs and Its Ecosystems, Passeig Marítim de la Barceloneta, 37-49, E-08003 Barcelona, Spain

Heavy metal concentrations in muscle tissue of chondrichthyans from the western Mediterranean Sea:
the tip of the iceberg

     1.   Pol, Carrasco-Puig; Universitat de València, Paterna, Spain; CATSHARKS, Association for the Study and
          Conservation of Elasmobranchs and Its Ecosystems, Passeig Marítim de la Barceloneta, 37-49, E-08003 Barcelona,
          Spain.
     2.   Juan A., Raga; Unidad de Zoología Marina, Instituto Cavanilles de Biodiversidad y Biología Evolutiva, Universitat de
          València, Paterna, Spain.
     3.   David, Ruiz-García; Unidad de Zoología Marina, Instituto Cavanilles de Biodiversidad y Biología Evolutiva,
          Universitat de València, Paterna, Spain.
     4.   Alejandro, Molera-Arribas; Instituto de Investigación en Medio Ambiente y Ciencia Marina (IMEDMAR-UCV),
          Universidad Católica de Valencia SVM, Calpe, Alicante, Spain;
     5.   Ana M., Hernández-Martínez; Instituto de Investigación en Medio Ambiente y Ciencia Marina (IMEDMAR-UCV),
          Universidad Católica de Valencia SVM, Calpe, Alicante, Spain.
     6.   Ana I., Colmenero; Institut de Ciències del Mar, CSIC, Barcelona, Spain.
     7.   Claudio, Barría; Unitat de Zoologia, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

The western Mediterranean Sea is a region with a high diversity of chondrichthyan species; however, this region is subjected to
a high discharge of pollutants, such as heavy metals. Consequently, owing to their ecological role, these species are prone to
heavy metal bioaccumulation. Therefore, an assessment of the concentrations of three heavy metals present in the muscle
tissue of 17 chondrichthyan species in the western Mediterranean Sea was performed. A total of 116 individuals were used,
mainly caught by trawling and small-scale fishing. Lead (Pb), cadmium (Cd), and copper (Cu) were quantified using Microwave-
Assisted Extraction (MAE) and Graphite Furnace Atomic Absorption Spectrometry (GF-AAS). Significant differences were
observed between some species and taxonomic groups for Pb, Cd, and Cu. Among all the analysed species, the rabbit fish
(Chimaera monstrosa) presented the highest concentration (mg/kg wet weight) of Pb (0.2924 ± 0.1689), of which some
individuals exceeded the concentration threshold for Pb established by the Commission Regulation (EU) 2023/915. However,
the velvet belly lanternshark (Etmopterus spinax) had the highest concentrations (mg/kg wet weight) of Cd (0.0622 ± 0.0244)
and Cu (0.8179 ± 0.4167), exceeding the maximum concentration of Cd allowed by the (EU) 2023/915. A negative correlation
between the concentration of Pb and trophic level was found, owing to the high concentrations found in low-trophic level




23
species, such as C. monstrosa and E. spinax. Overall, the results obtained are important for human consumption. This is
because these species are consumed and of great commercial interest in this region.

Keywords: Chondrichthyans; Heavy metals; Marine pollution; western Mediterranean Sea; Human consumption



Alejandro J. Molera Arribas
IMEDMAR-UCV; Escuela de doctorado Universida Católica de Valencia San Vicente Martir

Heavy metal monitoring via the small-spotted catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula; Linnaeus, 1758):
Biomonitor potential assesment & multiple-scenario implementation

     1.   Alejandro J. Molera Arribas; Escuela de doctorado Universidad Católica de Valencia San Vicente martir/Instituto de
          Investigación en Medio Ambiente y Ciencia Marina (IMEDMAR-UCV), Universidad Católica de Valencia San Vicente
          Martir, Calpe, Alicante, Spain
     2.   Ana Mª Hernández Martínez; Instituto de Investigación en Medio Ambiente y Ciencia Marina (IMEDMAR-UCV),
          Universidad Católica de Valencia San Vicente Martir, Calpe, Alicante, Spain
     3.   Jose Rafael García March; Instituto de Investigación en Medio Ambiente y Ciencia Marina (IMEDMAR-UCV),
          Universidad Católica de Valencia San Vicente Martir, Calpe, Alicante, Spain
     4.   Jose Tena Medialde; a1Instituto de Investigación en Medio Ambiente y Ciencia Marina (IMEDMAR-UCV),
          Universidad Católica de Valencia San Vicente Martir, Calpe, Alicante, Spain

The small-spotted catshark Scyliorhinus canicula, is a demersal Scyliorhinid shark species commonly found in Mediterranean
and Northeastern Atlantic waters. The philopatric and sedentary nature of adult female individuals, along with its high
abundance among bottom trawl bycatch; stock exploitation resilience and widespread distribution could support the xenobiotic
biomonitoring potential of this species. Previous research on the subject concluded the specie´s muscle tissue is capable of
reflecting space-time persistent Pb, Cd and Cu hotspots.
To further explore such potential, interspecific monitoring has been attempted between Merluccius merluccius and S. canicula
for which a total of 49 individuals of each species were gathered and data correlation was performed among individuals
captured in the same haul. The Cd and Pb biomonitor potential of S. canicula egg capsules was also assessed. A total of 75
embryos were exposed via solution to different concentration ranges of these xenobiotics (Cd = 0.05-17.12 and Pb = 3-102.78
mg·Kg-1) for a 2.5 month period. All samples were analysed via GFAAS and matrices were digested via MAE techniques.
High significant interspecific correlation values were observed in Cd and Pb concentrations between both species (Spearman r
= 0.817 and 0.833 respectively) as well as moderate positive correlation for Cu (Spearman r = 0.633). Regarding Pb and Cd
accumulation by egg capsules, high linearity was observed between dissolved concentrations of the elements and those found
within the egg capsule (r2 = 0.98 and 0.96 respectively) with signifficant differences between trials occurring at higher Cd and
Pb exposure concentrations.

Keywords: GFAAS; MAE; Biomonitor; Heavy metal; Scyliorhinus canicula



Jessica Savage
Royal Holloway University of London; Institution 2: Institute of Zoology; Institution 3: Zoological Society of London

Microplastics in reef manta ray feeding grounds

     1.   Jessica Savage; Royal Holloway University of London.
     2.   Heather Koldewey; Zoological Society of London.
     3.   Tom B. Letessier; Institute of Zoology.
     4.   Marcus Rowcliffe; Institute of Zoology.
     5.   David Morritt; Royal Holloway University of London.

Microplastics (plastic particles sized under 5mm) are ubiquitous in the marine environment. They are known to have negative
effects on marine organisms when ingested, including accumulation in digestive systems, causing starvation, and leaching of
toxic chemicals, impacting development and reproduction. The habitat of reef manta rays (Mobula alfredi), a filter-feeding
elasmobranch, overlaps with plastic pollution hotspots globally. This makes them at risk of ingesting the particles, with potential
negative consequences on their fitness. The species is already listed as Vulnerable on the IUCN Red list, due to other
anthropogenic pressures, such as fishing. It is therefore important to understand the risk of plastic pollution on this charismatic
megafaunal species. This study is investigating the presence of microplastics in reef manta ray feeding grounds in the Chagos
Archipelago. This is a no-take Marine Protected Area, home to a resident population of reef manta rays. However remote, the
beaches of the Archipelago are covered in plastic debris which originates from elsewhere. This suggests there will be plenty of
microplastics in the Archipelago waters. Quantifying the amount of microplastic in the water will build a better picture of how it
could impact the local population of reef manta rays. It will also hopefully input into wider conversations about plastic reduction
on remote islands.

Keywords: Microplastics; filter-feeder; manta ray; pollution;




24
Session 8: Other anthropogenic pressures - contaminants, climate change and
recreation (Part 2)

Nicholas Payne
Trinity College Dublin

Metabolism, biogeography, and range shifts in sharks & rays

     1.   Nicholas, Payne; Trinity College Dublin
     2.   Yuuki, Watanabe; Graduate University for Advanced Studies, SOKENDAI

Environmental temperature affects physiological functions, representing a barrier for the range expansions of ectothermic
species. To understand the link between thermal physiology and biogeography, a key question is whether among-species
thermal sensitivity of metabolic rates is mechanistically constrained or buffered through physiological remodeling over
evolutionary time. The former conception, the Universal Temperature Dependence hypothesis, predicts similar among- and
within-species thermal sensitivity. The latter conception, the Metabolic Cold Adaptation hypothesis, predicts lower among-
species thermal sensitivity than within-species sensitivity. Previous studies that tested these hypotheses for fishes
overwhelmingly investigated teleosts with elasmobranchs understudied. Here, we show that among-species thermal sensitivity
of resting metabolic rates is lower than within-species sensitivity in teleosts but not in elasmobranchs. Further, species richness
declines with latitude more rapidly in elasmobranchs than in teleosts. Metabolic Cold Adaptation exhibited by teleosts might
underpin their high diversity at high latitudes, whereas the inflexible thermal sensitivity approximated by Universal Temperature
Dependence of elasmobranchs might explain their low diversity at high latitudes. These findings are discussed in the context of
range expansions of sharks and rays, including recent examples from Ireland and the UK.

Keywords: Range shifts; Metabolism; Thermal sensitivity



Catarina Pereira Santos
MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre/ARNET – Aquatic Research Network, Laboratório Marítimo
da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Cascais, Portugal; Environmental Economics
Knowledge Center, Nova School of Business and Economi

Shifts in the habitat suitability for large hammerhead sharks under climate change

     1.   Catarina, Pereira Santos; MARE/ARNET; NovaSBE; Sphyrna Association;
     2.   Francisco, Borges; MARE/ARNET.
     3.   Miguel, Guerreiro; MARE/ARNET.
     4.   Jaquelino, Varela; MARE/ARNET; Sphyrna Association.
     5.   Vasco, Pissarra; MARE/ARNET; Sphyrna Association.
     6.   Catarina, Frazão-Santos; MARE/ARNET; FCUL DBA; NovaSBE; Sphyrna Association.
     7.   Rui, Rosa; MARE/ARNET; FCUL DBA; Sphyrna Association.

One of the chief consequences of climate change is the worldwide redistribution of species in the pursue of physiologically and
ecologically favourable conditions. As part of one of the most threatened groups of vertebrates, assessing how climate change
may affect the distribution patterns of key shark species is essential for their long-term conservation and management. The
present study aims to assess how climate change projections (based on the representative concentration pathways 2.6, 4.5,
6.0, and 8.5) for the middle and end of the century may affect the global patterns of habitat suitability (HS) for large
hammerhead sharks – a unique and particularly threatened groups of elasmobranchs. Poleward shifts are projected for all
three species, with considerable tropical declines for both S. lewini and S. zygaena. Additionally, regional shifts in suitability
have the potential to affect population connectivity, the access to key habitats, and levels of exposure to other anthropogenic
pressures, along with the effectiveness of conservation and management efforts. Our results showcase the importance of
climate change for species’ extinction risk assessment and the urgency of its consideration for the design and implementation
of conservation measures tailored to the oceans of tomorrow.

Keywords: Ecological niche models; habitat suitability; hammerhead sharks; Climate change




25
Noémie Coulon
Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA) MNHN, CNRS, IRD, SU, UCN,
UA, 38 Rue du Port Blanc , Dinard, France

Northeast Atlantic elasmobranch community on the move: functional reorganisation in response to
climate change.

     1.   Noémie, Coulon, Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA) MNHN, CNRS, IRD,
          SU, UCN, UA, 38 Rue du Port Blanc , Dinard, France
     2.   Sophie, Elliott, Game & Wildlife Conservation Trust, Salmon & Trout Research Centre, East Stoke, Wareham BH20
          6BB, UK
     3.   Nils, Teichert, Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA) MNHN, CNRS, IRD,
          SU, UCN, UA, 38 Rue du Port Blanc , Dinard, France
     4.   Arnaud, Auber, IFREMER, Unité Halieutique Manche Mer du Nord, Laboratoire Ressources Halieutiques, 150 quai
          Gambetta, BP699, 62321 Boulogne-sur-Mer, France
     5.   Matthew, McLean, University of North Carolina Wilmington, 601 College Rd, Wilmington, NC 28403, USA
     1.   6.Thomas, Barreau, Service des stations Marine, Station marine de Dinard, 38 Rue du Port Blanc, Dinard, France
     6.   Eric, Feunteun, Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA) MNHN, CNRS, IRD,
          SU, UCN, UA, 38 Rue du Port Blanc , Dinard, France
     7.   Alexandre, Carpentier, Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA) MNHN,
          CNRS, IRD, SU, UCN, UA, Université de Rennes, Rennes, France

While spatial distribution shifts have been documented in many marine fishes under global change, the responses of
elasmobranchs have rarely been studied, despite their irreplaceable role in the ecosystems and their high extinction risk, which
may have led to an underestimation of their potential additional threats. We used a 24-year-long time series (1997-2020) of
scientific bottom trawl surveys to examine the effects of climate change on the spatial distribution of nine elasmobranch species
within Northeast Atlantic waters. We found that suitable habitats for four species increased on average by a factor of 1.6 and,
for six species, shifted northwestwards and/or in depth over the past two decades. By integrating species traits, we showed
changes in habitat suitability led to changes in the elasmobranchs trait-composition. Moreover, communities deepened and
their mean trophic level decreased. We also note an increase in the mean community size at maturity correlated in a less
pronounced way to a decrease in fecundity. Because skates and sharks are functionally unique and dangerously vulnerable to
both climate change and fishing, we advocate for urgent considerations of species traits in management measures because of
their utility to better identify species whose loss could have irreversible impacts in face of the myriad of upcoming threats,
especially for unmonitored species. In this way, we would gain efficiency in implementing biodiversity conservation.

Keywords: climate change; community; elasmobranch; species traits; shift



Jaquelino Lopes Varela
MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre / ARNET – Aquatic Research Network, Laboratório
Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal, Cascais, Portugal; Sphyrna
Association, Sal Rei 5110, Boa Vista Island, Cabo Verde.

Resilience of juvenile sharks to disease under moderate marine heat wave conditions

     1.   Jaquelino, Varela; MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre / ARNET – Aquatic Research Network,
          Laboratório Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal, Cascais, Portugal; Sphyrna
          Association, Sal Rei 5110, Boa Vista Island, Cabo Verde.
     2.   Sandra, Martins; MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre / ARNET – Aquatic Research Network,
          Laboratório Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal, Cascais, Portugal;
          Comparative Molecular and Integrative Biology, Centro de Ciências do Mar, Universidade do Algarve, 8005-139
          Faro, Portugal.
     3.   Melanie, Court; MARE—Marine and Environmetal Sciences Centre/ARNET—Aquatic Research Network, Laboratório
          Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, 2750-374 Cascais, Portugal.
     4.   Catarina, Santos; MARE—Marine and Environmetal Sciences Centre/ARNET—Aquatic Research Network,
          Laboratório Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, 2750-374 Cascais, Portugal;
          Sphyrna Association, Sal Rei 5110, Boa Vista Island, Cabo Verde; Environmental Economics Knowledge Center,
          Nova School of Business and Economics, New University of Lisbon, 2775-405 Carcavelos, Portugal.
     5.   José, Paula; MARE—Marine and Environmetal Sciences Centre/ARNET—Aquatic Research Network, Laboratório
          Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, 2750-374 Cascais, Portugal; Departamento de
          Biologia Animal, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa,2750-374 Cascais, Portugal.
     6.   Inês, Ferreira; UCIBIO—Applied Molecular Biosciences Unit, Department of Chemistry, School of Science and
          Technology, NOVA University Lisbon, 2819-516 Caparica, Portugal; Associate Laboratory i4HB, Institute for Health
          and Bioeconomy, School of Science and Technology, NOVA University Lisbon, 2819-516 Caparica, Portugal;
     1.   LAQV—Associated Laboratory for Green Chemistry—REQUIMTE, Department of Chemistry, School of Science and
          Technology, NOVA University Lisbon, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal;
     7.   Mário, Diniz; UCIBIO—Applied Molecular Biosciences Unit, Department of Chemistry, School of Science and
          Technology, NOVA University Lisbon, 2819-516 Caparica, Portugal;

26
     2.   Associate Laboratory i4HB, Institute for Health and Bioeconomy, School of Science and Technology, NOVA
          University Lisbon, 2819-516 Caparica, Portugal.
     8.   Tiago, Repolho; MARE—Marine and Environmetal Sciences Centre/ARNET—Aquatic Research Network,
          Laboratório Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, 2750-374 Cascais, Portugal;
          Departamento de Biologia Animal, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, 2750-374 Cascais, Portugal.
     9.   Rui, Rosa; MARE—Marine and Environmetal Sciences Centre/ARNET—Aquatic Research Network, Laboratório
          Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, 2750-374 Cascais, Portugal; Sphyrna
          Association, Sal Rei 5110, Boa Vista Island, Cape Verde; Departamento de Biologia Animal, Faculdade de Ciências,
          Universidade de Lisboa, 2750-374 Cascais, Portugal.

Climate change is affecting the oceans in different ways. Marine heat waves, for example, are becoming more frequent, more
prolonged, and more intense, endangering marine life. Assessing the impact of these extreme events on disease outbreak and
dynamics in sharks is poorly understood. Here, we investigated the effects of a simulated (moderate) marine heat wave (MHW;
Δ2°C; 9 days) on the physiological (ventilation rates) and biochemical (several oxidative-stress biomarkers on gills, muscle,
brain, and liver tissues) condition of juvenile small-spotted catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula) infected with ectoparasite
Amyloodinium ocellatum. No mortality differences were observed, but a significant increase in ventilation rates were observed
under the MHW treatment. Significant changes in enzymatic antioxidant activities were observed among tissues, but only
superoxide dismutase activity was affected under MHW conditions. Protein repair and removal mechanisms (heat shock protein
and total ubiquitin), and oxidative damage on lipids (malondialdehyde) and DNA (8-hydroxy-2′- deoxyguanosine) also did not
significantly change between treatments. Our result is consistent with other studies that have shown that sharks display some
level of resilience to the effects of climate change-related stressors. However, another category of marine heat wave (IV or V
for example) could produce other physiological effects.

Keywords: Climate change; Elasmobranch; Parasite; Oxidative stress;



Gemma Scotts
Institute of Marine Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Ferry Road, Southsea, Portsmouth, UK; Marine Research
and Conservation Foundation, Lydeard St Lawrence, Somerset, UK.

A social science story: what motivates recreational shark angling in the UK?

     1.   Gemma, Scotts; Institute of Marine Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Ferry Road, Southsea, Portsmouth, UK;
          Marine Research and Conservation Foundation, Lydeard St Lawrence, Somerset, UK.
     2.   Michael, Scales; Institute of Marine Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Ferry Road, Southsea, Portsmouth, UK.
     3.   Gonzalo, Araujo; Marine Research and Conservation Foundation, Lydeard St Lawrence, Somerset, UK;
          Environmental Science Program, Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, College of Arts and
          Sciences, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar.
     4.   Hollie, Booth; Interdisciplinary Centre for Conservation Science, Department of Biology, University of Oxford, Oxford,
          UK; The Biodiversity Consultancy, King’s Parade, Cambridge, UK.
     5.   Sarah, Marley; Institute of Marine Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Ferry Road, Southsea, Portsmouth, UK;
          Scotland’s Rural College, Craibstone Estate, Ferguson Building, Aberdeen, UK.

The role of recreational angling as both a threat to shark stocks and an opportunity to support shark conservation tends to be
overlooked. Sharks have been described as the aquatic ‘big game’ equivalent, displayed as ‘trophies’ and caught for the ‘thrill
of the fight’. Historical fears of sharks have led to an increase in shark fishing tournaments, increasing the rate of decline of
shark populations threatened with extinction. However, modern-day social science studies in the United States and Australia
have contradicted these fears, with a growing desire amongst anglers to become advocates for shark conservation. Here, we
examine anglers’ motivations behind shark fishing in the United Kingdom (UK) a popular but understudied location for
recreational shark fishing. Angler demographics, perceptions towards sharks and perceptions of shark population trends were
also explored. A total of seven shark fishing operators and 44 recreational anglers responded to our structured surveys
throughout Aug-Nov 2021. Respondents primarily comprised of over-fifty, educated and wealthy male anglers. Anglers were
motivated by the ‘appreciation for sharks and nature’ (n=43) and the ‘thrill/challenge’ (n=38). Obtaining a photo (status) was the
least popular reason for taking part in shark fishing, further contradicting historical studies. Recreational shark fishing in the UK
is strictly catch and release, with anglers demonstrating best practice techniques to minimise stress to caught sharks. We also
identify a population of anglers who are knowledgeable about local shark species and recognise their role in contributing to
shark conservation but identify a lack of higher-level management to legislate change.

Keywords: Recreational fisheries; Social science; Fisheries management; Blue sharks; Conservation




27
Luke Cameron
Trinity College Dublin

A review of elasmobranch catch-and-release science: synthesis of current knowledge, implications for
best practice and future research directions

     1.   Cameron, Luke W J; Trinity College Dublin.
     2.   Roche, William K; Inland Fisheries Ireland.
     3.   Beckett, Katy; Trinity College Dublin.
     4.   Payne, Nicholas L; Trinity College Dublin.

Until relatively recently commercial fisheries have been considered the main driving factor for elasmobranch population
declines. However, this belief has begun to shift with the realisation that recreational elasmobranch catches may equal or
exceed commercial catches in some regions. Many recreational angling fisheries for elasmobranchs involve high participation
in catch-and-release angling practices. However, high release rates may not necessarily equate to high survival rates.
Therefore, to assist accurate assessment of the potential impact of recreational angling on elasmobranchs, we attempted to
summarise and integrate currently available information on specific risk factors associated with recreational angling, alongside
associated mortality rates, as well as information on angler behaviour as it relates to identified risk factors. We categorised the
major angling-related effects into two groups: injury-induced effects; and biochemical disruption-induced effects; providing a
summary of each group and outlining the main lethal and sub-lethal outcomes stemming from these. These outcomes include
post-release mortality, behavioural recovery periods (which may in-turn confer increased predation risks), chronic health
impacts, and capture-induced parturition and abortion. Additionally, we detailed a range of angling practices and equipment,
including hook-type, hook removal and emersion, as well as inter- and intra-specific factors, including aerobic scope,
respiratory mode, body size and species-specific behaviours, which may influence injury and/or mortality rates and should
therefore be considered when assessing angling-related impacts. We then utilised these data to provide a range of actionable
recommendations for both anglers and policymakers which would serve to reduce the population-level impact of recreational
angling on these enigmatic animals.

Keywords: Recreational angling; Rod and line; Lamniformes; Carcharhiniformes; Rajiformes




28
Friday 20th October 2023


Theme topic: Elasmobranch stranding events: what can we learn?

Pablo García-Salinas
Fundación Oceanogràfic de la Comunitat Valenciana; Associació LAMNA; Grupo de Acuicultura y Biodiversidad,
Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología Animal, Universitat Politècnica de València.

Use of CT scan reveals necropsy-overlooked swordfish (Xiphias gladius) impalement injuries in stranded
blue sharks (Prionace glauca)
     1.   Pablo, García-Salinas; Fundación Oceanogràfic de la Comunitat Valenciana; Associació LAMNA; Grupo de
          Acuicultura y Biodiversidad, Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología Animal, Universitat Politècnica de València.
     2.   Jaime, Penadés-Suay; Associació LAMNA; Fundación Oceanogràfic de la Comunitat Valenciana; ; Unidad de
          Zoología Marina ICBiBE, Universitat de València.
     3.   Javier, Aznar; ICBiBE, Unidad de Zoología Marina ICBiBE, Universitat de València.
     4.   Aitor, Campos-Sosa; Fundación Oceanogràfic de la Comunitat Valenciana; Associació LAMNA; Facultad de
          Veterinaria, Universidad CEU Cardenal Herrera.
     5.   Jose Luis, Crespo-Picazo; Fundación Oceanogràfic de la Comunitat Valenciana.
     6.   Marta, Muñoz-Baquero; Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad CEU Cardenal
          Herrera; Fundación Oceanogràfic de la Comunitat Valenciana.
     7.   Carlos, Rojo-Solís; Veterinary Services, Oceanogràfic, Ciudad de las Artes y las Ciencias; Pharmacology &
          Toxicology Department, Veterinary Faculty, Complutense University of Madrid.
     8.   Daniel, García-Párraga; Veterinary Services, Oceanogràfic, Ciudad de las Artes y las Ciencias.

Recently, analysis of eighteen strandings in eastern Spain has identified fourteen lethal interactions between blue sharks and
swordfish. In these cases, the sharks were impaled in the cephalic region by swordfish rostra. While some signs of interaction
were easily identifiable, others proved elusive despite thorough physical examinations and dissection on necropsy.
Computed Tomography (CT) has emerged as a valuable diagnostic tool for identifying and characterizing these distinctive
injuries, even revealing healed wounds from previous impalements. The detailed imagery obtained enables the evaluation of
tissue damage and wound trajectory, offering a unique insight into each interaction. We show the efficiency of this technique by
using a Somatom Volume Access (Siemens) scanner located at the Oceanogràfic veterinary hospital. Parameters for body
exploration included a 5 mm slice thickness and interval, with a retro-recon acquisition of 0.5 mm utilizing lung and mediastinal
algorithms.
Rostra fragments were discovered embedded in soft tissues or cranial cartilage in twelve sharks, four of which have multiple
rostra from past impalements. Two other animals exhibited signs of impalement without fragments. Analysis of the cases
always shows adult sharks impaled by juvenile swordfish. The high prevalence (77.8%) and similarity of the interactions
diminish the likelihood of chance accidents, suggesting intentional ofensive or defensive behaviour by the swordfish.
These data suggest that agonistic interactions between swordfish and blue sharks may be more common than previously
thought Due to challenges in lesion detection, impalement may have been overlooked in the past, highlighting the importance
of employing CT scans whenever possible.

Keywords: Behaviour; Interspecific relations; Agonistic interactions; Causes of Stranding, Diagnostic Tools




Aitor Campos
Fundación Oceanogràfic de la Comunitat Valenciana; Associació LAMNA; Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad
CEU Cardenal Herrera.

What do the lesions found in stranded blue sharks (Prionace glauca) reveal about their interactions with
swordfish (Xiphias gladius)

     1.   Aitor, Campos-Sosa; Fundación Oceanogràfic de la Comunitat Valenciana; Associació LAMNA; Facultad de
          Veterinaria, Universidad CEU Cardenal Herrera.
     2.   Jose Luis, Crespo-Picazo; Fundación Oceanogràfic de la Comunitat Valenciana.
     3.   Marta, Muñoz-Baquero; Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad CEU Cardenal
          Herrera; Fundación Oceanogràfic de la Comunitat Valenciana.
     4.   Emma, Pla-Gonzalez; Fundación Oceanogràfic de la Comunitat Valenciana.
     5.   Saubidet, Mariana; Fundación Oceanogràfic de la Comunitat Valenciana.
     6.   Pablo, García-Salinas; Fundación Oceanogràfic de la Comunitat Valenciana; Associació LAMNA; Grupo de
          Acuicultura y Biodiversidad, Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología Animal, Universitat Politècnica de València.
     7.   Jaime, Penadés-Suay; Associació LAMNA; Fundación Oceanogràfic de la Comunitat Valenciana; ; Unidad de
          Zoología Marina ICBiBE, Universitat de València.
     8.   Daniel, García-Párraga; Veterinary Services, Oceanogràfic, Ciudad de las Artes y las Ciencias.
     9.   Ortega-Porcel, Joaquín; Grupo de Patología y Sanidad Animal, Dpto. PASAPTA, Facultad de Veterinaria,
          Universidad CEU Cardenal Herrera-CEU Universities.


29
Fatal interactions between blue sharks (Prionace glauca) and swordfishes (Xiphias gladius) have been described in the
western Mediterranean Sea as a cause of stranding and death of the former in the last years. This study describes, both
macroscopic and microscopically, the lesions found in eight blue sharks, stranded in Spanish coasts, presenting evidence of
impalement from swordfish´s rostrum.
All the analysed animals presented the fatal injuries in the head, mainly grouped around the eyes in the frontal plane. Injures
were characterized by multiple haemorrhages, predominant heterophilic cell infiltrates, and the presence of fibrin in the fatal
injury, which are typical signs of an acute lesion. The most affected tissue was the brain, which showed meningeal and brain
haemorrhage, accompanied by encephalitis and encephalomalacia. Additionally, we observed lesions in some eyes that were
stabbed, displaying acute panophthalmitis. Furthermore, chronic signs such as the presence of fibroblasts and mononuclear
infiltrates in the wounds, as well as rostrums from past interactions completely surrounded by fibrotic connective tissue, were
clear indications of past interactions that had healed. These findings suggest that sharks have the potential to survive these
types of interactions.
The animals showing signs of chronicity exhibited other lesions repeatedly, such as hepatic emaciation, necrotic haemorrhagic
ulcers with mononuclear infiltrates in the spiral valve, and enlargement of the renal glomerulus. The complete necropsy and
study of the tissues of the stranded sharks proved to be a useful tool to better understand the nature and the consequences of
the interaction between these two species.

Keywords: Agonistic interactions; Stranding causes; Veterinary; Pathology; Necropsy procedures




Session 9: Citizen science II: Citizen scientists collecting novel samples or data

Alice Chamberlain
Zoological Society of London

Below the surface of the Welsh coast using BRUVS

     1.    Jake Davies; Zoological Society of London / Natural Resources Wales
     2.    Tom Letessier; Zoological Society of London
     3.    Joanna Barker; Zoological Society of London
     4.    Ben Wray; Natural Resources Wales
     5.    Jessica Meeuwig; University of Western Australia / Blue Abacus
     6.    Jason Meeuwig; Blue Abacus
     7.    Kate Moses; Zoological Society of London
     8.    Alice Chamberlain; Zoological Society of London
     9.    Sarah Davies; Zoological Society of London / Natural Resources Wales
     10.   Charlotte Pike; Zoological Society of London

Baited Remote Underwater Video Systems (BRUVS) are widely used as a non-destructive electronic tool to investigate the
abundance and diversity of fish in marine and freshwater environments.
Project SIARC is working with local fishers and their charter vessels to deploy BRUVS off the coast of North Wales to obtain
footage that improves our understanding of species, including elasmobranchs present in North Wales and their habitat
utilisation. So far, from 90 BRUV deployments, 41 different fish species have been recorded, including five elasmobranchs.
This presentation will highlight the key findings from the first year of BRUVS deployment.
In parallel, the footage obtained from the BRUVS allows us to make life under the Welsh waters visible to citizen scientists
globally. Video footage captured is shared via Instant Wild (an online tool that allows the general public to identify wildlife
species from remote camera footage across the world) , allowing individuals to identify species, contributing to data collection
and increasing awareness of the elasmobranchs present in Welsh waters whilst enhancing inclusivity and access of the natural
environment.
Project SIARC is a collaboration between the Zoological Society of London, Natural Resources Wales and six partners and
made possible thanks to the National Lottery Heritage Fund, Welsh Government’s Nature Networks Fund and On the EDGE
Conservation.

Keywords: BRUVS; Fishers; Citizen Science; Technology; Wales




30
Jenny Hickman
Mareco

Tourism-led monitoring of a migratory oceanic shark in the UK

     1.   Jenny Hickman; Mareco.
     2.   Gemma Scotts; Mareco.
     3.   Mark Johns; Blue Shark Snorkel
     4.   Emma Nicol; Mareco
     5.   Samuel Matthews; Mareco
     6.   Richard Rees; Celtic Deep
     7.   Victoria Walker; Blue Shark Snorkel
     8.   Emma William; Celtic Deep
     9.   Gonzalo Araujo; Mareco

Monitoring pelagic highly migratory species is challenging, particularly in regions where weather conditions can be
unpredictable and adverse. The blue shark Prionace glauca is no exception, and recent estimates of ~10M individuals fished
annually, understanding their distribution and habitat preference is important for area-based management. Blue shark swim-
with tourism is increasing across various countries, including the UK, providing both a need to understand the nature of these
interactions, and an opportunity to gather novel data on this highly migratory species. UK tour operators reported blue shark
interaction data 2021-2023, maxN, swimmer numbers and environmental parameters. Further data were obtained on tidal
state, depth, SST, and chlorophyll-a concentration. Chum soak time and maxN were used as response variables to understand
the drivers of shark occurrence and relative abundance. Preliminary results show that tidal phase, sea surface temperature and
depth are likely to be important factors influencing blue shark occurrence, distribution and relative abundance. This study
provides not only a unique insight into the ecology and behaviour of a globally important shark species, but has also created a
valuable opportunity for ongoing collaboration between science and industry, and a springboard for long-term data collection
and active management of a growing blue economy sector.

Keywords: Oceanic shark monitoring; Blue Shark; Remotely sensed data; Swim-with tourism; Prionace glauca



Arthur ORY
Des Requins et Des Hommes (DRDH)

First porbeagle shark photo- Identification catalogue : free diving and social science to enhance
ecological knowledge Lamna nasus off Brittany costs (France)

     1.   Arthur Ory, Des Requins et Des Hommes (DRDH), 15 Rue Dumont d'Urville, BLP Technopole Brest-Iroise, 29280
          Plouzane - FRANCE
     2.   Paul Abaut, Des Requins et Des Hommes (DRDH), 15 Rue Dumont d'Urville, BLP Technopole Brest-Iroise, 29280
          Plouzane - FRANCE
     3.   Lucas Zaccagnini, Des Requins et Des Hommes (DRDH), 15 Rue Dumont d'Urville, BLP Technopole Brest-Iroise,
          29280 Plouzane - FRANCE
     4.   Armelle Jung, Des Requins et Des Hommes (DRDH), 15 Rue Dumont d'Urville, BLP Technopole Brest-Iroise, 29280
          Plouzane - FRANCE

Photo identification is a non-invasive method used to distinguish individuals in the wild based on some external visual criterium.
As a capture-recapture methodology photo-ID allows to evaluate important ecological parameters such as spatio-temporal
preferences, philopatry, abundance up to growth rates estimation.
Porbeagle shark has encountered a severe decrease all other its range of distribution and was subject to a fishing regulation by
European Council (No 23/2010) ; since that access to biological information on the species is scarce.
DRDH team started in 2021 a free diving protocol to follow hotspots of porbeagle (Lamna nasus) established in the northern
cost of Brittany. A data set of videos and photos was gathered through regular standardized dives from DRDH team as well as
social media and stakeholder inquiries.
We defined 5 different phenotypic marks which allow us to identify more than 100 individual sharks and thus initiate the first
and build up a working catalog. Sightings occurred from may to October between 2015 and 2023 with some re sightings
confirmed within weeks, months or years distance. All encountered sharks were females, ranging from 1,5 to 3 meters Lt
documented for their maturity status.
The initial results of this study support the ecological importance of the area for the species in regards to biotic and abiotic
parameters. The participatory science dimension of the project offers interesting public awareness possibilities in addition to
data provisioning and collaborative tool for other international research teams. Outputs will be discussed in the context of a
growing interest for shark and underwater tourism.

Keywords: Photo-ID; Porbeagle shark; Conservation; Free-diving; Tourism




31
Alicia Rodríguez-Juncá
BIOECOMAC, Dept. Animal Biology, Edaphology and Geology, University of La Laguna, Tenerife, Canary
Islands, SPAIN

Mobulids in the Canary Islands: what do we know?

     1.   Alicia, Rodríguez-Juncá; BIOECOMAC, Dept. Animal Biology, Edaphology and Geology, University of La Laguna,
          Tenerife, Canary Islands, SPAIN
     2.   Ana F., Sobral; Manta Catalog, Azores, PORTUGAL


Despite the charismatic status of the Mobulidae family, our current understanding of this group remains limited. Given their
highly migratory nature and the current global vulnerability they face, it is imperative to gain a comprehensive understanding of
their ecology and behaviour in order to support conservation actions. Up until now, there has been a significant knowledge gap
in mobulid research in the Canary Islands. Situated in the Eastern Atlantic, the Canary Islands offer unique opportunities for
studying these animals. Manta Catalog represents the first line of work focused on the Mobulidae family in the region. Through
community science, engaging the fishing and diving sectors, and by reviewing historical sources of information, we have
compiled baseline information on the occurrence of this group in the archipelago. This work significantly contributes to our
knowledge on these threatened animals in the Canary Islands and emphasises the importance of community science in long-
term studies of migratory and pelagic species.

Keywords: Mobulidae; species occurrence; community science; historical records; Canary Islands



Annemiek Hermans
Wageningen University

The egg case: Successful extraction of DNA from beached egg cases enables elasmobranch genetic
diversity assessment

     1.   Annemiek Hermans; WUR.
     2.   Daniël van Berkel; WUR.
     3.   Reindert Nijland; WUR.

Most elasmobranch populations are under pressure, and to advise policy makers on appropriate conservation measures, data
on abundance, life history traits, spawning grounds and population structure are required. The application of DNA based
techniques can provide some of this information, but commonly is dependent on tissue sampling (e.g., muscle, scale and
blood) which requires handling and potentially underestimate less common species. Environmental DNA (eDNA) is shown as a
reliable tool for the assessment of elasmobranch species diversity, but so far is unable to provide reliable data on population
diversity. Egg cases of oviparous elasmobranchs can form a valuable aid in determining a species spatial distribution, defining
spawning areas and DNA based analysis of population structure. So far, egg cases for this type of research were collected
from both commercial fisheries and scientific surveys, generally with the embryo still inside, ensuring the quality of DNA.
However, many of the egg cases wash up on shore after hatching departure or predation. When exposed to the elements, the
genetic material in the egg case will start degrading, but DNA fragments of sufficient quality could still be viable for population
genetics. We now present the successful isolation and sequencing of 2kb long mtDNA fragments from 14-day-old, hatched egg
cases using a combination of liquid nitrogen, keratinase and collagenase. Developing this method further, beached egg cases
collected by means of citizen science can provide a useful tool to determine oviparous elasmobranch population structure with
limited resources and the added bonus of creating public awareness.

Keywords: egg cases; population genetics; oviparous; mtDNA; elasmobranch




32
Session 10: Informing fisheries science

Romaric Jac
Institute of Marine Research - Norway

Are deep-sea chimaeras a hidden conservation priority we've ignored?

     1.    Fabian Zimmermann; Institute of Marine Research
     2.    Caroline A. Tranang; Institute of Marine Research
     3.    Claudia Junge; Institute of Marine Research

Deep-sea chondrichthyans have been underestimated and overshadowed. This misconception assumes they are unaffected by
global changes and face minimal fishing threats. Among chondrichthyans, the order Chimaeriformes, specifically the rabbitfish
Chimaera monstrosa, is one of the most striking examples. Our three-year research focused on unravelling the mysteries
surrounding C. monstrosa in the Northeast Atlantic, where it is commonly caught as bycatch. It is classified as 'Near
Threatened' by IUCN in European waters. Although we documented its abundance, habitat preferences, and responses to
warming waters, significant gaps persist in understanding its life history traits and ecology, hindering targeted conservation
measures. Using models and mapping tools, our study aimed to identify diverse populations and critical areas in need of
protection. Along the Norwegian coast, we observed variations in growth rates and maturity, indicating potential adaptations to
fisheries or environmental conditions. We located some areas that could arguably function as mating or nursery areas. Our
research suggests that the newly colonized waters of northern Norway host a well-developed population of C. monstrosa. This
colonization and potential further expansion northward, driven by warmer waters, underscore the necessity for monitoring
critical areas, vulnerability to warming waters, and potential changes in the food web, particularly in the warming and heavily
impacted North Sea. By providing insights into C. monstrosa's distribution patterns, regional variations, and implications for
conservation, these findings contribute to the development of species-specific conservation measures.

Keywords: Chimaera monstrosa; Critical areas; Fisheries management; Life history traits; Northeast Atlantic Ocean



Giulia Bressan
Department of Biology, University of Padova

Exploration of management strategies for a sustainable fishery of elasmobranchs in the Adriatic Sea

     1.    Carlotta Mazzoldi, Department of Biology, University of Padova, Italy
     2.    Camilla Antonini, ISPRA Italian Institute for Environmental Protection and Research, Italy
     3.    Alberto Barausse, Department of Biology, University of Padova, Italy
     4.    Matteo Barbato, Department of Biology, University of Padova, Italy
     5.    Giulia Bressan, Department of Biology, University of Padova, Italy
     6.    Marco Costantini, WWF World Wide Fund for Nature
     7.    Licia Finotto, Department of Biology, University of Padova, Italy
     8.    Simone Niedermüller, WWF World Wide Fund for Nature
     9.    Giulia Prato, WWF World Wide Fund for Nature
     10.   Jennifer Pytka, Department of Biology, University of Padova, Italy
     11.   Carlo Zampieri, Department of Biology, University of Padova, Italy
     12.   Saša Raicevich, ISPRA Italian Institute for Environmental Protection and Research, Italy

High bycatch of elasmobranchs and their decline in the Adriatic Sea call for management actions. Within the Italian monitoring
programs of the Marine Strategy Framework Directive, we investigated the post-release survival rates of juveniles of
commercial species to explore the efficacy and feasibility of the implementation of a minimum conservation reference size
(MCRS). From May 2020 to June 2023, through 90 on-board fishing trips using different fishing gears we evaluated the At-
Vessel Mortality (AVM; 3443 individuals, 14 species), Short-term post-release mortality (St-PRM; two hours after capture, on
board, 788 individuals, 14 species) and Long-term PRM (Lt-PRM; 72 hours after capture, at laboratory, 121 individuals, 3
species). AMV was on average 16%, varying among species, fishing gears and seasons and depending on factors such as
temperature and duration of air exposure. St-PRM and Lt-PRM were generally low, below 16% and 20%, respectively. To
better estimate mortality, by combining conventional tagging and acoustic telemetry, in the framework of the MedBycatch
project, we investigated Lt-PRM in the field. We tagged 1816 individuals of 16 species with spaghetti tags, 61 individuals of 3
species with acoustic tags. The tagging study contributed also to the understanding of the use of space and to highlight
residency and site fidelity behaviours. To rigorously explore the potential efficacy and sustainability of the release of juveniles,
we constructed individual based population dynamics models to assess the expected recovery of populations according to
different MCRS and survival rates.

Keywords: fishery; survival; acoustic telemetry; tagging; management




33
Martina Ciprian
iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of Aquatic Ecosystems

By ElasmoCatch: a multidisciplinary approach to improve knowledge and conservation of
elasmobranchs in Amvrakikos Gulf.

     1.   Martina, Ciprian; iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of Aquatic Ecosystems, 54645 Thessaloniki,
          Greece.
     2.   Ioannis, Giovos; iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of Aquatic Ecosystems, 54645 Thessaloniki,
          Greece; Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture, University of Patras, 30200 Messolonghi, Greece; Department of
          Biology, University of Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35121 Padova, Italy.
     3.   Vasilis, Minasidis; Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture, University of Patras, 30200 Messolonghi, Greece.
     4.   Roxani, Naasan Aga-Spyridopoulou; iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of Aquatic Ecosystems,
          54645 Thessaloniki, Greece.
     5.   Georgios, Rallis; iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of Aquatic Ecosystems, 54645 Thessaloniki,
          Greece.
     6.   Carlotta, Mazzoldi; Department of Biology, University of Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35121 Padova, Italy.
     7.   Dimitrios K., Moutopoulos; Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture, University of Patras, 30200 Messolonghi,
          Greece.

The poor conservation status of Chondrichthyes in the Mediterranean Sea requires effective management strategies. Ad-hoc
conservation measures for different areas and species are needed. In this perspective, the By ElasmoCatch Project is focusing
on the Amvrakikos Gulf (Greece). Here, only small-scale fishery is operating, using set-nets and longlines, in some cases
targeting Mustelus mustelus and Myliobatidae. From 2022 until now, 547 fishing operations have been monitored through
interviews (532) and onboard surveys (45). A total of 1176 elasmobranchs have been recorded. Among the 10 species present,
2 Critically Endangered (Mediterranean Region) stingrays Aetomylaeus bovinus and Gymnura altavela were commonly caught
(25.5% of recorded elasmobranchs). Moreover, identification issues for specimens of the family Dasyatidae emerged. To better
understand the biology and ecology of elasmobranchs in the area and clearly identify the species, a multidisciplinary approach
is used (e.g., data on life-history traits, stomach contents, genetic). Finally, we are investigating post-release mortality (through
40 minutes tank maintenance, 92; and a conventional-tagging program, 189) to understand the efficacy of release as a
management strategy.
Given the high biodiversity and presence of both pregnant females and newborns of different species, this region appears to be
crucial for elasmobranchs, and it was proposed as Important Shark and Ray Area (ISRA).
Future steps will include an acoustic-tagging program to further understand survival after capture and use of space, heavy-
metal analyses, and testing of other mitigation measures (e.g., gear modifications), with the final aim to find the best
management strategy and its implementation by the local community.

Keywords: Amvrakikos Gulf; Bycatch; Management strategy; Multidisciplinary approach; Small-scale fishery




Manuel Seixas
CIIMAR/CIMAR, Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research, University of Porto and FCUP,
Faculty of Sciences of University of Porto

Enhancing Elasmobranch Mitogenomic Knowledge: Transcriptome-Based Assembly Approach

     1.   Manuel Seixas; CIIMAR/CIMAR, Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research, University of Porto,
          Terminal de Cruzeiros do Porto de Leixões, Av. General Norton de Matos, s/n, 4450-208 Porto, Portugal and FCUP,
          Faculty of Sciences of University of Porto, Department of Biology, Rua do Campo Alegre, s/n, 4169-007 Porto,
          Portugal
     2.   Rodrigo Domingues; CIIMAR/CIMAR, Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research, University of
          Porto, Terminal de Cruzeiros do Porto de Leixões, Av. General Norton de Matos, s/n, 4450-208 Porto, Portugal
          FCUP, Faculty of Sciences of University of Porto, Department of Biology, Rua do Campo Alegre, s/n, 4169-007
          Porto, Portugal Oceanographic Institute, Department of Biological Oceanography, University of Sao Paulo, Praça do
          Oceanográfico, 191, Cidade Universitária, 05508-120, São Paulo, Brazil
     3.   Agostinho Antunes; CIIMAR/CIMAR, Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research, University of
          Porto, Terminal de Cruzeiros do Porto de Leixões, Av. General Norton de Matos, s/n, 4450-208 Porto, Portugal and
          FCUP, Faculty of Sciences of University of Porto, Department of Biology, Rua do Campo Alegre, s/n, 4169-007
          Porto, Portugal


Commonly, there is a shortage of available omics resources from elasmobranchs on public databases, such as genomes,
transcriptomes, and mitogenomes. This highlights the importance of taking the most advantage of available resources. Thus,
we assessed the potential of using transcriptomes from elasmobranchs to computationally recover their mitogenomes.
Within this work, we gathered more than 30 transcriptomic entries from the NCBI Database from elasmobranch species whose
mitogenome was not available. We were able to perform mitochondrial genome assemblies for 10 species whose mitogenome
was previously unreported: Isistius brasiliensis, Negaprion brevirostris, Potamotrygon amandae, P. leopoldi, Rhizoprionodon

34
taylori, R. terraenovae, Scyliorhinus rotifer, Squalus suckleyi, Tetronarce californica, and Urobatis jamaicensis. The recovered
assemblies ranged from 16,620 to 17,710 nucleotides, and half of the final assemblies presented a 100% recovery rate (the
lowest reached 92%).
The assembly of these mitogenomes will empower further studies that can be relevant to understanding the evolutionary and
ecological framework of elasmobranchs, especially considering the important role of the mitochondrial genes on oxidative
phosphorylation. Additionally, it will assist population genomic studies that often rely on partial mitochondrial genomes,
extending the already powerful tool of transcriptomics.

Keywords: Mitogenomes; Transcriptomics; Bioinformatics



Francesco Garzon
Hatherly Laboratories, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, Devon, United Kingdom

Survival and post-release behaviour of pelagic sharks caught in recreational catch-and-release fisheries
in Europe revealed by electronic tagging.

     1.    Francesco Garzon; Hatherly Laboratories, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, Devon,
           United Kingdom
     2.    Matteo Barbato; Department of comparative biomedicine and food science - University of Padova; National
           Biodiversity Future Center (NFBC)
     3.    Jacopo Bernardi; Department of Biology - University of Padova
     4.    Owen M. Exeter; Centre for Ecology and Conservation, Penryn campus, University of Exeter
     5.    Cat Gordon; The Shark Trust
     6.    Lucy A. Hawkes; Hatherly Laboratories, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, Devon,
           United Kingdom
     7.    Ali Hood; The Shark Trust
     8.    Tom W. Horton; Centre for Ecology and Conservation, Penryn campus, University of Exeter
     9.    Cat Gordon; The Shark Trust
     10.   Carlotta Mazzoldi; CoNISMa, National Inter-University Consortium for Marine Sciences, Department of Biology,
           University of Padova;National Biodiversity Future Center (NFBC)
     11.   David Righton; Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science
     12.   Joana F. Silva; Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science
     13.   Matthew J. Witt; Hatherly Laboratories, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, Devon,
           United Kingdom

Recreational shark fishing accounts for millions of shark captures each year across the world, with many fishers now employing
a "catch and release" (C&R) approach. In Europe, C&R fisheries for sharks are widespread and involve thousands of sharks
each year, including the blue shark (Prionace glauca) and the porbeagle shark (Lamna nasus). Despite this, studies on the
potential impacts of C&R fishing are generally lacking, with only one investigation conducted on porbeagle sharks in North
America and none on blue sharks globally.
To address the potential impacts of a range of handling and environmental conditions, this ongoing study uses short-term
electronic tags (45 days) to assess the effects of C&R fishing on the behaviour and mortality of blue and porbeagle sharks
caught recreationally in southwest UK waters and the northern Adriatic Sea. To date, no mortalities have been observed among
tagged sharks (n=18). However, high-resolution data obtained from retrieved tags (n=5) suggests differences in diving patterns
between the immediate post-release period and later stages of tracking, indicating a potential behavioural impact of capture.
These preliminary results suggest that, within the range of handling and environmental conditions studied so far, C&R fishing
for blue and porbeagle sharks is unlikely to results in mortality with 45 days of release, although sublethal short-term effects on
animal welfare may require further attention. Further research is necessary to examine the short- and long-term behavioural
effects of C&R fishing and identify specific aspects of the practice that may be refined to improve outcomes for sharks.

Keywords: angling; catch and release; telemetry; conservation; ecology



Ana Filipa Sobral
Okeanos R&D Centre, Department of Oceanography and Fisheries, University of the Azores, Portugal; Manta
Catalog, Portugal

Filling the gap: conservation genetics of the Sicklefin devil ray - from oceanic islands to ocean basins

     1.    Emily, Humble; Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies and the Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, EH25
           9RG, UK
     2.    Rob, Ogden; Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies and the Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, EH25 9RG,
           UK

The survival of chondrichthyans is a major marine conservation concern, with over one-third of species currently at risk of
extinction due to their exceptional vulnerability and low resilience to high levels of exploitation. However, our extremely limited


35
knowledge of their basic ecology hampers the implementation of proper management and conservation actions. There is also a
knowledge gap on the genetic diversity and population structure of these species at different spatial scales. This is especially
true for migratory species, such as the Sicklefin devil ray (Mobula tarapacana), that utilizes the restricted coastal habitats of
oceanic islands. Understanding the degree of genetic connectivity allows to define population boundaries and infer dispersal
patterns, while describing genetic diversity will allow to inform appropriate measures to preserve it. To fill this knowledge gap,
we used a genetic multi-marker approach. We evaluated population structure and assessed connectivity at different spatial
scales – from ocean basins to the island groups within the Azores archipelago - through the analysis of Single Nucleotide
Polymorphism (SNP) markers and Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). The results of this project will provide science-based
knowledge to support suitable management and conservation actions, regionally and globally.

Keywords: Mobula; Genetics; Connectivity; Population structure; Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms



Andrew J. Temple
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology

Small-scale fishers are incentivised to overfish threatened sharks and exacerbate their own vulnerability

     1.   Andrew Temple; King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
     2.   Per Berggren; Newcastle University
     3.   Narriman Jiddawi; University of Dar es Salaam
     4.   Nina Wambiji; Kenya Marine and Fisheries Research Institute
     5.   Chris Poonian; Community Centered Conservation
     6.   Yussuf Salmin; The State University of Zanzibar
     7.   Michael Berumen; King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
     8.   Selina Stead; Leeds University


To achieve sustainable shark fisheries, it is as important to understand the social and economic drivers of overfishing as it is
the biological drivers and environmental consequences. The extinction risk of sharks is disproportionately higher in coastal
tropical waters where small-scale fisheries dominate, presenting unique management challenges. Small-scale fisheries provide
a critical source of economic and nutritional security, but fishers are among the most vulnerable socio-economic groups
because their exposure to economic, social, and environmental shocks is combined with limited adaptive capacity. Using
Kenya and Zanzibar as a case study, we examine the interactions between sharks and small-scale fisheries. We find that
sharks are an important source of economic and nutritional security, primarily from species threatened with extinction. Further,
the most economically valuable sharks are larger, slower reproducing, and more likely to be threatened with extinction,
providing a strong economic incentive to target endangered species. Given the high economic motivation and intensive fishing
pressure, small-scale fisheries are undoubtedly important contributors to the ongoing decline of many threatened shark
species. The decline of sharks may have damaging consequences for wider marine ecosystems and ecosystem services. In
the absence of effective fisheries management, we show that within small-scale fisheries the conditions exist for an
economically incentivised positive feedback loop in which vulnerable fishers are driven to persistently overfish vulnerable and
declining resources. In doing so, they undermine their own economic and nutritional security and that of their communities. To
be successful management must break the feedback loop or be doomed to failure.

Keywords: fisheries; endangered species; food security; nutrition; economics




36
Adetola Adebowale
University of Cape Town, South Africa
adbade024@myuct.ac.za

Harriet Allen
The Shark Trust
harrieta@sharktrust.org

Sara A.A AlMabruk
Marine Biology in Libya Society
sara.almabruk@mb.org.ly

Tomas Bañeras Bosch
Área de Toxicología, Universidad de La Laguna; Angel Shark Project
11banyerastomas@gmail.com

Adi Barash
Sharks in Israel, Environmental Organization for the protection of sharks and rays, Israel
adibarash@hotmail.com

Mateo Barbato
Department of Biology- University of Padova; National Biodiversity Future Center (NFBC)
mateo.barbato.1@phd.unipd.it

Joanna Barker
Zoological Society of London / Project SIARC / Angel Shark Project
joanna.barker@zsl.org

Stephan Bruns
Biology Department, College of Science, UAE University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates
bruns-stephan@web.de

Rachel Bustamante
Earth Law Center
rbustamante@earthlaw.org

Luke Cameron
Trinity College Dublin
CAMEROLU@tcd.ie

Aitor Campos
Aitor, Campos-Sosa; Fundación Oceanogràﬁc de la Comunitat Valenciana; Associació LAMNA;
Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad CEU Cardenal Herrera.
aitor.campos@alumnos.uchceu.es




37
Pol Carrasco Puig
Universitat de València, Paterna, Spain; CATSHARKS, Association for the Study and Conservation of
Elasmobranchs and Its Ecosystems, Passeig Marítim de la Barceloneta, 37-49, E-08003 Barcelona,
Spain
pol.carrasco.puig@gmail.com

Alice Chamberlain
Zoological Society of London
alice.chamberlain@zsl.org

Ryan Charles
IUCN Shark Specialist Group - ISRA PRoject
ryancharles@live.co.uk

Mar�na Ciprian
iSea, Environmental Organisation for the Preservation of Aquatic Ecosystems
mar�na.ciprian@isea.com.gr

Noémie Coulon
Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA) MNHN, CNRS, IRD, SU,
UCN, UA, 38 Rue du Port Blanc , Dinard, France
noemie.coulon@mnhn.fr

Valen�na Crobe
GenoDREAM, Department of Biological, Geological & Environmental Sciences (BiGeA), University of
Bologna, Ravenna, Italy
valen�na.crobe2@unibo.it

Sarah Davies
Zoological Society of London / Natural Resources Wales
sarah.davies@zsl.org

Eleonora de Sabata
MedSharks
ele@medsharks.org

Lorenzo Jacopo De San�s
CNR IRBIM
lorenzo.desan�s@irbim.cnr.it

Ana Espino Ruano
IU ECOAQUA, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria
anamaria.espino@ulpgc.es




38
Ana Filipa Sobral
Okeanos R&D Centre, Department of Oceanography and Fisheries, University of the Azores, Portugal;
Manta Catalog, Portugal
aﬂsobral@gmail.com

Licia Finoto
University of Padova
licia.ﬁnoto@unipd.it

Pablo García-Salinas
Fundación Oceanogràﬁc de la Comunitat Valenciana; Associació LAMNA; Grupo de Acuicultura y
Biodiversidad, Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología Animal, Universitat Politècnica de València.
pgarcia@oceanograﬁc.org

Francesco Garzon
Hatherly Laboratories, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, Devon, United
Kingdom
fg350@exeter.ac.uk

Eleanor Greenway
Wageningen University and Research; Wageningen Marine Research
eleanor.greenway@wur.nl

Yaara Grossmark
Faculty of Architecture and Town Planning, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel;
Sharks in Israel, Environmental Organization for the protection of sharks and rays, Israel
yaarag@sharks.org.il

Annemiek Hermans
Wageningen University
annemiek.hermans@wur.nl

Jenny Hickman
Mareco
jenny@mareco.org.uk

Alejandro J. Molera Arribas
IMEDMAR-UCV; Escuela de doctorado Universida Católica de Valencia San Vicente Martir
ale.mole@mail.ucv.es

Romaric Jac
Institute of Marine Research - Norway
romaric.jac@zohomail.eu

David Jimenez-Alvarado
Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria; IU-ECOAQUA; Angel Shark Project
david.jimenez@ulpgc.es


1
Irene Kingma
Dutch Elasmobranch Society
kingma@elasmobranch.nl

Lydia Koehler
University of Plymouth
lydia.koehler@plymouth.ac.uk

Leigh Livne
Morris Kahn Marine Research Station
leigh.livne@gmail.com

Jaquelino Lopes Varela
MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre / ARNET – Aquatic Research Network,
Laboratório Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal, Cascais,
Portugal; Sphyrna Association, Sal Rei 5110, Boa Vista Island, Cabo Verde.
jaquelinovarela1987@gmail.com

Sol Lucas
Newcastle University, Marine Research and Conservation Foundation
s.a.lucas2@newcastle.ac.uk

Federico Maioli
University of Bologna
f.maioli@unibo.it

Rachel Mawer
(aﬃliation at time of research) University of Glasgow; NatureScot
rmawer98@gmail.com

Giulia Bressan
Department of Biology, University of Padova
carlota.mazzoldi@unipd.it

Soﬁa Mazzone
University of Plymouth; Abigail McQuatters-Gollop
soﬁamazz1@live.co.uk

Lucy Mead
Zoological Society of London; Queen Mary University of London
lucy.mead@ioz.ac.uk

Eva Meyers
Leibniz Institute for the Analysis of Biodiversity Change / Angel Shark Project
angelshark2014@gmail.com




1
Youri Ivann MVOMO MINKO
Université de Bretagne Occidentale
youri.minko@univ-brest.fr

Lorenzo Minoia
Department of Integrative Marine Ecology, Genoa Marine Centre, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn -
Italian National Institute of Marine Biology, Ecology and Biotechnology, Villa del Principe, Piazza del
Principe 4, 16126 Genoa, Italy; Department of Physical,
lorenzo.minoia@szn.it

Re'em Neri
Sharks in Israel; Ben Gurion University of the Negev;Interuniversity Institute for Marine Sciences in
Eilat;
reemneri@gmail.com

Charlote Nuyt
Institute of Marine Research
charlotenuyt@gmail.com

Bríd O'Connor
Marine Institute of Ireland and University College Cork
brid.o'connor@marine.ie

Arthur ORY
Des Requins et Des Hommes (DRDH)
arthur.ory@desrequinsetdeshommes.org

Nicholas Payne
Trinity College Dublin
paynen@tcd.ie

Jaime Penadés-Suay
Associació LAMNA; Fundación Oceanogràﬁc
jaime.penades@associaciolamna.org

Catarina Pereira Santos
MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre/ARNET – Aquatic Research Network, Laboratório
Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Cascais, Portugal; Environmental
Economics Knowledge Center, Nova School of Business and Economi
catarina.cp.santos@gmail.com

Felix Petersma
University of St Andrews; Centre for Research into Ecological and Environmental Modelling
�p@st-andrews.ac.uk

Charlote Pike
Zoological Society of London
charlote.pike@zsl.org

1
Maria Pozo-Montoro
Universidad de Murcia
mpozo-montoro@outlook.com

Jenny R. Bortoluzzi
Trinity College Dublin
bortoluj@tcd.ie

Alicia Rodríguez-Juncá
BIOECOMAC, Dept. Animal Biology, Edaphology and Geology, University of La Laguna, Tenerife,
Canary Islands, SPAIN
mantacatalogcanarias@gmail.com

Jessica Savage
Institution 1: Royal Holloway University of London; Institution 2: Institute of Zoology; Institution 3:
Zoological Society of London
jessica.savage@ioz.ac.uk

Gemma Scots
Institute of Marine Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Ferry Road, Southsea, Portsmouth, UK; Marine
Research and Conservation Foundation, Lydeard St Lawrence, Somerset, UK.
gemmalouise.scots@gmail.com

Manuel Seixas
CIIMAR/CIMAR, Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research, University of Porto
and FCUP, Faculty of Sciences of University of Porto
manueljrcseixas@gmail.com

Lote Svengård Dahlmo
NORCE & UiB
losv@norceresearch.no

Chris Taklis
BiodiversityGR
ctaklis@gmail.com

Mariana Arguero Tejeda
CICIMAR - IPN
marianaarguerot@gmail.com

Andrew J. Temple
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
andrew.j.l.temple@gmail.com

James Thorburn
Edinburgh Napier University
j.thorburn2@napier.ac.uk


1
Hector Toledo-Padilla
Angel Shark Project: Canary Islands
hectortp92@gmail.com

Aylin Ulman
Mersea Marine Consulting, The Shark Trust UK, Sea Around Us
uaylin@hotmail.com

Paddy Walker
Dutch Elasmobranch Society
walker@elasmobranch.nl

Lucas Zaccagnini
DRDH, 15 rue Dumont d'Urville, BLP Technoopole Brest-Iroise, 29280 Plouzane
lucas.zaccagnini@desrequinsetdeshommes.org




2
