  the Azores, R. Frederico Machado 4, 9901-862 Horta, Portugal
 2Department of Oceanography and Fisheries, Centre of IMAR of the University of the Azores, Horta, Azores,

                                                  Portugal
              3Okeanos research centre of the University of the Azores, Horta, Azores, Portugal
                                                4Nektos.net
 5CEIIA – Center for Innovation and Creative Engineering, Av. D. Afonso Henriques, 4450-017 Matosinhos,

                                                  Portugal
             6Customised Animal Tracking Solutions (CATS), 7 Marlua Avenue, Moffat Beach,

                                        Queensland 4551, Australia
7Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology, University of Hawaii at Manoa, PO Box 1346, Coconut Island, Kaneohe,

                                            Hawaii 96744, USA
   8Departamento de Pesca e Aquicultura, Universidade Federal Rural de Pernambuco, R. Dom Manoel de

                       Medeiros, s/n, CEP 52171-030, Dois Irmãos, Recife/PE- Brasil.




        Biologging technology has provided scientists with unprecedented tools to
investigate the ecology and behaviour of marine animals, but tag deployment and
attachment methods have lagged behind. Electronic tagging of elasmobranchs still
essentially involves implanting anchors or drilling the fins of restrained animals. On
the other hand, most biologging tools are quite specific and designed to measure and
archive/transmit a narrow and specific set of variables providing a limited view of
the animal’s ecology and behaviour. We propose a new non-invasive approach for
deploying innovative high frequency multisensor towed tags for deep diving animals
that don’t require restraining or manipulation of the animals, neither the attachment
of intramuscular anchors. This new multisensot towed tags combine satellite tracking,
3D high frequency accelerometry, speed and imagery to unveil the behaviour of deep
diving sharks and pelagic rays. The attachment of a modified fin clamp and a harness
systems were tested and are being routinely used to study the fine scale behaviour
and habitat use of blue sharks and chelien devil rays in the Azores, mid-north Atlantic.
Examples of high frequency multisensor data combined with on-board imagery will
be presented. Clamps and harnesses are fitted with galvanic timed releases (GTR) and
deployed manually by a free-diver or from the boat using a harness deployment
frame. The tags retention can be determined according to the GTR used. Focal
observations and biologginged data suggest that both methods produce little or no
adverse behavioural reaction of the animals, offering a valid alternative for short term
tagging of pelagic sharks and mobulid rays.
    25 years of tracking: Using long term datasets to infer
 ontogenetic shift in the lemon shark, Negaprion brevirostris,
                 and conservation implications

   Clemency White1,2, Samuel Gruber2, Maurits van Zinnicq Bergmann2,3, Tristan
                 Guttridge2, Bryan Franks4, Kristine Stump5,6.

                1Environment Department, University of York, Heslington, YO10 5DD, UK.
                          2Bimini Biological Field Station, South Bimini, Bahamas.
3Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University, 11200 SW 8th Street, Miami, FL, 33199,

                                                   USA.
     4Department of Biology and Marine Science, Jacksonville University, 2800 University Boulevard N,

                                       Jacksonville, FL, 32211, USA.
             5Field Lab Consulting, LLC, 1180 8th Ave West #208, Palmetto, FL, 34221, USA.
            6Ransom Everglades School, 3375 Main Highway, Coconut Grove, FL, 33133, USA.

                                    Email: clemencywhite27@gmail.com




       Tracking technologies serve as a tool for elucidating animal movement and
behaviour when out of visual range, which is particularly useful for marine species.
These methods can be used to produce a detailed baseline of space use, identify
ontogenetic shift and inform conservation management. This study compiled active
and passive tracking data on the lemon shark, Negaprion brevirostris, around Bimini,
the Bahamas, between 1992-2018, providing information on space use across a broad
timescale. Differences in space use were compared between sexes, life stages (neonate,
juvenile, adult) and stages of industrial development (before, during, after) using
dynamic Brownian-bridge movement models. Different life stages consistently show
clear partitioning in space use across the past 25 years, with home range expanding
with ensuing life stages. This is particularly important in neonates, who utilise small
activity spaces very close to the island’s fringing mangroves for protection from
predators during key developmental phases. The successive increase in activity space
also suggests that for protection to be effective for N. brevirostris, and for other species
capable of long range migration, more robust temporal and spatial protection
regulations are required. Furthermore, differences in space use before and after
industrial development and mangrove removal suggests anthropogenic impacts are
changing natural activity patterns. In the context of previous research about N.
brevirostris life histories and considering the proposed North Bimini Marine Protected
Area, this study provides a firm baseline for how populations of N. brevirostris use
habitat and specifically how they use Bimini. This provides us with tools to better
protect Bimini’s N. brevirostris populations, as well as a starting point for conservation
on a global scale.
       A microsatellite marker approach of the reproductive
 strategy in two lanternshark species, Etmopterus spinax and
                      Etmopterus molleri

          Laurent Duchatelet1, Nicolas Oury2, Jérôme Mallefet1, Hélène Magalon2

       1Marine Biology Laboratory, Earth and Life Institute, Université catholique de Louvain, 3 Place croix

                               du Sud, 1348 Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium.
       2Université de La Réunion UMR ENTROPIE 9220, CS 92003, 97744 Saint Denis CEDEX 9, France.

                                     Email: Laurent.duchatelet@uclouvain.be




        Genetic tool evolution allows a better understanding of reproductive strategies
in various marine organisms such as sea turtle, marine mammals, fishes or
elasmobranchs. Studies on reproductive strategies in shallow-water sharks using
microsatellite variations become more and more popular. According to recent genetic
studies, multiple paternity seems to be common within elasmobranch. Conversely,
genetic relevant data about deep-sea elasmobranch are poor (i.e. Squalus mitsukurii
and Galeorhinus galeus), mainly due to the difficulty to observed and collected
samples from these elusive animals. Due to the lack of data, plans and long-term
conservation managements are rare for these deep-sea sharks. Among them,
Etmopteridae, are represented by at least 43 species. The velvet belly lanternshark,
Etmopterus spinax is one of the most studied species mainly due to its ability to emit
light (i.e. bioluminescence). Although relatively common, E. spinax biological data
and life style is limited (i.e. lifespan, stomach content, distribution, parasitism).
Comparatively, almost no data is available for the slendertail lanternshark,
Etmopterus molleri. Most of lanternsharks are hightly caught as bycatch by trawling
fisheries and discarded at sea due to no commercial value. Given the relative high
fishing mortality pressure and the lack of reproduction strategies, genetic diversity
and population dynamics information, these lanternsharks may already be facing
severe population collapses.
The aim of this work is to focus on the reproductive strategy in two lanternsharks
species. We detailed the paternity in 42 litters for the velvet belly lanternshark from
Norway and 7 litters for the slendertail lanternshark from Japan using 29 and 20
microsatellite loci newly developed for E. spinax and E. molleri, respectively. This
microsatellite-based reproductive mode study appear to be a promising tool to gain
crucial informations for small deep-sea lanternsharks in order to assess population
dynamics and management strategy.
      Environmental DNA (eDNA) as an ecological tool for
      locating Angelshark (Squatina squatina) nursery sites

  Fenella Wood1,2, Joanna Barker3, Alex Hayward4, David Jiménez-Alvarado5, Eva
                           Meyers6, Michael Cunliffe1,2

 1School of Biological and Marine Sciences, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, UK. 2The Marine Biological

                              Association of the United Kingdom, Plymouth, UK.
                                  3Zoological Society of London, London, UK.
                  4 Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of Exeter, Penryn, UK.
  5Centre for Biodiversity and Environmental Management, IU-EcoAqua, University of Las Palmas de Gran

                                        Canaria, Gran Canaria, Spain.
                       6Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig, Bonn, Germay.

                                      E-mail: fenella.wood@hotmail.co.uk




Angelsharks (Squatina squatina) are benthic sharks that historically ranged
throughout the Northeast Atlantic Ocean, including the Mediterranean and Black
Seas. Intensification of demersal fishing and habitat loss are thought to have caused
dramatic population declines, with Angelsharks currently listed as Critically
Endangered on the IUCN Red List. The Canary Islands (Spain), however, offers a
unique stronghold where Angelsharks are commonly encountered. To effectively
conserve such a threatened species, it is important to identify and manage areas that
are vital to their key life stages, such as nursery sites. To do so, nursery sites need to
be located and confirmed; however, this proves challenging because juvenile
Angelsharks are difficult to observe due to their camouflaged colouration and burying
behaviour under sand. Environmental DNA (eDNA) is increasingly being used in
conservation studies as it can offer an alternative or complementary method to
identify the presence of animals that are challenging to observe. eDNA has not yet
been applied to study Angelsharks or nursery grounds of elasmobranch species; this
study is the first to explore this. This project aimed to test the reliability of eDNA and
apply eDNA to locate potential nursery sites for further targeted research in the
Canary Islands, in collaboration with the Angel Shark Project (ASP). We show that the
developed species-specific eDNA tool is reliable in identifying the presence or absence
of Angelsharks at beaches across the Canary Islands, through comparison with
traditional data collected by the ASP through visual surveys and citizen science.
eDNA is a quick, easy method compared to traditional survey methods and provides
a good basis with which to identify potential nursery sites where further research can
then be concentrated. eDNA will be vital for future surveying throughout the
Angelshark’s historical range, such as the Celtic Sea, to understand where fragmented
populations still occur.
       Poster
presentations
   Transmigration and capture-risk of mako shark in North
                          Atlantic

                  Gonzalo Mucientes1, Marisa Vedor1, Nuno Quieroz1

      1CIBIO-InBIO, Campus Agrário de Vairão, Universidade do Porto, 4485-668 Vairão, Portugal

                                    gonzalomucientes@gmail.com




        The shortfin mako shark Isurus oxyrinchus is one of the fastest sharks, reaching
speeds of up to 70 km/h. Belonging to family Lamnidae it is the second-most common
oceanic shark caught by high seas longlines, mainly because of the high value of
shortfin mako fins and meat. North Atlantic reported catches currently exceed 3300
tons annually and the 2017 ICCAT stock assessment confirmed that the North Atlantic
stock is overfished.
In this work we tagged a total of 41 makos (17PSATs and 24 SPOTs) with devices from
Wildlife Computers and Sirtrack between 2008 and 2017. After generating all tracks
we demonstrated three trans-Atlantic migration for this species (> 3,000km). In order
to know the degree of fishing risk, these paths were analyzed in relation to the CPUEs
calculated from the logbook data of three fishing vessels (data ranging from 1996 to
2018) as a proxy of the "real risk" of capture for mako sharks. In addition we calculated
the AIS positions to determinate longliner distribution in North Atlantic, to assess the
"potential risk" of capturing makos in open ocean by commercial vessels.


      *POSTER CORNER PRESENTATION
Mysterious strandings of a deepwater shark in Norwegian
fjord
          Claudia Junge1, Diana Zaera1, Lasse Eliassen1, Ole Thomas Albert1

            1Havforskningsinstituttet (Institute of Marine Research, IMR), Tromsø, Norway

                                     Email: claudia.junge@hi.no




        Many shark strandings have been reported and investigated across the world,
especially within the last few years. If the rate of those strandings does in fact increase
or if there are merely better monitoring programs in place today, is not clear. What we
do know however is that in the majority of cases we don`t know why a given
stranding occurs where and when it does. In some cases the culpitts causing the death
of stranded sharks could be identified, what is unclear in most cases however is the
question of “why now?”. What might change the resilience of a local shark population
making them locally susceptible to biotic (e.g. parasites, bacteria, fungi) or abiotic (e.g.
salinity, oxygen, temperature) factors? We explored reported cases of shark
strandings across the globe, looking for trends and similarities. In Norway, we
detected that a velvet belly lantern shark, Etmopterus spinax, population exhibits
repeated mass stranding events in a deep fjord system. E. spinax is a small-sized
deepwater shark, which is often captured as by-catch in commercial deep-water
fisheries and discarded due to its low commercial value. Locally, populations can be
large and catches are mostly separated by sex. We sampled 400 E. spinax from a recent
stranding event, and tested various hypotheses based on previously reported cases,
expert consultation as well as local environmental data. This investigation into the
causes and drivers of such strandings is especially timely in light of similar recent
strandings of various species on e.g. the US coast in California. Results and the most
likely scenario are presented, and lively discussions about causes and potential new
hypotheses are strongly encouraged!
      Comments about landings statistics of sharks and rays;
                  Catalonia as a case study

                               Claudio Barría1, Ana I. Colmenero1

1 Institut de Ciències del Mar (ICM-CSIC), Passeig Marítim de la Barceloneta 37-49, 08003 Barcelona, Spain

                                         Email: barria@icm.csic.es




        Fishery statistics are used to see trends in the populations of some species. This
information is not accurate for some groups and may lead to confusion in species that
are similar or not so well known to consumers, as in the case of sharks and rays.
However, the landings statistics could be useful to evaluate the populations of
elasmobranches which have characteristics that make them very susceptible to
overfishing.
In this study we analysed the landings statistics of sharks and rays for the last 17 years
and we evaluated if the species were well identified from the fish markets of
Catalonia.
Results showed that the number of sharks caught is higher than rays, many of them
in danger of extinction. Rays show a constant increase in landings but in the last four
years a decline is observed; an important fact considering that more than half of the
rays are threatened with extinction. The species with the highest landings is Raja
asterias and then it disappears from the landings statistics and becomes Raja sp,
probably due to identification problems of these species in the fish markets. Sharks
keep their catches stable; the species with the highest offload are Galeus melastomus
and Scyliorhinus canicula. However, from a monitoring conducted in the fish market
we observed that many sharks were erroneously labelled.
It is recommended to be very conservative when evaluating the elasmobranchs at the
species level from landings since important bias may exist due to identification
problems; however this information can be very useful to observe trends at a general
level. In addition, a greater effort is needed in the standardization of landings of
sharks and rays in order to be useful when evaluating possible decreases in their
populations.
 Sharks, rays and quimeras of Seine and Unicorn Seamounts
                    (NE Atlantic Ocean)

   Mafalda Freitas1,2, João Delgado2,3, Ricardo Sousa2,3, Ana Luísa Costa1 Antonina
                              Santos4, Manuel Biscoito1,2

1MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Estação de Biologia Marinha do Funchal (EBMF), Cais

  do Carvão, Promenade da Orla Marítima do Funchal, 9000-107 Funchal, Madeira, Portugal and Museu de
                                     História Natural do Funchal (MMF).
    2OOM – Observatório Oceânico da Madeira – ARDITI, Edifício Madeira Tecnopolo, Piso 2, Caminho da

                               Penteada, 9020-105 Funchal, Madeira, Portugal.
  3 Direção de Serviços de Investigação, Direção Regional de Pescas, Estrada da Pontinha, 9004-562 Funchal,

                                              Madeira, Portugal.
 4 IPMA – Instituto Português do Mar e da Atmosfera, Rua Alfredo Magalhães Ramalho, 6, 1495-006 Lisboa,

                                                   Portugal.
                                     Email: mafalda.freitas@cm-funchal.pt




       Seamounts are undersea mountains rising relatively steeply at least several
hundred meters from the surrounding deep sea floor but do not reach the surface.
The Seine and Unicorn Seamounts belong to the Madeira-Tore seamount chain located
between the Portuguese mainland and Madeira Island (NE Atlantic).
A collection of Chondrichthyes from the Seine and Unicorn Seamounts was studied.
The specimens were caught during two research cruises in 2004 and 2017 between the
top of the seamounts and 2500 m of depth.
Sixteen species belonging to 7 families were collected in the two surveyed seamounts.
This work is a contribution to the knowledge increase of seamount-associated fish
fauna and a check-list of sharks rays and quimeras species known to date is given.
     Madeira Island (NE Atlantic) a nursery area for smooth
     hammerhead shark, Sphyrna zygaena (Linnaeus, 1758)?

                            Mafalda Freitas1,2, Manuel Biscoito1,2

1MARE – Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Estação de Biologia Marinha do Funchal (EBMF), Cais

 do Carvão, Promenade da Orla Marítima do Funchal, 9000-107 Funchal, Madeira, Portugal and Museu de
                                História Natural do Funchal (MMF).
  2OOM – Observatório Oceânico da Madeira – ARDITI, Edifício Madeira Tecnopolo, Piso 2, Caminho da

                           Penteada, 9020-105 Funchal, Madeira, Portugal.
                                Email: mafalda.freitas@cm-funchal.pt




       The smooth hammerhead shark, Sphyrna zygaena, is a circumtropical species
found worldwide in coastal, pelagic, and semi oceanic waters off and on continental
shelves of the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans.
The IUCN lists the smooth hammerhead as Vulnerable globally, but there is a lack of
regional information on smooth hammerhead life history, movement patterns, and
population dynamics.
Over the last years, 6 smooth hammerhead shark juveniles were caught by fishermen
in Madeira suggesting that this can be a nursery area for this species.
Coastal nursery sites provide critical refuge for young sharks. Knowing how sharks
use these habitats and interact with other species will help us to better understand
their ecological role and implement protection measures.
Suitability of a small MPA for the recovery of an endangered
      elasmobranch: the undulate ray (Raja undulata)

Inês Sousa1, Esben M Olsen2, Even Moland2, Joffrey Baeyaert1, Jorge MS Gonçalves1,
                          Carla Freitas2,3, Karim Erzini1

                  1CCMAR–Centre of Marine Sciences, 8005-139 Faro, Portugal.
                         2Institute of Marine Research, His 4817, Norway.
                  3Observatório Oceânico da Madeira, 9020-105 Funchal, Portugal.

                 E-mail: isousa@ualg.pt; permanent email: inesgcsousa@gmail.com




Rays are presently recognized as a group that raises conservation concerns, given their
low resilience to fishing pressure. Using spatial management for the recovery of rays’
populations is a promising strategy, and information of the effectiveness of this
approach is needed. The undulate ray (Raja undulata) is a coastal species that has
undergone declines in abundance within its geographic range and is currently
classified as endangered by the IUCN. We studied the spatial dynamics of this species
in a small marine protected area located in the north-eastern Atlantic, the Luiz
Saldanha Marine Park (Portugal). Thirteen individuals were tagged (7 males, 6
females) with acoustic transmitters (expected battery life of 20 months). Passive
acoustic telemetry data was collected from May 2014 to June 2017 in the fully
protected area and adjacent partially protected area. Movements of tagged specimens
were predominantly longitudinal along the coast. Some individuals exhibited year-
round residency in the reserve, while others were not solely restricted to the fully
protected area and migrated to the adjacent partially protected areas. Individuals
generally remained at depths shallower than 40m and exhibited a moderate-high site
fidelity within the study area. Results suggest that this species can benefit from small
coastal MPAs. However, the recovery of healthy populations regarding abundance
and genetics will probably require the protection of more extended sections of coastal
areas.
        Elevated trawling inside European protected areas
         undermines potential conservation benefits for
                         elasmobranchs

Kirsti A. Burnett1, Kristina Boerder2, Manuel Dureuil1,2, Rainer Froese3, Boris Worm2

         1Sharks of the Atlantic Research and Conservation Centre, Halifax, NS, B3L 2Y5, Canada
  2Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, 1355 Oxford St., PO BOX 15000, Halifax, NS, B3H 4R2,

                                                Canada
   3GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, Düsternbrooker Weg 20, 24105 Kiel, Germany

                                    Email: burnettkirsti@gmail.com




        Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) are increasingly used as a primary tool to
conserve biodiversity and threatened species in the oceans. This is particularly
relevant in heavily exploited hotspots such as Europe, where sensitive indicator
species such as elasmobranchs (sharks, skates, and rays) are at risk of extirpation.
However, MPAs in Europe do not explicitly target elasmobranchs. Here we ask if
Europe’s current MPA system could be utilized as a potential conservation tool for
sharks, skates and rays. We present commercial trawling and elasmobranch hotspots
across 20 species. We then investigate industrial trawl fishing and elasmobranch
abundance in and around 727 MPAs designated in the European Union. We find that
average trawling intensity inside MPAs is elevated at least 1.4 fold compared to non-
protected areas and elasmobranchs decreased >70% in abundance in heavily trawled
areas. Overall 59% of MPAs are commercially trawled. We conlcude that the
widespread use of MPAs for industrial fishing undermines potential conservation
benefits for many sharks, rays and skates that are vulnerable to commercial trawling
activities.
  Blue shark occurrences in the Gulf of Lion coastal waters
(France) through participatory data collection involving sport
        fishermen and implications for management

   Pauline Lapostolle1, Quentin Delaigle2, Caroline Meric2, Jean Claude Hodeau3,
                                Matthieu Lapinski 4


              1AILERONS association, University of Montpellier 2, 34 090 Montpellier

                               E-mail: pauline.lapostolle@outlook.fr




        Increasing human impact through fisheries, coastal development and pollution
require management and conservation measures for shark Mediterranean
species. Data on the distribution are therefore crucial in order to establish population
statement and ecological functions of habitats (nursery, breeding, migration, feeding)
especially at a regional scale. Assessed as Critically Endangered in the Mediterranean
Sea (IUCN, 2016), the Blue shark (Prionace glauca) is regularly accidentally catched by
sport fishermen in the Gulf of Lion coastal waters (France) during the summer
season. Preliminary results from the “Open Sea” participatory science project leaded
by Ailerons association since 2015 in collaboration with voluntary sport fishermen
showed that the Gulf of Lion can support high densities of blue sharks from April to
September. Interestingly, this area seems i/ to be used as a nursery by Prionace
glauca given that most of the observations concerned juvenile stages including Young-
Of-the-Year (= < 60 cm), and ii/ to be a potential breeding area as reproduction
behaviour evidences (recent body damages on females caused by bites) have been
noticed. Still ongoing, this project has therefore a dual objective: raising sport
fishermen awareness with intensive information campaign on the promotion of no-
kill fishing while collecting ecological and biological data (geographical coordinates,
sea conditions, depth, size, sexe, DNA samples) concerning a threatened species,
which could certainly guide future management measures by reducing human
induced pressures.
 Occurrence of the guitarfish species threatened of extinction
    in the Mediterranean Sea and the northeast Atlantic

                      David Nos1, Ana I. Colmenero1, Claudio Barría1

 1Institute of Marine Sciences (ICM-CSIC). Renewable Marine Resources Department. Passeig Marítim de la

                                  Barceloneta, 37-49. Barcelona (Spain)
                                       Email: dnfqam@cid.csic.es




        Guitarfishes are one of the most endangered elasmobranchs. They have a wide
distribution, but their populations are decreasing fast. Currently there are two species
of guitarfish threatened of extinction inhabiting in the Mediterranean Sea and the
northeast Atlantic Ocean: Rhinobatos rhinobatos and Glaucostegus cemiculus. The aim of
this study is to analize the distribution of both guitafishes as well as to identify their
abundance and breeding or mating areas based on scientific papers and citizen
science. The results show 33 scientific records of R. rhinobatos and G. cemiculus in the
eastern Mediterranean while in the western Mediterranean scientific reports of these
species were almost inexistent. Citizen science allowed to find, for the first time,
records of guitarfishes in the Spanish coast. We highlight the existence of a potential
hotspot of abundance in the Atlantic Ocean and the sighting of a pregnant female of
G. cemiculus in the Mediterranean coast (Murcia) which could indicate a potential
nursery area. In conclusion, we report for the first time the presence of guitarfish
aggregations in the Spanish coast and the detection of a possible nusery area in the
western Mediterranean Sea. Since guitarfishes are in danger of extinction, research
involving users, scientists and authorities is essential for the preservation of these
species and their habitat.
    Application of laser photogrammetry on C. carcharias in
                      natural environment

             Simone Di Crescenzo1,2, Primo Micarelli2, Umberto Scacco1,3

                           1Università degli Studi della Tuscia, Viterbo, Italy
                        2Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima, Grosseto, Italy
            3ISPRA, Istituto Superiore per la Protezione e la Ricerca Ambientale, Rome, Italy

                               Email: simonedicrescenzo123@gmail.com




        Most morphometric methods of investigation used on large marine organisms
are intrusive, as they involve the capture or the killing of the animal. In the last decade
new methods and new technologies have been developed able to supply the same
morphometric data avoiding contact with the animal. The result of these efforts was
the introduction also in the ecological field of laser photogrammetry.
Photogrammetry is a non-invasive remote sensing technique that uses digital
photography or images to measure objects or, in the case of animals, morphometry.
Laser photogrammetry uses two laser beams, parallel to each other, to obtain the real
dimensions of a body starting from a digital image. The objective of the present study
is to provide a contribution to the definition and validation of the method for the study
of white sharks. Data were collected during XIV° Scientific Expedition in South Africa
(2017) managed by Centro Studi Squali and Unical to study the behaviour of
Carcharodon carcharias. We proceeded to create a system suitable for the study of the
white shark, being careful to the problems highlighted in the literature. The realized
instrument was equipped with two filming means, in this way the attention was
focused on two aspects: the real effectiveness of laser photogrammetry and the
efficiency of using a reflex camera compared to an action-cam. The tool made allowed
to obtain valid data. From these, estimates of the total lengths of the samples
encountered were obtained by processing the frames considered valid using an
appropriately defined protocol. The results obtained by the two imaging systems were
compared with each other and with the data derived from the visual estimation
(traditionally used not invasive method). The comparison of results allowed some
indications regarding the effectiveness of the new morphometric measurement
system and its degree of reliability.
 Shark ecotourism in Cabo San Lucas, Mexico: Ethology and
                     economic revenue

    Olimpia Berdeja-Zavala1,2, Edgar E. Becerril-García2,3, Edgar Mauricio Hoyos-
             Padilla2, Emilio Sperone4, Andrés Cisneros-Montemayor5

1 Departamento Académico de Ciencias Marinas y Costeras, Universidad Autónoma de Baja California Sur, La

                                                 Paz, Mexico.
                                   2Pelagios Kakunjá A.C., La Paz, Mexico.
       3 Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, Mexico.
      4 Dipartimento di Biologia, Ecologia e Scienze della terra, Università della Calabria, Rende, Italy.
  5 Institute for the Oceans and Fisheries, AERL, University of British Columbia, British Columbia, Canada.

                                         Email: bg.ragde@gmail.com




       Shark exploitation through ecotourism has risen in the last few decades. It has
been suggested that this activity is useful for shark conservation through
environmental education and personal experiences. It is estimated that shark
ecotourism in Mexico generates around 12,500,000 USD anually. The present study
will be conducted in Cabo San Lucas (CSL), which was the 6th most visited destination
in Mexico during 2017. The average surface temperature in CSL is 18ºC with seasonal
variations of up to 6ºC (16-22ºC). These range of temperature allows the observation
of different shark species throughout the year. During warmer months, it is possible
to observe silky sharks (Carcharhinus falciformis) and smooth hammerhead sharks
(Sphyrna zygaena). In the coolest months, it is possible to register shortfin makos (Isurus
oxyrinchus) and blue sharks (Prionace glauca). The present study will describe shark
ecotourism in CSL using ethological techniques and a first economic valuation of the
resource. The data will be obtained throughout the year with the support of local
service providers. This will result in data regardinf species, sex, total length and
behavior. Etholigical observations will be recorded while the sharks are within 10m
from the tourists. Data will be registered by the observer and later doublechecked with
submarine footage obtained with a GoPro Hero 5 camera. The economic valuation of
this activity will be described with surveys filled out by the tourists. This surveys
include demographic data like age, sex, occupation, nacionality, satisfaction,
transportation, lodging questions as well as the motivation for visiting CSL with their
perception of conservation after the activity. The expected results are the annual
revenue derived from this activity and far-sighted projections based on hypothetic
scenarios, the growth potential, and the actual annual revenue.
  Utilising data sourced from ecotourism to investigate the
  affects of environmental and anthropic variables on great
                    white shark behaviour

                           S. Maycock1, M. Ladley2, C. Tudorache1

     1 Leiden University, Institute of Biology Leiden, Sylviusweg 72, 2333 BE Leiden, The Netherlands.
            2 White Shark Projects, 16 Geelbek St, Van Dyks Bay, Gansbaai, 7220, South Africa

                                  Email: greatwhitemik20@hotmail.com




        Ethical ecotourism companies, in addition to encouraging protection of sharks
through continued economic gain to the local community and education of visiting
tourists, can be used in scientific research, as they accumulate huge amount of contact
time with the animals in the field. White Shark Projects, South Africa volunteered data
collected by their onboard crew during tourist excursions from 2009 through 2011,
constituting over 950 sampling hours and 2,277 individual great white sharks with
behaviour described. Environmental variables related to weather (air temperature,
barometric pressure, cloud cover, wind direction and speed), environment (bottom
depth, lunar phase, seal activity, sea surface temperature, underwater visibility), and
ocean conditions (swell height, tide), and anthropic variables (arrival time, bait type,
chum type, total chumming time, location, observer) will be used in a generalised
linear mixed model (GLMM) in order to assess which variables are related to high
shark abundance, and active and aggressive behavioural states. This study will be the
first to use ecotourism data in scientific research, allowing the assessment of the
validity of ecotourism data for science. Furthermore, this work will take steps for
further understanding great white shark behaviour, using the first model which
considers both the affects of anthropic variables and environmental variables, to
describe how external factors can influence the behaviours which white sharks
exhibit.


       *POSTER CORNER PRESENTATION
 FindRayShark project: testing non-invasive technologies to
                monitor sharks and rays

     Miguel P. Pais1, Ana Veríssimo2,3, Rita Vasconcelos4, Jorge Fontes5,6,7, Sofia
                                    Henriques1

   1MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa,

                                                Portugal.
            2CIBIO - Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos Portugal.
                               3Virginia Institute of Marine Science, USA.
                  4IPMA - Instituto Português do Mar e da Atmosfera, Lisboa, Portugal.
5Institute of Marine Research (IMAR), Department of Oceanography and Fisheries, University of the Azores,

                                            Horta, Portugal
     6MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, University of the Azores, Horta, Portugal
                           7Okeanus, University of the Azores, Horta, Portugal

                                         Email: mppais@fc.ul.pt




       Many species of Elasmobranchs are currently under threat from overfishing,
since their life history traits make them intrinsically vulnerable to population
depletion. Despite decades of research, insufficient knowledge on nearly half the
species of elasmobranchs is still impairing our ability to protect them. Assessing the
presence, abundance and population status of marine elasmobranchs of high
conservation concern is particularly troublesome due to the harmful effects of many
traditional sampling techniques and the logistical difficulty of studying these marine
organisms, given their generally shy nature, high mobility and low abundance. Thus,
a paradigm shift is needed in our approach to acquire knowledge on the distribution
and population status of these species.
Project FindRayShark aims to contribute to the conservation of sharks and rays
worldwide by implementing a technologically innovative and non-invasive approach
to assess their populations, by coupling baited remote underwater video surveys
(mono, stereo and spherical) and environmental DNA metabarcoding to survey the
presence and abundance of elasmobranch populations locally. Tests have been
conducted in a public aquarium and at a pilot study area in Faial Island, Azores, where
elasmobranchs are commonly sighted. On the next phase the methods will be applied
to the Berlengas Marine Protected Area, western Portugal, where knowledge on
elasmobranchs’ biodiversity is scarce but urgent.
The non-invasive methods optimised on this project may be applied to other
understudied sites worldwide, and their results will allow the proposal of
management actions and good practice guidelines adequate for the context of the
study area. We also hope to raise awareness through varied dissemination activities
to different target groups using project outputs, namely local and national
management agencies, tourism operators, and the public at large.
          Whatsapp for What’s up with sawfishes ?
  The use of social media for data collection and community
 awarness in remote areas, case study of Indonesaw program

                         Armelle Jung1, Dharmadi2, George Burgess3

       1DRDH – Des Requins et Des Hommes, BLP-Technopole Brest-Iroise, 15 rue Dumont d’Urville 29280

                                            Plouzane, France.
  2Research Center for Fisheries and Development, Komplek Bina Samudera, Jl Pasir Putih II, Ancol Timur,

                                            Jakarta, Indonesia.
 3Florida Museum of Natural History, Dickinson Hall, PO Box 117800, Gainesville FL 32611-7800, United

                                                States.
                               Email: armelle@desrequinsetdeshommes.org




        Indonesia is a country wide as a supra region, the fourth most populated nation
in the world and one of the top wildlife biodiversity hotspots on Earth. Despite being
the first nation for elasmobranch catches, Indonesia still host four of the five sawfishes
species worldwide that are listed Critically Endangered and Endangered. WhatsApp
is a freeware and cross-platform messaging, the application allows the sending of text
messages, images and other media as well as voice and video calls; it is daily used by
over 1 billion people. The Indonesaw program aims to evaluate the status of sawfishes
in the Indonesian archipelago by developing research surveys on set up of an alert
network. The approach is following IUCN Global Strategy for sawfish conservation
and set up on the achievements of similar successful project created in western Africa.
Indonesian laws protects sawfishes since 1999 and their trade is illegal; nevertheless
bycatch still occurs and illegal business was discovered for rostrum but also meat and
fins (fresh, frozen or dried). By using new social networks as Whatsapp with fishing
communities Indonesaw already succeed in promoting safe-release of 15 live
sawfishes (Anoxypristis cuspidata) at sea and the collection of recent catches and trade
data. This new approach offers a real time method for sensitization but also allows
our team to present a first evaluation of the actual sawfish distribution. The relevance
of social media utilization in emerging countries is discussed in regards to the
importance of conservation challenges in this region of the world.
              Everybody wants to see a shark!
 Developing of shark observation site on the Israeli coastline

                                     Shira Salingré1,2,3

                      1Nature and Parks Authority, Jerusalem 95463, Israel
                              2Sharks in Israel, Michmoret, Israel
                         3Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel

                                 Email: shira.salin@gmail.com




        Requiem sharks are almost non-existent in the Mediterranean Sea, with
dramatic population declines of over 90%. Yet around the Israeli coastline, they seem
to be relatively abundant. For the past 10 years, at least, these species approach the
warm water of coastal power stations in Israel during the winter months. In the
Hadera station, every year an increasing number of visitors arrive to observe them, by
foot and above and below the water, as well as media reporters. While the growing
interest shines a light on the need to protect these species, the same interest creates
pressure on the sharks and increases the risk of conflict or harm for both sides.
A new initiative, with collaborators from NGOs and governmental organisations,
seeks to ease this pressure and to develop a shark observation site which is managed
responsibly while putting the sharks' benefit and conservation in first priority. Last
season, we engaged with the local diving community and set up an information stand
for the visiting public. We have also done a great deal of planning an observation deck,
information boards and underwater markers and buoys for divers and watercrafts.
We are considering options regarding the restriction of fishing activity. Best practice
guide for all users of the site has been prepared and is pending publication. One of
our collaborators, the University of Haifa, is conducting an ecotourism research,
which we trust will give a better understanding in the future of how to best manage
this site.
We are now facing yet another shark season and with our new plan, we hope the
sharks will return safely and that the public will be able to enjoy watching and
learning about them, while not jeopardising them or their return.

      *POSTER CORNER PRESENTATION
The project “Shark Attract”: Sharks and rays conservation by
 enhancing awareness within fishermen communities and
                           society

  Susana França1, Vera Sequeira1, Célia Teixeira1, Luís Alves2, Sara Novais2, Marco
                            Lemos2, Henrique Cabral1

    1 MARE- Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa,

                                                Portugal.
2 MARE- Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, ESTM, Instituto Politécnico de Leiria, Peniche, Portugal




       Sharks and rays are an extremely diverse group of fishes, with more than 1200
species, present in all marine ecosystems. In the last decades, they have been under
increasingly intense fishing pressure, which has been affecting populations
worldwide. Their life-history characteristics, such as low fecundity, late sexual
maturity and reduced number of offspring, make them a fragile resource, highly
vulnerable to overfishing and clearly collide with its fisheries resources dimension.
The Shark Attract project aims at tackling sharks and rays conservation through
increasing awareness and knowledge with tailor-made activities and actions targeted
to different audiences and stakeholders, such as fishermen, students, general public,
managers and public authorities. The work plan comprise the analyses of existing data
on rays and sharks fisheries trends, as well as the collection of new data in the main
fishing harbors along the Portuguese mainland coast, the characterization of the major
problems regarding fisheries affecting sharks and rays through interaction with
fishermen communities and the implementation of knowledge transfer and
awareness actions directed to the different audiences. It is expected that the project
generates a solid scientific knowledge regarding sharks and rays fisheries in Portugal,
identifies ways to reduce shark fishing mortality (reducing bycatches, enhancing
discards or live specimens, changing fishermen practices), and increases the interest,
knowledge and awareness of society by these endangered fishes. Outreach activities
will be of great importance as they are expected to involve a significant amount of
people out of the scientific scope as well, and will allow to raise awareness and
increase the perception of the present situation concerning sharks and rays, which
may contribute to change mentalities and attitudes, and ultimately to these species
conservation.
Is dermal denticle size a good discriminant criteria to identify
           Deania species (Fam. Centrophoridae)?

            Cristina Rodríguez-Cabello1, Irene Grasa1, Montserrat Pérez2

            1Spanish Institute of Oceanography (IEO). Apdo. 240. 39080 Santander. Spain.
              2Spanish Institute of Oceanography (IEO). Apdo. XX. 39080 Vigo. Spain.

                                    Email: cristina.cabello@ieo.es




       Three elasmobranch species of the genus Deania are reported from NE Atlantic
waters: D. calcea, D. hystricosa and D. profundorum. Whereas D. profundorum is easily
recognized by the presence of a sub-caudal keel on the lower caudal peduncle, the
other two species are mainly discriminated by the size of the dermal denticles and
body color. In this study we explore the feasibility of this criterion by examining
several individuals (N=32) of diverse size and sex caught in different areas (Le Danois
Bank, Aviles Canyon, continental slope) of the Cantabrian Sea. Morphometric
measurements of 40 characters, denticle size and genetic analysis were undertaken for
each individual. Multivariate analysis was used to check differences among samples.
Size and shape of dermal denticles varied according to body region. Furthermore the
size of dermal denticles is positive correlated to fish length. Other morphometric
characters should be considered for better identification of these species. Reliable and
consistent discrimination of Deania species is essential for conservation and
sustainable management of these deep-water elasmobranchs which are regularly by-
catch of deepwater fisheries.
 Helminth infracommunities in two torpedo species from the
     gulf of València: is EOD behaviour affecting their
                         abundance?

         Jaime Penadés-Suay1,2, Tania Regacho López1, Francisco Javier Aznar1

1Marine Zoology Unit, Cavanilles Institute of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biology, Universitat de València,

                                              València, Spain
             2Associació LAMNA per a l’estudi dels elasmobranquis a la Comunitat Valenciana

                                        Email: jaime.penades@uv.es




        In this project we have studied the intestinal parasitic community of two
species of Torpedo, 30 T. torpedo and 17 T. marmorata. The specimens were collected in
the ports of València and Perelló, on the west coast of the Mediterranean sea and were
captured by trammel fishing nets during March and June 2017. Specimens of three
genera of cestodes were identified: order Onchoproteocephalidea (Acanthobothrium
sp.), order Rhinebothriidea (Rhodobothrium sp.) and order Tetraphyllidea
(Anthobothrium sp.). The characteristics of the host (sex, size and habitat) and the
location of parasitic fauna along the intestinal tract were analyzed. Stadistically there
is no relation between the characteristics of the host and their parasites. The genus
Acanthobothrium seems to have a preference to be in the middle region of the spiral
valve due to a greater absorption of nutrients. It is observed that torpedo have a poor
parasite fauna as genus and when compared with other coastal elasmobranchs. The
causes could be related to a matter of contact with the parasites (influenced by diet or
sedentability) or compatibility. A third hypothesis is studied: wether or not the
Electric Organ Discharge used by Torpedo species when predating affects parasites.
For this, a model species (Micromesistius poutassou) was used to compare the effect of
electric discharges on Anisakis sp., proving that they affect parasites mobility. Further
studies need to be done on its effects on parasite capacity of infection.

        *POSTER CORNER PRESENTATION
       Effects of ocean acidification over the neuroanatomic
                   development of benthic sharks

             Catarina P. Santos1,2, Maria R. Pegado1,2, Marta Pimentel1,
 Maria Paulo3, Ana Couto1, Eduarda Pinto1, Ricardo Cyrne1,2, José R. Paula1, Gabriel
                                Martins2, Rui Rosa1

1MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Laboratório Marítimo da Guia, Faculdade de Ciências da

         Universidade de Lisboa, Avenida Nossa Senhora do Cabo 939, 2750-374 Cascais, Portugal.
         2 IGC - Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, R. Quinta Grande, 6, 2780-156 Oeiras, Portugal
 3Ghent University, Faculty of Sciences, Marine Biology Research Group, Campus Sterre S8, Krijgslaan 281,

                                           9000 Ghent, Belgium
                                          Email: cdcsantos@fc.ul.pt




       As atmospheric CO2 levels rise, continuous uptake by the oceans is changing
the seawater chemistry, resulting in ocean acidification (OA). Exposure to the foreseen
high CO2 conditions has been reported to trigger an array of behavioral changes
across marine taxa, namely in top-predators such as sharks. Nonetheless, the
consequences of such conditions over the neuroanatomic development are still widely
understudied. Here we investigate the impacts of OA in the early relative brain
development rate and neuroanatomy of temperate shark (Scyliorhinus canicula)
embryos and juveniles reared under either control (400 µatm) or high CO 2 conditions
(900 µatm | Δ 0.3 pH units) since laid. Using the “OpenT” open-source platform for
optical projection tomography, we built three-dimensional neuroanatomic models in
order to evaluate OA effects over the brain development patterns across the
embryogenesis. Additionally, the activity levels and response to food-related
olfactory cues of the juveniles was assessed. Preliminary results suggest changes in
the relative size of the optic lobe following exposure to high-CO2 conditions, with
potential consequences in the processing and integration of visual information and
thus, the ability to properly respond to environmental cues. Moreover, changes in
their behaviour were observed, with OA-exposed individuals showing higher levels
of feeding motivation upon cue delivery. Sharks have a crucial role in the balance of
the oceans trophic ecology and the population decline seen in recent years may result
in a top-down disruption of marine ecosystems. OA may present itself as an
additional threat to this k-strategy predator, particularly if affecting the brain-power
and behaviour of the new recruits.
    Chondrichthyans as bioindicators of marine pollution: a
        potential tool for environmental monitoring

              David Nos1, Joan Navarro1, Claudio Barría1, Montserrat Solé1

 1Institute of Marine Sciences (ICM-CSIC). Renewable Marine Resources Department. Passeig Marítim de la

                                  Barceloneta, 37-49. Barcelona (Spain)
                                       Email: dnfqam@cid.csic.es




       Chondrichthyans are regularly found in the bycatch of commercial fisheries in
the northwestern Mediterranean. They play an important role as predators so these
species could serve as sentinels of pollution in high trophic levels of the marine
ecosystems. Samples of the liver of 20 species of chondrichthyans including 1
chimaera, 11 sharks and 8 rays (rajiformes and myliobatiformes), were collected in
scientific surveys and from the bycatch’s of trawling and longline fisheries between
2011 and 2014. The aim of this study is to evaluate the potential of chondrichthyans as
bioindicators of pollution using the carboxylesterase activity (CE) as biomarker of the
environmental exposition to determinate contaminants. CEs are a versatile family of
enzymes with the ability to metabolize and inhibit many pesticides, pharmaceuticals
and other endogenous products, with a particular affinity for the organophosphate
pesticides. The CE basal activity was measured with the substrates 4-nitrophenyl
acetate (4NPA) and 1-naphtyl acetate (1NA). The substrate 1NA was the one which
showed higher enzymatic activities. Higher CE activity was found in the rajiformes
species, followed by sharks and the chimaera, with lower activities. In vitro sensitivity
to the OP Dichlorvos was tested with the species Scyliorhinus canicula. The results
showed that the substrate 1NA would be the most adequate for biomonitoring, as it
was more sensitive to the pesticide in the liver (IC50 = 2.37 μM) and plasma (IC50 =
0.051 μM). The interspecific variation of the CE basal activity and the different
inhibitions of the pesticide Dichlorvos and the drug fenofibrate, indicate different
sensitivities of each species to determinate pollutants.

       *POSTER CORNER PRESENTATION
  The project “BlueSharker”: Blue harks as biomonitors of
 Atlantic waters through an integrated biomarker assessment

 Luís Alves1, Marco F.L. Lemos1, Begoña Jiménez2, Susana Mendes1, Ana Oropesa-
                     Jiménez3, Dick Roelofs4, Sara C. Novais1

       1MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Intututo Politécnico de Leiria, Portugal
  2 Dept. of Instrumental Analysis and Environmental Chemistry, Institute of Organic Chemistry, (IQOG-

                                          CSIC), Madrid, Spain
3 Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Extremadura, Badajoz, Spain; INBIO G+C - Instituto Universitario de

    Investigación en Biotecnología Ganadera y Cinegética, Universidad de Extremadura, Cáceres, Spain
             4 Institute of Ecological Sciences, Vrije University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

                                        Email: sara.novais@ipleiria.pt




       Marine ecosystems are continuously being burdened with xenobiotic
contaminants released by human activities, often resulting in a decline of their
resources. Long-lived and top predator marine species such as sharks tend to
accumulate particularly high levels of environmental contaminants via
bioaccumulation and biomagnification processes. Given their susceptibility to
pollutant accumulation, their wide distribution and their importance to the
ecosystems, sharks are ideal candidates to be used in marine pollution monitoring
studies. The “BlueSharker” project will focus on the potential of blue sharks (Prionace
glauca) to be used as sentinel species for marine pollution monitoring surveys through
the development and application of suitable biological biomarkers. This work will
focus on linking the tissue contaminant body burdens of sharks (trace elements and
persistent organic pollutants) to their responses at different levels of biological
organization: from molecular markers at the gene level, to biochemical parameters at
the sub-cellular level related to detoxification, oxidative stress, neuronal function,
immune system and energy metabolism, and histological lesions at the tissue/organ
level. Moreover, as an ultimate goal, the research team will check if the correlations
found between the contaminant levels and the biological responses for the other
tissues can be also found in sharks blood and/or skin, which would enable the use of
such biomarkers in a less-invasive way in marine biomonitoring programs.
Ultimately, this research aims to provide a simple and fast way for assessing the
physiological state and general fitness of blue sharks, which given their ecological
impact as top predators, will indirectly allow inferring about the quality of the oceans.
Moreover, by relating the biological responses with contaminant body burden, an
improved understanding on the organisms’ mechanisms to cope with different ocean
contamination scenarios will be provided, enhancing the development of a biomarker
toolbox for biomonitoring marine environments.
            A Devil not so evil: new data from a female Mobula
             mobular (Bonnaterre, 1788) caught in Greece

                  Archontia Chatzispyrou1, Aikaterini Anastasopoulou1

 1Hellenic Center for Marine Research, Institute of Marine Biological Resources and Inland Waters, Athens,

                                          19013 Attica, Greece
                                      Email: a.chatzispyrou@hcmr.gr




        The Giant Devil Ray is an epipelagic filter feeder, mainly occurring in the
Mediterranean Sea, characterized by low growth rate and low productivity. Most
information on Mobula mobular derives from incidental bycatch and opportunistic
sightings. The species is included in Appendix II of the Bern Convention (1982) and
in Annex II of the “Protocol concerning Specially Protected Areas and Biological
Diversity in the Mediterranean” (1996) of the Barcelona Convention (1976); it is also
protected by the Greek national legislation (Presidential Decree 67/1981). The IUCN
Red list classification for the Giant Devil Ray is ‘Endangered’, mainly due to the
scarcity of data and the entanglement in fishing gears as bycatch. Knowledge gaps
still exist on M.mobular and therefore the status of the species is under investigation.
The present study is aiming to contribute valuable information on the biology of the
species from observations on a mature female specimen, accidentally caught in long
line, in July 2018 in Greece. The devil ray weighted 63.5kg and was reported to iSea, a
Greek Environmental Organization, through the citizen science project “Sharks and
rays in Greece and Cyprus”. The authors were informed and in collaboration with the
members of the iSea took samples from the dead ray only for research purposes. The
presence of trophonemata observed in the uterus of the female M.mobular, indicated
the nourishment of an embryo recently. Morphometric measurements were recorded
to the nearest mm and its organs were weighted to the nearest gr in the laboratory.
Results were compared to previous reported measurements from the eastern
Mediterranean Sea. Additional information on the reproductive biology of M.mobular
along with data on its distribution and abundance constitute a useful tool for future
management and conservation actions for this endangered elasmobranch.
 Feeding behaviour of whale shark at Nosy Be (Madagascar)
           and link to phytoplancton community

Emilio Sperone1, Primo Micarelli2, Gianni Giglio1, Chiara Romano2, Sandro Tripepi1,
 Oscar Mari1, Samira Gallo1, Giorgio Pascolo1, Giorgia Zicarelli1, Carlotta Barba3,
                       Francesco Bolinesi4, Olga Mangoni4

        1 Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende (Italy)
                             2 Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima (Italy)
                                 3 Manta Diving, Nost Be (Madagascar)
                      4 Department of Biology, University Federico II, Naples (Italy)




       In December 2017 a research expedition was carried out off the island of Nosy
Be in Madagascar to study the feeding behavior of the whale shark. We report the
behavioral modules of the whale shark and their relationship with the phytoplankton
community in terms of biomass and functional groups. In 31 sites, surface water was
collected in the following five behavioural conditions: 1. absence of whale sharks, 2.
presence of swimming whale sharks, 3. presence of whale sharks in horizontal
feeding, 4. presence of whale sharks in vertical feeding, 5. presence of whale shark in
vertical gulping.
Two liters of seawater were filtered on filters and stored at -20°C for HPLC analyses
to determine phytoplankton pigment spectra. Chlorophyll-a (Chl-a) concentration
was used as an indicator of total biomass and biomarker pigments were used as
chemotaxonomic descriptors to define the contribution of the main phytoplankton
groups to the total Chl-a.
The exhibition of vertical feeding behaviours of whale sharks showed a significant
correlation with sites characterized by higher phytoplankton biomass. Since vertical
feeding is considered as a strong feeding behaviour, we can assume that the
phytoplankton concentration could play a role for the feeding strategy of the species.
Chryptophytes, haptophytes and cyanobacteria were the most abundand taxa in term
of biomass. The results seem to highlight a certain correlation between behavioral
feeding modules exhibited by sharks and the presence of some phytoplankton taxa
that might be involved in the release of the DMS. This substance is produced by
phytoplankton in response environmental stressors such as ocean acidification
nutrient limitation and grazing pressure. Since DMS is a substance characterized by a
strong odor, the results seem to highlight the fundamental role of smell in the
identification of food sources by the whale shark: this will represent the future aim of
the research.
      Surface behaviour of bait attracted white sharks and
       influence of biological and environmental factors

    Giuseppe Rijllo1, Primo Micarelli2, Lorenzo Leporati2, Gianni Giglio1, Chiara
  Romano2, Sandro Tripepi1, Luna Graziadio1, Francesca Romana Reinero1, Angelo
                           Carotenuto3, Emilio Sperone1

        1 Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, Rende (Italy)
                             2 Centro Studi Squali, Massa Marittima (Italy)
                    3 Department of Biology, University “Federico II”, Naples (Italy)




       Individual surface behaviour of white sharks in the presence of bait has been
studied from 2005 to 2018 at Dyer Island Nature Reserve (South Africa). Observations
were made from a commercial cage-diving boat. We observed 220 white sharks that
exhibited 9 different types of individual behaviour: parading, bait following, visual
inspection, breach, tail slap, tail stand, spy hop, repetitive aerial gaping, and head-up
vertical emerging. We compared the exhibition of these behaviors and the complexity
of the ethograms to both biological (sex, age) and environmental (tides, cloud cover,
underwater visibility, sea surface conditions, temperature, time of the day) factors.
Breach and tail slap were most often performed by male sharks, and tail slap and tail
stand were more often performed by mature animals. The general ethogram consisted
of an average of 20 behavioural units. The comparison of the ethograms between
males and females did not revealed significant correlations, but the ethograms of
female white sharks were more complex with more transitions between behavioural
units. A significant correlation was observed comparing ethograms of mature and
immature white sharks: young sharks performed more complex ethograms with a
higher number of behavioural units.
We observed also that environmental conditions affected the sequence and structure
of individual behaviors and in particular the approach to the bait, the duration of the
ethograms and the complexity of decisional trees and transitional matrices. In
particular, we observed a strong influence of the cloud cover and, consequently,
underwater visibility
Our observations suggested that the surface behaviour of white sharks is a complex
tactical situation in which animals show plastic responses to environmental
conditions and according to sex and age.
 Drone technology to determine the behavior of Carcharodon
           carcharias in Dyer Island, South Africa
               and Guadalupe Island, Mexico

    Claudia Yacuta-Castillo1,2, Edgar E. Becerril-García2,3, Edgar Mauricio Hoyos-
                               Padilla2, Emilio Sperone4

1 Departamento Académico de Ciencias Marinas y Costeras, Universidad Autónoma de Baja California Sur, La

                                                 Paz, Mexico.
                                   2Pelagios Kakunjá A.C., La Paz, Mexico.
      3 Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz, Mexico.
      4 Dipartimento di Biologia, Ecologia e Scienze della terra, Università della Calabria, Rende, Italy.

                                             bg.ragde@gmail.com




        The white shark (Carcharodon carcharias) is an apex predator that congregates in
some continental and oceanic islands where ecotourism is a frequent activity.
Although the ecotourism with this species has been an alternative to the fishing
pressure, information about its biology, behavior, and ecology is still scarce and
necessary for its management. Studies about the interactions between sharks and baits
during ecotourism activity are also still limited. This project aims to describe an
ethological comparison of the white shark between Guadalupe Island, Mexico and
Dyer Island, South Africa, that shown oceanic and coastal environments, respectively.
The behavior will be recorded onboard local tourism boats at these locations.
Intraspecific and shark-bait interactions will be registered using drone techonology
during aerial census of 20 min per flight and 10 m of height at 7:00, 10:00, 13:00 and
16:00 h. The comparison of behavioral patterns in both locations will be useful to
describe the effect on behaviour of the environmental factors such as surface
temperature, visibility, wind speed, and cloudiness. Sexual behavior patterns will be
analyzed in collaboration with citizen science programs, using underwater pictures
and videos from the tourists to identify the sex of the animals. This study will be the
first to compare the behaviour of two different white shark populations by the use of
drones. The results will provide information for tourism, the scientific community,
and for the authorithies in charge of the improvement and management of this
vulnerable species.
   Abundance, distribution and behavior of Elasmobranchs
    with app reports in the Gulf of Papagayo, Costa Rica

                Erwan Piot2, Ilena Zanella1, Andrés López1, Pablo Fallas3

                 1Asociación Conservacionista Misión Tiburón, Playa del Coco, Costa Rica
                              2 Veterinary student, ONIRIS, Nantes, France
                                  3 Big Shot apps, San Pedro, Costa Rica

  E-mail: erwan.piot@orange.fr, izanella@misiontiburon.org, alopez@misiontiburon.org, pablolf@gmail.com




        The Gulf of Papagayo, located in northwestern Costa Rica, presents significant
touristic infrastructures and year round aquatic activities. Its northern part features
an important Marine Protected Area whereas the rest of the gulf is not protected. The
substantial diversity of Elasmobranch in this area is responsible for a valuable touristic
activity, but information on species, abundance, distribution, behavior are almost
unknown. To fill in this gap in wildlife documentation, the organization “Misiόn
Tiburόn” created in 2016 a smartphone application called “Misiόn Tiburόn”® and
successfully drew in sea professionals, especially divers, to report Elasmobranch
sightings within the application. Recorded variables included basic diving data (date,
GPS coordinates, dive time, depth, water temperature) and quantity, specie, sex,
behavior for each Elasmobranch observation. By enhancing direct observation
reporting, and engaging Costa Rican citizens and tourists, this project aimed to raise
public awareness on Elasmobranch ecology and extinction threats. The present is
based on the data collected between 06/01/2016 and 06/01/2018, and specifically
describes Elasmobranch population in term of species, distribution and behaviour in
relation to its marine environment in the Gulf of Papagayo. In 2 years, more than 1244
observations from all Costa Rican coasts have been reported and validated, among
which 64% covered the Pacific coast and particularly the Gulf of Papagayo. We first
classified species based on seasonal or resident characteristics, before describing
relationships between distribution patterns and specific ocean condition for some
species. We show evidence for abundance variations for specific species, both in terms
of time distribution (monthly variation) and space distribution (within the gulf). The
evolution of these patterns will be studied by continuing diving reports through the
application. In future works, impacts of the abundant aquatic recreational activities
and their development needs to be evaluated to paint an exhaustive view of the
Elasmobranch population and evolution perspectives.
    The Great Eggcase Hunt – a citizen science conservation
        project supporting wider conservation policies

                           Cat Gordon1, Rebecca Gillham1
                                 1The Shark Trust, UK.

                               Email: rebecca@sharktrust.org




       Since its inception in 2003, the Great Eggcase Hunt (GEH) has utilised the
collaborative power of citizen scientists to further research into egglaying
elasmobranchs. To date it has received over 200,000 records and engaged numerous
dedicated eggcase hunters. What started as a way to educate the public about shark
conservation developed into an effective way of collating important, usable data on
the diversity of egglaying elasmobranchs found around British waters, of which there
are 13 species commonly found. The Shark Trust has continued to utilise the
information submitted by the public to gain a better understanding of species
diversity, relative abundance, and distribution as well as the location of potential
egglaying sites. Data obtained from the project has resulted in an in-depth report
celebrating 100,000 submissions, as well as provided updated descriptions detailed in
a peer reviewed publication (with another currently in prep). To support the ease and
accuracy of recording and to encourage regular submissions, a smartphone app has
been developed and translated into additional languages with project partners.
International submissions have been received from as far afield as Australia and
Ecuador increasing knowledge of eggcase identification from around the world. A
push for divers and snorkellers to look for underwater eggcases in situ supports
research into egglaying grounds and an improved understanding of the substrates
eggcases are deposited on. Data collated and analysed from the GEH has allowed the
Shark Trust to provide scientific input into conservation policies; most recently the
UK government Marine Conservation Zone (MCZ) designation process that aims to
identify species and habitats requiring protection. The static life history phase of an
oviparous species leaves them at risk to human disturbance. Therefore, understanding
the location of egglaying sites and habitat preference is vital when considering spatial
protection. Here we present examples of how this citizen science project is able to
support and influence conservation policies affecting elasmobranchs.
   Photo-identification of Bull rays (Aetomylaeus bovinus)
                 (Geoffroy St. Hilaire, 1817)

 Silvio Solleliet-Ferreira1,2,3, G. Nowell 4, N. Vasco Rodrigues 5, Simon Charter 6,
  Jurgen den Hartog 7, Renate Reijns 7, D. Das1,2,3, R.M. Boys1,2,3, J. Fontes1,2,3, P.
                                       Afonso 1,2,3

 1Department of Oceanography and Fisheries, Centre of IMAR of the University of the Azores, Horta, Azores,

                                                  Portugal
              2Okeanos research centre of the University of the Azores, Horta, Azores, Portugal
3Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre and Centre of the Institute of Marine Research of the University of

                       the Azores, R. Frederico Machado 4, 9901-862 Horta, Portugal
                                              4Sharklab-Malta,
                                            5Oceanário de Lisboa
                    6South African Association of Marine Biological Research (SAAMBR)
                                                    7I3S




    The bull ray Aetomylaeus bovinus requires urgent conservation measures,
consubstantiated by an upgrade of its IUCN conservation status in 2015 to Critically
Endangered for the Mediterranean Sea. This coastal and large but very poorly studied
elasmobranch is mainly threatened by habitat degradation and bycatch due to the use
of non-selective fishing gears. However, such proximity to anthropic activities offers
an advantage to deepen our knowledge of this species. If appropriately applied and
fine-tuned, photo-identification is an affordable, accurate and non-invasive technique
which allows scientists to reliably identify individuals within a population. Bull rays
exhibit very distinctive and individual dorsal colour patterns, bluish strips which
remind the reflex of the surface on a sandy bottom. As benthos-pelagic feeders,
spending most of their time feeding on the sea floor, bull rays are constantly exposing
their natural patterns. Thus, any snorkeler with a camera can gather pictures of the
species and contribute to a global demographic scientific initiative. Here we propose
a novel, semi-automated photo-identification methodology to study the demography,
habitat and ecology of A. bovinus populations for the first time as a key tool embedded
in a global citizen science initiative. We also present some preliminary results,
extracted from the 223 high quality pictures collected during 103 snorkelling surveys
ran in Malta and the Canary Islands. At least 15 individuals could be reliably
identified, and some re-sightings support eventual sight fidelity and seasonal
migrations.
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE

                                 João Correia
                                   Luís Alves
                               Marco Lemos
                                  Sara Novais
                       Sofia Esteves da Silva



ORGANIZING COMMITTEE

                                 João Correia
                                   Luís Alves
                               Marco Lemos
                                  Sara Novais
                       Sofia Esteves da Silva

                          Adriana Januário
                        Alexandre Marques
                              Ana Augusto
                           Cláudia Correia
                              Cristina Salas
                                Inês Morão
                                 Joana Silva
                                 Lénia Rato
                            Luana Granada
                             Manuel Seixas
                            Sofia Ferradosa
                                Rafael Félix
                              Tiago Simões
ORGANIZED BY




SPONSORED BY




                                     l emos
               laboratory of ecology and mechanismsof stress
               marine ecology | ecotoxicology | applied biotechnology | aquaculture
