ant Invasion

Metamorphosis is a common process during which an irreversible ontogenetic transition leads to a shift in
challenges. Certain trade-offs are inherent in metamorphosis; for example, species that metamorphose
early and small have frequently minimized mortality in the first environment, but face increased risk in the
second. Species have developed a number of strategies to optimize this transition and, to ensure that
they reach reproductive size, their post-metamorphic behavior is often compensatory to its timing. The
reciprocal nature of this transition raises the possibility that vulnerability to secondary habitat quality may



                                                                                                             175
vary by strategy. In order to explore the interplay between metamorphic strategy and environmental
change we monitored the response of three amphibian species to habitat alterations driven by Japanese
stilt-grass (Microstegium vimineum) invasion. We stocked metamorphic American toads (Anaxyrus [Bufo]
americanus), southern leopard frogs (Lithobates [Rana] sphenocephalus), and eastern newts
(Notophthalmus viridescens) into 58m2 pens spanning 8 invasion fronts. Using robust capture periods we
tracked the survival and growth of these 2,600 marked individuals for 10 months. We found that the initial
6-week survival of toads was lower in invaded habitats, likely due to increased predation pressure from
lycosid spiders, but that this effect diminished as they grew. Leopard frog survival was not affected by
invasion status; however, growth rates were lower in invaded habitats, likely due to reduced prey
availability. Neither the high survival nor slow growth rates of efts were influenced by invasion status.
These results show species-specific responses to invasion-driven habitat changes. We hypothesize that
species that metamorphose early and forage actively to support rapid post-metamorphic growth are more
susceptible to increased predation pressure, whereas species that metamorphosed at a larger size and
are more cryptic, ambush foragers are more affected by altered prey availability. In contrast, species with
flexible time horizons to reproduction may prioritize survival over growth by aestivating during adverse
conditions, minimizing trophic effects. These results demonstrate that metamorphic strategy can influence
the nature and strength of the responses of related species to environmental change, and support
theoretical models that predict the prioritization of either growth or survival as a function of the timing of
metamorphosis.



Diaz de la Vega, Anibal (Instituto de Biologia UNAM); Mendez, Fausto (Instituto de Biologia UNAM,
Canada)

Are clonal lineages identical?

Closer relatives species could present similar physiological requirements even though they inhabit
different environments. The environmental temperature is an important resource for ectotherms and
determines physiological traits. Parthenogenetic lizards of the cozumela complex were generated by two
independent hybridization events between the same gonochoristic species (mother species: Aspidoscelis
angusticeps and father species: A. deppii ). Therefore this complex it is an ideal model to determine if
the physiological requirements of the parthenogenetic lineages, originated by the same parental species,
are alike between them or among parental species. We determined the thermal efficiency index and
thermal preferences of the cozumela complex lizards ( A. cozumela, A. maslini, and A. rodecki ) and the
parental species in the Yucatan peninsula of Mexico . Thermal efficiency indexes of all species were
determined by the thermal quality of the habitat and the precision of organisms to thermoregulate.
Thermal preferences of A. cozumela and A. maslini were similar to A. deppii ; however, thermal
preferences of A. rodecki were similar to the mother species. These results suggest that clones with
similar origin present different physiological traits between lineages and even among populations of the
same clone. However, the thermal preferences are phylogenetically conservative, at least with one of the
parental species, supporting the ―frozen niche variation‖ hypothesis.



Dickman, Christopher (University of Sydney);

Effects of habitat fragmentation on lizards of the Simpson Desert, central Australia

Spinifex grasslands predominate in the arid regions of central Australia, and provide habitat for some of
the world‘s richest assemblages of lizards. Although they are remote and generally subject to limited



                                                                                                          176
disturbance from people, the grasslands are subject to wildfires at intervals of 10 – 25 years that may
burn swathes of country exceeding a million hectares. Here, I describe the effects of a wildfire in the
Simpson Desert of central Australia that burnt for five months in 2001 – 2002 and fragmented the
grassland into patches ranging in area from a few square metres to >10 000 ha.

Post-fire surveys showed that the abundances, richness and composition of lizard assemblages were
largely unaffected in the immediate aftermath of the fire, but also that lizards declined after 1 – 2 years in
burnt compared with unburnt sites. Observations and experiments identified three causes of lizard loss in
burnt areas. The fire: 1) increased the susceptibility of lizards to free-ranging predators such raptors, lace
monitors and feral cats, 2) removed key habitat resources needed for shelter and thermoregulation, and
3) depleted invertebrate food resources. Initial declines in surface-active invertebrates were linked to
decreases or local losses of generalist lizards such as several species of Ctenotus , whereas longer-term
declines in termites appeared to drive reductions in numbers of specialist lizards such as Lerista labialis
and Rhynchoedura ornata . Some declines in lizard abundance and diversity were detected also in
unburnt sites; in accordance with predictions of island biogeographic theory, rates of loss were higher in
small patches of unburnt spinifex than in larger ones. Heavy rainfall in 2007 and again in 2010 – 2011 has
driven the recovery of spinifex in burnt areas, but current sampling shows that neither the abundances
nor diversity of lizards have reached pre-fire levels.

Climate projections indicate that central Australia will become hotter in future, but also that there will be
an intensification of ‗boom‘ and ‗bust‘ cycles that are driven by flood rains. These conditions will likely lead
to more frequent and extensive wildfires, in turn exacerbating the fragmentation of lizard populations and
assemblages. I discuss management options that should mitigate these effects.



Dillman, Casey (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Hilton, Eric (Virginia Institute of Marine Science,
Canada)

Development of the Pectoral Fin Spine in Acipenseridae (Actinopterygii: Acipenseriformes)


 Recent comprehensive studies on the anatomy and development of Acipenser brevirostrum and
Scaphirhynchus platorynchus have provided a wealth of information for comparative anatomical and
phylogenetic studies. These studies have also provoked numerous questions. One such question
involves the development of pectoral girdle and the formation of the pectoral fin spine, a proposed
synapomorphy for Acipenseridae. In this study we document the ontogeny of these regions and their
constituent components via developmental series for four species: A . fulvescens (30 – 170 mm TL), A.
medirostris (18-70 mm TL), A . transmontanus (19-131 mm TL), and S . albus 18-79 mm TL). Timing,
morphology, and pattern of development for the dermal bones, and pectoral fin spine among these
species are discussed and compared with other Acipenseriformes (e.g., a developmental series of
Polyodon spathula [15-120 mm TL] as well as other members of the family Acipenseridae). Additionally,
the ratio of fin spine length to total length is investigated to determine if ontogenetic changes occur in the
species examined. This study contributes to the ongoing character exploration for our studies of
phylogenetic relationships among acipenserids.




                                                                                                            177
Dillman, Casey (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Laumann, Katie; Hilton, Eric (Virginia Institute of
Marine Science, Canada)

Nuclear DNA perspectives and problems in estimating relationships among sturgeons
(Acipenseriformes: Acipenseridae)

Genome duplication is a prominent feature in the evolutionary history of fishes generally, and subsequent
lineage-specific genome duplications have also occurred (e.g., within Catostomidae and Salmonidae), as
well as proposed reductions in genome size (e.g., Tetraodontiformes). Rarely, however, are polymorphic
polyploidy levels seen across a natural assemblage of species. As exemplars of this phenomenon
sturgeons (Acipenseridae) provide a model clade for investigation. In this study we examined this
polymorphic polyploidy phenomenon utilizing DNA sequence data from – normally – single-copy nuclear
loci from half of the recognized species in the clade; our taxon sampling encompasses all documented
levels of polyploidy within this family (i.e., 2n to 16n). These data are examined with reference to patterns
seen from multi-copy nuclear loci, or the repeated regions of the nuclear genome that have been used
previously (i.e., the Internal Transcribed Spacer and nuclear ribosomal DNA regions). The utility of these
loci in reconstruction of hypotheses of relationships among taxa is explored.



Dixon-MacCallum, Graham (University of Victoria);

Habitat preferences of snakes and lizards in urban parks in Victoria, British Columbia.

Urban parks are of value, not only to the people who visit them for recreation, but to wildlife that rely on
parks to survive. In Victoria, British Columbia, urban parks support three species of snake, genus
Thamnophis, and two lizards, Elgaria coerulea and Podarcis muralis, but the specific habitat preferences
of these species are poorly understood. The habitat available at medium- and small-scale in four parks
will be quantified, as will the diversity and abundance of reptiles in those parks. Medium-scale habitat
composition will be quantified using GIS software to determine the ratios of landcover types (e.g. forest,
field, wetland, or shrub), and the length of habitat edges. Surveys will be performed along randomly
chosen transects and all snakes and lizards encountered will be captured by hand. Small-scale plot-
based vegetation surveys will be performed at each capture location, and at a location 50 m away along a
randomly selected compass bearing. Comparison of habitat characteristics at capture points and paired
random points will allow inferences about habitat preferences of snakes and lizards. I expect that habitat
edge will be the greatest predictor of reptile abundance in urban parks in Victoria. Therefore, parks that
are more heterogeneous at medium- and small-scale will have higher diversity and abundance. This
study will help inform park managers for the creation and maintenance of urban parks where populations
of wildlife, including snakes and lizards, can persist and thrive.



Doan, Tiffany (Oicos Habitare);

Squamate Diversity Patterns in Peru and Bolivia

The South American countries of Peru and Bolivia are home to 5.7% of the world‘s squamates species.
As part of the Global Assessment of Reptile Distributions, I mapped the species distributions of all lizards
and snakes that occur in Peru and Bolivia. Peru contains 393 squamate species belonging to 19 families,
whereas Bolivia is home to 287 squamate species of 17 families. Endemicity was particularly high in
Peru, with 119 endemic species (30.3%); the number of endemic squamates from Bolivia was much lower
(28 species), representing just 9.8% of species. In Peru, lizards had a much higher rate of endemism



                                                                                                         178
than snakes or amphisbaenians, whereas in Bolivia, the rate was similar for lizards and snakes.
Coefficients of Biogeographic Resemblance demonstrated that Peru and Bolivia share the most similar
squamate fauna of South American countries, with 159 species in common. Peru was next most similar
to Ecuador, whereas Bolivia was second most similar to Paraguay. Species accumulation curves that
compared year of description with time demonstrate that for both countries there is no plateau, indicating
that novel species await description in both nations. Hotspots in Peru occur in Iquitos (122 species),
Puerto Maldonado (100 species), and the Urubamba Valley (95 species). Bolivian hotspots include Santa
Cruz de la Sierra (104 species) and Riberalta (59 species). After completion of snake and lizard species
maps, 59 species in Peru and 66 species in Bolivia were only documented in a single one-degree cell.
Eighteen one-degree grid cells in Peru and 21 cells in Bolivia did not contain any records of snakes or
lizards, which indicates that additional widespread sampling is necessary to fully describe the squamate
faunas of these countries.



Donaldson, Terry (University of Guam Marine Laboratory);

Species Diversity and Characteristics of a Parrotfish Spawning Aggregation Site

A number of species of parrotfishes (Labridae: Scarinae) form spawning aggregations that have
predictable spatial and temporal patterns. Spawning aggregations formed by these fishes are either
resident or transient in nature. Mating systems and behaviors utilized by these fishes range from lek-like
behavior of terminal-phase males with paired spawning, group spawning by immature-phase males and
females, sneaking by immature phase males during pair spawning of terminal phase males with individual
females, and group spawning by relatively large aggregations of individuals. At Guam, Mariana Islands,
parrotfish spawning aggregations may be found on reef terraces near promontories or reef drop-offs. The
species diversity of parrotfishes utilizing the same spawning aggregation sites varies but may include as
many as five species on a daily basis related to both tidal state and time period, with another species
participating during a specific lunar phase. Of spawning aggregation sites assessed thus far, 2-3
resident spawning aggregation species are usually most abundant with other species less so.



Donnelly, Maureen (Florida International University); Shoo, Luke (Centre for Tropical Biodiversity &
Climate Change, Queensland, Australia); Olson, Deanna (US Forest Service, Corvallis, United States);
McMenamin, Sarah (University of Washington, Seattle, United States); Murray, Kris (University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia); Van Sluys, Monique (Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil); Msuya, Charles (University of Dar es Salaam, Dar Es Salaam, United States);
Stratford, Daniel (Griffith University, Canada); Terhivuo, Juhani (Finnish Museum of Natural History,
Canada); Merino-Viteri, Andres (James Cook University of North Queeensland, Canada); Herbert, Sarah
(EcoGecko Consultants, Canada); Bishop, Phillip (University of Otago, Canada); Corn, P. Steven (US
Geological Survey, Canada); Dovey, Liz (Dept. of Climate Change, Canada); Griffiths, Richard (The
Durrell Institute of Conservation & Ecology, Canada); Lowe, Katrin (Griffith University, Canada);
Mahoney, Michael (The University of Newcastle, Canada); McCallum, Hamish; Shuker, Jonathan;
Simpkins, Clay (Griffith University, Canada); Skerratt, Lee (James Cook University, Canada); Williams,
Stephen (James Cook University of North Queeensland, Canada); Linhoff, Luke (Florida International
University, Canada); Hero, Jean-Marc (Griffith University, Canada)

Engineering a Future for Amphibians under Climate Change

Following the 2009 INTECOL meeting in Brisbane Australia, a workshop was convened to discuss
potential efforts that might mitigate some climate change effects on amphibians. A survey of the
literature revealed three types of interventions that could help amphibians threatened with



                                                                                                      179
extirpation/extinction:   installations of microclimatic and microhabitat refugia, enhancement and
restoration of breeding sites, and manipulation of hydroperiod. In this presentation we review the findings
of Shoo et al. (2011) and focus on the international efforts to re-establish the Kihansi Spray Toad in
Tanzania. We use the Kihansi Spray toad as a case study because it involves efforts across all three
types of interventions described by Shoo et al. (2011). The assurance population exported to the United
States crashed to very low numbers until new husbandry efforts at the Toledo Zoo improved captive
reproduction success. The United States now has six zoological gardens involved in captive rearing and
Tanzania has established a biosecure site to hold captive animals for release into the re-engineered
wildlands of the Kihansi Gorge.



Donnelly, Maureen (Florida International University); Geerdes, Erica; Whitfield, Steven (University of
South Dakota, Vermillion, United States); Alvarado, Gilbert (Unversidad Nacional, Heredia, Costa Rica);
Kerby, Jacob (University of South Dakota, Vermillion, United States)

Ranavirus infection in native amphibians at La Selva Biological Station, Costa Rica: The first
report of ranavirus in Central America

Ranaviruses are globally widespread group of iridoviruses capable of causing mass mortality events in
amphibian populations, and are acknowledged to be a significant threat to amphibian populations in many
parts of the world. Central America hosts a diverse, unique, and highly threatened amphibian fauna, yet
there has been little effort to describe presence, systematics, host range, or impacts to hosts or
populations of Ranaviruses. In this study, we examined toe clips from 104 individuals of twelve different
species of amphibians collected at La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica. Utilizing quantitative PCR
methodology, we detected the presence of ranavirus in four of these samples all from a single direct
developing species, Craugastor bransfordii. We are currently conducting work on a larger dataset at the
same location and have found additional positive samples. These same individuals were also sampled
for the amphibian chytrid fungus (known to be present at the site) to determine any patterns in co-
infection. Future work will investigate the impacts of ranavirus to Costa Rican amphibian species.



Doody, Sean (The Orianne Society); Castellano, Christina (The Orianne Society, Clayton, GA, United
States); Rhind, David (Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Populations, and Communities,
Canberra, N, Australia); Green, Brian (University of Canberra, University of Canberra, N, Australia)

Paradise Poisoned: The Ecological Effects of a Toxic Invasive Species

Invasive species are a threat to native biodiversity worldwide, but can also facilitate native species. When
invasive animals reduce top predators, mesopredator ‗outbreaks‘ can occur; top predators can suppress
mesopredators both by killing them and by motivating changes in their behavior. The cane toad, Bufo
marinus, is toxic to naïve predators, was introduced into Australia in 1935, and has been filling its niche
by moving westward ever since. Our field research demonstrated that cane toads cause severe
population-level declines in some predatory lizards via lethal toxic ingestion. We also revealed releases
(associated with toad-induced top predator declines) in selected mesopredators, an apex predator, and a
herbivore, We predict releases in other species, including a threatened species. The severe declines of
predatory monitor lizards coupled with recent evidence of cascading effects on their prey suggest that
cane toads are re-shaping riparian communities in tropical Australia through both direct negative effects
and indirect facilitation.




                                                                                                        180
Dorcas, Michael (Davidson College); Hart, Kristen (U.S. Geological Survey, Davie, FL, United States);
Pittman, Shannon (University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United States); Snow, Ray (National Park
Service, Homestead, FL, United States); Cherkiss, Michael (U.S. Geological Survey, Davie, FL, United
States); Fujisaki, Ikuko (U.S. Geological Survey, Davie, United States); Mazzotti, Frank (University of
Florida, Davie, FL, United States)

Translocated Invasive Burmese Pythons Demonstrate Remarkable Movement and Navigational
Abilities

Animals must navigate in order to obtain resources within their environment. The navigational strategies
that individuals employ in both familiar and novel environments have important implications for their ability
to use their environment. A variety of navigational strategies have been documented in reptiles, most of
them based on some form of path integration, which requires the memory of an outward path to return
―home‖. True navigation, the ability to travel directly towards a goal after displacement to an unfamiliar
location without using familiar routes, has rarely been documented in reptiles, primarily in sea turtles.
Evidence for true navigation is typically found in long-distance migrants such as birds, marine fish, and
monarch butterflies. We conducted a study to examine the ability of invasive Burmese pythons (Python
molurus bivittatus) to navigate ―home‖ when displaced considerable distances from their point of capture.
We translocated 6 adult Burmese pythons 20-35 km from their capture locations. Within 3-8 months, all
snakes exhibited directed, long-distance movements towards their original capture locations (rho=0.96,
P<0.0001). Most snakes resumed less-directed movement patterns when they arrived close to their
original capture locations. Our results indicate that invasive Burmese pythons exhibit true homing and
navigational abilities when displaced long distances from their home range. Such abilities may reduce
risk associated with the exploration of new areas outside their home range and may have important
implications for expansion of the geographic range of invasive python in south Florida.



Dorr, Scott (California Polytechnic State University); Holding, Matthew; Frazier, Tony; Taylor, Emily
(California Polytechnic State University, Canada)

Stress Reactivity of Male and Female Western Rattlesnakes (Crotalus o. oreganus and C. o.
helleri)

The effects of stress hormones on reptile physiology are poorly understood, with some literature
indicating correlations between elevated glucocorticoid (e.g., corticosterone) concentrations and reduced
reproductive fitness, and others suggesting no effect. In theory, divergent selective pressures should
result in differential stress reactivity between males and females due to unequal lifetime reproductive
success and reproductive costs. We hypothesized that female western rattlesnakes will exhibit blunted
stress reactivity in order to avoid detrimental effects of high corticosterone levels on reproductive
physiology and behavior. We obtained blood samples from free-ranging Northern Pacific rattlesnakes ( C.
o. oreganus) and Southern Pacific Rattlesnakes ( C. o. helleri ) at two sites in Central California. Stress
reactivity was evaluated by measuring the change in plasma concentrations of the stress hormone
corticosterone in response to a stressor (confinement in an opaque bucket for one hour). We predicted
that the increase from basal (stress response) levels of corticosterone would be lower in female
rattlesnakes than in males. These data will allow us to progress toward a better understanding of sex
differences in adrenocortical physiology.




                                                                                                         181
Drake, Dana (University of Missouri);

Sampling of Terrestrial Salamanders Reveals Atypical Color Morphs in the Southern Redback
Salamander, Plethodon serratus

While much is known about the common, widely distributed, and widely studied Eastern Redback
Salamander, Plethodon cinereus , far less is known about its more geographically restricted sister taxon,
the Southern Redback Salamander, P. serratus , including habitat use and the occurrence frequency and
types of color morphs. In the spring and fall of 2010 and 2011, we conducted area-constrained leaf litter
and natural cover object searches for terrestrial salamanders in 800 different 3m2 plots in mature upland
hardwood forests of Sinkin Experimental Forest (USDA), Dent County, Missouri, USA. We encountered
1876 Plethodon serratus , 20 Plethodon albagula and 4 Eurycea longicauda . Of the salamanders
encountered, 75 % were found in leaf litter, 14 % under woody cover and 11 % under rocks. Two
salamanders were encountered in cicada burrows. Five of the salamanders encountered during the
surveys were atypical color morphs, and all atypical color morphs occurred in P. serratus . In addition to
the namesake redback phase and the leadback phase known to occur in P. cinereus , we encountered
a silverback (light gray dorsal stripe), a ghostback (white dorsal stripe) and a hypomelanistic (leucistic), or
milky, version of a redback phase. In the populations sampled, leaf litter sampling proved to be the most
effective for encountering P. serratus , and the frequency of non-redback phases of P. serratus was
extremely low but diverse.



Drake, Kristina (US Geological Survey); Nussear, Kenneth; Esque, Todd (US Geological Survey,
Henderson, NV, United States); Barber, Amy (University of Nevada-Reno, Reno, NV, United States);
Vittum, Katherine (US Geological Survey, Hendeson, NV, United States); Medica, Philip (US Geological
Survey, Henderson, NV, United States); Tracy, Richard; Hunter, Kenneth (University of Nevada-Reno,
Reno, NV, United States)

Does Translocation Influence Physiological Stress in the Agassiz's Desert Tortoise?

Wildlife translocation is increasingly used to mitigate disturbances to animals or habitat due to human
activities, yet little is known about the extent to which translocating animals causes stress. To understand
the relationship between physiological stress and translocation, we conducted a multi-year study (2007-
2009) using a population of Agassiz‘s desert tortoises (Gopherus agassizii) near Fort Irwin, California.
Blood samples were collected from adult tortoises in three treatment groups (resident, translocated, and
control) for one year prior to and two years after translocation to determine if this activity caused a
measurable physiological stress response, and the time frame over which animals adjust to translocation.
Samples were analyzed by radioimmunoassay for plasma total corticosterone (CORT), a glucocorticoid
hormone commonly associated with stress responses in reptiles. CORT values were analyzed in relation
to potential covariates (e.g. animal sex, date, activity, treatment, handling time, air temperature,
movement, precipitation, and annual plant production) among seasons and years. On a broad scale, we
measured lower CORT in years of low annual forage and precipitation and higher concentrations in years
with more abundant forage and precipitation. However, when attempting to tie this to the areas inhabited
by individual tortoises, estimated annual biomass production, precipitation, and movement did not
significantly explain CORT concentrations. CORT values in males were higher than in females, and
values for both varied monthly throughout the activity season and among years. We found that
translocation of desert tortoises did not result in elevated stress levels. Rather variations in CORT
concentration were best explained by the year and sex of the animal. From these results, we conclude
that translocation does not elicit a physiological stress response in desert tortoises.




                                                                                                           182
Drechsler, Axel (University of Bielefeld); Ortmann, Daniel (Forschungsmuseum Alexander König, Bonn,
Germany); Schmidt, Benedikt R. (University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland); Steinfartz, Sebastian
(University of Bielefeld, Bielefeld, Germany)

Applied conservation genetics in the context of a human induced decline: a case study on the
endangered crested newt (Triturus cristatus) in Germany

The Fauna-Flora-Habitat-Directive (FFH-Directive) was established to protect endangered plants and
animals in Europe and thus became therefore also an important tool to protect threatened amphibian
species. According to its danger of extinction, the great crested newt (Triturus cristatus) is one of the
amphibian species listed in this FFH-Directive (appendix II and IV). Irrespective of its high protection
status, a population of crested newts in Krefeld (Germany) representing the so far species‘ highest single
evidence with more than 4000 adult individuals was heavily disturbed by performed reconstruction
measures. By inserting a bentonite ground layer in the year 2001 the main reproduction habitat of the
newts lost its temporal periodicity leading to an increase in predatory fish species. As a consequence, the
population of crested newts in this central habitat collapsed. In order to find out in how far other
subpopulations in that area have been affected by this human impact, we performed from 2004-2011 a
monitoring of 26 habitats of crested newts. In the course of this monitoring all crested newts were trapped
by Ortmann`s funnel traps and tagged to perform a capture-mark-recapture analysis. Additionally a set of
20 microsatellite loci as genetic marker was used to get insights in the migration of crested newts.
Furthermore, an estimation of census versus effective population sizes of each subpopulation was
implemented to identify source and sink populations.

On the basis of more than seven years of monitoring and sampled 2.400 individuals for genetic analysis,
this study combines demographic aspects with population genetic data for this species to a so far non-
reached level. A future management plan based on these insights of demographic and genetic structure
should allow stabilising this former outstanding population of crested newts in terms of population size.



Dreher, Corinna (University of Veterinary Medicine of Hannover); Proehl, Heike (Institute for Zoology,
University of Veterinary Medicine of Hannover, Hannover, Germany)

The Importance of Coloration and Advertisement Calls for Mate Choice in Strawberry Poison
Frogs (Oophaga pumilio)

The interaction of sexual signals of different modalities can be important for mate choice decisions, but
has not yet been investigated in many animal taxa. In strawberry poison frogs both acoustic signals as
well as visual signals vary among populations and are supposed to be employed in courtship. While frogs
in Costa Rica are all red and considered to be aposematic, different populations of strawberry poison
frogs on the islands and adjacent mainland of the Bocas del Toro Archipelago in Panama differ widely in
color patterns. In Costa Rica the variability of calls is higher but the variability of coloration is smaller than
in Panama. To investigate the importance and the interaction of visual and acoustic signals for mate
choice we tested receptive females of strawberry poison frogs in Panama and Costa Rica for their
preference for local traits directly in their natural habitat. In total we tested 452 receptive females in two
Costa Rican and four Panamanian populations for their mate preference when given the choice between
two presented calls (local vs. non-local) in five types of playback experiments. In three of those
experiments the calls were presented in combinations with plasticine model frogs of two different colors
(local vs. non-local). Our results showed that females of Panamanian populations significantly preferred
the local call sequence over the non-local (i.e. Costa Rican) call sequence, independent of the color of
presented model frogs. In Costa Rica, females preferred the local call over the non-local (i.e.



                                                                                                              183
Panamanian) call only in one population in one out of three experiments. Additionally, in two Panamanian
populations females showed week preferences for either the local or the non-local color morph. Overall
our results suggest that acoustic signals are more important for mate choice than visual signals in
strawberry poison frogs. Furthermore the patterns of sexual preferences for advertisement calls or color
patterns seem to vary among populations. The study highlights the importance for testing receptive
females in the wild in multiple populations because sexual and natural selection pressures seem to differ
geographically within species.



Drumheller, Stephanie (The University of Iowa);

Exploring Patterns of Modern and Fossil Crocodylian Bite Marks from a Phylogenetic Perspective

Within the science of taphonomy, the study of the processes of preservation, it has been determined that
many patterns of fossil modification and survival can be correlated to anatomical features, particularly
skeletal element structure and overall shape. Systematists observe morphological similarities when
identifying phylogenetically informative characters. Despite this apparent source of potential overlap,
correlations between phylogenetic and taphonomic patterns have not been explored. An actualistic
survey of crocodylian bite marks provides an unprecedented opportunity to test whether phylogeny can
be used to predict taphonomic patterns in the fossil record. Bite mark samples were collected from 21 of
the 23 generally recognized species of extant crocodylian. Bite marks were observed under low
magnification and with a scanning electron microscope. Particular attention was paid to the bisected
marks previously identified as diagnostic for the group and to new types of marks. Presence or absence
of these feeding trace types were coded as binary characters and added to a published character-taxon
matrix encompassing extinct and extant eusuchians. A maximum parsimony analysis was performed with
and without these characters, and bite mark character states were mapped onto the resulting trees. The
bisected bite marks originally seen with actualistic studies of Crocodylus niloticus feeding can also be
identified on fossil specimens and associated with two extinct species, Crocodylus anthropophagus and
Deinosuchus riograndensis. The phylogeny generated during this analysis successfully predicts the
presence of bisected marks in both of these taxa. New fossil examples of bite marks attributed to a non-
crocodylian crocodyliform provide a case study in how using phylogeny to predict taphonomic patterns
can be projected beyond the crown group. This method does have limitations; extinct crocodyliforms filled
a wider array of ecological niches than their living relatives, and morphologies representing feeding
strategies no longer exploited by modern crocodylians are known. Actualistic data cannot be collected in
a phylogenetic framework for wholly extinct crocodyliform morphologies, such as ziphodont dentition or
expanded, anvil-like teeth associated with durophagy, but more distantly related extant groups may be
morphologically similar, and phylogeny can direct when and where those analogies are most appropriate.



Drymon, Marcus (Dauphin Island Sea Lab); Powers, Sean; Kroetz, Andrea (Dauphin Island Sea Lab,
Canada); Kevin, Feldheim (Field Museum, Canada); Gautreaux, Jill; Moore, Frank (University of Southern
Mississippi, Canada)

Are tiger sharks a seasonal conduit of terrestrial energy into marine foodwebs?

As apex predators, some shark species have the potential to couple energy pathways from disparate
foodwebs. This is particularly true of tiger sharks, highly migratory fish known for the breadth of items they
consume. In addition to foraging on invertebrates, bony and cartilaginous fishes, sea snakes, marine
mammals and seabirds, tiger sharks are known to consume terrestrial birds. While accounts of this



                                                                                                          184
predator-prey interaction date back over half a century, we know little about the pervasiveness of this
phenomenon within a population, or of the potential contribution terrestrial birds make to the diet of tiger
sharks. We investigated the extent to which individual tiger sharks are dietary generalists or specialists
using a combination of stomach content and stable isotope analyses. Tiger sharks were sampled during
routine, standardized bottom longline surveys of the coast of Alabama from 2009-2011. From fall 2010 to
fall 2011, stomachs (n=48) and muscle tissue (n=52) were collected. Gut contents were identified to the
lowest possible taxon, and avian remains (primarily feathers) were genetically identified. Three metrics
were calculated from gut content data: the Shannon index, individual specialization and mean niche
width. Individual isotope variation was used to compare to individual gut content variation. By using this
combination of techniques, in concert with time series data from a standardized coastal bird survey, we
combine datasets across marine and terrestrial ecosystems to evaluate the frequency of specialized
feeding behavior in a known generalist shark. While tiger shark populations consume a notoriously wide
range of items, identifying the extent that trophic strategy varies among individuals is increasingly
important in the face of management measures that may impact only portions of the population (e.g. the
recent harvest ban in Florida).



Du Preez, Louis (North-West university); Badets, Mathieu (School of Environmental Sciences &
Development, North-West University, Potchefstroom 2531, South Africa, Canada); Corrado, Costa (CRA
ING Via della Pascolare, 16 00015 Monterotondo Scalo (Roma) ¿ Italy, Canada); Claudio, Angelini
(Dipartimento di Biologia Animale e dell¿Uomo, Università `La Sapienza¿ di Roma, Viale dell¿Universita
32, 00185 Roma, Italy, Canada)

Investigating colors and patterns in Cacosternum boettgeri: Do parasites matter?

Polymorphic color and body patterns of anurans are underexploited systems for studying the evolution of
phenotypic variations in nature. A well documented part of this phenomenon is the sexual dimorphism
that may account for the intra specific variation of ecology and behavior. However, despite attempts to
find correlations between fitness-related traits and morph types, the results were mostly inconclusive. The
effects of direct selection by visually-oriented predators were more significant. Because parasites would
act as long term predators, their distribution within host populations may indirectly reveal cost associated
to sexual selection processes. We initiate here a first step towards answering this question, using the
amazing diversity of color and patterns variations in Cacosternum boettgeri (Pyxicephalidae) and its
species-specific parasite Polystoma sp . (Trematoda, Monogenea). The study involved 211 adult frogs
that were analyzed for both phenotypic traits and parasitic loads. In addition, 11 different clutches were
reared until metamorphosis resulting in 492 froglets to estimate the genetic inheritance of the phenotypic
traits. Preliminary results indicate a classic Mendelian genetic system behind the color and stripe patterns
of the host species. Although parasitic loads are not correlated to any specific phenotype among males, a
significant bias was observed between expected and observed female phenotypes. Relying on
preliminary analyses of this present study, a great, a great potential for evolutionary ecology is
uncovered.




                                                                                                        185
Du Preez, Louis (North-West University); Viviers, Joanita; Badets, Mathieu (North-West University,
Potchefstroom, South Africa)

Sex in the city: Amietia angolensis in an urban environment

We aim to understand the fundamental biological processes behind the distribution of amphibians in
urban environments. The description of social structure and appropriate spatial scales in amphibian
populations remain a major issue for their conservation, especially when they inhabit urban environments.
Although numerous studies have provided insight in the behavioural strategies and spatio-temporal
distribution of amphibians, there is a serious lack of long term monitoring to shed light on migration
patterns and mirco habitat utilization in a social context. The common river frog (Amietia angolensis)
presents an ideal model for a long term monitoring since they are active almost throughout the year,
utilize a variety of water bodies and have an extended breeding period. Intra specific interactions and
spatial distributions over various scales can be studied depending on large variation of abiotic
environmental parameters such as rainfall and temperature. We engaged in a long term monitoring of the
population dynamics of A. angolensis in order to describe how prenuptial migrations and intra specific
interactions affect the social structure of the population. The study was conducted at a semi-natural
environment namely the Botanical Garden of the North-West University (Potchefstroom, South Africa),
where 18 water bodies provide breeding habitat for the species. Throughout the botanical garden a total
of 165 frogs were captured by hand, measured, weighed, sexed and individually mark with a
subcutaneous pit tag that allow future identification without disturbing the frog. Over a period of one year
we conducted a survey every two weeks, scanning every frog we could find throughout the garden and
documented its position and behaviour. The following night we focussed on a single pond where we every
90 minutes documented the exact position, orientation and behaviour of each frog at this pond. Migration
between and within ponds were documented in relation to density and breeding events. Here we present
the preliminary results dealing with calls, migration, population dynamics and inter-individual interaction.
An integrated framework of spatial migration and individual behaviour allows describing the importance of
territorial aspects and social structures in the complete population of A. angolensis.



Duarte-Guterman, Paula (University of British Columbia); Navarro-Martin, Laia (University of Ottawa,
Canada); Ryan, Michael J. (University of Texas, Canada); Trudeau, Vance L. (University of Ottawa,
Canada)

Sexual development in frogs: a comparative study with implications for endocrine disruption

Several studies have shown that sex steroids alter frog sexual differentiation. Inhibition of sex steroid
synthesis or exposure to exogenous steroid can induce complete sex reversal or an intersex condition, in
which both ovarian and testicular tissue appear in the same gonad. The general impacts of sex steroids
on gonad morphology have been demonstrated in many different frog species, but with little exploration of
gonadal (sex) differentiation at the transcriptional and molecular level. To develop a broad perspective on
frog sexual development, we compared species of different families: the Neotropical Túngara frog (
Physalaemus pustulosus ), the African Western Clawed frog ( Silurana tropicalis ), and the North
American Wood frog ( Rana sylvatica ). We profiled the developmental expression of estrogen- and
androgen- related genes (respectively, aromatase and estrogen receptors, and 5alpha-reductases and
androgen receptor), and dmrt1 (sex determining gene in other vertebrates) in the gonad-mesonephros
complex (GMC). We measured transcript levels at three stages of tadpole development covering the
period of gonadal differentiation: premetamorphosis, prometamorphosis, and metamorphic climax. Most
genes showed similar expression in males and females across developmental stages in the three
species. The greatest exception was the estrogen-synthesising enzyme, aromatase, for which the



                                                                                                        186
expression was sexually dimorphic and diagnostic of sex in all species (greater in females than in males),
to the extent that sex could be identified even before visual identification of the gonadal sex (at pre- and
prometamorphic stages). These results suggest that aromatase can be used as a marker of anuran
ovarian development and it has a conserved role in gonadal development in vertebrates. Surprisingly, we
did not find the converse: no gene was a unique marker of testicular development in all species. We
therefore suggest that gonadal development is regulated by estrogen levels and similarly to other
vertebrates, absolute androgen levels do not seem to be important, i.e., high aromatase and estrogen
synthesis will guide ovarian development, while low estrogens relative to androgens will allow testicular
development. We suggest that aromatase and the ratio of estrogens to androgens are important
molecular and physiological endpoints for screening potential impacts of enviro



Dubey, Sylvain (University of Lausanne); Shine, Richard (University of Sydney, Sydney, N, Australia)

Are reptile and amphibian species younger in the Northern Hemisphere than in the Southern
Hemisphere?

The growing availability of phylogenetic information about major lineages provides an opportunity to
explore broad geographic patterns in evolutionary history. Our meta-analysis of molecular phylogenetic
data reveals that reptile and amphibian species distributed in temperate-zone areas of the Northern
Hemisphere are younger than taxa from the Southern Hemisphere according to (i) the inferred timing of
the split between two sister species and (ii) the oldest intraspecific diversification event within each taxon.
These results may be due to climatically driven cladogenic and extinction events or may be an artefact of
differing levels of taxonomic knowledge about the fauna. Current rates of species descriptions suggest
that many more taxa remain to be described in the Southern Hemisphere than the Northern Hemisphere;
for that bias to fully explain our results on species age differences, the proportion of undescribed
Southern taxa would need to be ≥12% in reptiles and ≥51% in anurans. In reptiles, taxonomic ignorance
plausibly explains the apparent difference in mean age of species between the Southern and Northern
Hemispheres; but this explanation can apply to amphibians only if a vast number of Southern taxa remain
to be described.



Duckett, Paul (Macquarie University); Wilson, Peter; Stow, Adam (Macquarie University, north ryde, N,
Australia)

Keeping up with the neighbours: Using a genetic measurement of dispersal and species
distribution modelling to assess the impact of climate change on an Australian arid zone gecko
(Gehyra variegata)

The distributions of species are predicted to be substantially influenced by global climate change (GCC).
Predictions include distributional shifts towards higher latitudes and altitudes, altered biotic interactions,
and species extinctions. The survival of species will be contingent on their ability to adapt or disperse.
While species distribution models are a popular tool for gauging how the distribution of favourable climate
may change over space and time, knowledge of dispersal is key to predicting if species are capable of
reaching new areas in the timescales imposed by GCC. Estimates of dispersal are also required to
predict future losses to intraspecific genetic diversity. Previously, species dispersal capabilities have been
assumed when assessing the impact of GCC, which either overestimates (no dispersal) or
underestimates (unlimited dispersal) losses in distribution and genetic diversity. We sampled 740 Gehyra
variegata throughout central and eastern Australia, encompassing much of the recorded distribution for



                                                                                                           187
this gecko. Genotypes from 16 microsatellite loci and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequence data were
obtained from each individual to estimate mean annual dispersal distance             and to quantify levels of
genetic diversity within each evolutionary significant unit identified. Species distribution modelling
predicted the current and future distribution of the species, and we used annual dispersal distances to
evaluate whether the species could keep up with shifts in the range of their favourable climatic conditions.
We show that 17-41% of the current G. variegata distribution is unlikely to reach their future distribution
within the timescale imposed by global climate change. Consequently, this will result in substantial losses
of genetic diversity, which may be detrimental to the evolutionary potential of this species. Our
interdisciplinary approach can make further use of molecular and occurrence record data sets to answer
the critically important question of whether a species has the capacity to reach future areas of favourable
climate, and will help quantify and prioritise areas that are important to conserve.



Dufresnes, Christophe (University of Lausanne); Wassef, Jérôme (University of Lausanne, Canada);
Ghali, Karim (University of Lausanne / Vivarium of Lausanne, Canada); Brelsford, Alan; Stöck, Matthias
(University of Lausanne, Canada); Lymberakis, Petros (Natural History Museum of Crete, University of
Crete, Canada); Crnobrnja-Isailovic, Jelka (University of Nìs / University of Belgrade, Canada); Perrin,
Nicolas (University of Lausanne, Canada)

Late Quaternary fine-scale phylogeography in Europe: Post-glacial recolonization, cryptic genetic
structure, and diversity hotspots in the European tree frog (Hyla arborea)

The major patterns of postglacial recolonization have been well characterized in many groups (Hewitt
2011, Genetica, 139: 617-638), but little is known on the fine-scale demographic and spatial intraspecific
changes that influenced ancestral populations and their postglacial expansion(s). Especially in
amphibians, such knowledge is scarce, but crucial to identify areas of high conservation value. While
Iberian ( Hyla molleri, Hyla meridionalis ) and Italian ( Hyla intermedia ) tree frogs were restrained by
Pyrenean and Alpine arcs in their postglacial expansions, the diverse Asia Minor taxon ( Hyla orientalis )
colonized northeastern Europe to the east of the Carpathians (Stöck et al., in review). European tree
frogs ( Hyla arborea ) had a Balkanian refugium, from which they recolonized Central and NW-Europe,
and thus provide a good model to study intraspecific variation in amphibians across Europe. Combining
phylogenetics and population genetics, we unraveled cryptic structure and strong variation of diversity in
65 populations across the entire H. arborea range , and inferred a historical biogeographic scenario.
MtDNA-phylogeny (1547 bp, n = 243) revealed a relic Eastern Adriatic clade (stemming from old range
contractions during the Riss glaciation; divergence time: 180 kya), and a younger, wide-spread
paraphyletic group with distinct haplogroups in the southern Balkans, Adriatic coast, Central and Western
Europe (90 kya, early Würm glaciation). Mismatch distributions suggest ancient range expansions in
Balkan populations (50-25 kya), whereas frogs from NW-Europe only expanded after the Last Glacial
Maximum (10-16 kya). We document complex genetic structure (up to 6 groups, 4 Balkanian; 28
microsatellites; n = 750), tightly linked to geography and past climate. Most diversity is found on the
Balkans (especially on the Adriatic and Greek coasts), and genetic diversity significantly decreases along
colonization routes (Pearson‘s r = -0.84). H. arborea survived in several genetically-rich regional sub-
refugia, from where few founders recolonized NW-Europe. Local ―diversity hotspots‖ should be
considered in future conservation management.




                                                                                                          188
Durso, Andrew (Utah State University); Somers, Ann B; Kirchoff, Bruce K (University of North Carolina -
Greensboro, Greensboro, NC, United States)

Development of visual learning tools for identifying herpetofauna

Taxonomic experts identify organisms by gestalt, the essence or shape of an entity's complete form. This
allows experienced herpetologists to identify their study organisms with split-second timing. However, the
vast majority of resources for teaching organism identification (e.g., taxonomic keys and field guides) are
instead feature-based. While we recognize the value of traditional, character-based approaches to
identifying organisms, we believe that the use of gestalt recognition approaches by students early in the
learning process can improve recognition and retention by involving the neural regions responsible for
holistic processing. Later, when learning characteristics helpful for understanding taxonomic and
phylogenetic relationships, the neural regions responsible for analytical processing can be informed by
prior holistic knowledge of species appearance. We are developing software that allows users to train
their visual systems to recognize images of 277 species of native southeastern herpetofauna by gestalt,
rather than by characteristics. Improvement in the speed and accuracy of students‘ abilities to recognize,
remember, and name species will allow herpetology classes to become more effective. Another
advantage of a gestalt approach using multiple photographs as models is the ability to better represent
variation within a species, commonly omitted from taxonomic keys and field guides. We believe this
approach will be useful not only in herpetology courses, but also in helping members of the public learn to
identify herpetofauna, a frequent challenge to the success of citizen science projects involving accurate
species identification.



Durso, Andrew (Utah State University); Mullin, Stephen (Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, IL,
United States)

Dietary ecology of a sand prairie snake community

Snake diets are difficult to study because individual snakes feed infrequently and opportunities to directly
observe predation by snakes are rare. These difficulties are compounded by the low detection probability
of individual snakes. As a result, comparative long-term data on snake diets are sparse, and the influence
of diet on snake community ecology is poorly understood. We used stable isotopes of nitrogen and
carbon to examine the vertebrate community at a sand prairie along the Mississippi River in northwestern
Illinois. Consistent with our prediction, snake scale tissues were enriched in nitrogen and carbon relative
to the whole-body homogenates of their prey. Among prey guilds, toads were enriched in carbon relative
to other anurans, small mammals, lizards, and turtle eggs from the same site, whereas turtle eggs were
enriched in nitrogen relative to the other prey guilds. We observed relatively high overlap among the
isotopic compositions of scale tissue of four snake species. Furthermore, we found that the snake species
traditionally considered the most specialized, Heterodon nasicus (Western Hog-nosed Snakes), had the
largest niche breadth and occupied the highest trophic position. Our results illustrate the value of stable
isotope analyses, and challenge the conventional wisdom from previous studies of prairie snake dietary
ecology.




                                                                                                        189
Durtsche, Richard D. (Northern Kentucky University); Bachman, Katherine; Carnahan, Kelsey; Cross,
Sarah (Northern Kentucky University, Canada)

Measurement of the mechanisms of digestion in tadpoles along the developing gastrointstinal
tract

Digestion and assimiliation of foodstuffs in developing vertebrates is often dependent upon changes in
the chemical environment along the gut depending on the level and type of food digestion and the
optimality of conditions for enzyme activity. Low pH in the stomach can chemically breakdown food while
activating pepsin protein enzymes. In vertebrates that consumed cellulose, there are areas of the gut
(e.g., colon) that could show lower pH and oxygen levels that would indicate locations of anaerobic
fermentation and the release of volatile, short-chain, fatty acids. Our measurements across
developmental stages of tadpoles (anuran larvae) document ontogenetic shifts in acid concentrations in
the gut suggesting upregulation of digestive activites within the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. As free living
vertebrates, anuran larvae undergo developmental changes in the formation of the GI tract, they are also
consuming foods as might an adult vertebrate. Functional changes in digestive processes in tadpoles can
therefore be either a response to the maturation of the system or to the the varied foods consumed.
Previous research in our lab has shown changes in pH across the GI tract, suggesting digestive
processes similar to adult vertebrates. Our continued investigations of differential acid concentrations
along the gut has resulted in the design and fabrication of improved pH and dissolved oxygen
microelectrodes. These microprobes have been used to measure digestive changes in various sections of
the gastrointestinal tract in various species of frog ( Lithobates clamitans, L. sylvatica ) tadpoles. These
solid-state microelectrodes with tip diameters of ≤ 5-10 µm maintain a precision of R 2 = 0.95 against
standard solutions.



Eads, Bryan (Indiana University - Purdue University Fort Wayne); Hayter, Lindsey (Indiana University -
Purdue University Fort Wayne, Dupont, United States); Kingsbury, Bruce (Indiana University - Purdue
University Fort Wayne, Fort Wayne, United States)

Road Responses and Culverts as a Tool for Increasing Habitat Connectivity for the Federally
Threatened Copper-bellied Watersnake (Nerodia erythrogaster neglecta) and other Wetland
Snakes

Habitat fragmentation is a major contributor to habitat degradation, with roads playing a major role in
dividing the landscape. Roads and their traffic are not only hazards that cause injury and mortality, but
also are potentially perceived barriers further inhibiting movement and thus further reducing gene flow
and increasing risks for small populations. If we are to mitigate the impacts of roads, we need to identify
means of controlling when and where snakes cross them, and provide safe corridors that they will utilize
―through‖ the barriers roads impose. We have been investigating the responses of a suite of wetland-
associated snakes, the Copper-bellied Watersnake ( Nerodia erythrogaster neglecta ), Midland
Watersnake ( N. sipedon ), Eastern Gartersnake ( Thamnophis sirtalis ), and the Eastern Ribbonsnake (
T. sauritus ) to various road surfaces and canopy cover combinations. We are examining relative
responses to gravel versus paved road surfaces, and those surfaces with tree canopy present or absent.
We are also exploring the willingness of these species to pass through culverts already existing in the
landscape. Our preliminary findings indicate that the two Thamnophis species and N. e. neglecta were
generally unwilling to cross roads regardless of treatment. However, in contrast, N. sipedon exhibited a
high frequency of crossing on all road and canopy cover combinations except for paved without canopy
cover. In general, canopy cover appears to be more important than road surface type when considering
road crossings. Nerodia sipedon also appears to have little aversion to utilizing the culverts tested thus



                                                                                                         190
far (0.5 and 1.0 m diameter), passing through both (avg. 83 and 86 %) of the time. Based on our findings,
to promote crossing roads at sites perceived to be most advantageous, canopy should be maintained
near and over the road, and, at least for some species, we can also utilize culverts to encourage
potentially less dangerous passage.



Earl, Julia (University of Missouri); Semlitsch, Raymond (University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United
States)

Carryover Effects in Amphibians: How Much Complexity is Needed to Predict Survival?

Carryover effects occur when experiences early in life affect an individual‘s performance at a later stage
and are important in many socially and economically critical research areas, including human health and
food production. Recent studies have shown that experiences in early stages can, but not always,
interact with later stages to create unintuitive patterns. These studies with different outcomes vary in taxa
and types of environmental variation. We were interested in whether similar patterns would emerge
under the same experimental design with similar taxa. To examine this, we implemented a four-way
factorial experimental design with different forestry practices on three species of anurans (in different
years) in the aquatic larval stage and terrestrial juvenile stage. We investigated whether one
environment, both environments, or the interaction between the environments best predicted survival.
We found that the most complex model (the four-way interaction) was never the best model. However, in
two species/years, the best predictors of juvenile survival included factors from both the terrestrial and
aquatic environments. In the third species/year, factors from only the terrestrial environment best
predicted survival, but low survival may have limited our ability to detect other differences. Both life
history parameters (size and time to metamorphosis) and aquatic habitat variables indicated carryover
effects, and these effects were found in the short- and long-term. Our study and others show that
environmental factors from different habitats have the potential to affect a single demographic parameter.
Future work recognizing the potential importance of multiple life stages simultaneously will better assess
their impacts on population dynamics.



Earl, Julia (University of Missouri); Semlitsch, Raymond (University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United
States)

Habitat-induced diet shifts in tadpoles: using stable isotopes in replicated experiments

Differences in habitat can alter many aspects of an organism‘s biology, including survival and growth. All
of these habitat-associated changes are affected by food quantity and quality, and organisms often shift
their diets with these changes. Anuran larvae are known to perform better in open canopy ponds than
closed canopy ponds, which has been attributed to lower food quality in closed canopy ponds. However,
understanding diet changes is important to understand the mechanisms associated with differences in
performance. To investigate this, we raised tadpoles (spring peepers, gray treefrogs, and toads) in
mesocosms where we manipulated shading and litter (grass, leaves or none). We collected tadpoles at
metamorphosis (Gosner stages 42 to 46) and possible food items and analyzed whole organisms for
carbon and nitrogen stable isotopes. We also looked for consistent changes in isotopic ratios with body
size, developmental stage, and time to metamorphosis, which were averaged by mesocosm. We were
particularly interested in developmental stage, because tail absorption during metamorphosis may alter
isotopic ratios. In toads and spring peepers, there was no effect of individual characteristics on isotopic
ratios. However, in gray treefrogs, nitrogen isotopic ratios increased with longer larval periods. We found



                                                                                                         191
no effect of developmental stage on either carbon or nitrogen isotopic ratios, which may indicate that
metabolism during metamorphosis does not alter isotopic ratios, though controlled laboratory experiments
are needed to confirm this. We found that carbon, but not nitrogen, isotopes in frog tissue were affected
by both shading and litter input. We consistently found that carbon isotopic ratios (CIR) decreased with
increases in canopy cover. Metamorph tissues in all three species also had higher CIR when raised in
mesocosms with no litter than other litter types. Additionally, spring peeper metamorph tissue had lower
CIR when raised with leaves than with grass. The significant effects of shading and litter on CIR in frog
tissue likely indicate distinct shifts in diet relating to canopy cover. Additionally, the similar responses of
all three species indicate that they likely shift their diet in similar ways with changes in canopy cover. This
study shows that using stable isotopes in replicated experiments can determine general patterns with
relation to diet and help us understand mechanisms of manipulated variables.



Ebrahimi, Mehregan (Flinders University); Bull, Michael (Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia)

How to decrease dispersal after translocation in the endangered pygmy bluetongue lizard (Tiliqua
adelaidensis)

Many methods have been suggested by conservationists to protect endangered species. One method
that is not always successful is translocation to new or to previously occupied sites. Regular monitoring,
an important component to determine success of translocation, has often shown low success in reptile
translocation attempts due to disperse from release sites. Therefore, any factor which can persuade a
species to remain close to the release site will be useful in a translocation program. Habitat quality, food
availability, predation risk and competition are all potentially influential factors. The pygmy bluetongue
lizard (Tiliqua adelaidensis) was thought to be extinct until 1992, when it was discovered in the stomach
of dead brown snake (Pseudonaja textilis) near Burra in South Australia. It is now known from a few
highly isolated fragments of native grasslands, all privately owned and all restricted to a small region in
the mid-north of South Australia. Translocation to more sites within their previous range will spread the
risk of extinction for this species, if animals will establish at translocation sites. They spent most of their
time inside single entrance burrows made by lycosid and mygalomorph spiders. We simulated
translocation of this species by releasing four individuals into each of four bird-wire roofed 15 m diameter
circular enclosures. Each cage was divided into three areas. A central (4 meter diameter) area was the
main translocation site in which we experimentally changed habitat factors. This area included artificial
burrows as refuges. A surrounding 10 m wide ring of bare ground represented a matrix of unsuitable
habitat around the central area. A 1 m wide marginal area around the inner perimeter of the cage was
also provided with artificial burrows to identify any lizards that dispersed from central area. Four
surveillance cameras in each cage monitored lizard behaviour. Our experimental design allowed us to
compare the tendency for lizards to remain in the central area where they were released, under different
sets of conditions at the release site. For instance we found lizards were less likely to disperse if provided
with additional food each day. We also considered factors such as burrow density, spatial pattern of
burrows, vegetation density, and the presence of additional conspecific cues. These trials will be the
basis for release site design in more realistic translocation trials in the future.




                                                                                                           192
Echaubard, Pierre (Laurentian University); Wilkinson, Lindsay (Laurentian University, Canada); Pauli,
Bruce (Environment Canada, Canada); Lesbarrères, David (Laurentian University, Canada)

Habitat fragmentation, host genetic diversity depletion and pathogen prevalence in Lithobates
(Rana) pipiens: a landscape genetics approach

Amphibians are the vertebrate group facing the most severe decline worldwide with half of the roughly
6000 species described having at least a threatened status. While several other factors have been listed,
habitat fragmentation and the occurrence of Emergent Infectious Diseases have been suggested to be
two of the main determinants associated with population declines. Considering both the individual severity
of each of these two threats and the potential for synergistic effects between them, the objective of the
present study is to investigate the tripartite interconnection between habitat fragmentation, genetic
diversity depletion and ranavirus occurrence in Ontario populations of Lithobates (Rana) pipiens. We
sampled L.pipiens populations in 18 Ontario locations for toe-clips from which we extracted DNA. We
then typed each samples at seven polymorphic microsatellite loci (Rpi100, Rpi101, Rpi102, Rpi 103, Rpi
105, Rpi 106, Rpi 108) and screened them for ranavirus presence by PCR using primers known to
amplify a portion of the major capsid protein within the Frog Virus 3 genome. Additionally, in order to
quantify habitat quality with regard to frog biology we built a landscape matrix incorporating indexed
landscape variables for each location sampled. We used GIS as a tool for merging geographic
information on road density, buildings and forest cover, rail presence, types of aquatic habitats, amount of
water edges and land use layers.

Our results suggest that both rail and road density were related to lower intra and among population
genetic diversity while forest density and the quality and extent of aquatic habitat were positively related
to genetic diversity components. Our results suggest thus that both fragmentation of habitat and
landscape permeability are important environmental features potentially affecting amphibian
metapopulation dynamics by reducing gene flow between interconnected populations. Furthermore we
found a significant negative relationship between two measures of intra-population genetic diversity and
ranavirus prevalence. Our study therefore tend to confirm that increasing the extent of landscape
fragmentation and habitat deterioration, in addition to have direct consequences in terms of individual
survival, might also result in free-ranging populations having less conserved genetic diversity and higher
risk of extinction, particularly upon future exposure to emerging pathogens.



Echelle, Anthony (Oklahoma State University); Schwemm, Michael (Oklahoma State University,
Canada); Nagle, Brett; Simon, Andrew (University of Minnesota, Canada); Lang, Nicholas; Van Den
Bussche, Ron (Oklahoma State University, Canada)

Molecular systematics of the Nocomis biguttatus complex

Nuclear (S7) and mitochondrial (cytb) sequences were used to investigate the systematics of the
Nocomis biguttatus complex ( N. biguttatus, N. asper, and N. effusus ). The widespread N. biguttatus
seems paraphyletic with respect to N. effusus . The White River (Ozark) population of N. biguttatus is
sister to a clade in which the remainder of N. biguttatus is sister to N. effusus . The primarily Ozarkian
species, Nocomis asper , is sister to N. biguttatus-N. effusus . The disjunct population of N. asper in
Blue River, southcentral Oklahoma, carries alleles from N. biguttatus at low (0.05, S7) to moderate
(0.15, cyt b) frequencies, whereas haplotypes of N. biguttatus appear absent from Ozark populations of
N. asper . The small sample (n = 2) of the disjunct population of N. asper from the Ouachita River in
central Arkansas carried haplotypes that were identical, or nearly so, to haplotypes from the Ozark




                                                                                                        193
population. These results are discussed with respect to historical biogeography and the possibility of
anthropogenic introductions.



Edgehouse, Michael (Lewis-Clark State College); Brodie III, Edmund D. (University of Virginia, Canada);
Brodie Jr., Edmund D (Utah State University, Canada)

Interspecific aggression and habitat partitioning in garter snakes from Santa Lucia Preserve,
Monterey County, California.

Defense of a limited resource, such as space or food, has recently been discovered in snakes and has
been widely documented in lizards. Garter snakes ( Thamnophis spp. ) are historically considered
generalist predators and not subject to food as a limiting resource. Our data, however, show that the
common garter snake ( Thamnophis sirtalis ) and the aquatic garter snake ( Thamnophis atratus ) show a
preference for amphibians as their primary food source at the Santa Lucia Preserve (SLP), Monterey
County, California. This food preference forces snakes at SLP to utilize similar habitats. We show, when
snakes are alone, a 100% preference for aquatic or near aquatic habitat.         In contrast, when counter-
specific snakes are together, Thamnophis sirtalis will occupy the aquatic habitat and Thamnophis atratus
will occupy an area far removed from water. Thamnophis sirtalis will often physically force Thamnophis
atratus from the aquatic habitat through repeated biting or through other displays of aggression.



Edwards, Danielle (Yale University); Evans, Ben; Garrick, Ryan; Benavides, Edgar (Yale University,
Canada); Tapia Aguilera, Washington (Galapagos National Park, Canada); Rusello, Mike (University of
British Columbia, Canada); Gibbs, James (Syracuse University of New York, Canada); Caccone, Gisella
(Yale University, Canada)

The application of extant and museum genetic samples for investigating the genetic
consequences of species recovery efforts from hybrid Giant Galapagos tortoises

Repatriation of species that have become extinct either locally or in the wild can have important
consequences for maintaining natural ecosystem processes. However, what are our options for
repatriation when all that remains of a species are hybrids? For species with few or no individuals
remaining historical DNA samples are vital for establishing background estimates of original allele
frequencies and diversity. For Giant Galapagos tortoises, studies using historic genetic samples from
museum specimens have been critical in clarifying the genetic architecture of extinct and endangered
species. These data have also been combined with extant DNA samples to identify individuals from a
population on northern Isabela Island that are hybrids containing ancestry in various Giant Galapagos
tortoise species (e.g., Chelonoidis elephantopus, a species previously thought to be extinct). Historical
interactions between humans and Giant Galapagos tortoises lead to the establishment of a hybrid
population on Volcano Wolf (northern Isabela) containing the ancestry of many of the extant and some
extinct species of tortoise. We use historic DNA samples taken from museum samples collected from
Pinta to identify hybrids on Volcano Wolf with ancestry in C. abingdoni – typified by Lonesome George as
the world‘s most endangered species that consists of a single individual. In order to explore the
genetic outcomes that can be achieved using hybrid individuals in repatriation programs we use the
genetic data from these hybrids in combination with demographic data taken from captive and wild
tortoise populations to simulate the genetic outcome, relative to that previously observed on Pinta Island,
of various repatriation strategies in a management and evolutionary perspective. Specifically, we sought
to understand what the effects of long-term versus short-term backcrossing (i.e., for one to 5 generations)




                                                                                                       194
would have on the evolutionary trajectory (after 10 to 100 generations post repatriation) of the species
under both unlimited and more economically realistic scenarios. Additionally, we analyze the effect of
―successfulness‖ of the breeding program on the future potential genetic architecture of the species. We
present these results, in addition to discussing the challenges of species repatriation with limited genetic
material and with only historical samples as a benchmark.



Edwards, Robert J. (University of Texas-Pan American); Garrett, Gary P. (Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department, Mountain Home, TX, United States); Remshardt, Jason (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
Albuquerque, NM, United States); Roberson, Aimee M. (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Alpine, United
States)

Conservation efforts for the Rio Grande silvery minnow into the Big Bend region of Texas and
Mexico

The Rio Grande silvery minnow ( Hybognathus amarus ) is one of the most endangered fishes in North
America and was first federally listed in 1994. Originally inhabiting the Rio Grande from Española, New
Mexico to the mouth of the river near Brownsville, the species is currently found in approximately 5% of its
former range in central New Mexico. The Recovery Plan for the species recommended that it be
reintroduced into portions of its former range. The first experimental reintroductions of the species was
approved and undertaken in December 2008. More than 600,000 minnows were released at four sites in
the Big Bend region in each of the past 4 years. The reintroduced fish have shown at least some survival
at each of the sites and have been found considerable distances away from the reintroduction sites. Rio
Grande silvery minnow eggs have been collected from two of the monitoring sites in 2010 and in August
2010, a 37 mm standard length juvenile Rio Grande silvery minnow was taken at one site, indicating
some successful reproduction.



Edwards, Shelley (University of Stellenbosch); Vanhooydonck, Bieke (University of Antwerp, Antwerpen,
Belgium); Herrel, Anthony (CNRS-MNHN, Paris, France); John, Measey (Nelson Mandela Metropolitan
University, Port Elizabeth, South Africa); Tolley, Krystal (South African National Biodiversity Institute,
Cape Town, Western Cape Province, South Africa)

Convergent evolution associated with substrate decouples phenotype from phylogeny in the
southern African lacertid lizards (Eremiainae, Lacertidae)

Convergent evolution can explain similarities in morphology between species, due to strong selection on
a fitness-enhancing phenotype in response to local environmental conditions. Previous work has revealed
how morphological convergence exists between ecotypes, with morphology being directly related to
microhabitat usage, some well-known examples of which include cichlids, finches and anoline lizards.
Southern Africa possesses a high diversity and endemism of reptile taxa. The southern African landscape
is varied in terms of habitat, with many lizard species inhabiting a particular micro habitat (e.g. rock,
compact sand, loose sand, grass, trees). Within the African radiation of lacertid lizards, species range
from strictly rupicolous to strictly psammophillic, whilst others are generalists in terms of habitat choice.
We hypothesised that in the African radiation of lacertid lizards (Eremiainae) overall body and limb
morphology would be independent of phylogeny, but dependent on substrate type. To test this hypothesis
Bayesian inference and maximum likelihood methods were used to examine evolutionary relationships for
17 species from all 5 Eremiainae genera using two mitochondrial (16S and ND4) and two nuclear (RAG1
and KIAA-2018) markers. Principal component analysis and clustering analysis on size-corrected linear
measurements of body, head and limbs were conducted to examine congruence between evolutionary



                                                                                                         195
relationships and morphology. Our phylogenetic analysis reveals taxonomic mis-assignments of species
within Australolacerta and Ichnotropis. However, morphological analyses indicate that the mis-assigned
species are convergent in body features: species utilising compact substrates exhibited more slender
bodies and shorter limbs compared to the stockier bodies and longer limbs of the sand-dwelling species.
Sand-diving lacertids possessed significantly larger heads. We attribute this to convergence as a result of
adaptation to substrate types, and we conclude that in the Eremiainae, similarity in body plan is not
always congruent with shared ancestry, but in all cases it is coupled to habitat usage.



El Mouden, El Hassan (Cadi Ayyad University); Fattah, Abderazzak Fattah; Slimani, Tahar Slimani;
Radi, Mohamed; Tabrouri, Fatima Ezzahra (Cadi Ayyad University, Faculty of Sciences-Semlalia,
Laboratory of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, Marrakech, Morocco, Canada); Marquez, Rafael
(Fonoteca Zoológica, Departamento de Biodiversidad y Biología Evolutiva, Museo Nacional de Ciencias
Naturales (CSIC), Madrid, Spain, Canada); Beltran, Juan Francisco (Departamento de Fisiología y
Zoología, Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain, Canada); De Pous, Philip (Society
for the Preservation of Herpetological Diversity, Den Haag, the Netherlands; Institute of Evolutionary
Biology (CSIC-UPF), Barcelona, Spain, Canada)

Breeding site characteristics and amphibian species diversity in the Tensift-Haouz region
(Marrakech-Morocco)

Several studies show that amphibians are the most threatened animal group in the world. The causes of
this phenomenon are very diverse and include habitat destruction and fragmentation, pollution,
pathogens, climate change or interactions among several factors. Understanding habitat use and
characteristics of different species is than a major challenge in conservation biology. This study focused
on amphibian species diversity and their abundance in the Tensift-Haouz region in south-western
Morocco, as well as on the environmental factors (including human activity impact) determining their
occurrence patterns and abundance. For this purpose, we used 16 variables to characterize the breeding
site and their surrounding terrestrial areas. The fieldworks were taken between February 2007 and
March 2011. From the 13 species inventoried in Morocco, a total number of 7 species were identified in
the studied region.      Pelophylax saharicus, Amietophrynus mauritanicus and Bufo boulengeri are
common in the studied region. Among these species, only the first one occurred in a polluted site (the
Tensift River with Pt>13 mg/l, NH4+>3 mg/l, DCO>2000 mg/l; indicating high pollution). Bufo bufo, Hyla
meridionalis and Discoglossus scovazzi are localized in the mountainous region and surrounding areas,
whereas Bufo brongersmai is restricted to the arid zone of the northern part of studied region.
Concerning the distribution of this Moroccan endemic species, five new localities were identified in the
Jbilet region which reveals its abundance in the region, while its absence and despite several
prospecting, in the Tensift River indicate its disappearance from this site, likely as a result of pollution.
Based on the collected data and additional data from literature and fieldwork, the potential distribution
under current climatic conditions was predicted using maximum entropy modelling.

This study has been supported by the Hassan II Academy for Science and technique – Project ICGVSA.




                                                                                                         196
Emel, Sarah (Washington State University); Storfer, Andrew (Washington State University, Canada)

Predicting the distributions under climate change of two Pacific Northwestern salamanders:
Rhyacotriton kezeri and R. variegatus

In the face of global climate change and the expected rapid shift in species‘ suitable habitat toward the
poles, the accurate prediction of future geographic distributions of species is essential to mitigate the
anticipated loss of biodiversity. The ability to predict future ranges is especially important for organisms
with restricted distributions and limited dispersal abilities, particularly amphibians. We examined two
endemic Pacific Northwestern amphibian species that are likely to be heavily impacted by climate change
due to their restricted ranges and specific habitat needs, Rhyacotriton kezeri and R. variegatus.
Rhyacotriton kezeri has a restricted range in coastal southern Washington and northern Oregon, while R.
variegatus has a larger, yet still restricted range in coastal Oregon and northern California. Both species
inhabit old-growth forest and require the highly-oxygenated water of waterfall splash zones in headwater
streams due to their high susceptibility to desiccation. We constructed correlative ecological niche models
for the future geographic distributions of R. kezeri and R. variegatus using multiple modeling methods:
the maximum entropy-based program Maxent and the genetic algorithm-based model GARP. These
models combined hundreds of presence/absence data points for each species with current climate and
topographic data layers to predict suitable future habitat based on a range of future climate scenarios.
Occurrence data was partitioned equally into training and testing data for assessing the predictive
performance. We found that predicted future geographic distributions of both species will shift northward,
leading the future distribution of R. kezeri to overlap with the current distribution of the congener R.
olympicus in the Olympic Peninsula of Washington, whereas the future distribution of R. variegatus may
include habitat currently occupied by R. kezeri or R. cascadae to the north and northeast of its current
distribution. Although further research is required to predict a more likely realized niche incorporating
biotic factors such as dispersal for these species, predicting the future distribution based on the
fundamental niches is valuable. These analyses defined the maximum potential for the future distribution
of R. kezeri and R. variegatus, allowing for the targeted conservation of major portions of the core of
those predicted ranges.



Engler, Jan (Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig Bonn); Ihlow, Flora; Dambach, Johannes;
Flecks, Morris; Hartmann, Timo; Nekum, Sven; Rajaei, Hossein; Rödder, Dennis (Zoological Research
Museum Alexander Koenig Bonn, Bonn, Germany)

On the brink of extinction? How climate change may affect global chelonian species richness and
distribution

Anthropogenic global climate change has already led to alterations in biodiversity patterns by directly and
indirectly affecting species distributions. It has been suggested that poikilothermic animals, including
reptiles, will be particularly affected by global change and large-scale reptile declines have already been
observed. Currently, half of the world's freshwater turtles and tortoises are considered threatened with
extinction, and climate change may exacerbate these declines. In this study, we assess how global
chelonian species richness will change in the near future. We use species distribution models developed
under current climate conditions for 78% of all extant species and project them onto different
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) scenarios for 2080. We detect a strong dependence
of temperature shaping most species ranges, which coincide with their general temperature-related
physiological traits (i.e., temperature-dependent sex determination). Furthermore, the extent and
distribution of the current bioclimatic niches of most chelonians may change remarkably in the near
future, likely leading to a substantial decrease of local species abundance and ultimately a reduction in



                                                                                                        197
species richness. Future climatic changes may cause the ranges of 86% of the species to contract, and of
these ranges, nearly 12% are predicted to be situated completely outside their currently realized niches.
Hence, the interplay of increasing habitat fragmentation and loss due to climatic stress may result in a
serious threat for several chelonian species.



Ennis, Bradley (University of Southern Mississippi); Peterson, Mark (University of Southern Mississippi,
Canada)

Fish and decapod crustacean intertidal habitat use patterns within micro-tidal salt marsh systems

The intertidal marsh surface has widely been accepted as an essential fish habitat as it provides resident
nekton an area for breeding, foraging, and shelter from predators.            However, the potential use of this
habitat is often limited based on the hydrodynamic patterns of the region. For example, some studies
have supported the notion that the variation in accessibility to the salt marsh intertidal created by different
tidal dynamics can directly influence the overall marsh nekton productivity. In addition, previous published
work in US East coast meso-tidal systems showed differences in intertidal salt marsh use based on
species and size class distributions. The purpose of this project was to provide a better understanding of
how nekton use the salt marsh intertidal of a micro-tidal system by focusing on the role of tidal dynamics
along salt marsh gradients. Nekton were captured from the marsh surface twice in August and twice in
September 2011 with an array of bottomless lift nets during slack high tide at three sites within Crooked
Bayou, Grand Bay NERR. Each sampling site consisted of three arrays of four bottomless lift nets that
extended from the main channel edge to the marsh interior centered between 0-8, 9-16, 17-24, & 25-36 m
from the channel edge. Elevation data was acquired for each site. Time-averaged abundance of all
species within a site marsh level indicated no significant difference in mean total density nor species
richness (p > 0.05) among salt marsh levels at any site suggesting the habitat use patterns as a whole
are homogeneously on the marsh surface at high tide as far in as 30 meters. In contrast, a significant site
difference (p < 0.05) existed for mean species density and richness. This may be attributed to variation in
elevation among sites; however, there was minimal variation between site rivulets morphology, channel
width, DO, and salinity. We anticipate making direct comparisons of these patterns based on community
structure, species density and size class distributions. By facilitating our understanding of nekton habitat
use on the marsh surface, enhanced management practices can be implemented in an effort to conserve
this critical fisheries habitat, and further identify potential risks that may be created through anthropogenic
impact, poor restoration efforts, or climatic change.



Ernst, Raffael (Senckenberg Natural History Collections Dresden);

Merging community ecology and phylogenetic biology in amphibian research: How habitats shape
anuran trait communities and species life-history traits

Amphibians are not only known to be one of the most diverse tetrapod vertebrate groups, they also
exhibit an outstandingly high diversity in terms of life history traits that have evolved in particular lineages.
Amphibian habitat requirements are very diverse and complex. They exhibit distinct assemblage patterns
over a range of spatial, temporal, and functional scales and community composition is largely influenced
by the effects of environmental variables and spatial or biotic processes. Provided that similar
environmental templets lead to similar adaptations, observed trait distribution patterns would reflect how
evolution has shaped amphibian species to cope with the temporal and spatial variability of their present
environment. Human activities and global change processes would therefore not only have the potential



                                                                                                             198
to alter species ranges but also the trait composition and therefore the response variability and thus
flexibility of entire ecosystems. Within a large scale meta-analysis we searched for multiple trait-habitat
relations in tropical anuran assemblages. Our aim was to investigate whether these relations converge
across global regions. The specific goal was to test whether trait-habitat relations reflect common
evolutionary history or environmental trait filters. We compared large anuran data sets derived from
investigations of anuran assemblages in three biogeographic regions (Guiana Shield, South America;
Upper Guinea Forest Block, West Africa; Borneo Rain Forests, South-East Asia). These were
complemented by molecular community phylogenies in order to test for phylogenetic structure and
phylogenetic signal in traits. We present first results that highlight the importance of integrating trait-
habitat links into analyses of biological assemblages as this can enhance the predictive power and
general application of species assembly rules in ecology, particularly when phylogenetic comparative
methods are simultaneously applied. In order to predict anuran trait composition based on habitat
templets, trait-habitat links cannot be assumed to be universal but rather have to be individually
established prior to model building. Only then can direct trait-based approaches be useful tools in
predicting fundamental anuran community patterns.



Espindola, Vinicius (Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro);

Comparative anatomy of the swim bladder and associated structures of Callichthyidae:
phylogenetics implications (Ostariophysi, Siluriformes)

The Neotropical catfish superfamily Loricarioidea contains six families: Trichomycteridae,
Nematogenyiidae, Callichthyidae, Scoloplacidae, Astroblepidae and Loricariidae, including about 144
genus and 1,130 species. Loricarioidea is characterized by odontodes and a reduced and paired swim
bladder encapsulated in expansions of the parapophysis of the complex centrum. The family in study is
Callichthyidae including eight genus and 200 species, characterized by two rows of overlapping bony
plates on each side of the body. Several hypotheses were used to express the interrelationships of the
subfamily Callichthyiane and Corydoradinae, containing the complex genus Corydoras the largest in
Siluriforms with more than 180 species, plus the genus Aspidoras and Scleromystax . The previously
species analyze were defined in nine different clades in Corydoradinae and also Aspidoras, Callichthys,
Hoplosternum, Lepthoplosternum, Megalechis and Dianema. Over different 60 specimens were cleared
stained to analize the swim bladder and the Weberian apparatus. New characters were provided as
encased swim bladder elongated or short, ventral processes lateral or anterior to canals between the
swim bladder, fifth and sixth parapophysis fused only in Callichthyidae, robust sixth ribs and canals
between the swim bladder over the middle section of the capsule or near the complex vertebra centrum.
The phylogeneticss implications are important for the understanding the relationships within Corydoras
and the subfamilies.



Espinoza, Mario (Universidad de Costa Rica - CIMAR); Clarke, Tayler; Villalobos-Rojas, Fresia;
Wehrtmann, Ingo (Universidad de Costa Rica - CIMAR, Canada)

Dietary overlap and resource partitioning of four elasmobranch species off the Pacific of Costa
Rica: implications for management

Sharks and rays are believed to play a significant role as top predators in aquatic food-webs, and
presumably their removal can have significant ecological consequences. Twenty-five elasmobranch
species are captured as by-catch in the commercial trawling fishery off the Pacific coast of Costa Rica,



                                                                                                       199
which accounts for over 36% of its elasmobranch diversity. At the moment Costa Rica lacks of adequate
landing statistics, species-specific catch data and basic biological information on demersal
elasmobranchs. Therefore, a better understanding of the distribution, diet composition, and ontogenetic
shifts of common demersal elasmobranch species was used 1) to assess the degree of dietary overlap
between species, 2) to identify feeding habitats and 3) to generate management strategies. A total of
1174 stomachs from four elasmobranch species were analyzed: Raja velezi (N = 512; 86% full),
Mustelus henlei (N = 333; 83% full), Zapteryx xyster (N = 234; 80% full) and Torpedo peruana (N = 95;
58% full). Decapods were the most important prey item in immature R. velezi , M. henlei and Z. xyster
, particularly in the Central Pacific region, while teleost fishes and stomatopods were more abundant in
adults captured in the North Pacific. All life-stages of T. peruana fed primarily on teleost fishes along the
entire Pacific coast. Dietary overlap was typically high between R. velezi and Z. xyster, with little overlap
between M. henlei and T. peruana. The relative importance of crustaceans in the diet of elasmobranch
species captured in the Central Pacific region suggest that shallow coastal habitats may be important for
early stages. Additionally, differences in patterns of habitat use and ontogenetic dietary shifts may be
reducing intra and inter-specific competition for resources. Management and conservation strategies for
elasmobranch species associated to trawling fisheries in Costa Rica should focus on reducing by-catch
rates and fishing effort in shallow coastal waters, particularly in the Central Pacific region.



Esque, Todd (US Geological Survey); Drake, Kristina (US Geological Survey, Henderson, NV, United
States); Nussear, Kenneth (US Geological Survey, Henderson, NE, United States); DeFalco, Lesley;
Scoles-Sciulla, Sara; Medica, Philip (US Geological Survey, Henderson, NV, United States)

Desert Tortoise Use of Burned Habitat

Wildfires burned more than 36,000 acres of critical habitat for the desert tortoise ( Gopherus agassizii ) in
southern Nevada in 2005. In the Mojave Desert, the proliferation of introduced annual grasses,
particularly red brome ( Bromus madritensis ssp. rubens ) and Mediterranean grass ( Schimus barbatus
and S. arabicus ), has increased fire frequency and fire size, resulting in long-term habitat alteration
across portions of the landscape. Direct effects of fire on desert tortoises include mortality due to acute
heat exposure, and potential loss of food and cover. Indirect effects include long-term changes in
vegetation composition and structure, and these are hypothesized to affect the quality of desert tortoise
habitat. To investigate the indirect effects of wildfire on tortoises, we compared movement patterns, home
range size, microhabitat use, behavior, and survival for desert tortoises located in, and adjacent to,
burned habitat. Annual plant production in burned habitat was higher than in unburned habitats and
primarily consisted of invasive annual grasses. As expected, burned habitat had notably lower perennial
plant cover throughout the study. To evaluate how the shifts in vegetation affect habitat use, animal
activity, and behavior, tortoises were monitored using radio telemetry. Approximately 45% of observed
home ranges in the post-fire environment contained burned habitat, and numerous observations
(n=11,407) corroborated tortoise use of both habitat types (48.7% burned, 51.3% unburned). We found
that tortoises moved further into burned habitat with each successive year following the fire. Foraging
behavior was most often observed in burned habitat and ―resting‖ was the most frequent behavior
observed in unburned habitat. Tortoises were more likely to use burrows for shelter in burned habitat,
while vegetation was used as a shade resource more often in unburned areas. This study demonstrates
the continued use of severely fire-altered habitat by desert tortoises, with evidence of increasing re-
colonization of the area over time, suggesting that burned habitat should continue to be managed for
desert tortoises.




                                                                                                         200
Etchison, Luke (Ball State University); Pyron, Mark (Ball State University, Muncie, United States)

Quantifying substrate, flow, and depth to explain stream fish assemblages

The majority of stream fish assemblage studies quantify potential habitat, and include substrate, flow, and
water depth. However, these rely on observational associations and lack empirical control. Experimental
tests for substrate choice or other habitat in nongame fishes are less common and seemingly nonexistent
for complete assemblages. We reviewed published studies of fish assemblages for current science of
stream substrates, flow, and depth as habitat, and suggest future directions and methods. We provide
examples of substrate quantification techniques and experimental studies of substrate use by fishes.



Evans, Susan (University College London);

On the evolution and early history of lepidosaurian reptiles

Lepidosauria is a large and successful clade encompassing squamates (lizards, snakes and
amphisbaenians) and rhynchocephalians (tuatara). Research into their origins and evolutionary history
has been ongoing for more than 150 years, stimulated in part by Gunther's 1869 description of the skull of
the extant New Zealand tuatara, Sphenodon . Over the last few decades, however, new fossil
discoveries combined with the application of more rigorous phylogenetic analyses (molecular and
morphological) have helped to clarify the story. Moreover, experimental computer modelling of
anatomically accurate 3-D representations of modern lepidosaur heads, validated by in vivo data, is
providing valuable insights into the selective advantages of different morphologies. Lepidosaurs arose at
least 240 million years ago, probably earlier, and had split into the two living daughter lineages,
Squamata and Rhynchocephalia, by at least 230 mya. Contrary to long held opinion, the ancestral
lepidosaur did not have a fully diapsid skull and the contrasting skull morphologies of squamates and
rhynchocephalians are equally derived. A literal reading of the fossil record suggests that
Rhynchocephalia radiated first, achieving a global distribution throughout Pangaea by the end of the
Triassic. The early squamate record is much poorer and there is some evidence that the two groups had
different ecological tolerances. Both groups diversified in the Late Jurassic but by the end of the Early
Cretaceous rhynchocephalians had disappeared from northern continents and squamates were the
dominant group there. Nonetheless, much of their contrasting history remains to be discovered.



Evans, Susan (University College London);

The origins of modern squamate diversity: insights from the Mesozoic record

Squamates are one of the most diverse groups of living tetrapods combining high species numbers,
global distribution, morphological disparity, and varying size, reproductive strategies, diet, locomotion and
ecology. The evolution of at least some of these traits can be followed in the fossil record. Although the
ancestors of squamates and rhynchocephalians had separated by at least the Late Triassic, the early
record of squamates is comparatively poor. It improves somewhat in the Late Jurassic (Europe, North
America, Asia), but most of the described taxa are morphologically generalised showing limited dietary or
locomotor specialisation. There is a striking change in the Early Cretaceous where the record provides
the first examples of herbivory, viviparity, aquatic specialisation, climbing and gliding adaptations, and
size reduction. Palaeobiogeographically, the record extends across both Laurasia and Gondwana
although the latter record remains poor. Major Late Cretaceous groups like the borioteiioids and




                                                                                                         201
mosasauroids are recorded for the first time, as are representatives of modern clades like snakes and
monstersaurs. Whether this apparently sudden diversification is an artefact of the greater number of
known fossil localities, many preserving more complete material, or reflects a genuine explosive radiation
is currently difficult to judge, although molecular analyses can provide a complementary source of data.



Farallo, Vincent (Ohio University);

The role of micro-habitat in shaping the evolutionary ecology of Plethodontid salamanders of the
eastern United States

Habitat is a critical component of any organism‘s ecology. However, determining what aspects of a
habitat are the most influential to an organism‘s survival is not always as clear. Salamanders of the family
Plethodontidae are an important component of the ecosystems of the Appalachian Mountains. Although
this group has been studied extensively, the majority of studies either utilize microhabitat data with a
small number of species or broad scale climate data with a large number of species. Ultimately
salamanders are influenced by microhabitat as this is the scale at which these organisms live. Therefore
in order to make large scale multi-species inferences one most incorporate large scale microhabitat data.
I will gather microhabitat data over a large area of the range of Plethodontid salamanders. These data
will be used to determine how microhabitat is affected by macrohabitat variables such as climate, and
then in turn how the salamanders are influenced by changes in microhabitat. These results will be
especially important because salamanders are an excellent bioindicator and will therefore I will be able to
infer potential impacts of the ecosystem as a whole as a result of changes to salamanders microhabitat. I
will be presenting preliminary results from spring 2012 as well as discussing the goal of the continuing
work on this project.



Fares Sabbag, Ariadne (UNESP); Lúcio Lyra, Mariana; Fernando Baptista Haddad, Célio; Aguirre
Brasileiro, Cinthia (UNESP, Canada)

Phylogeographic analyses of the Thoropa miliaris group (Amphibia, Anura)

The genus Thoropa (Anura: Cycloramphidae) is endemic to the Atlantic Forest in Brazil, with the
exception of one species ( T. megatympanum ) inhabiting the transition zone between Atlantic Forest
and Cerrado. The adults are usually found on humid rocky outcrops and they place their eggs in
freshwater films on rocks, where the tadpoles continue living after hatching. Some species can even
inhabit rocky seashore, showing an interesting adaptation to high levels of salinity. This genus includes
six nominal species that are currently divided into two groups: T. miliaris ( T. miliaris, T. taophora, T.
saxatilis, and T. megatympanum ) and T. petropolitana ( T. petropolitana and T. lutzi ). Previous work
with T. miliaris and T. taophora suggested that diversity in this group may be underestimated. In this
context, the aim of our study was to analyze the phylogeographic structure of T. miliaris group using
mitochondrial and nuclear molecular markers. Our analyses using mitochondrial markers revealed 87
haplotypes in nine well defined clades for the four species. Thoropa saxatilis and T. megatympanum
are both monophyletic and do not show population structure, whereas T. taophora is also monophyletic,
but shows geographic population structure. For T. taophora, we have found a population in Juréia (state
of São Paulo) which forms an independent clade when compared with the rest of the samples for the
species, supposedly because Juréia was once an island which resulted in genetic differentiation between
these samples and those from other parts of the state. The samples identified as T. miliaris showed a
subdivision into five distinct non-monophyletic clades. Although these clades are somewhat concordant



                                                                                                        202
with geography, some individuals from some of the clades of T. miliaris have similar distributions, which
probably reflects a contact zone. Thus, we conclude that T. miliaris is a complex of species. We
corroborate the previous hypothesis that the T. miliaris group includes more than four species. We are
expanding our sampling collection and conducting further analyses to clarify the phylogenetic relationship
among these species.



Faria, Marina (Unesp); Lyra, Mariana; Haddad, Célio (UNESP, Canada)

Molecular analysis of species of the genus Fritziana Mello-Leitão, 1937 (Anura; Hemiphractidae)

The genus of marsupial tree frogs Fritziana (Family Hemiphractidae) is endemic of mountain regions of
Brazilian Atlantic Rain Forest. There are three species described for this genus considered valid today:
Fritziana fissilis, F. goeldii, and F. ohausi. Although the genus has been subject of several studies
dealing with its taxonomy, phylogeny and systematic, some populations remain without identification. It is
mainly because of data deficiency in the original descriptions, the small number of correctly identified
specimens in collections, and the difficult access to the type materials. There is a huge overlap on
morphological characters, which makes it difficult to use them to identify each species, being necessary a
molecular analysis to try to define each one. The present study aimed to understand the relationship
between species of the genus Fritziana, as well as the relationship between populations of each species,
using molecular markers. We already have 90 DNA samples from throughout the distribution of the three
species of the genus. The DNA amplification and sequencing were made using two mitochondrial loci
(16S and COI). Our data shows that the genus is separated in five or six groups, depending on the type
of analysis made. All the populations identified as F. ohausi belong to the same clade, well separated of
the other species. This result was expected because morphologically and ecologically this species is
clearly different from the others. However, this clade is structured into four internal groups, with
specimens from the same locality in different clades. Samples identified as F. fissilis and F. goeldii are
both paraphyletic, but the phylogenetic relationship among all clades is not yet resolved. Based on our
results we believe that the populations of F. fissilis from Santa Catarina, Paraná, Minas Gerais, São
Paulo, and Espírito Santo states probably represent a new species. The same situation happens with F.
goeldii , but in this case it is possible that the species are sympatric. Currently we are analyzing new
nuclear loci aiming to better understand the relationship between the observed clades. We are also
conducting morphological analysis of all specimens looking for additional evidence for new candidate
species.



Farrugia, Thomas (University of Alaska Fairbanks); Seitz, Andrew (University of Alaska Fairbanks,
Fairbanks, AK, United States)

Movement patterns of skates in the Gulf of Alaska and implications for the management of a skate
fishery

Skates are in growing demand worldwide, specifically in European and Asian markets. As part of
supplying this demand, the U.S. landings of skates in 2008, mainly from the Atlantic Ocean, was
estimated at 65 million pounds, worth US$11 million. However, several Atlantic Ocean skate stocks are
declining. In contrast, Alaska has relatively healthy skate stocks but skates can only be retained as non-
target catch in federal and state waters of Alaska. Big skates ( Raja binoculata ) are the most frequently
landed skate in the Gulf of Alaska and are managed by two management agencies, that each divide the
skate non-target catch quota into multiple management areas and assume that big skates do not move



                                                                                                       203
among these areas. If a directed skate fishery is to be developed, more ecological data such as
movement patterns and habitat use need to be explored. We deployed pop-up archival transmitting (PAT)
tags on seven big skates in Prince William Sound, Alaska in July 2011 and set them to pop up in May and
June 2012. This was the first instance of an electronic tag being deployed on any skate species in the
Pacific Ocean and provided novel data on the movement patterns, temperature and depth utilization of
big skates. It also provided a fishery-independent estimate of the connectivity of big skates between
management areas. Ecological data such as these are crucial when managing a novel fishery, and are
necessary when employing increasingly popular ecosystem-based management.



Faruk, Aisyah (Institute of Zoology); Belabut, Daicus (University Malaya, Canada); Norhayati, Ahmad
(University Kebangsaan Malaysia, Canada); Knell, Robert (Queen Mary University of London, Canada);
Garner, Trenton (Institute of Zoology, Canada)

Evaluating the impact of oil palm plantations on tropical amphibians

Agriculturally-altered habitats, especially oil palm plantations, are coming to dominate the Southeast
Asian landscape. Recent studies have shown reduced species diversity associated with this commodity,
but data on amphibian diversity are lacking. We set out to answer the following questions: (1) Are there
substantial differences in species richness and individual abundances between the forest and palm-oil
plantation and (2) What are the differences in assemblage composition within this group between the two
habitat types? Based on other studies of oil palm, we predicted that species richness would be lower
compared to complex forest habitats and that plantations would support a larger proportion of
disturbance-tolerance species.

Survey work was undertaken in four mature oil palm plantation sites and two adjacent native forest sites
in Malaysia. Stream, riparian and terrestrial plots were surveyed in 2009 and 2010, allowing species
richness and species assemblage composition to be compared between oil palm plantations and forest
for the two habitat types.

There were no significant differences in species richness between plantation and forest for either year,
although the species richness of forest plots in 2010 was somewhat higher.

Although species richness showed little difference, amphibian community composition differed greatly
between the two habitat types. All plots (stream, riparian and terrestrial) showed significant variation
between the two habitat types. Whereas the community structures in plantation streams were consistent,
forest stream communities were not.

Although plantation habitats do support large numbers of breeding amphibians, abundance-based
estimates fail to show the fundamental differences in species composition between the two habitat types.
Those found dominating the plantations were mostly least concern species, frequently found in other
disturbed habitats. We conclude that under current management regimes oil palm plantations do not
serve as a refuge or alternative habitat for forest dwelling amphibians.




                                                                                                     204
Feldman, Chris (University of Nevada, Reno); Brodie, Jr., Edmund (Utah State University, Canada);
Brodie, III, Edmund (University of Virginia, Canada); Pfrender, Michael (University of Notre Dame,
Canada)

Constraint shapes convergence in tetrodotoxin resistant sodium channels of snakes

Natural selection often produces convergent changes in unrelated lineages, but the degree to which such
adaptations occur via predictable genetic paths is unknown. If only a limited subset of possible mutations
are fixed in independent lineages, then it is clear that constraint in the production or function of molecular
variants is an important determinant of adaptation.             We demonstrate remarkably constrained
convergence during the evolution of resistance to the lethal poison tetrodotoxin (TTX) in six snake
species representing three distinct lineages from around the globe. Resistance conferring amino acid
substitutions in a voltage-gated sodium channel (Na v 1.4) are clustered in just two regions of the protein
and a majority of the replacements are confined to the same three positions. The observed changes
represent only a small fraction of the experimentally validated mutations known to increase Na v 1.4
resistance to TTX. These results suggest that constraints due to functional tradeoffs between ion channel
function and toxin resistance lead to predictable patterns of evolutionary convergence at the molecular
level.    Our data are consistent with theoretical predictions and recent microcosm work that suggest a
predictable path is followed during an adaptive walk along a mutational landscape, and that natural
selection may be frequently constrained to produce similar genetic outcomes even when operating on
independent lineages.



Fellers, Gary (U.S. Geological Survey); Kleeman, Patrick (U.S. Geological Survey, Point Reyes Station,
CA, United States); Miller, David (U.S. Geological Survey, Laurel, MD, United States); Halstead, Brian
(U.S. Geological Survey, Dixon, CA, United States)

Amphibian population trends in Yosemite National Park: What do we know from long-term
monitoring?

In 2000, the U.S. Geological Survey implemented the Amphibian Monitoring and Research Initiative
(ARMI) which is designed to provide data on amphibian population trends on federal lands throughout the
U.S. We implemented the ARMI program at Yosemite National Park, California (USA) using two different
approaches. One was a focused mark-recapture study of Rana sierrae at a single meadow complex, and
the other was a statistically-based design that used double surveys at 175 sites across 14 watershed
units to evaluate population trends in three anuran species (R. sierrae, Pseudacris regilla, Bufo canorus)
throughout the 3,081 km2 park. We tagged 757 individual R. sierrae from 2003 to 2011 and used mark-
recapture data based on 2,431 captures to model population trends related to precipitation, sex, and year.
The R. sierrae population fluctuated from 45 to 115 frogs over the nine years of our study, but there was
no clear up or downward trend. We conclude that this R. sierrae population at Yosemite NP is stable
over a relatively long period of time, even in the presence of Bd. The watershed research was initiated in
2004 and continues as an ongoing program. We use double survey protocol at each site (pond, lake or
meadow) to assess detectability for each species for each year. Detectability for the three anurans is
high, ranging from approximately 0.70 - 0.90. We have analyzed presence data along with 15 site and
survey covariates to evaluate population trends for each of the three study species. There are different
population trends for different species, and different trends in the two major river drainages within the
park. While population trends for Bufo and Rana are somewhat inconsistent, Pseudacris populations are
declining within each of the major drainages.




                                                                                                          205
Fenker Antunes, Jéssica (Universidade de Brasília); Gonçalves Tedeschi, Leonardo; de Campos
Nogueira, Cristiano (Universidade de Brasília, BRASÍLIA, Brazil)

Phylogenetic diversity, habitat loss and conservation priorities in Neotropical pitvipers

The biodiversity crisis requires the urgent need to evaluate in a more criterions distribution patterns and
threats to the species and the planet‘s biological wealth. However, few studies quantifying the effect of
habitat loss on patterns of phylogenetic diversity, an important measure of diversity that incorporates
information about relation between species. The aim of our study is understand this relation and test
widely used common metrics of biological diversity as surrogates for conserving evolutionary diversity in
well studied, wide ranging Neotropical endemic pitvipers. We compiled species occurrence records for the
40 terminal taxa in pitviper phylogeny. We then generated niche models for all terminal taxa and
calculated range sizes and percentage of habitat loss. We estimated ED and EDGE values, weighted with
data on habitat loss (EDHL) and threat status (EDGE). We tested the phylogenetic signal in range size,
percentage of habitat loss and IUCN threat status, and then regressed these values with ED scores. We
mapped areas of high richness and high phylogenetic diversity. Finally, we tested the performance of
widely used biodiversity measures for capturing phylogenetic distinctiveness of pitvipers faunas selected
according to endemism, richness, threat, presence in major biomes or biodiversity hotspots to random
values. Taxonomic priority ranks differed according to the metric of evolutionary diversity, with EDGE
categories wider differences found when. We found no phylogenetic signal in range size, threat and
habitat loss, and no significant regressions between ED values and range size, threat and habitat loss.
Usual methods like richness, endemism and threat are not good surrogates for preservation the history of
the group. The spatial distribution of phylogenetic diversity (PD) shows three areas of high levels of PD,
being generally coincident with spatial variations in richness. Pitviper faunas assembled according to
endemism, open and forest biomes and biodiversity hotspots were not significantly different from random.
However, the species subset included in the IUCN redlist showed significant phylogenetic clustering as
did the species subset found in the richest areas. An approach taking into account habitat loss and
phylogenetic diversity would be the best way to preserve the history of this group of Neotropical snakes,
and could aid in the conservation of other organisms for which phylogenetic or spatial data are not
available.



Fenolio, Danté (Atlanta Botanical Garden);

Conserving South Chile's Imperiled Amphibians

The Darwin‘s Frog Conservation Initiative (DFCI) is a collaboration between the Atlanta Botanical Garden
(ABG), the National Zoo of Chile, the Catholic University of Chile, and biologists from Northern Arizona
University and the University of Texas at Tyler. Goals of the initiative focus on (1) elucidating reasons
behind the declines of Darwin‘s Frogs and other amphibians endemic to Chile‘s temperate forests, (2)
developing captive assurance colonies with ex-situ breeding of endangered species, (3) monitoring
diseases in wild populations, and (4) educating the public regarding amphibian declines. We developed a
captive breeding facility on grounds of the National Zoo of Chile (Parque Metropolitano de Santiago). The
lab is modeled after facilities at ABG with one exception; we designed one of its walls made of glass so
that the visiting public could see into the laboratory, rendering the lab an attraction at the zoo. Key
features include ﬁltered water with a spare storage tank and a backup generator that activates when the
power grid goes down. Automated misting, light, and temperature systems maintain appropriate
environmental conditions. All of these features worked perfectly after the 2010 earthquake. An insect
culture facility exists on the ﬁrst ﬂoor, providing live food for the colony. A bilingual website featuring our




                                                                                                           206
project (www.savedarwinsfrogs.org) provides another public interface. We have emphasized education
for the personnel running the facility with training at ABG and at the Association of Zoos and Aquarium‘s
captive amphibian management program. Fieldwork has involved visiting historic localities where
Darwin‘s Frogs (Rhinoderma) have been reported as well potential sites, collecting skin swabs and
testing for the presence of amphibian chytrid fungus.

We are now working toward the conservation of additional species of southern Chile‘s most endangered
amphibians. The DFCI is expanding their amphibian conservation program within Chile to include four
new goals: (1) to implement a new, cost-effective, amphibian breeding laboratory made from two
repurposed cargo shipping containers; (2) to increase the capacity of the existing in-country project such
that assurance colonies of six more imperiled Chilean amphibian species can be accommodated; (3) to
work toward assurance colonies ranging from 50 to 65 individuals of each species; and (4) to train two
additional Chilean zoo staff members in captive amphibian management at the ABG.



Fernandez de Carvalho, Joana (Center of Marine Sciences (CCMAR)); Coelho, Rui (CCMAR, Faro,
Portugal); Neves dos Santos, Miguel (IPIMAR, Olhão, Portugal); Erzini, Karim (CCMAR, Faro, Portugal)

Life history of the bigeye thresher shark, Alopias superciliosus, in the Tropical Eastern Atlantic
Ocean

The bigeye thresher, Alopias supercilious, is commonly by-catch in pelagic longline fisheries targeting
tunas and swordfish. Still, very little information is available for this species‘ life history in the Atlantic
Ocean. As part of the EU Data Collection Regulation framework, Portuguese fishery observers have been
placed aboard fishing vessels collecting information on captures, size, sex, maturity stage, and biological
samples such as vertebrae. A total of 760 bigeye threshers were recorded between 2008 and February
2011, throughout the Atlantic. In the NE Atlantic, almost all size classes were observed and there was a
higher proportion of females (65.08%). In the SE Atlantic, larger specimens were found and the presence
of males (56.12%) was higher than females. Vertebrae of 356 bigeye threshers were collected and
analysed so far. These were collected along a wide geographical range (between 18ºN and 28ºS), mostly
along the East Atlantic, with size of specimens ranging from 101 to 265 cm fork length (FL). Preliminary
trials were carried out to determine the most efficient band enhancement technique for this species, in
which crystal violet section staining was found to be the best methodology. A linear relationship between
specimen size and vertebrae diameter was found and observed vertebrae showed 1 to 22 pairs of
opaque and hyaline bands. Preliminary growth models based on the Von Bertalanffy growth function
(VBGF) and the VBGF with fixed size at birth were calculated and the parameters are presented and
discussed. Maturity ogives were fitted for 402 specimens that had maturity data available, and size at first
maturity was estimated at 206.1 cm FL for females and 159.7 cm FL for males. The results presented in
this paper can be used and integrated in future ecological risk analysis and stock assessment models for
this species in the Atlantic Ocean.




                                                                                                           207
Ferreira, Luciana (UFRPE); Afonso, André (UFRPE, Recife, Brazil); Castilho, Pedro (UFRPE, Serra
Talhada, Brazil); Hazin, Fábio (UFRPE, Recife, Brazil)

Habitat use of the nurse shark, Ginglymostoma cirratum, off Recife, Northeast Brazil: a combined
survey with longline and acoustic telemetry

Despite the high abundance of nurse sharks Ginglymostomas cirratum in shallow waters, knowledge on
its ecology is still rather limited, with most studies restricted to the Caribbean and Florida coast. This
study presents results on the relative abundance, sex ratio, size distribution, seasonal fluctuations and
residency of the nurse shark, off Recife, northeast Brazil. Nurse sharks comprised 13.3% of the total
catch of 1033 bottom longline sets, done from 2004 to 2011, and ranged in size from 107 to 300 cm TL.
98 sharks were tagged with an 8% recapture rate. The overall sex ratio for nurse sharks was 1.3♀:1♂,
however, it showed a strong variation throughout the year. The monthly CPUE of male nurse sharks
showed a somewhat more seasonal trend than females. Male CPUE tended to be lower ( 0.02) from
October to April (except for December). Although female CPUE oscillated within a range similar to that of
males, it showed no clear seasonal pattern. Of 8 acoustically tagged sharks, 6 were detected by the array
of acoustic receivers. Most detection of males were recorded during the first semester of the year,
peaking in February and March with zero detection from May to September. Females, in turn, were
detected throughout the year, although most detection happened in the second semester, peaking in
September. The results indicate that nurse sharks have a year-round occurrence in the study area and
remain in the monitored area for variable periods of time. The strong seasonal shifts in the sex ratio of
catches and the patterns revealed by the acoustic detections also suggest a possible difference in habitat
usage or in seasonal movements between sexes, which hadn‘t been described so far for the Brazilian
coast and may have serious implications for the management and conservation of nurse sharks at
Northeast Brazil.



Ferry, Lara (Arizona State University West);

Elasmobranchs in Biological Research

Elasmobranchs get a lot of attention both within and beyond the scientific realm due to their fascinating,
and sometimes terrifying, habits. This high profile has, in many cases, overshadowed some of the most
amazing insights that have come from the study of this group. Such studies have taught us not only
about the cartilaginous fishes, but also have given us novel insights into the most important and difficult to