Sphenodon is famed for being the only living member of Rhynchocephalia, the sister taxon of Squamata,
a phylogenetic position that makes it the best available extant outgroup taxon for comparative studies of
squamates. Moreover, Sphenodon is frequently referred to as a ―living fossil‖ and as ―unchanged for
150-250 million of years‖. This perception is closely linked to the common assumption that Sphenodon
represents a ―basal‖ or ―primitive‖ lepidosaur. Although very convenient this supposition is often made
without any reference to primary palaeontological literature or peer reviewed fossil data. Palaeontological
research over the last 30 years has shown that for much of the Mesozoic (227-90 million years ago [Ma])
Rhynchocephalia are far more diverse and ecologically important than is widely appreciated. There are
now over 50 fossil species known from all over the world and these include small robust terrestrial forms
(‗clevosaurs‘), short bodied aquatic forms (‗sapheosaurs‘), long bodied aquatic forms (Pleurosaurinae),
and large heavily built herbivores (Eilenodontinae). Thus the modern diversity of Rhynchocephalia and
taxonomic isolation of Sphenodon is a product of extinction rather than an absence of diversification or
evolution. There are some teeth and partial jaws from the Jurassic (160 Ma) that closely resemble those
of Sphenodon (Argentina, Mexico, UK) but it remains unknown as to whether these animals resembled
the modern Sphenodon in their entirety. Perhaps more importantly the most ancient and plesiomorphic
Rhynchocephalia (e.g. Gephyrosaurus, Diphydontosaurus, Triassic-Jurassic, about 205 Ma, UK) differ
from Sphenodon in a number of ways. These early forms are much smaller (skull length = 15-40 mm),
more lightly built, have relatively long limbs, long snouts, and possess a greater number of more
acuminate teeth on the dental margins and palate. The structure of their temporal region also shows that
the absence of an external ear and presence of a lower temporal bar is secondary in Sphenodon and
not primitively retained as historically supposed. Therefore, although Sphenodon is the best available
living outgroup for Squamata it should be used with caution and the morphology of fossil lepidosaurs
should also be considered to provide a more holistic total evidence approach.



Jones, Melissa (Texas State University); Vandewege, Michael (Mississippi State University, Starkville,
MS, United States); Forstner, Michael (Texas State University, San Marcos, TX, United States)

Habitat suitability and head-start efficiency and effectiveness: Tested in the endangered Houston
toad (Bufo houstonensis)

The Houston toad, endemic to the State of Texas, was first described in Houston, Texas in 1953. In 1970,
the Houston Toad was the first animal in Texas and the first amphibian federally listed as an endangered
species. Houston toad populations have remained in a continual decline consequent of multiple
stressors, including habitat fragmentation, continued urban growth of the city of Bastrop, red imported fire
ants, fertilizers and chemical run off, agricultural practices, wildfire, and drought. As consequence of
prolonged drought and habitat loss a head-starting program was developed and implemented for Bastrop
County, Texas. Since 2007, thousands of head-start tadpoles and juveniles have been released in
Bastrop County. A preliminary study in 2010 used a suite of genetic markers to test and monitor head-
start success of tadpole and juvenile Houston toads. Results from this study conclude that head-starting
does increases early life stage mortality and survivorship ship estimates are comparable to wild toad
populations. Head-starting efforts themselves will not be sufficient to achieve success in the recovery
efforts. Therefore we used mesocosom exclosures to evaluate our best options for habitat recovery
consequent of drought and catastrophic wildfire induced changes and decades of fire suppression. We
tested and compared adult survivorship within six different habitat types to gain insight on habitat
suitability for the Houston toad. As head-starting efforts continue we will use our habitat suitability results
to further implement and refine our management efforts.




                                                                                                           349
Jones, Michael (University of Massachusetts Amherst); Willey, Lisabeth (University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Canada)

Distribution and Ecology of Box Turtles (Terrapene carolina bauri) in the Ten Thousand Islands,
Florida, USA

We studied the distribution and ecology of Florida Box Turtles (Terrapene carolina bauri) in the Ten
Thousand Islands, an estuarine mangrove ecosystem encompassing 300 square km in southwestern
Florida. We surveyed fifteen islands, including both natural barrier islands and anthropogenic shell-works
islands constructed by the Calusa Indians approximately 2000 ybp. We detected 147 box turtles on seven
offshore or riverine shell-works islands. We did not detect any box turtles during cursory surveys of
natural barrier islands, suggesting that box turtles are absent from these sites or less abundant than on
the shell islands. We evaluated differences in detection rates and morphometrics across the seven shell-
works islands where box turtles were detected. We estimate population size on one 26 ha shell island to
be approximately 54 turtles (42.8– 76.3); equivalent to a density of 2.1 turtles/ha (1.7 – 3.0), lower than
estimates from islands in Tampa Bay and the Florida Keys. Our surveys suggest that density and
demography may vary significantly between the anthropogenic shell islands. Box turtle populations on
shell islands may be suppressed by raccoon depredation, collection by humans, and/or adverse
environmental conditions. Box turtle populations on the Calusa shell mounds of the Ten Thousand
Islands provide interesting examples of box turtle populations living on manmade islands and provide the
opportunity to evaluate metapopulation dynamics and density-dependent behavioral ecology in a long-
lived vertebrate.



Jones, Michael (University of Massachusetts Amherst); Willey, Lisabeth (University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Canada); Sievert, Paul (USGS Massachusetts Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit,
Canada); Akre, Thomas (Longwood University, Canada); Castellano, Christina (Orianne Society,
Canada); Erb, Lori (Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife, Canada); Grgurovic, Mark
(Swampwalkers Wetland Ecosystem Specialists, Canada); Johnson, Glenn (State University of New York
Potsdam, Canada); Koch, Stephanie (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Canada); Marchand, Michael (New
Hampshire Fish and Game, Canada); Mays, Jonathan (Maine Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Department,
Canada); Ross, Angelena (New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, Canada); Urban,
Chris (Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission, Canada); Windmiller, Bryan (Hyla Ecological Services,
Canada)

Regional Planning and Monitoring Programs for Two Rare Turtle Species in the Northeastern USA

Blanding‘s turtle ( Emydoidea blandingii ) and wood turtle ( Glyptemys insculpta ) are long-lived emydid
turtles that rely seasonally on both wetland and upland habitats, are of regional conservation concern in
the northeastern United States, and are listed as ―Endangered‖ by the IUCN. Both species are apparently
threatened by habitat loss and elevated adult mortality rates, and local population declines have been
documented for both species. To improve the effectiveness of regional conservation efforts, formal
working groups composed of land managers, state biologists, and researchers were established to
prioritize and coordinate conservation, management, and monitoring activities for both species throughout
the northeastern United States. In 2011, the Blanding‘s Turtle and Wood Turtle Working Groups received
funding through State Wildlife Grants programs (USFWS Competitive SWG, and NEAFWA Regional
Conservation Needs, respectively). Key contributors to both projects include biologists and land
managers from agencies, universities, NGOs, and private industry from 5 and 12 states, respectively. We
are identifying priority sites for conservation and management, developing management plans for priority




                                                                                                       350
sites, implementing standardized regional monitoring programs, and establishing meaningful and
productive partnerships with additional agencies, land-trusts, and managers. As part of this effort, we
have devised a two-tiered regional monitoring strategy that utilizes 1) broad-scale occupancy and
abundance sampling to detect population trends across the region, and 2) spatial mark-recapture
methods to estimate population density at key sites. We will discuss the details of these plans, as well as
preliminary results from spring 2012 sampling, and we seek critical feedback on our monitoring and site
prioritization approaches.



Jones, Peter (Northern Illinois University); King, Richard (Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL, United
States)

Integral projection modeling as a technique for the demographic analysis of species with
indeterminate growth

The commonly used matrix population projection technique depends on breaking the population of study
into discrete classes frequently based on body size. For many species, however, the divisions between
size-based classes are arbitrary given that body size is a continuous variable and this can lead to
imprecise and inaccurate population models. An alternative to matrix models that shares many of their
useful features is the integral projection model (IPM). Rather than separating individuals into discrete
classes each with its own set of vital rates, IPMs utilize continuous functions based on the state of an
individual (e.g. body size, age). These states can be continuous or discrete. Thus, IPMs are ideal for the
population modeling of species with indeterminate growth (e.g. fish, amphibians, and reptiles). IPMs
retain some useful characteristics of matrix projection models such as the projected population growth
rate from the dominant eigenvalue, stable size distribution and reproductive value from the eigenvectors,
and sensitivity and elasticity analysis. Because IPMs do not require the division of individuals into
classes, fewer data are necessary for the parameterization of an IPM compared with a matrix projection
model. Here we investigate geographic-scale variation in the demography of the Eastern Massasauga
(Sistrurus catenatus catenatus) via IPMs. We parameterized IPMs with growth functions from two
populations at opposite ends of the Eastern Massasauga‘s distribution (southern Illinois and southeastern
Ontario). Stable size distributions from the IPMs showed a greater abundance of large adults (>800 mm
SVL) in the Ontario population than the Illinois population, a pattern consistent with observed size
distributions. This difference is also reflected in the model elasticities, which showed that the highest
elasticities for the Ontario population were at a larger adult size than for the Illinois population. IPMs can
also be parameterized with different survival and fecundity functions to facilitate more complex
comparisons among populations or to explore alternative management strategies.



Jones, Susan (University of Tasmania); Awruch, Cynthia (University of Tasmania, Hobart, T, Australia)

Steroid production by maternal and embryonic tissues in a viviparous lizard

Hormones have important organisational and activational roles during embryonic development. These
hormones may have maternal or embryonic origins. In viviparous (live-bearing) vertebrates, the embryo is
exposed to maternal hormones via the placenta, which forms an interface between maternal and
embryonic endocrine systems. Environmental influences on the maternal endocrine system may therefore
be transmitted to the embryo. We examined steroid production by embryonic and maternal tissues in the
viviparous lizard Niveoscincus ocellatus. We hypothesised that patterns of steroid production would vary
between tissues, with embryonic stage, and between different temperatures in this ectothermic species.



                                                                                                          351
Females were collected in mid to late gestation and sacrificed. Embryos were removed and staged:
samples were allocated to groups according to embryo stage (Stage 30-37; Stage 39 or Stage 40 = pre-
birth). Their adrenals and gonads were incubated at 16° or 28°C (species‘ preferred body temperature)
for three hours, with or without the steroid precursor pregnenolone; for younger embryos, the entire
embryo trunk was incubated. Maternal tissues (oviduct, placenta, corpus luteum, non-luteal ovary, and
muscle = non-endocrine control tissue) were also incubated at 16° or 28°C with or without pregnenolone.
Incubation media were assayed for testosterone, progesterone, estradiol and corticosterone using
radioimmunoassay. Of the maternal tissues, the corpus luteum produced the most progesterone, with
greater production in the presence of pregnenolone (F1, 48=89.85, P<0.001). Temperature had little
effect on hormone production, contrary to expectations. Progesterone production by corpora lutea was
significantly lower at stage 40 (F2, 48=59.17, P<0.001). Placenta and uterus were also steroidogenic,
producing low levels of estradiol, and progesterone. This suggests the potential for local regulation of the
hormonal environment in which the embryos are developing. In older embryos, the adrenals produced
measurable corticosterone. Corticosterone production did not vary between incubation temperatures (16
and 28°C) but was significantly higher in the presence of pregnenolone (F1, 76=17.51, P<0.001). These
results suggest the potential for maternal-embryo endocrine signaling in a viviparous reptile.



Joyce, Walter (University of Tübingen);

New Insights from the Fossil Record into the Basal Evolution of Turtles

Turtles have an exceptional fossil record, because they typically live in aquatic habitats, are relatively
large bodied, possess a heavily ossified shell, and therefore have great potential to enter the fossil
record. Yet, surprisingly little was known as recently as 20 years ago about the early evolution of turtles,
including the origin of the turtle shell, the origin of various modern subclades and their morphological
adaptations, and basic biogeographic patterns. Although many evolutionary questions remain far from
resolved, new fossils and global approaches to phylogeny are providing first glimpses at a cohesive
evolutionary history for the group. The purpose of this contribution is to introduce some of the more
relevant fossil finds and summarize their impact on the study of turtle evolution. Points of particular
interest include: 1) conclusive evidence that the turtle shell evolved through a novel interaction of the ribs,
dorsal vertebrae, and girdles with the skin and not from the gradual fusion of osteoderms with the
underlying skeleton; 2) the conclusion that the shoulder girdles of turtles are not inside the rib cage, but
rather anterior to it, as in most basal amniotes; 3) the predominantly terrestrial ecology of the stem turtle
lineage versus the primarily aquatic habitat preferences of the turtle crown; 4) support for a global clade
of large-bodied stem turtles, Meiolaniformes, that diversified throughout the Mesozoic and only went
extinct during the Holocene; 5) the post-Triassic split of the turtle crown; 6) the possibility that the
pleurodiran jaw-closure mechanism evolved from a cryptodiran-like jaw closure mechanism; and 7) the
near-contemporaneous split of crown turtles into three primary lineages, Pleurodira, Cryptodira, and
Paracryptodira, as the result of the break-up of Pangea in the Early to Middle Jurassic.



Juneau, Véronique (University of Ottawa); Blouin-Demers, Gabriel (University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON,
Canada)

Chocolate Turtles are back: Cocoa butter injections, but not Silastic implants, of corticosterone
can be used to mimic chronic stress in a free-living ectotherm, the painted turtle




                                                                                                           352
Chronic stress typically results in an elevation of circulating levels of glucocorticoids in vertebrates, which
can affect their fitness. In this context, we want to determine how elevated GC levels affect the acute
stress response, immune function, and reproductive success in a long-lived free-ranging reptile, the
painted turtle (Chrysemys picta), by experimentally mimicking the secretion of these stress hormones. To
do so, we conducted a validation study to assess the effectiveness of two corticosterone (CORT)
administration methods at chronically elevating CORT blood levels in the painted turtle: Silastic implants
and cocoa butter injections. In a first experiment, adult turtles kept in captivity received a subcutaneous
Silastic implant (control without implant, empty implant, sealed, or with holes) and were blood-sampled
over 28 days. Compared to controls, we observed no significant difference in baseline CORT levels,
hormonal stress response, or body condition. In a second experiment, we tested an epicoelomic injection
of molten cocoa butter mixed with CORT in free-living painted turtles. Turtles were recaptured and blood-
sampled in the field over several weeks. We found that cocoa butter implants of CORT kept circulating
CORT levels elevated for up to three weeks. We conclude that cocoa butter injections, but not Silastic
implants, of CORT can be successfully used in painted turtles to mimic the typical elevation in circulating
CORT levels associated with chronic stress, and represents a promising method for other ectotherms in
temperate climate.



Juterbock, Eric (Ohio State University);

Night Shift: Activity at Both Ends of the Night for Two Species of Southern Appalachian Woodland
Salamanders, Plethodon jordani and Plethodon shermani

During an investigation of the climbing behavior of southern Appalachian plethodontid salamanders, I
have quantified aspects of the behavior of Red-cheeked Salamanders, Plethodon jordani (PJ), and Red-
legged Salamanders, Plethodon shermani (PS), as they emerge from their daytime shelters around
sunset, and retreat to shelter around dawn. Data were collected between August 2009 and September
2011. PJ were observed along a trail to Chimney Tops in Great Smoky Mountains National Park, TN,
USA, whereas PS were observed along trails in Standing Indian Recreation Area of the Nantahala
National Forest, NC, USA. Salamanders were only observed, using headlamps; time and location were
recorded for each individual observed. An Extech Instruments Easyview EA30 light meter was used to
record light levels, in lux, with the sensor placed as close to the salamander‘s position as possible.
Typically, this was within a few centimeters of the anterior of the individual; measures were taken at the
mouth of any burrow in which individuals were so located. Times were standardized relative to the sunset
or sunrise times available from Weather Underground for nearby weather stations (Knoxville, TN for PJ,
and Franklin, NC for PS). Both species typically begin to emerge about 20 minutes before sunset, with
typical levels of activity reached by about 45 minutes after sunset. For 17 observation periods, the first
PJ was observed on the surface a median of 11 (4 to 27) min before sunset; the first PS was seen a
median 9.5 min before (n=20, 18 before to 11 after). The timing of activity during retreat is essentially a
mirror image relative to sunrise of the pattern at emergence. The last PJ was observed a median 10 min
after sunrise (n=3, -2 to +16); the last PS, 7 min (n=8, -5 to +25). Relatively few salamanders are active
on the surface in microhabitats with light levels in excess of 2 lux, or after sunrise; activity before sunset is
slightly more common. Microhabitat light levels are undetectable (<0.01 lux) by approximately 30 minutes
after sunset/before sunrise. Although individuals may be found up on vegetation quite close to the time of
sunrise or sunset, it is more typical to observe the first ascents or last descents when there is no
measurable light. The circadian cycles apparent in these data do not appear to differ between the two
focal species.




                                                                                                             353
Kacev, David (SDSU); Hyde, John (Southwest Fisheries Science Center, Canada); Lewison, Rebecca;
Bohonak, Andrew (SDSU, Canada)

Using Genetics in a Mark-Recapture Framework to Estimate Population Size of Data Poor
Elasmobranchs

Accurate estimation of the size of wild populations is critical for effective management, but incredibly
difficult in pelagic ecosystems. Traditional population assessments have relied upon fisheries catch
records to generate CPUE trends, however this is difficult for non-target species where data can be very
sparse.        In this study, we developed a model using population genetic data in a mark-recapture
framework to generate a rough estimate of population size. We simulated data for 16 microsatellite loci
using average allelic richness and allele distributions drawn from a wild population of short fin mako
sharks. We then ―bred‖ these individuals by choosing two at random and randomly selecting one allele
per locus from each to create an offspring genotype. From each paring we generated one to four
offspring based on litter sizes found in the literature. We thus created an f1 generation based on 10 years
of the model run. We sampled the genotypes of the f1 generation and used these data to reconstruct the
putative parental genotypes, which could then be compared to known adults, and assigned each to its
putative parents. The first time an offspring was assigned to a putative parent, it was considered a mark
on that parent, and each subsequent assignment of an offspring to that parent was considered a
recapture. These mark-recapture data were used in a Jolly-Seber model to generate an estimate of the
putative adult population, which could then be compared to the actual adult population size to assess the
utility of this method for population size estimation. We then tested this framework using actual mako
shark population genetic data.



Kaiser, Kristine (UC Riverside); Pollinger, John (UCLA Conservation Genetics Resource Center, Los
Angeles, CA, United States)

Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis shows high genetic diversity and ecological niche specificity
among haplotypes in the Maya Mountains of Belize

The pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) has been implicated in amphibian declines around
the globe. We set out to determine the diversity of Bd haplotypes found in the Maya Mountains of Belize,
Central America and to identify which climatic factors best described the distribution of the most common
haplotypes. We collected skin swabs from 524 amphibians in the protected areas of the Maya
Mountains of Belize. We used quantitative PCR (qPCR) to test for Bd and sequenced of a portion of the
5.8s and ITS1-2 regions. We sequenced 72 samples from at least 26 species that had tested PCR-
positive for Bd at least once; 30 samples were sequence-positive for Bd. Eight unique Bd haplotypes
were identified in the Maya Mountains, five of which were previously undescribed. We incorporated
WorldClim and remotely sensed vegetation data into a Maxent model to determine the distribution of the
two most common haplotypes, KK5 and KK15. The heuristic estimates of relative contributions of each
variable to models provided by Maxent revealed that models for the two haplotypes were driven by
distinctly different climate factors. Although the primary contribution to both haplotypes came from tree
cover, the other major contributor to the distribution model for haplotype KK5 was annual mean
temperature, while KK15 was driven secondarily by precipitation of the warmest quarter. Removal of tree
cover from the model did not qualitatively change results. Other studies have shown that different strains
may differ in virulence; thus, the 5.8s - ITS1-2 region diversity found in this study suggests that there may
be substantial differences among populations or haplotypes. Future work should focus on whether
diversity in for other genomic regions and possibly pathogenicity can be associated with haplotypes at




                                                                                                         354
this locus, as well as the integration of molecular tools with other, ecological tools to elucidate the ecology
and pathogenicity of Bd.



Kajiura, Stephen (Florida Atlantic University); Tellman, Shari (Florida Atlantic University, Canada)

Quantification of massive seasonal shark aggregations

South Florida witnesses an enormous migration of marine apex predators each year as massive
aggregations of blacktip ( Carcharhinus limbatus ) and spinner sharks ( C. brevipinna ) move through the
area. The close proximity of the Gulf Stream to the Palm Beach County (PBC) shoreline may constrain
the sharks to the coastal environment with tens of thousands of individuals congregated in the shallow,
nearshore waters. This natural bottleneck in PBC provides a unique opportunity to estimate abundance
of the southeastern US population of these important apex predators during their annual migration. Over
a sixteen month period, a biweekly aerial survey was flown along the 75km length of PBC from Boca
Raton inlet to Jupiter inlet with a high definition video camera and digital SLR camera mounted out of the
window of the plane to provide a continuous record of the area from the shore seaward to about 200m.
The light-colored, sandy seafloor and clear water characteristic of PBC facilitate visualization of the
sharks close to shore. The number of sharks was counted and used to generate a seasonal population
estimate but since the survey sampled only sharks close to shore at depths less than 5m, the total
population size is actually much greater. Shark abundance peaked in the winter (February) and declined
to nearly zero in the summer months and was inversely correlated with water temperature. The sharks
were not uniformly distributed along the coast, but appeared in loose clusters of up to thousands of
individuals. Although sharks could be found along the entire length of PBC, the stretch of coastline
between Boynton Inlet and Palm Beach Inlet consistently exhibited the greatest numbers of sharks.
There was no apparent correlation between shark abundance and proximity to inlets or reef structure. In
addition to sharks, seasonal abundance of other large marine vertebrates, including mantas and
manatees, was also quantified, although neither demonstrated the massive aggregations seen in the
sharks. These baseline abundance data can be used as a comparison for future studies to determine if
shark population size is changing and if sharks are restricting their southward migration as global water
temperatures increase. Future studies will employ electronic tagging of sharks to determine the extent of
their movements along the eastern seaboard.



Kakehashi, Ryosuke (Hiroshima university); Kurabayashi, Atsushi (Institute for Amphibian Biology,
Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University, Canada); Oumi, Shohei (Section of Agriculture and
Forest, Amami City Government, Amami, Kagoshima, Canada); Katsuren, Seiki (Okinawa Prefectural
Institute of Health and Environment, Canada); Hoso, Masaki (Netherlands Centre for Biodiversity
'Naturalis', Canada); Sumida, Masayuki (Institute for Amphibian Biology, Graduate School of Science,
Hiroshima University, Canada)

Complete mitochondrial sequences of three Japanese Babina (Ranidae, Anura) species and their
phylogenetic position in Ranidae

Genus Babina of family Ranidae initially consisted of two species (Thompson, 1912), but now includes 10
species (Frost, 2011). Three Babina species (Babina holsti, B. subaspera, and B. okinavana) are
distributed across the Ryukyu archipelago, Japan; the former two species and the latter species have
been listed as class B1 and B1+2 endangered species, respectively, in the IUCN Red List. At present, no
consensus on the phylogenetic position of genus Babina in family Ranidae has been reached. For




                                                                                                           355
example, Stuart (2008) suggested a close affinity between Babina and a ranid group consisting of
Glandirana, Hylarana, and Sanguirana, while Cai et al. (2007) indicated a clade consisting of Babina +
(Rana + Lithobates), and Kurabayashi et al. (2010) favored the monophyly of Babina and Odorrana.
Consequently, the sister taxon, or taxa, of genus Babina remains to be elucidated. To resolve this
phylogenetic problem, we sequenced the entire mitochondrial (mt) genome of three Japanese Babina
species and that of another ranid species (Lithobates catesbeianus). We then performed molecular
phylogenetic analyses with the largest molecular dataset (11,345 bp from 2 ribosomal RNA- and 13
protein-encoding genes) used to date in studies dealing with Babina phylogeny. It is well known that gene
rearrangements in the mt genomes of animals can provide usable phylogenetic information, and frequent
mt gene rearrangements have been observed in phylogenetically nested anurans (including Ranidae
members). Thus, we surveyed mt gene rearrangements in the Babina mt genome. Phylogenetic analyses
(maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference) revealed a monophyly of Babina and Odorrana. Of the
surveyed species, only L. catesbeianus manifested typical neobatrachian-type mt gene organization. In
the B. okinavana mt genome, an additional pseudogene of tRNA-His was observed in the D-loop
downstream region. Furthermore, in B. holsti and B. subaspera, the tRNA-His/ND5 gene block was
translocated from its typical position to the D-loop downstream region, and the translocated tRNA-His
gene became a pseudogene. The tRNA-His/ND5 translocation seems to be a synapomorphy of the two
Babina species (corresponding to the original Babina members). The position (D-loop downstream
region) of the tRNA-His pseudogene is consistent with the derived tRNA-His position reported from the
Odorrana mt genomes. Thus, the mt gene rearrangement observed here supports the monophyly of
Babina and Odorrana. Furthermore, the tandem duplication and random loss model, the traditional model
used for mt gene rearrangement, could be used to explain the mt gene rearrangements observed in
Babina and Odorrana.



Kam, Yeong Choy (Tunghai University); Cheng, Wei Chun (Tunghai University, Taichung, Taiwan);
Chen, Yi Huey (Chinese Culture University, Taipei, Taiwan); Yu, Hon Tsen (National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan); Roberts, Dale (University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia)

Sequential, polygynous double clutching does not produce more offspring in a tree frog with
paternal care

Sequential polygyny is a reproductive strategy that allows males to continue to mate and compensates for
the loss of future breeding opportunities incurred by egg attendance. Using the frog Kurixalus eiffengeri
we tested i) earlier predictions that attending males fathered two, overlapping clutches and ii) that double
clutching leads to improved offspring numbers. Using five microsatellite DNA markers, we genotyped 15
pairs of overlapping clutches which differed slightly in developmental stage. Parentage analyses showed
at least 12 of 15 pairs of overlapping egg clutches were sired by the attending male mated with different
females, providing the first genetic evidence to support an earlier prediction that attending males sired
both egg clutches. Field surveys found a low incidence of overlapping clutches (4.9 % of 263 egg-
occupied stumps), suggesting sequential polygyny is uncommon. Nests with multiple clutches contained
significantly more eggs than nests with single clutches but hatched similar number of tadpoles. Results
suggest that continuous calling that attracts females during egg attendance is a reproductive tactic that
maximizes mating opportunities. However, adoption of the sequential polygyny tactic may only result in
marginal fitness gains for males that are traded off against average higher egg mortality in larger egg
clutches.




                                                                                                        356
Kamei, Rachunliu (Systematics Lab, Department of Environmental Studies, University of Delhi); SD, Biju
(Systematics Lab, Department of Environmental Studies, University of Delhi, Canada)

Northeast India: an overlooked centre of caecilian diversity

Northeast India has traditionally been interpreted as a ‗gateway‘ between biodiversity hotspots rather than
having its own unique biota. Northeast India, a region that spreads across ca. 255,168 sq km , was
shown to contain only four extremely poorly known species of caecilians ever since the accidental
discovery of the first species more than a century ago in 1904. Caecilian-dedicated research in northeast
India was initiated in a backdrop of only 20 museum specimens collected from less than 10 localities. We
conducted soil-digging surveys during 2006–2011 comprising of over 2000 person-hours at more than
300 localities across northeast India and our studies have so far unearthed one new family of caecilians
(Chikilidae), one new genus (Chikila), and at least 20 new candidate species in two families –
Ichthyophiidae and Chikilidae. In addition to revealing hidden caecilian diversity, our morphological and
phylogenetic analyses have also shown that northeast India harbors an ancient lineage, 140 ± ca. 20
million years old, with its closest relatives in Africa. Our findings of chikilids‘ close phylogenetic and
morphological affinities to the African lineage (herpelids) reflects the importance of northeast India as an
important biogeographic unit in understanding vertebrate evolution and Gondwanan biogeography.
Further, the northeast Indian ichthyophiids hold the potential to improve our understanding of the
dispersal routes between the South and Southeast Asian caecilian fauna in this group, and hence that of
terrestrial dispersal in general, by virtue of their geographic location. Results and implications of our
preliminary investigations into the caecilian fauna of the currently poorly documented northeast India
underscores the importance of this region as a potential hotspot of caecilian diversity. However, further
explorations and conservation actions are urgent because the region‘s biodiversity is generally under high
threat from the burgeoning resident human population and rapid deforestation.



Kapfer, Joshua (University of Wisconsin-Whitewater);

The influence of habitat type and the presence of an invasive wetland plant (Phalaris arundinacea)
on capture rates of sympatric rare and common gartersnake species (Thamnophis butleri and T.
sirtalis).

Research that investigates the impact of invasive plants on reptiles, particularly snakes, is sparse.
Butler‘s Gartersnake ( Thamnophis butleri ) is a rare snake, endemic to the upper Midwestern United
States (USA).      Little research has focused on the habitat associations of this snake, which is often
sympatric with the Common Gartersnake ( T. sirtalis ).        The highly invasive wetland grass Phalaris
arundinacea (Reed Canary Grass) has become established or dominant throughout much of the
geographic distributions of these snakes. The impacts of this invasive grass on the habitat associations
of T. butleri and T. sirtalis have not previously been examined. During two years of drift fence surveys
at three survey sites and five habitats sampled in southeastern Wisconsin (USA), we captured 243 adult
T. butleri and 311 adult T. sirtalis. Thamnophis sirtalis was found more often in Reed Canary Grass than
T. butleri , which had more specific habitat preferences and most often occurred in upland habitats,
particularly grassland, rather than wetlands. These findings have important regulatory and conservation
implications for the globally rare T. butleri . For example, our data supports the importance of upland
habitat protection as part of conservation strategies for T. butleri . In addition, management of wetland
habitat for this species must consider the impact of RCG and direct habitat restoration strategies
accordingly.




                                                                                                        357
Karamiani, Rasoul (Razi university); Rastegar-Pouyani, Nasrullah (Razi University, KERMANSHAH,
Canada); Nilson, Göran (Göteborg, Sweden, Sweden, Sweden)

On the Status of Slender Racer Snake Platyceps najadum (Eichwald, 1831) (Reptilia: Colubridae)
in Iran

The genus Platyceps Blyth, 1860 distributed from southern parts of the Balkan Peninsula, Turkey, Syria
to Iran. Four species of this genus occur on the Iranian Plateau as follows: Platyceps karelini (BRANDT,
1838), Platyceps najadum (EICHWALD, 1831), Platyceps rhodorachis (JAN, 1865), and Platyceps
ventromaculatus (GRAY, 1834). Of the above-mentioned species, the Dahl‘s whip snake, Platyceps
najadum (Eichwald, 1831) is distributed from the Adria to the Kopet Dag, Turkmenistan, and extends at
least as far south as the lower Euphrates Valley and the Zagros range in Iran (Schätti et al., 2005) and
consists of six subspecies as follows: Platyceps n. najadum (Eichward, 1831), P. n. schmidtleri (Schätti
and McCarthy, 2001), P. n. atayevi (Tuniyev and Shammakov, 1993) P. n. albitemporalis (Darevsky &
Orlov, 1994), P. n. dahlii (Fitziger, 1826), and P. n. kalymnensis (Schneider, 1979).

 During field work on the herpetofuna of western and southwestern regions of the Iranian Plateau from
June 2008 to September 2010 we collected 50 specimens of Platyceps najadum and also examined the
specimens deposited in the RUZM (Razi University Zoology Museum), and examined based on metric,
meristic and pholidotic characters. The comparisons were indicative of the presence of differences in the
morphology and scaling between Iranian specimens with Turkish specimens that confirmed to separate
them in subspecific level.



Karin, Benjamin (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California); Stubbs, Alexander (Museum
of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California, Canada); Arifin, Umilaela; Iskandar, Djoko (Institut
Teknologi Bandung, Canada); McGuire, Jimmy (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California,
Canada)

Herpetofaunal Survey and Biogeography of Maluku Province, Indonesia

This talk focuses on a herpetofaunal survey undertaken as part of a 4-month field expedition to Indonesia.
Our sampling effort was focused on a series of remote islands in Maluku Province, eastern Indonesia. We
worked on four major island groups – Aru, Kei, Seram, and Banda – that are, nevertheless, rarely visited
by herpetologists, as well as on a series of smaller and very remote islands that form a chain between the
Kei Islands and Seram. These islands have rarely, if ever been visited by herpetologists previously and
were targeted in part because it was unclear a priori which major biogeographic provinces they belong to
(i.e., Maluku, Australo-Papua, or the Lesser Sundas). Our research team collected almost 1000
specimens from 10 islands representing at least 65 species, including at least 3 to 5 species that appear
to be undescribed. In addition to presenting our results on the herpetofaunal composition of these islands,
we present preliminary molecular phylogeographic data for a number of taxa, including Lamprolepis and
Cyrtodactylus, that places these insular populations in a larger biogeographical context. In Addition, we
compare a newly discovered population of Lophognathus found on remote Tam Island to the
phylogenetic findings of Melville et. al. (2010) on Australian and Indonesian populations of
Lophognathus. These findings will be presented in conjunction with a separate talk by Alexander Stubbs,
another member of the research expedition whose talk will focus on Carlia and Lygisauraus skinks.




                                                                                                       358
Karraker, Nancy E. (University of Rhode Island); Dudgeon, David (University of Hong Kong, Canada)

Importance of Amphibians to Streams in South China

Amphibians play important ecological roles and comprise a significant proportion of the community
biomass in some terrestrial and aquatic habitats. Declines in amphibian populations may impact
ecosystems where amphibians are key food web constituents. Our objectives were to delineate the
importance of larval and adult amphibians relative to other aquatic organisms in Hong Kong's streams.
We surveyed streams bi-monthly, quantifying density and biomass of larval amphibians (Paa exilispinosa,
Xenophrys brachykolos), fishes, crustaceans, and insect larvae and conducted monthly mark-recapture
surveys for all adult frogs for one year. Mean biomass of tadpoles was five times higher than decapoda
shrimps and crabs, the second and third most abundant taxa. Densities of tadpoles in pools ranged from
0 - 76 per sq m and averaged 17 per sq m during the study period. Three species of adult frogs were
recorded, ranging in densities from 0.40 – 0.85 frogs per sq m and averaging 0.50 per sq m. Despite
harboring the highest human densities in the world and associated pollution, hillslope streams in Hong
Kong are relatively well-protected and contain some of the highest reported densities of tadpoles and
adult frogs. Declines of streams amphibians in this region would result in the loss of the most important
herbivores and predators in these streams and possibly a significant source of prey for other stream-
dwelling animals.



Karst, Tanya (Victoria University of Wellington); Bell, Ben (Victoria University of Wellington, Canada)

Mitigation of mortality in a translocated rare New Zealand frog (Leiopelma pakeka)

The remaining natural population of the threatened New Zealand frog Leiopelma pakeka occurs in only
16 ha of regenerating forest on Maud Island in the Marlborough Sounds, New Zealand, where an
estimated 19,000-34,000 frogs occur. This population has been the source of a series of translocations,
and here we review the history and future prospects for the first NZ mainland translocation into the Karori
Sanctuary, Wellington, which has had mixed success. While transferred frogs survived well in mesh forest
enclosures, breeding over four successive seasons, those individuals released into the adjacent forest
failed to establish. To investigate this failure, we consider those factors most likely to contribute to such
apparent mortality. These include potential predators, such as the invasive house mouse, Mus musculus,
as well as birds that forage on the forest floor, including the little spotted kiwi, Apteryx owenii . We review
possible steps that might be taken to mitigate threats to the frog in Karori Sanctuary in the future, so that
a wild population might be established there. This would provide empirical evidence necessary to support
the proliferation and expansion of L. pakeka to other sites in New Zealand.



Kasperoviczus, Karina (University of São Paulo); Braz, Henrique B. (University of São Paulo, Canada);
Almeida-Santos, Selma (Butantan Institute, Canada)

Life-history variation in island populations of the Bothrops jararaca complex (Serpentes,
Viperidae)

Island species often show different life-history traits compared to their mainland relatives. Body size
variation is certainly one of the most commonly documented. In snakes, body size influences important
reproductive parameters as sexual maturity and fecundity. Hence, variation in body size also implies
variation in several aspects of life history. Here, we investigate body size variation and its influence on
sexual maturity and litter size in island populations of the Bothrops jararaca complex ( B. jararaca, B.



                                                                                                           359
alcatraz and B. insularis ). Data for adult body size, litter size and body size at maturity were obtained
from 321 preserved specimens from four island populations: B. jararaca from Búzios Island (BI) and
Ilhabela (II), B. alcatraz from Alcatrazes Island (AI) and B. insularis from Queimada Grande Island (QI)
and compared with a mainland population of their closest relative: B. jararaca from São Paulo city (SP).
Female body size differed among populations. B. jararaca females (SP, BI and II) did not differ in mean
body size, however they were larger than B. insularis (QI) and B. alcatraz (AI). Adult B. insularis were
larger than B. alcatraz. Litter size was influenced by maternal body size and differed among populations.
Litter size did not differ among SP, II and BI populations but it was higher than the island populations from
QI (mean = 7.9) and AI (mean = 2.7). Litter size in B. alcatraz was smaller than other populations. This
interpopulational variation in litter size is likely a result of the variation in the maternal body size. After
removing body size effects litter size did not vary among populations. Mean adult body also size
influenced body size at maturity. Minimum body size at maturity increases as mean adult body size
increases: mean adult body size explains 80% of the variation of body size at maturity. In general,
females attain sexual maturity with body size between 69% (II) and 95% (BI) of the mean adult body size.
Body size at sexual maturity varied among populations. B. jararaca females from SP and II and B.
insularis females (QI) attain sexual maturity with similar body sizes (relative to mean body sizes) (mean =
74%). B. alcatraz female mature at 81% of the mean body sizes and B. jararaca (Búzios) at 95%.
Thus, B. alcatraz and B. jararaca (BI) seem adopt the strategy of delaying maturity in relation to B.
insularis and B. jararaca from SP and II. Such late maturity provides attain relatively large body sizes at
maturity.



Kasperoviczus, Karina (University of São Paulo); Sueiro, Leticia; Santos, Juliana (University of São
Paulo, Canada); Almeida-Santos, Selma (Butantan Institute, Canada)

Ultrasonographic evaluation of the follicular dynamics in the golden lancehead, Bothrops
insularis, maintained in captivity

Information on squamates follicular dynamics is usually obtained from the dissection of several preserved
females. However, this approach may be difficult for those species poorly represented in museums,
especially threatened taxa. Ultrasonography is a non-invasive, secure and low-priced technique that may
be used alternatively to evaluate the functions of the reproductive tract. The golden lancehead Bothrops
insularis is an endemic snake from the Queimada Grande Island, Brazil. It is included in the red list of
IUCN as critically endangered. The Butantan Institute holds the project ‗Conservation of the golden
lancehead, Bothrops insularis ‘ (IBAMA: permit 25650-1) in which 40 adult individuals (20 males, 20
females) are kept in captivity since March 2010. Here, we used portable ultrasonography in combination
with abdominal palpation of follicles/eggs to assess the female reproductive status. Initially, we combined
both palpation and ultrasonagraphy. Palpation reliably revealed enlarged follicles but did not distinguish
between vitellogenesis and pregnancy. Therefore, we used frequent palpation throughout the year to
distinguish reproductive activity of any kind and periodic ultrasonography to verify palpation findings.
Ultrasonographic evaluations performed in September and October revealed in all females (n = 20) oval
structures, with low echogenicity measuring between 16 and 25 mm; characteristic of vitellogenic follicles.
Such structures were also observed in 11 females in December and in two females in February. However,
in one female additionally to the oval hypoechogenic oval structures, we also visualized oval
hyperechogenic and homogeneous structures, suggesting that such a structure rather than being
composed by liquid it is probably composed by connective/fibrous tissue or by fat. Later, this female
oviposited 13 atresic eggs in five different oviposition events. The follicles showed rigid consistency,
weighed from 0.53 to 2.40 g and measured from 6.52 to 26.28 mm in length. The data of follicular
dynamic presented confirms the reproductive cycle previously described for the species with



                                                                                                           360
vitellogenesis occurring between March and September. Moreover, these data suggest that even in
captivity and in the lack of contact with males, individual females did not lose the timing of reproductive
events. However, some individuals, for unknown causes, ovulate and oviposit atresic follicles, while
others seem to reabsorb the follicles and not ovulate.



Kathriner, Andrew (Villanova University);

New species of bent-toed gecko (Squamata: Gekkonidae: Cyrtodactylus) from East Timor

Recent investigations into the herpetofauna of East Timor have yielded several new species of bent-toed
geckos (Cyrtodactylus). Although known from elsewhere in the Lesser Sundas, members of this genus
were previously unknown from East Timor, which has long been herpetologically neglected. Collections
from 3 of the 13 administrative districts in the country yielded 27 Cyrtodactylus specimens representing
four putatively new species. In order to assess the phylogenetic position of these taxa and delimit species
boundaries we incorporated all samples into a larger molecular phylogeny of the genus, including
representatives of all major subclades. We applied maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and
Bayesian inference methods to analyze data from one mitochondrial DNA locus (ND2) and several
nuclear loci. All new taxa fall within a broader clade that also includes other Lesser Sunda species, as
well as the recently described C. kimberleyensis from Western Australia. They do not, however, form a
monophyletic group within this clade, suggesting more than one colonization of Timor. The colonization of
Australia from Timor is also supported by our data. All Timorese Cyrtodactylus, as well as most other
members of the larger clade to which they belong are characterized by small size (< 75 mm SVL) and
similar scalation and color pattern. Further investigation into the remaining unsurveyed districts of East
Timor may yield additional undescribed species of Cyrtodactylus . Until now the biodiversity of East
Timor has been under estimated, largely because of the nation‘s turbulent recent history.



Katzenberger, Marco (Estación Biológica de Doñana); Hammond, John (University of New Mexico,
Canada); Tejedo, Miguel (Estación Biológica de Doñana, Canada); Calabuig, Cecilia (Universidade
Federal de Rio Grande do Sul, Canada); Relyea, Rick (University of Pittsburgh, Canada)

Swimming your way through predators and pesticides: How the presence of a predator and a
pesticide affects the thermal physiology of an anuran

Most organims, in their natural environment, present a range of phenotypes which result from the
combination of both natural selection and environmental induction. Predation is a pervasive process in
nature that causes selection on, and induction of, prey phenotypes, such as altering morphology. The
presence of predatory stress induces considerable morphological changes in Grey Treefrog Hyla
versicolor tadpoles. Also, Relyea (2012) discovered that a pesticide (herbicide) was capable of inducing
changes in tadpole morphology in a direction and magnitude that appeared to mimic the adaptive
morphological changes induced by predators. To determine how this predator and herbicide-induced
plasticity affects the thermal physiology of the Grey Treefrog , we raised tadpoles in mesocosms, under
four different treatments (control, predator, pesticide, predator+pesticide), using dragonfly nymphs (Anax
sp.) as predators and Roundup Power Max as pesticide. For studying the thermal physiology, we
determined the upper critical thermal maximum (CTmax), using a slightly modified version of Hutchison‘s
dynamic method, and thermal performance curves (TPCs) based on locomotor performance (burst
swimming speed). Tadpoles in treatments which included the presence of predatory stress had
significantly higher CTmax. However, there was no visible effect of the pesticide on CTmax. Optimum



                                                                                                        361
temperature (Topt) appears to be very similar between treatments and tadpoles with only pesticide cues
show slightly lower Topt. Tadpoles in all induced treatments were always faster than in control, as
expected due to the morphological changes, indicating a vertical shift of the curves. Furthermore, the
increase in burst speed was higher around the optimum temperature, indicating a change in the shape of
the curve (specialist-generalist trade-off). This specialist-generalist change seems to be more evident in
the predator treatment. Although predator and pesticide cues have a similar effect on morphology, there
are considerable differences when it comes to thermal physiology. If the presence of this pesticide
significantly lowers Topt, there could be important ecological effects, especially considering the predicted
increase in environmental temperatures due to climate change.



Kawai, Ushio (Texas Tech University); Mori, Akira (Kyoto University, Canada); Horita, Juske (Texas
Tech University, Canada); Hori, Michio (Kyoto University, Canada); Perry, Gad (Texas Tech University,
Canada)

Analysis of diet and trophic position of lizards in a dry forest of northwestern Madagascar, using
stomach contents, feces, and stable isotopes

Madagascar is one of the hottest biodiversity hotspots and contains over 400 species of reptiles, and
many of them endemic. The Malagasy forest is rapidly disappearing because of clearing and other human
activities, making conservation of flora and fauna an international priority. Many studies of reptilian
taxonomy and biogeography have been conducted, but ecological studies are few. During the rainy
season (November to March) of 2009-2012, we conducted a dietary study of lizards living in a dry forest
of northwestern Madagascar. The study focused on four diurnal species ( Lygodactylus tolampyae,
Oplurus cuvieri , Phelsuma kochi, and Zonosaurus laticaudatus) and one nocturnal species (
Blaesodactylus ambonihazo) in disturbed and less disturbed habitat in Ankarafantsika National Park.
Diets were examined by stomach flushing and feces, and stable isotope ratio was analyzed to determine
their trophic positions. Stomach contents and feces analysis showed that the lizards mainly utilize
invertebrates, predominantly insects such as Hymenoptera and Coleoptera but also plant materials such
as fruits. The results of stable isotope analysis indicated that trophic dynamics of these lizard species
differed between habitats.



Keall, Susan (Victoria University of Wellington); Refsnider, Jeanine (Iowa State University, Canada);
Daugherty, Charles (Victoria University of Wellington, Canada); Godfrey, Stephanie (Murdoch University,
Canada); Moore, Jennifer (Michigan State University, Canada); Nelson, Nicola (Victoria University of
Wellington, Canada)

Female tuatara minimize effort/risk by migrating to the closest nesting rookery

Preservation of all necessary resources and habitat components is critical for the conservation of island
species that are unable to disperse. Migrations between residence and nesting habitat can exact high
costs on individual females, and may have population demographic consequences in cases where female
mortality during nesting migrations is high. Tuatara are the sole representatives of the reptilian order
Rhynchocephalia, and natural populations are restricted to 32 offshore islands in New Zealand; thus,
conservation of this unique species requires precise knowledge of habitat use and requirements on these
islands. We examined patterns in nesting migrations of the largest tuatara population, occurring on
Stephens Island, New Zealand, over five years. We found that only about 7% of female tuatara lived in
the rookery in which they nested, with most females instead migrating to a nesting rookery from their




                                                                                                        362
residential area. However, most females minimized the distance travelled on nesting migrations by
nesting in a rookery adjacent to their residential area. Females that travel further to nest likely incur
greater energetic costs. Moreover, because nesting habitat on Stephens Island is not limited but high-
quality home territories likely are, we hypothesize that female tuatara nest in the closest available nesting
habitat to minimize the likelihood of losing their territory to conspecifics while on nesting migrations.



Keehn, Jade (University of Nevada, Reno); Nieto, Nathan; Tracy, C Richard (University of Nevada,
Reno, Canada); Gienger, Chris (Austin Peay State University, Canada); Feldman, Chris (University of
Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV, United States)

Isolation at Work: Body Size Divergence between the Reptiles of Anaho Island and the mainland
of Pyramid Lake, Nevada

The "Island Rule" predicts that small animals that colonize islands will evolve larger body sizes, while the
reverse is expected to occur for large animals that colonize islands. However, the Island Rule is
controversial, with inconsistent and even contradictory trends reported for differing taxa, including reptiles.
We test the Island Rule in a reptile community isolated on a desert island-- Anaho Island in Pyramid Lake,
Nevada. Using live and museum specimens from Anaho Island and proximal mainland populations, we
examine whether size differences have accumulated in one snake and four lizards (Crotalus oreganus,
Callisaurus draconoides, Aspidoscelis tigris, Sceloporus occidentalis, Sceloporus uniformis ). In
addiction, we examine deviations in allometries and body scaring to make inferences about dietary shifts
and changes in predation pressure or competition between island and mainland populations, and whether
these mechanisms can explain the Island Rule in our system.



Keely, Claire (The University of Melbourne); Hale, Joshua (Museum Victoria, Canada); Parris, Kirsten;
Heard, Geoff (The University of Melbourne, Canada); Melville, Jane (Museum Victoria, Canada); Hamer,
Andrew (Australian Research Centre for Urban Ecology, Canada)

Conservation genetics of an endangered Australian frog in an urbanising landscape

Urbanisation is a leading cause of species extinctions worldwide and is considered a major threat to
global biodiversity. Recently proposed urban growth boundaries will increase the extent of Melbourne,
Australia by an additional 40,000 hectares. The endangered Growling Grass Frog ( Litoria raniformis )
will be directly impacted by Melbourne‘s urban expansion over the next few decades. Remnant
populations of this frog occur throughout the proposed urban growth areas, and the species is known to
be sensitive to habitat fragmentation caused by urbanisation. We assessed the genetic structure of
remnant populations of L. raniformis across Melbourne‘s urban fringe. Tissue samples were collected
from 270 individuals across the south-west, west and south-east regions of the city, and combined with a
further 179 samples obtained previously from northern Melbourne. Haplotype composition and diversity
were determined by sequencing a fragment of the mitochondrial gene, COI. In total, 24 distinct
haplotypes were represented. Shared haplotypes and low levels of diversity were observed between
populations distributed across Melbourne‘s north. In contrast, populations in the south-east were
composed largely of unique haplotypes and showed the greatest level of diversity.

Microsatellite-based analyses were used to examine population structure within northern Melbourne.
Structuring was high, suggesting restricted gene flow both between and within population clusters
(metapopulations). Gene flow in this system appears curtailed by strongly distance-limited dispersal and
by urban barriers.     Information acquired during this project will be integrated into models of



                                                                                                           363
metapopulation viability for L. raniformis around Melbourne, and used to inform decisions concerning
reserve design, translocations and re-introductions.



Keevil, Matthew G. (Laurentian University); Brooks, Ronald J. (University of Guelph, Canada); Litzgus,
Jacqueline D. (Laurentian University, Canada)

Investigating the trade-off between short-term reproductive effort and somatic growth in a
northern population of Snapping Turtles (Chelydra serpentina).

The morphology of turtles (i.e. the rigid shell) implies that individuals have an inherent body-size-
dependent constraint on their ability to increase annual reproductive output in response to periods of high
resource availability, especially when clutch frequency cannot be more than annual as a result of
seasonal limitations. Growth in body size in Snapping Turtles ( Chelydra serpentina ) at Algonquin Park,
Ontario, continues for several years after the first clutch is laid. This growth may result from annual
resource acquisition that exceeds the physical limit that can be invested in the current clutch given body
size constraints, or investment in growth (and future reproductive value) may be prioritized over
investment in the next clutch. We hypothesized that variation in annual resource acquisition and
assimilation due to environmental fluctuations will be partitioned into either variation in annual
reproductive investment or variation in somatic growth, with the more prioritised component displaying
less variation. If female Snapping Turtles prioritize investment in proximal reproductive effort over somatic
growth and future reproductive potential, then we predict that variance in clutch mass will not be higher
when growth rates are high, as during the years following the first reproductive event. However, if
individuals preferentially allocate resources towards maintaining somatic growth and future reproductive
potential, then we predict that clutch mass will show greater variation when growth rates are high. We
report preliminary results of an investigation into this relationship between variation in clutch mass and
somatic growth rate following maturity.



Keevil, Matthew G. (Laurentian University); Brooks, Ronald J. (University of Guelph, Canada); Litzgus,
Jacqueline D. (Laurentian University, Canada)

Twenty-two years later: A lack of density dependent compensation and no evidence for recovery
after a mortality event in an undisturbed population of Snapping Turtles (Chelydra serpentina).

Density dependent compensation includes a collection of mechanisms that permit population stability and
recovery from perturbations in population density. However, the importance of density dependence for
population regulation of long-lived organisms can be difficult to assess because demographic responses
operate over long temporal scales. Consequently, density dependent compensation in turtle populations
has been infrequently tested. We used data from a long-term mark-recapture and nest monitoring study
of Snapping Turtles ( Chelydra serpentina ) in Algonquin Provincial Park, Ontario, to assess population
recovery over two decades following a major natural mortality event that occurred between 1986 and
1989. We sought evidence for density dependent compensation by comparing survival, fecundity,
immigration, individual growth, and recruitment at initial and subsequent low density. If density affects
realized patch quality then we predicted that there would be a compensatory response in one or more of
these vital rates. Additionally, if dispersal in Snapping Turtles is mediated by resource competition, then
emigration will be negligible after a decrease in density and recruitment of dispersing individuals will
increase. Conversely, if inbreeding avoidance is the primary selective pressure causing dispersal then
both emigration and immigration are predicted to occur independently of changes in patch saturation. We



                                                                                                         364
found no evidence of density dependent compensation in any of the vital rates examined and no
indications of population recovery. The estimated population size of nesting females declined from 59
(95% CI = ± 9) the year before to 29 (95% CI = ± 9) the year after the mortality event. In 2010 the
population size was 23 (95% CI = ± 8) individuals. The estimated survivorship of nesting females in the
most supported Jolly-Seber model (0.95, 95% CI = ± 0.015) did not differ before and after the mortality
event. There was no positive change in relative clutch size or mass. Our observations also suggest a
continuing high rate of dispersal in our population and low recruitment from immigration. This lack of
density dependence and extremely slow or absent recovery has important consequences for
conservation and management. The insensitivity of dispersal to population density has additional
implications for populations in fragmented habitats where dispersal mortality is likely to be much higher.



Kelehear, Crystal (The University of Sydney); Brown, Gregory; Shine, Richard (The University of
Sydney, Camperdown, Australia)

Rapid evolution of parasite life history traits on an expanding range-edge

Ecologists and evolutionary biologists often make the simplifying assumption that the systems they study
are in spatial equilibrium, but this assumption is regularly violated in the natural world, as populations
often expand and contract in time and space. For instance, species invasions are generally coupled with
range expansions or contractions, which in turn, drive rapid evolutionary change. Cane toads (Rhinella
marina) are currently expanding their invasive Australian range with increasing rapidity – facilitated by
evolved increases in dispersal ability. Whilst there is growing evidence that range advance can induce
rapid evolutionary change in vertebrates, there is no evidence that similar changes are taking place in the
parasites of these expanding vertebrates, yet similar forces should be at work. We studied a parasitic
lung nematode native to South America that was introduced to Australia with the founder cane toads. We
collected parasites from across a gradient of cane toad invasion history from the range-edge to the
population core and exposed them to toads in a common garden to identify life‐history traits that facilitate
parasite range expansion. We conclude that range-edge parasites invest in few large offspring that are
better equipped to survive in an environment where host density is low, as is the case at an expanding
range edge.



Kenaley, Christopher (Harvard University);

A Device for Dampening Drag: A Novel Hypothesis for the Function of Enormous Fangs in Deep-
sea Fishes

Many deep-sea fishes possess spectacular morphologies that enable the capture of large prey in a
seascape devoid of biomass. Perhaps the most distinctive feeding morphologies of deep-sea teleosts are
enormous fangs set on extremely long jaws. Although the functional significance of these phenotypes has
long been assumed (e.g., caging or impaling devices), no single study has addressed what functional
advantages enormous fangs confer. In recent years, a handful of studies have employed theoretical
models to predict feeding performance and to describe the dynamic forces associated with jaw adduction
in deep-sea fishes. These studies have demonstrated that the most important force opposing jaw
adduction in long-jawed, deep-sea taxa, namely drag, differs substantially from that of shallow-water taxa,
namely inertia of the lower-jaw system. As a corollary, any prey item put in motion by the jaws of a deep-
sea predator might impose much greater negative forces associated with drag and that this might alter
adduction performance considerably. Based on these insights and a series of feeding simulations for



                                                                                                        365
several species of the dragonfish family Stomiidae, a new hypothesis is proposed for the function of
enormous fangs of deep-sea fishes. A theoretical model that accounts for mass and the hydrodynamic
properties of typical dragonfish prey items predicts that fangs function to optimally position prey in such a
manner that reduces negative forces acting on the lower jaw. These results demonstrate that without
optimal positioning by long teeth, the capacity of dragonfishes to consume large prey items is severely
diminished.



Kendall, Neala (University of Washington); Heino, Mikko (University of Bergen, Canada); Dieckmann, Ulf
(International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis, Canada); Punt, Andre; Quinn, Thomas (University of
Washington, Canada)

Plasticity and microevolution contribute to changes in age and size at maturation of Alaskan
sockeye salmon under size-selective harvest

Spatial and temporal variation in life history traits, including age and size at maturation, can be influenced
by natural environmental and anthropogenic processes, including size-selective exploitation. Such life
history trait changes can be mediated by phenotypic plasticity and genetic evolution. Wild population
complexes of sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) in Bristol Bay, Alaska have become smaller at a
given age over the last half-decade but their age composition has not changed. These fish have been
intensely harvested by a size-selective gillnet fishery since 1900 that has usually caught larger than
average fish, but selection has varied over time. Marked changes in both freshwater and ocean
conditions have occurred over this time period. We estimated probabilistic maturation reaction norms
(PMRNs) for males and females in nine discrete populations over 50 years to quantify differences in
maturation length thresholds and evaluate whether fishery selection contributed to microevolutionary
changes in maturation length. PMRNs decreased over time for six of nine spawning populations and
differed among spawning populations and between males and females. We conclude that environmental
changes in the ocean (decreased growth rates) have likely combined with adaptive microevolution
(decreased maturation length thresholds) to produce the observed length and age at maturation patterns.
PMRNs did not decrease in all populations perhaps because of variable size-selective fishing, less size-
selective exploitation, and lower rates of exploitation. Managers and scientists can incorporate
evolutionary considerations, track further changes in age and size at maturation, and consider the
important differences in key traits among locally adapted populations for continued sustainability.



Kendell, Kris (Alberta Conservation Association);

Northern Leopard Frog (Lithobates pipiens) Recovery Program in Alberta, Canada: Insights from
10 Years of Translocations

Alberta Conservation Association is a member of a provincial recovery team that is responsible for
facilitating, monitoring, and evaluating the conservation and recovery of the northern leopard frog (NLF)
(Lithobates pipiens) in Alberta. The team is guided by Alberta Fish and Wildlife and team members and
associated organizations are responsible for implementation of actions and strategies that are outlined in
the recovery plan to restore and maintain the species for future generations. A number of actions have
been designed to meet the objectives of the NLF recovery plan including: population and habitat
monitoring, reintroductions, habitat protection, and outreach initiatives. Several reintroductions have been
attempted in Alberta to re-establish the NLF in select areas. Between 1999 and 2010 we attempted two
approaches for reintroduction: head-starting and egg translocation. Reintroduction efforts using egg



                                                                                                          366
translocations have demonstrated some success. A self-sustaining NLF population has been achieved at
one site. In 2011, we observed introduced frogs from previous releases at four additional reintroduction
sites, including evidence of successful breeding. To help direct reintroductions, a genetic diversity and
structure study was undertaken to determine the genetic suitability of potential source populations. A
disease surveillance project was also undertaken to minimize disease transmission between amphibian
species during reintroductions and to determine the presence of amphibian disease, such as ―chytrid‖
fungus (Batrachochytrium dendobatidis), prior to reintroductions.



Kerr, Kaety (Hofstra University); Burke, Russell (Hofstra University, Hempstead, United States)

Lizards as hosts of Lyme-disease vectors in South Carolina

Host species composition and utilization by ticks may be important factors affecting the prevalence of
Lyme disease. In association with a larger NSF-funded study, the goal of our project was to measure host
species composition (particularly lizards) and their associated tick burdens. We examined the distribution
of larval and nymphal black-legged ticks ( Ixodes scapularis ) on hosts at the Savannah River Site (SRS)
in South Carolina from spring 2010 through spring 2012. We used a wide array of host capture methods,
replicated at three SRS sites. Methods included traditional methods such as Sherman traps, drift fences
with pitfall arrays, and cover boards, as well as burlap bands targeting arboreal lizards. All seven species
of lizards captured were parasitized by I. scapularis . Tick burden counts conducted in the field were
verified by holding animals in the lab. The techniques differed in their efficacy in catching tick hosts.
Methods most effective in capturing skinks ( Plestiodon ) were cover boards, pitfalls, hand captures, and
burlap bands, respectively. Burlap bands were highly effective for capturing arboreal species including
Anolis carolinensis and Sceloporus undulatus. Aspidoscelis sexlineata were only caught in pitfall traps.
Plestiodon fasciatus, P. laticeps, and P. inexpectatus had the highest tick burdens, and therefore were
the most important hosts. Ixodes nymph abundance peaked in April on Plestiodon with an average of
4.4 nymphs per skink and tapered off throughout the summer. Ixodes larvae were found on Plestiodon
from May to July with an average of 3.75 larvae per skink. Conversely, mice had much lower nymphal
and larval burdens throughout the summer. Between April and September when lizards are most active,
56% of Plestiodon captured were parasitized by juvenile ticks, whereas only 4% of mice were parasitized.
The difference in I. scapularis host utilization and the frequent occurrence of ticks on lizards suggests
possible differences in I. scapularis behavior in the southeast compared to the northern U.S. If juvenile
I.scapularis are questing for lizards in leaf litter and not on vegetation as in the north, human encounters
with ticks would be lowered.



Kessel, Steven (University of Windsor); Gruber, Samuel (Bimini Biological Field Station Foundation,
Miami, FL, United States); Franks, Bryan (Rollins College, Winter Park, FL, United States); Gedamke,
Todd (National Marine Fisheries Service, Miami, FL, United States); Chapman, Demian (Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, NY, United States)

"Acoustic fishing" - filling the gaps in acoustic coverage

Acoustic monitors have been used for many years to study various aspects marine organism life-history,
including residence, movement and migration.          Study species are issued with an acoustic transmitter
and an array of acoustic monitors is established in their suspected habitat/home-range.         The biggest
shortfall of this system is that data can only be collect when the study animals are within acoustic range of
a monitor. Without using additional techniques you cannot conclusively determine where they are the



                                                                                                         367
rest of the time.    In Jupiter, Florida, we have been using an array of Vemco VR2W monitors to track
lemon sharks ( Negaprion brevirostris ) since 2007.        Monitor placements were based either on diver
reports or best guesses of where the lemon sharks may spend their time. Other areas the animals use,
but not covered by reports or predictions, would not be revealed under the normal use of this technology.
To overcome this shortfall we employed a new technique labelled ‗acoustic fishing‘. Acoustic fishing is
the act of moving a monitor, or several monitors, through the marine environment to search for
acoustically tagged animals. The location of detections can later be extrapolated by matching the time
and date of the detection to the locations recorded by the associated GPS logger. We have employed
acoustic fishing in two different formats; 1) a monitor hung over the side of the vessel whist hook and line
fishing for lemon sharks. This not only has the potential to identify new areas of habitat use, but also
tells us if any (and which) previously acoustically tagged sharks were in the vicinity of our fishing efforts
but not captured. 2) We conducted focused acoustic fishing trips by drifting six monitors perpendicular
to shore, providing a more structured method for identifying new areas of use within the study region.
Acoustic fishing revealed up to 18 acoustically tagged sharks in the fishing area without a single re-
capture, indicating sharks may be avoiding the fishing gear after their initial capture event.      Focused
acoustic fishing trips supported theories of seasonal lemon shark presence in the region and also
provided additional data for other research projects using acoustic telemetry. Acoustic fishing is a cost
effect method for revealing new locations used by the study species and a good tool for identifying
potential new sites for fixed monitor deployments.



Khan, Zaheer (Department of Zoology, University of Karachi); Hussain, Babar (Canada)

Population status and distribution of reptiles in coastal areas of Karachi

Pakistan derives its marine resources from the Arabian Sea, which has a coastline of 1050 km and lying
in the Sindh and Balochistan provinces. Sindh and Balochistan coasts have different physical and climatic
characteristics. Karachi coast is an important area for reptiles. It has the marine, muddy, sandy and rocky
habitats having special significance in the distinct natural environment in the tropical region of southern
Pakistan. The reptiles of Pakistan are a blend of Palearctic, Indo-Malayan and Ethiopian forms, and have
179 species consisting of lizards, snakes, turtles, tortoises, crocodile and gavial. The important sites on
the Karachi coast for the reptiles are Manora, Sandspit, Hawkesbay and Cape Monze areas. The present
study was carried out between 2006-2011 covering four selected areas, total thirty reptilian species was
recorded including ten lizards species such as Tree Lizard (Calotes versicolor versicolor), Spotted Barn
Gecko (Hemidactylus brooki), Yellow Bellied Common House Gecko (Hemidactylus flaviviridis), Persian
House Gecko (Hemidactylus persicus), Blotched House Gecko(Hamidactylus triedrus), Mediterranean
House Gecko (Hamidactylus turcicus), Blue Tail Sand Lizard (Acanthodactylus cantoris), Spotted Lacerta
(Mesalina watsonana), and Bengal Monitor (Varanus bengalensis), Desert Monitor (Varanus griseus).
Seventeen snakes species viz. Beaked Sea Snake(Enhydrina schistosa), Blue Green Sea Snake
(Hydrophis caerulescens), Annulated Sea Snake (Hydrophis cyanocinctus), Persian Sea Snake
(Hydrophis lapemoides), Broad Band Sea Snake (Hydrophis mamillaris), Reef Sea Snake (Hydrophis
ornatus), Yellow Sea Snake (Hydrophis spiralis), Pygmy Sea Snake (Lapemis curtus), Spotted Small
Headed Sea Snake (Microcephalophis cantrois), Pelagic Sea Snake (Pelamis platurus), Spotted Viperine
Sea Snake (Praescutata viperina), Blotched Diadem Snake (Sphalerosophis diadema diadema), Cliff
Racer (Platyceps rhodorachis), Saw-scaled Viper (Echis carinatus) Black Cobra (Naja naja) Indian Sand
Boa (Eryx johnii johnii) and Glossy bellied Racer (Coluber Ventromaculatus), and three turtles species
Green Turtle (Chelonia mydas), Olive Ridley (Lepidochelys olivacea), and Hawksbill Turtle (Eretmochelys
imbricata). Along the Karachi Coast, a new Green Turtle nesting site was discovered near Mubarak
Village, an area of difficult access approximately 25 km from Hawkesbay. During 2010- 11, first time 3



                                                                                                         368
new species Desert Monitor, Indian Sand Boa and Glossy bellied Racer were recorded in the Manora,
Hawkesbay and Capemonze areas. Based on current data Green Turtles (Chelonia mydas) were the
most commonly reported species throughout our study period, while Olive Ridley (Lepidochelys olivacea)
has not been recorded since 2005. It has disappeared from the Karachi Coast most probably due to 2003
oil spill. During the surveyed we noted that habitat degradation a main threat at coastal areas of Karachi.



Kielgast, Jos (University of Copenhagen, Natural History Museum of Denmark); Francis Thomsen, Philip
(University of Copenhagen, Natural History Museum of Denmark, Centre for GeoGenetics, Copenhagen,
Denmark); Lønsmann Iversen, Lars (University of Copenhagen, Section for Freshwater biology, Hillerød,
Denmark); Willerslev, Eske (University of Copenhagen, Natural History Museum of Denmark, Centre for
GeoGenetics, Copenhagen, Denmark)

How to study your favourite organism in the field without the distress of finding it first?

Freshwater ecosystems are among the most endangered habitats on Earth, with thousands of animal
species known to be threatened or already extinct. Reliable monitoring of threatened organisms is crucial
for data-driven conservation actions but remains a challenge owing to nonstandardized methods that
depend on practical and taxonomic expertise, which is rapidly declining. Here, we show that a diversity of
rare and threatened freshwater animals—representing amphibians, fish, mammals, insects and
crustaceans—can be detected and quantified based on DNA obtained directly from small water samples
of lakes, ponds and streams. We successfully validate our findings in a controlled mesocosm experiment
and show that DNA becomes undetectable within 2 weeks after removal of animals, indicating that DNA
traces are near contemporary with presence of the species. We further demonstrate that entire faunas of
amphibians and fish can be detected by high-throughput sequencing of DNA extracted from pond water.
Our findings underpin the ubiquitous nature of DNA traces in the environment and establish
environmental DNA as a tool for monitoring rare and threatened species across a wide range of
taxonomic groups.



Kim, Jin Koo (Pukyong National University); Kwun, Hyuck Joon; Ji, Hwan Sung (Pukyong National
University, Canada)

Phylogeography of Mugil cephalus and Ammodytes personatus around the Korean peninsula:
evidence of a biogeographic barrier

Korea is bounded by water on the east (East Sea), west (Yellow Sea) and south (East China Sea), and
each of these seas are characterized by unique marine environments differing from each other. The
mean water depth varies from a maximum of 1,684 meters in the East Sea to only 44 meters in the
Yellow Sea. In the middle part of the East Sea, there is the stable polar front formed by the intersection
of the East Korean Warm Current (EKWC), which is higher in temperature and salinity, and the North
Korean Cold Current (NKCC). In the Yellow Sea, the Yellow Sea Bottom Cold Water (YSBCW) is
characterized by low temperature, low salinity and abundant suspended solids under the influence of
influx water from the Han River, Geum River, Youngsan River from Korea and Yangtze River from China.
Jeju Island and the southern part of Korea are directly affected by the high temperature and salinity of the
Tsushima Warm Current (TWC), a separated branch of the Kuroshio Warm Current (KWC). In particular,
Jeju Island is influenced by diverse water masses that include the Chinese Continental Coastal Water
(CCCW), YSBCW, Jeju Warm Current (JWC) and Korean Coastal Water. The diverse topography and
characteristics of these currents likely contribute to observed fish diversity as well as the biogeographic




                                                                                                        369
barrier in this region. There are four hypotheses regarding circulation patterns in the East China and
Yellow Seas suggested by Nitani (1972), Beardsley et al. (1985), Lie et al. (1998) and Lie and Cho
(2002). In order to clarify which hypothesis is closest to nature, we investigated molecular and
morphological differences among local populations of Mugil cephalus and Ammodytes personatus
around the Korean peninsula.



Kim, Sora (University of Wyoming); Casper, Dave (University of California, Santa Cruz, Canada);
Martínez del Rio, Carlos (University of Wyoming, Canada); Hoen, Danielle; Popp, Brian (University of
Hawaii, Canada); Koch, Paul (University of California, Santa Cruz, Canada)

Discrimination factors and incorporation rates for carbon and nitrogen isotopes from a long term
feeding study with sharks

Stable isotope analysis has provided insight to the dietary and habitat patterns of many birds, mammals,
and teleost fish. Crucial biological parameters to interpret field stable isotope data are discrimination
factors and tissue incorporation rates, which are not well studied in large vertebrate ectotherms. Sharks
have a unique physiology and a carnivorous diet, which likely affect their metabolic biochemistry and
these biological parameters. Because sharks have relatively slow metabolic rates and are difficult to
maintain in captivity, no long-term feeding study until isotopic steady state with a diet has been
conducted. Leopard sharks ( Triakis semifasciata ) were fed controlled diets for 3½ years in captivity. The
control group ate a constant diet of squid and the experimental group was switched to tilapia, an
isotopically distinct diet. Plasma, red blood cell, and muscle isotopic values were monitored throughout
the experiment to calculate discrimination factors and incorporation rates. Although discrimination factors
were similar to mammalian carnivores, tissue incorporation rates were an order of magnitude slower than
previously published studies. This discrepancy is likely due to the relatively slow metabolic rate of
ectotherms and large size of these leopard sharks in comparison to other feeding study subjects.
Furthermore, discrimination factors for liver, skin, and vertebrae were estimated for bulk tissue isotopic
compositions and for individual amino acids from white muscle tissue for individuals collected at the
experiment‘s termination. These results are the first robust discrimination factors and incorporation rates
for a suite of tissues from a long term controlled feeding study with sharks.



Kimble, Steven (Purdue University); Williams, Rod (Purdue University, West Lafayette, United States)

Rangewide population genetics of the eastern box turtle Terrapene carolina carolina

The eastern box turtle Terrapene c. carolina is experiencing steep census population declines across its
range in the eastern United States, likely due to a combination of habitat loss and fragmentation, road
mortality, disease, and collection. However, the genetic consequences of such declines vary
considerably, especially in long-lived taxa such as Testudines. For example, declines in census numbers
may reduce the genetic diversity available for a species to evolve responses to novel challenges such as
climate change or emerging diseases. Genetic considerations are also paramount in designing
conservation management practices such as head starting or transplantation. To address these gaps in
knowledge we collected samples from approximately 1550 individuals from the full range of the species
and genotyped them at six highly polymorphic microsatellite loci. Genetic diversity at these loci was high
(mean allelic richness = 41.6), and our data suggested the full range of the species was defined by only
three populations. Differentiation among these populations was low (mean Fst = 0.0278), and estimates
of effective population sizes were highly variable (699.9-7799.1). We sampled intensely (n≈00) in two



                                                                                                       370
contiguous state forests in Indiana and found that mean pairwise relatedness among individuals was very
low (r=0.002), suggesting high dispersal in this species and low chance of inbreeding depression. The low
level of population structure also suggests high gene flow, a surprising result in light of multiple studies
demonstrating low vagility among most adults. Despite anthropogenically-reduced connectivity of their
habitats and the prevalence of emerging infectious diseases, eastern box turtles still exhibit high genetic
diversity. This may provide sufficient flexibility for conservation and the species may maintain the ability to
evolve to meet new challenges in the long term. These conclusions should be interpreted cautiously,
however, as the genetic signatures observed are at the very least biased by sampling of more visible
adults, and may therefore represent a historical signal rather than contemporaneous genetic processes.



King, Jackie (Fisheries and Oceans Canada); McPhie, Romney (Fisheries and Oceans Canada,
Canada)

Age, growth and maturity estimates of spotted ratfish (Hydrolagus colliei) in British Columbia

The spotted ratfish (Hydrolagus colliei) is a deepwater chimaera ranging from southeast Alaska to Baja
California and is found at depths of up to 1,150 m. There is no commercial fishery for spotted ratfish in
British Columbia , but it is one of the dominant species routinely captured in groundfish bottom trawl
surveys. Despite being a large component of the ecosystem, few biological parameter estimates exist for
spotted ratfish due to a lack of suitable ageing structures to estimate age and growth. We sampled over
234 spotted ratfish captured in trawl surveys off the coast British Columbia ranging in size from 12 cm to
61.7 cm. The size at maturity estimates were larger for females (22.5 cm snout-vent length) than males
(17.5 cm). Both estimates are larger than those made for spotted ratfish off of California indicating
regional differences in life history traits for this species. We present preliminary results of age estimates
based on tritor counts on the vomerine plate. Based on these age estimates, we present growth curve
and age-at-maturity estimates for spotted ratfish. The vomerine plates are candidate ageing structures
for spotted ratfish, and warrant further investigation.



King, Richard (Northern Illinois University); Stanford, Kristin (Northern Illionois University and Ohio State
University F. T. Stone Laboratory, DeKalb, IL, United States); Reichard, Tim (Dr. Tim's Wildlife and
Exotics Care, LLC, Canada); Korfel, Lindsey; Flick, Lauren (Ohio State University F. T. Stone Laboratory,
Canada)

Pressure Sensitive Archival Tags: A Novel Method to Monitor Foraging Behavior in Semi-Aquatic
Snakes

To test whether pressure sensitive archival tags could be used to collect detailed information on the
foraging behavior of semi-aquatic snakes, we implanted Lotek tags programmed to record pressure every
2 min within the coelomic cavity of two adult female Lake Erie watersnakes ( Nerodia sipedon insularum ).
Snakes were also implanted with radio transmitters to facilitate recapture and tag recovery. These snakes
forage for bottom dwelling fish in the near shore waters of Lake Erie but spend non-foraging periods on
land. Thus, changes in pressure occur during transitions from non-foraging (terrestrial) to foraging
(aquatic) behavior. After several days of apparent inactivity, the two snakes exhibited 15 and 20 inferred
foraging bouts over a two week period during late-June and early-July. Inferred foraging bouts ranged
from 4 to 168 min with a median of 42 min. Intervals between inferred foraging bouts ranged from 60 to
1920 min (32 hr) with a median of 908 min (about 15 hr). Inferred foraging bouts accounted for 5.0% and
8.5% of the two snakes‘ time budgets. Individuals differed in the timing of inferred foraging bouts. One




                                                                                                           371
individual foraged predominately during daylight hours (18 of 20 foraging bouts) whereas the other was
equally likely to forage during daylight or at night (7 and 8 foraging bouts, respectively). Frequent
foraging, as inferred from pressure sensitive archival tags, is consistent with telemetry-based
observations of the two snakes included in our analysis as well as the feeding behavior of captive Lake
Erie watersnakes and patterns of prey recovery from free-ranging watersnakes. In contrast to other
methods, archival tags have the potential to provide far more detailed information on the timing, duration,
seasonality, and sex differences of foraging.



King, Richard (Northern Illinios University); Stanford, Kristin (Northern Illinios University, DeKalb, IL,
United States)

The roles of species biology, agency action, and public-private partnerships in Lake Erie
Watersnake recovery and de-listing

Restricted geographic distribution and declining population size led to listing of the Lake Erie watersnake,
Nerodia sipedon insularum , as threatened under the U.S. Endangered Species Act in fall 1999. The Lake
Erie watersnake recovery plan, approved in 2003, specified t hree criteria for delisting. The first,
Population Persistence , set overall and island-specific population size requirements for the U.S. islands.
The second, Habitat Protection and Management, set overall and island-specific habitat protection
requirements. The third, Reduction of Human-induced Mortality, sought to reduce intentional and
accidental human-induced mortality to the point where such mortality no longer represents a significant
threat. Recovery criteria were met through partnerships among state and federal agencies, universities,
non-governmental organizations, and citizen scientists and in fall 2011 the Lake Erie watersnake became
the     23rd species to be delisted due to recovery.         Timely listing, species biology (including high
reproductive potential and a shift in diet to an abundant new prey species), intensive population
monitoring, key land acquisitions, and active outreach efforts contributed to rapid recovery.          Post-
delisting monitoring will occur for a period of five years to ensure that the watersnake population remains
stable and that re-listing is not warranted.



King, Susan (Eastern Kentucky University); Richter, Stephen (Eastern Kentucky University, Richmond,
KY, United States)

Four-toed salamander (Hemidactylium scutatum) nest site characteristics in natural and
constructed wetlands

If constructed wetlands do not replicate the condition of natural wetlands, we could be losing critical
amphibian habitat. To study this, research needs to focus on species that have more restrictive habitat
requirements, like the four-toed salamander ( Hemidactylium scutatum ). In Daniel Boone National
Forest (DBNF) four-toed salamanders have been documented in constructed wetlands, but it is unclear if
constructed wetlands provide similar nesting characteristics provided by natural wetlands. The objective
of this research was to determine nest-site and wetland characteristics across constructed and natural
wetlands. In the spring of 2011, we searched the shoreline of six natural and six constructed wetlands in
DBNF and found 207 nests. At each nest we measured aspect, slope, pH, soil moisture, percent ground
cover, and distance to water. We also measured the canopy closure and amount of moss present at
each wetland. Four-toed salamanders nested in similar densities in natural and constructed wetlands.
Nest site characteristics were similar between wetland types, with the following exceptions: four-toed
salamanders nested more often in moss in natural wetlands (P < 0.001), the pH of the soil was lower at



                                                                                                        372
nests in natural wetlands (P = 0.02), and canopy closure was higher in natural wetlands (P = 0.03).
Factors important to the number of eggs per nest included wetland type, moisture, and female presence,
while the total number of eggs per wetland was explained by wetland type, area, and canopy closure.
Number of nests in a wetland was explained by wetland area. Results indicate the importance of
maintaining canopy closure, trees within the wetland, and downed woody debris to promote the growth of
large beds of moss. A second field season will focus on the factors influencing four-toed salamander
presence or absence in wetlands by comparing local and landscape characteristics of wetlands with and
without the species.



Kingsbury, Bruce (Indiana - Purdue University Fort Wayne); Frank, Michael (Indiana - Purdue University
Fort Wayne, Canada); Roe, John (University of North Carolina Pembroke, Canada)

Headstarting and Translocation as Repatriation Tools for Watersnakes

Habitat loss and fragmentation are factors leading to declines in many faunal populations. Restoring
habitats to support the rebound of local populations may help to remedy these declines, but in cases
where a species has been locally extirpated, natural recolonization is unlikely. Translocation has proven
to be a successful strategy for the repatriation of some extirpated wildlife, but its effectiveness for snakes
remains understudied. To explore the conservation value of such techniques, using telemetry we
compared the activities of Northern Watersnakes ( Nerodia sipedon ) that were resident at a site to
snakes translocated from nearby or that were headstarted in under various conditions in captivity.
Compared to residents, translocated snakes selected aquatic habitats with a more open canopy, moved
more extensively, and used areas outside of reserve boundaries more frequently. Yearling headstarts,
released the activity season after birth, showed restricted movements and used habitats in ways atypical
of residents. Translocated and resident snakes grew at similar rates, but yearling headstarts failed to
grow appreciably. Both experimental groups had low survivorship/site retention rates relative to
residents. Much of the mortality in headstarts occurred during the overwintering period, while mortality in
translocated snakes was limited to the active season. We also examined alternative approaches by
releasing headstarts that were raised for 1.5 years in captivity. These headstarts were raised largely
identically to the yearling headstarts, but for an additional year. They were then cooled for one month to
simulate an overwintering period, and divided into two groups to live for three months in either ―enriched‖
conditions, communally in an environment wherein they could bask and hunt more naturally, or
unenriched, wherein they remained in simple conditions as they had been raised previously. Both of
these older headstarted groups had similar growth rates to residents and were able to successfully
overwinter as well. Ultimately, survivorship was higher than, and thus at least as good as, residents
monitored over the same period. We conclude that headstarting can be successfully implemented in
terms of survival over one year post-release, and thus likely can be a useful tool for repopulation efforts of
imperiled species of Nerodia , including such species as the Copper-bellied Watersnake, N.
erythrogaster neglecta.



Kingsbury, Bruce (Indiana - Purdue University Fort Wayne); Woodley, Christopher; Deng, Yihao
(Indiana - Purdue University Fort Wayne, Canada)

Predicting Spring Emergence of the Eastern Box Turtle (Terrapene carolina)

Factors which stimulate Eastern Box Turtles ( Terrapene carolina ) and other reptiles to emerge from
over-wintering are poorly understood. This aspect of their biology is of general interest, but also has



                                                                                                          373
conservation value. We have found that turtles that have not emerged are less likely to be killed or injured
by prescribed fire. Resource managers could thus potentially minimize impacts of this and other
management tools if they could predict when turtles would be out. To find those environmental factors
linked to emergence, during the winters from 2006 to 2011 we monitored body (carapace) and soil
(surface, 15 and 30 cm) temperatures with iButton dataloggers, and also considered information from a
local weather station and derivatives of Julian date to examine circannual rhythms. Emergence times
varied by year and somewhat between individuals dispersed across the landscape within a given year,
thus emergence appears not to be principally driven by a circannual rhythm, but by local temperatures.
Later in winter body and soil temperatures were very stable and close to freezing. Early in March,
increased day length, rain, loss of snow cover and warmer air temperatures lead to higher and more
variable soil and body temperatures. Prior to emergence, body and all sub-surface soil temperatures
became quite similar, while surface temperatures continued to vary more widely. During this time, turtles
shifted body position to be closer to the soil surface. Cues most correlated with subsequent emergence
relate to shallow soil temperatures, and a robust predictive model can thus be derived from local soil
temperatures or even more generically using growing degree days. Implementation of such models to
help land managers time activities will thus help protect this declining species. The approach should also
have broader utility with respect to predicting emergence of other herpetofauna, and we will conclude our
presentation with an exploration of those potentials.



Kissel, Amanda (Simon Fraser University); Palen, Wendy (Simon Fraser University, Canada);
Govindarajulu, Purnima (Ministry of Environment, Canada); Bishop, Christine (Environment Canada,
Canada)

Evaluating conservation strategies for the Oregon spotted frog (Rana pretiosa) in British
Columbia, Canada

Strategies to stem or reverse declines in amphibian populations are often constrained by a lack of both
baseline population data and a clear understanding of the effectiveness of particular recovery methods.
This often results in management and conservation decisions based on expert advice and the
implementation of strategies modified from other recovery programs. The Oregon spotted frog ( Rana
pretiosa ) exemplifies this conservation dilemma, as it has been extirpated from 90% of its historic range,
and in Canada, is restricted to three remnant breeding populations. The Oregon spotted frog recovery
strategy in Canada includes a range of methods to augment extant populations, ranging from a ‗head-
start‘ program of early life stages, to captive breeding and re-introduction of older animals. However,
neither the biological or economic effectiveness of these various approaches has been evaluated. Here,
we used a series of field experiments, mark-recapture studies, and data from the published literature to
derive demographic life-history parameters for a stage-structured population matrix model to explore the
biological effectiveness of different management strategies.

We found strong support that later life stages (i.e. adult survival) have the largest effect on the
deterministic population growth rate. We also coupled these biological models with cost estimates in a
formal decision analysis to identify recovery strategies that both maximize the biological potential for
recovery while minimizing costs. For example, costs associated with the current ‗head-start‘ strategy are
on the order of $60,000 per year to produce 3000 juvenile frogs, whereas maintaining a full captive
breeding population requires an order of magnitude more funding. Our results suggest that this tradeoff is
maximized with a combination of low cost efforts such as translocating egg masses, and high cost captive
breeding and re-introduction of juvenile and adult frogs.




                                                                                                        374
In spite of these efforts, our estimates of the 20-year probability extinction for these populations remain
very high, suggesting that the recovery of this species may require more direct intervention than is
currently proposed.



Kissner, Jessica (Texas Tech University); Griffis-Kyle, Kerry (Texas Tech University, Canada)

Climatic Quandary: Amphibian Community Ecology during a Drought in the Southern High Plains

The Southern High Plains is characterized by its hot, dry climate, as well as its approximately 30,000
ephemeral playa wetlands. Anurans in this region are explosive breeders that depend on playa wetlands
for breeding habitat after rain events. As their complex life cycle suggests, they require suitable biotic and
abiotic conditions post-rainfall for successful breeding, egg survival, and tadpole development to ensure
population persistence. Amphibian ecology has received very little attention in Northeastern New Mexico.
Baseline data collection is necessary in this area to identify amphibian community composition, and key
habitat components impacting species presence, richness, and reproductive success. This region
experienced a drought in 2011, receiving less than half of its average annual precipitation. As such, we
were able to observe how amphibians use available habitat in the Southern High Plains in a drought year.
We sampled twenty-two playa wetlands using call, visual encounter, pipe, and funnel-trap surveys to
determine anuran species presence, richness, and reproduction. We recorded site-specific habitat
variables including rainfall amount, and playa water quality and area. We also measured landscape-level
factors such as road density, wetland density, and nearest wetland distance. Of the nine playa wetlands
inundated in 2011, we were able to detect anurans at five and evidence of reproduction at three wetlands.
Species richness ranged from 0 to 4 species per playa. Five anuran species were detected including the
spotted chorus frog (Pseudacris clarkii), a previously undocumented species in the state of New Mexico.
We observed wide fluctuations in pH (4.9 to 9.4) in wetlands used by anurans. With the threat of
impending climate change increasing the frequency of extreme events such as drought, it is crucial we
understand the impact this may have on community assemblages and associated available habitat.



Kissner, Jessica (Texas Tech University); Griffis-Kyle, Kerry (Texas Tech University, Canada)

Equipment Protection in Rural Rangelands of the Southern High Plains

Audio data-loggers are frequently used as a passive-means to record wildlife vocalizations in a variety of
taxa. Considerations regarding placement of this equipment is dependent not only on the biology of the
study species, but also on the environment in which they are used. For example, researchers typically
conceal equipment in an urban setting to prevent accidental or purposeful human destruction.
Additionally, it is important to consider using barriers for equipment placed in rural settings. When
conducting research in an area with large, terrestrial foragers such as cows, horses, and wild ungulates,
novel approaches are necessary to protecting this equipment and the data being collected. Furthermore,
when studying anurans in the southwest, precautions must be taken to further protect equipment from
lightening and submergence during monsoon rain events. We initiated a project on private rangeland in
the Southern High Plains in 2011 in which we established 10 unprotected data-loggers, attached with
screws 1 m above ground to wooden stakes driven 20 cm into the ground. Of the 10 data-loggers
deployed, seven were destroyed by ungulates, indicating a critical need to protect this equipment.
Following this, we conducted a field experiment to determine the degree of protection needed to guard
this equipment from damage. We established seven replicates with three treatments at each site: no
protection (control), box exclosure, and fenced exclosure. We also created false data-loggers using



                                                                                                          375
ammunition boxes with foam balls attached to the sides to simulate the microphones. In all conditions, we
attached the data-logger with fencing wire to the top of a t-post, approximately 1 meter from the ground.
For the box treatment, we made a rectangular mesh exclosure (48.3 cm x 27.9 cm x 12.7 cm) and placed
it over the data-logger. We created the fenced treatment by placing a triangular fence, constructed with
cattle panel and t-posts, around the data-logger. The three treatments were spaced approximately 2 m
apart and a trail camera was positioned with all three treatments within its field of view. We found that the
fence exclosure protected the data-loggers in all replicates while 43% in the box treatments and 100% in
the control treatments were destroyed.



Klaus, Samantha (Queen's University); Lougheed, Stephen (Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada)

Microclimatic predictors of call phenology for eastern Ontario anurans

Amphibians are considered indicators of ecosystem health because of their sensitivity to environmental
change due in part to their semi-permeable skin and aquatic developmental requirements. Mirroring many
other taxa, temperate frog species in recent years have increasingly initiated their breeding seasons
earlier, presumably in response to higher mean daily temperatures and the earlier onset of spring.
Conventional studies of climate change to date have used anecdotal records of environmental trends to
interpret phenological events. Despite the insight that this approach has provided, it is not ideal because
the data are often too broad-scale or piecemeal to allow detailed insights into factors that might affect
breeding behaviour. For example, many species of frogs occur in a variety of semi-aquatic ecosystems,
suggesting that different conspecific populations may be subject to different environmental influences.
Studying climatic variation at a local and regional scale simultaneously could help to attain greater
accuracy at predicting frog phenology and to understand which factors best predict the onset and peak of
breeding. Using seasonal remote survey stations, our research investigates how abiotic environmental
factors influence calling phenology in frogs using a four-year survey dataset of both microclimate and
male advertisement calls from wetland sites across eastern Ontario. Our study monitors when calling
occurs for nine species of frogs, the intensity of calling for each species, and the environmental conditions
daily for the entirety of their breeding seasons. We hope these long-term data will provide key insights
into the proximate factors that control initiation of breeding for eastern Ontario anurans, and enhance the
possibility for adaptive responses to changing temperature regimes. Our study also will allow us to better
predict responses to continued climate change.



Kleinteich, Thomas (Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel);

Made for digging - the functional significance of the caecilian skull

The fossorial lifestyle in caecilian amphibians (Lissamphibia: Gymnophiona) relates to various anatomical
specializations like limblessness and an elongated body shape. For digging, the skull of caecilians is
pushed into the soil; dorsoventral movements of the skull manipulate the substrate in front of the animal.
Several characteristics of the caecilian skull are generally considered as adaptations for fossoriality,
comprising the wedged shape, the fusion of bones, the coverage of the temporal region by dermal bones,
and the presence of widely overlapping sutures between bones. Here I will present a reviewing talk on the
recent progress in our understanding on how caecilian cranial morphology relates to digging
performance. Based on finite element modeling, we demonstrated that the presence or absence of
temporal fenestration in caecilian skulls surprisingly had no effect on the skull during digging. However,
the angle with that the skull is pushed into the substrate was found to be critical to minimize bending of



                                                                                                         376
the skull and to minimize stress. Further, finite element analysis suggests that the palate experiences the
highest stresses during digging and thus the palate is more likely to show adaptations for fossoriality than
the skull roof. The caecilian skull is kinetic, i.e. the squamosal plus the quadrate can be moved relative to
the parietal and the os basale. Cranial kinesis was shown to slightly decrease the stress on the tooth
bearing bones along the margin of the skull and to increase the stress on the palate. Further, cranial
kinesis results in a second joint for the jaw closing mechanism which was modeled to cause high effective
mechanical advantages for the jaw closing musculature and thus results in high bite forces. Interestingly,
species with temporal fenestration were found to have larger cross sectional areas in their set of jaw
levator muscles, suggesting that the absence, respectively presence, of temporal fenestration in
caecilians relates to biting performance, rather than digging.



Kleopfer, John (Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries);

Cooperative Management of an Endangered Urban Viper: The Story of the Canebrake Rattlesnake
(Crotalus horridus) Coastal Plain population in Virginia, USA

Kleopfer, John D. (JD), Alan H. Savitzky, Chris E. Petersen, Scott M. Goetz. Cooperative Management of
an Endangered Urban Viper: The Story of the Canebrake Rattlesnake ( Crotalus horridus ) Coastal Plain
population in Virginia, USA.

The Canebrake Rattlesnake ( Crotalus horridus ) Coastal Plain population is listed as State Endangered
in Virginia, USA. The Coastal Plain population of this species reaches the northern limit of its range in the
heavily urbanized region of southeastern Virginia known as Hampton Roads. Approximately 1.6 million
people live within 30 kilometers of all known populations. The primary causes of its decline have been
habitat loss and human persecution. With financial support from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service‘s State
Wildlife Grants program and the Department of the Navy‘s Natural Resources Program, the Virginia
Department of Game and Inland Fisheries began a partnership with the U.S. Navy and academic
biologists to investigate its ecology. The research site is located in Chesapeake, Virginia at the 1,214
hectare Naval Support Activity Norfolk, Northwest Annex (NSANW). To date, 50 individual rattlesnakes
have been radio-tracked and almost 15,000 observations have been recorded. Information on feeding,
reproduction, shedding, hibernation, predation and movement has been gathered. This research has led
to the acquisition of lands for conservation, including the 1,619 hectare Cavalier Wildlife Management
Area, which is adjacent to NSANW. The partnership has also resulted in the development of the 2011
Canebrake Rattlesnake Conservation Plan, which summarizes 17 years of research and provides
guidance for future research and conservation efforts. In 2011, the Canebrake Rattlesnake Conservation
Center was established at NSANW. This on-site facility allows researchers to perform surgeries for radio-
telemetry and to continue monitoring this population without removing snakes from the research site for
processing and transmitter implantation.



Klymus, Katy (University of Missouri); Humfeld, Sarah; Gerhardt, Carl (University of Missouri, Canada)

Behavioral and phylogenetic differentiation in the canyon treefrog, Hyla arenicolor

Understanding how species arise is a fundamental topic in biology and can be addressed by examining
the evolutionary forces that lead to speciation. One avenue is to examine the first step in the speciation
process: population differentiation. By looking at both phenotypic and genetic differences among




                                                                                                         377
populations we can hypothesize about the evolutionary forces that have led to observed phenotypic
differentiation.

In general, if trait and genetic divergence exhibit similar variability, neutral genetic drift may explain the
degree of differentiation. If, on the one hand, populations exhibit high trait variation relative to genetic
variation, we may invoke divergent selection acting on those traits. If populations have low phenotypic
variation but exhibit large genetic differences, then selection may be acting to conserve a particular trait
variant.

In this study we examined both genetic and behavioral differentiation within the canyon treefrog, Hyla
arenicolor . We were particularly interested in understanding if selection was acting to prevent
advertisement call divergence among genetically distinct lineages. Using genetic loci, we found evidence
for past hybridization and mtDNA introgression between two H. arenicolor populations and the sister
species, H. eximia. Advertisement call differences among H. arenicolor lineages were found to better
reflect the inferred nuclear phylogeny (both exon and AFLPs) rather than a phylogeny inferred from
mtDNA. These results suggest that lineages are not as divergent from on another as previously assumed
based on mtDNA data, and that drift rather than selection plays a more important role in call
differentiation within this system. We also describe biologically significant variation in the advertisement
calls throughout this specie‘s extensive range. Playback experiments suggest females can discriminate
against populations using specific call parameters, indicating a role for behavioral reproductive isolation.
Our results provide insight into the complex evolutionary history of this group, have implications for the
study of character evolution in this group, and emphasize the need for studies to expand sampling to
include closely rela



Knapp, Charles R. (John G. Shedd Aquarium); Hines, Kirsten (IUCN Iguana Specialist Group, Key
Biscayne, FL, United States); Zachariah, Trevor (University of Illinois, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Chicago Zoological and Aquatic Animal Residency Program, Urbana, United States); White, C. LeAnn
(5USGS National Wildlife Health Center, Madison, WI, United States); Iverson, John B. (Earlham College,
Richmond, United States); Buckner, Sandra D. (IUCN Iguana Specialist Group, Nassau, Bahamas);
Romero, L. Michael; Lattin, Christine R. (Tufts University, Medford, MA, United States)

Physiological Impacts of Tourism and Food Supplementation on Endangered Insular Iguanas

Physiological responses caused by wildlife-tourism interactions can be pronounced in free-ranging
species. Tourism companies in The Bahamas and Caribbean are increasingly marketing rock iguana
(genus Cyclura) feeding as part of their activity packages. This type of tourism is likely to continually
expand, and therefore the effects of these human-wildlife interactions should be monitored, understood,
and managed effectively. Using multiple populations of Bahamian rock iguanas (C. cychlura figginsi and
C. c. inornata), we investigated 28 sex-specific responses to both human-visitation pressure, and
associated food provisioning with a variety of semi-natural and unnatural food items. Our response
variables included body condition, physiological stress, and multiple hematological and biochemical
parameters. For both sexes, body condition and physiological stress (baseline corticosterone levels) did
not differ between visited and non-visited sites, suggesting that rock iguanas on islands visited by tourists
are not chronically stressed. However, for both sexes there were significantly elevated corticosterone
levels after 30 min of capture and restraint, indicating that these rock iguanas can physiologically respond
to stressful stimuli. We recorded hematological and biochemical differences between visited and non-
visited sites in response to being food provisioned. For both sexes, rock iguanas from visited sites had
higher packed cell volume, higher uric acid and lower potassium. In addition, females from visited sites
had higher glucose and iron. Males from visited sites, on the contrary, had higher calcium, cholesterol,



                                                                                                          378
cobalt, copper, and selenium, but lower molybdenum. We conclude that differences between visited and
non-visited sites are likely due to unnatural food items offered by tourists and the consequential changes
in how rock iguanas from visited sites forage. These effects may potentially have debilitating
consequences over time in these long-lived species, or under adverse environmental conditions.



Knapp, Nikolai (University of Wurzburg); Konopik, Oliver (University of Wurzburg, Wurzburg, Germany);
Bon, Wuu Yih; Grafe, Ulmar (Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Gadong, Malaysia)

Quantifying prey consumption by a tropical frog community: implications for ecosystem
consequences of amphibian declines

Knowledge about the ecosystem function of frogs is essential to assess consequences of global
amphibian decline on trophic interactions and ecosystem services. We estimated the daily amount of prey
(mostly arthropods) consumed by a tropical anuran community in a lowland mixed-dipterocarp rainforest
in Brunei Darussalam (Borneo). Values of consumed biomass per time were determined for numerous
prey organisms sorted to order level. Prey items included a wide range of arthropods, other frogs and
occasionally even snakes. To quantify prey consumption, abundance data on frogs was combined with
detailed information on each species‘ diet composition, obtained by stomach flushing and estimates of
daily nutrition requirements. In addition, prey uptake per day was estimated for certain frog and toad
species by following radio-tagged individuals and flushing stomachs before and after a 24 hour period of
foraging in their natural habitat. Feeding trials were used to correct for different digestion speeds of hard
and soft bodied prey items. Extrapolations of the impact of predation over 49,000 ha of rainforest (the
larger study area) were made by inferring a hypothetical stream network from a digital elevation model
with the assumption of a comparable frog community throughout the area. Our results provide a rough
estimate of total predation by a tropical anuran community and, thus, contribute to the understanding of
ecological functions of tropical anuran communities as an important group of insectivores in the rainforest
food web.



Knip, Danielle (The University of British Columbia); Heupel, Michelle (Australian Institute of Marine
Science, Townsville, Q, Australia); Simpfendorfer, Colin (James Cook University, Townsville, Q, Australia)

Evaluating marine protected areas for the conservation of tropical coastal sharks

Global declines in shark populations have created uncertainty in the future status of many species and
conservation efforts are urgently needed. Marine protected areas (MPAs) are used increasingly as
conservation tools around the world, but how they benefit mobile and wide ranging species like sharks
remains unclear. To evaluate the degree of protection MPAs may provide for sharks, we used an array of
acoustic receivers to examine the movements and spatial use of two tropical coastal species within two
MPAs in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park, Australia. Juvenile pigeye (Carcharhinus amboinensis) and
adult spottail (Carcharhinus sorrah) sharks were fitted with acoustic transmitters and monitored from 2009
to 2010. Both species displayed long-term use of MPAs, with some sharks detected for longer than 600
days. The mean percentage of time C. amboinensis and C. sorrah spent inside MPAs was 22% and 32%,
respectively. MPA use varied seasonally, with C. amboinensis spending a higher percentage of time
inside MPAs in summer (mean = 28%) and C. sorrah spending a higher percentage of time inside MPAs
in winter (mean = 40%). Although sharks used large areas inside MPAs, most tended to use only half of
the available protected space. In addition, all sharks made excursions from MPAs, but both species
exited and re-entered at consistent locations along the MPA boundaries. This research shows that MPAs



                                                                                                         379
have potential conservation benefits for shark populations by providing protection across different species
and life stages, and demonstrates how tracking studies can be used to help tailor MPA design to
maximize their effectiveness.



Knuckey, James (Moss Landing Marine Laboratories); Clerkin, Paul; Ebert, David (Moss Landing Marine
Laboratories, Canada)

Biodiversity and Conservation of Western Indian Ocean Chondrichthyans

The biodiversity of the Western Indian Ocean chondrichthyans is relatively unknown compared to other
better studied regions, such as the western North Pacific, North Atlantic , and Indo-Pacific regions. The
Western Indian Ocean has at least 279 species overall, with 152 shark species, 120 batoid species, and
8 chimaera species. This number comprises 23.3% of the approximately 1 ,200 valid species of
chondrichthyans. The sharks are more diverse than the batoids, but this is most likely due to more
attention having been paid to the sharks than the batoids in this region. The Carharhiniformes (82
species), Myliobatiformes (46 species), Squaliformes (36 species), and Rajiformes (29 species) are the
most dominant groups in terms of species-richness within this region.         The close proximity of the
Western Indian Ocean to the Indo-Pacific, which has been shown to be a center of origin for the marine
tropics, may explain the relatively high number of species. Most chondrichthyan species accounted for in
this study are coastal species, which may explain why some of the families have lower numbers than
reported in other regions, such as the Rajiformes; a species group known to generally occur in deeper
waters of the tropics. Islands and island chains show a high degree of endemism compared to the
continental shelf and upper slope habitats. The majority of species found in this region are listed as Data
Deficient (100 species), Near Threatened (54 species), or Vulnerable (51 species) on the IUCN Red List.
Enhanced identification of Western Indian Ocean chondrichthyans is crucial for developing improved
management and conservation policies for this group.



Kobayashi, Soh (Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry); Abe, Seiya (Central Research
Institute of Electric Power Industr, Abiko city, 20, Japan); Matsuki, Rikyu (Central Research Institute of
Electric Power Industry, Abiko city, 20, Japan)

Fine-scale case study of detecting genetic structure and gene flow restriction of Japanese brown
frog caused by recent urbanization.

To understand and evaluate connectivity between habitats is one of the most important issues in
landscape ecology. There were only few not so much case studies for amphibians which treat this issue
in fine scale of landscape, such as several square kilometers. For efficient evaluation of gene flow in fine
scale, landscape genetic approaches will be the most valid way. In the present study, we tested applied
techniques of landscape genetics to evaluate the genetic structure of Japanese brown frog (Rana
japonica) in the study sitefine scale area (approximately 3 x 3 kilometers) at Inba area, Chiba prefecture,
Japan. Japanese brown frog is one of the locally decreasing species, and suitable model animal for such
analyses because their breeding sites habitats in our study site wereare paddy fields which were divided
by hills (known as Satoyama landscape), and considered to form a meta-population. We used D-loop
region of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) regions as genetic markers for calculating Fst and FCT, both which
are indices ofas genetic distance among populations. Fst was compared with geological distances and
locations of breeding sites by using Barrier, and FCT was compared with locations of breeding sites by
SAMOVA to detect barriers of gene flow. In As the results of mtDNA analyses, three genetic groups and