 U.S. range of smalltooth sawfish stretched from North Carolina to Texas including the
Gulf of Mexico. Due to fisheries bycatch, habitat loss, and a low productivity, the US population has
declined leading to their inclusion on the U.S. Endangered Species Act in 2003. Necessary to their
recovery is a description of critical habitat, mandated in the Smalltooth Sawfish Recovery Plan. Using
passive acoustic telemetry and active tracking, precise delineation of smalltooth sawfish activity space
and patterns of habitat use can be determined. Juvenile smalltooth sawfish less than 1.5 meter total
length were fitted with two Vemco acoustic tags. An R coded tag was used to passively monitor
movements with an array of 32 VR2w receivers in Everglades National Park and 3 VR2w receivers in
Faka Union Bay, Florida. A continuous tag was used for active tracking using a VR100 hydrophone. In
2011, 24 animals were captured and fitted with acoustic transmitters. Residency time was found to be
longer than previously hypothesized with animals remaining in the system through out the winter months.
Seven animals were actively tracked for a minimum of 4 hours and a maximum of 32 hours. Benthic
samples and mangrove habitat properties were measured in an effort to create a habitat selectivity model.
For the benthic samples, percent sand, silt, clay and organic content were measured. Mangrove habitat
was measured throughout the two study sites and was categorized by branch overhang, prop root
density, and rhizome density. Other abiotic factors (temp, depth etc) were also measured.



Holmes, Bonnie (University of Queensland);

Long-term movement patterns of satellite tagged tiger sharks (Galeocerdo cuvier) in south
eastern Australia

The tiger shark (Galeocerdo cuvier) is one of the highest trophic order predators in Australia‘s coastal
marine waters. Described as a tropical species, G. cuvier movements into southern sub-tropical and
warm temperate waters have previously been assumed to occur seasonally in the austral summer.
Determining movement patterns and habitat use is vital for better understanding the role of tiger sharks in
structuring coastal communities. As a species potentially dangerous to bathers, it is also important to
understand when and where interactions with humans are likely to occur. Pop-up archival (PAT) and
Smart Positioning or Temperature Transmitting (SPOT) satellite tags were used to investigate seasonal
movement and site fidelity of tiger sharks in southern Queensland and northern New South Wales. A total
of 12 tiger sharks were tagged between 2007–2011 across a range of sizes, sexes and seasons.
Preliminary results indicate that some large and small tiger sharks of both sexes will remain in southern
Queensland waters during the cooler winter months. Depth profiles obtained from PAT tags indicated
maximum depths of over 1760 m, deeper than previously reported for the species, with water
temperatures as low as 5.9 degrees celsius. The greatest distance travelled was ≈1800 km, from Botany
Bay NSW to New Caledonian waters after 48 days at liberty. Notwithstanding this, the majority of
individuals maintained some fidelity to the coastal zone highlighting the importance of near-shore habitat.
We hypothesise that habitat utilisation is driven predominantly by prey availability.




                                                                                                       320
Holmes, Nick (Island Conservation); Butchart, Stuart (Birdlife International, Cambridge, United Kingdom);
Croll, Donald (Coastal and Conservation Action Lab, University of California at Santa Cruz, Canada);
Kiett, Brad (Island Conservation, Canada); McCreless, Erin; Newton, Kelly; Spatz, Dena; Tershy, Bernie
(Coastal and Conservation Action Lab, University of California at Santa Cruz, Canada)

Preventing reptile extinctions on islands: Assessing removal of invasive vertebrates at a global
scale

Islands make up only 5% of the earth‘s land area, but 64% of known species extinctions since ~1600
have taken place on islands and 37% of IUCN Critically Endangered species currently inhabit them.
Invasive vertebrates are the primary cause of insular extinctions, and the second greatest contributor to
endangerment of insular species today. Invasive vertebrates have been successfully eradicated from
>700 islands worldwide. These eradication efforts should be directed to islands and archipelagos that
offer the greatest biodiversity benefits. We have developed a database of the world‘s insular IUCN
Critically Endangered (CR) and Endangered (EN) vertebrates, using the IUCN Red List, UNEP Global
Island Database, Global Invasive Species Database, published and gray literature, and expert opinion.
Excluding sea turtles, we identified 169 CR or EN insular-breeding reptile species with populations on 433
islands. The Caribbean has a rich concentration of endemic and threatened insular reptile populations
where eradicating invasive vertebrates is technologically feasible (<30,000 ha and <1,000 people). Mona
island (Puerto Rico), with 4 CR/EN species, is a particularly important Caribbean island for insular
reptiles. This database can help facilitate eradication of invasive vertebrates from islands to benefit
threatened species.



Hölting, Monique (Museum of Zoology, Senckenberg Natural History Collections); Ernst, Raffael
(Senckenberg Natural History Collections, Dresden, Germany)

Logging AND Frogging? Exploration of Amphibian Diversity in the Selectively Logged Tropical
Forests of Guyana

Guyana is one of the most intensely forested tropical countries, where forest resources cover more than
three quarters of its land area. Even though in the past Guyana has had one of the lowest deforestation
rates of the world, timber value has long been recognized and 13.5 of its approximately 15 million ha of
rainforest is classified as state forest and thus potentially open to logging. Only little is known about the
actual consequences of logging for complex forest ecosystems and the question is, whether or not
sustainable forestry can be an adequate strategy to mitigate possible negative impacts. Our study aims to
fill that gap by resolving interactions between different levels of biodiversity and ecosystem functioning in
a region that is subject to selective sustainable silviculture. We use amphibian communities as a suitable
and sensitive organismic model. The main study is being conducted within a controlled polycyclic timber
harvesting scheme implemented by our project partner Iwokrama International Centre for Rainforest
Conservation and Development under the auspices of Forest Stewardship Council (FSC). First results
covering data for three consecutive years of investigation in the Iwokrama forest illustrate, that actual
changes in amphibian diversity between ‗pristine‘ and reduced impact logging areas are quite complex.
Both extreme climatic events and logging activities seem to affect amphibian diversity. There are
―winners‖ and ―losers‖, and while some species disappear, others recolonize. The challenge will be to
disentangle the various components leading to these changes, and resolving the underlying mechanisms.
This will not only be important to guarantee the long-term viability of particular species at risk, but also to
maintain the key feature of Guyana‘s forest, its biodiversity.




                                                                                                           321
Honda, Masanao (University of Tsukuba); Kurita, Takaki (University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan);
Toda, Mamoru (University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Canada); Ota, Hidetoshi (Institute of Natural and
Environmental Sciences and Museum of Nature and Human Activities, University of Hyogo, Hyogo,
Japan)

Phylogenetic relationships, genetic divergence and biogeography of Goniurosaurus kuroiwae
(Squamata: Eublepharidae) from the Central Ryukyus, Japan

The Kuroiwa's eyelid gecko Goniurosaurus kuroiwae is an endangered eublepharid species endemic to
the Central Ryukyus, Janan, and includes five recognized subspecies. Since there are considerable
geographical and morphological gaps between this species and the other congeners, all from
southeastern Continental China including Hainan Island and several off-shore islets, the former is
considered to be in an extremely relict state as a result of initial continental-insular vicariance and
subsequent extinction of related populations that had once occurred in the eastern part of the continent,
Taiwan, and the Southern Ryukyus. Also, subspecific diversification of G. kuroiwae has been considered
as a result of temporal changes in land configuration around the current Central Ryukyus. In the present
study, we examined phylogenetic relationships among the five subspecies of G. kuroiwae by analyzing
approximately 1,200 base positions of mitochondrial 12S and 16S rRNAs, and cytochrome b genes. Our
purposes are to test the currently prevailing morphology-based phylogenetic hypothesis for these
subspecies, and to discuss their genetic divergence and biogeography. Results of the analyses confirm
monophyly of populations representing the five subspecies of G. kuroiwae against the continental
congeners, and show a considerable genetic divergence of the former from the latter. However, our
results do not support the relationships hypothesized on the morphological ground in that the present
results strongly suggest 1) the primary dichotomy, with substantial genetic divergence, between G. k.
splendens from the Amami Island Group and the remaining subspecies, all from the Okinawa Island
Group, and 2) the presence of at least six independent lineages within the latter assemblage , indicating
non-monophylies of G. k. kuroiwae and G. k. orientalis. The prominent genetic divergence in G.
kuroiwae populations between the two island groups of the Central Ryukyus seems to have initiated in
the Miocene, i.e., prior to formations of those straits that have consistently been separating these island
groups since the late Pliocene or early Pleistocene. It is probable that the strong preference by G.
kuroiwae of subtropical karst limestone areas covered with humid vegetations, such as primary or well
recovered secondary forests, might have played a crucial role in isolating its populations on an apparently
single Central Ryukyu land mass. On the other hand, divergences within the Okinawa Island Group may
reflect almost concurrent vicariances involved by the Pleistocene sea level changes. It is noteworthy that
each of the samples from a few small islets have lost their genetic diversities completely or almost
completely in sequences examined. This result, along with recent reduction of suitable habitats on most
of those islets, strongly suggests an urgent necessity of effective conservation measures there.



Hopkins, Brittney (Virginia Tech); Hopkins, William; Jones, Devin; Willson, John (Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, United States)

Maternal Mercury Exposure Has Negative Consequences on Turtle Reproduction

In addition to the suite of beneficial resources (e.g. antibodies, hormones, and nutrients) that females
allocate to their offspring, research has demonstrated that females can maternally transfer a wide variety
of harmful contaminants. For example, the maternal transfer of mercury (Hg), a common and highly toxic
environmental contaminant, has been shown to negatively influence several reproductive parameters in
birds, fish and amphibians. Additionally, Hg can bioaccumulate and biomagnify within food webs,
exposing long-lived apex predators to high concentrations of Hg. Based on these observations, we



                                                                                                       322
evaluated the consequences maternally transferred Hg on a long-lived aquatic omnivore. We collected
eggs and tissues from gravid female snapping turtles (Chelydra serpentina) at various locations along an
Hg contaminated gradient at a historically contaminated river and at various nearby reference sites. We
incubated eggs in the laboratory, quantified embryonic morality, infertility, and hatching success of each
clutch, and assessed all hatchlings and dead embryos for gross morphological malformations. As
predicted, female turtles inhabiting contaminated areas accumulated high levels of Hg in their tissues,
and female Hg concentrations were strongly and positively correlated with Hg levels in their eggs. We
found that egg Hg was negatively correlated with hatching success and that decreased hatching success
was mediated through increased egg infertility and embryonic mortality. However, we found no effect of
egg Hg on malformation frequency, clutch size, or egg mass. This is the first study to demonstrate
relationships between maternally transferred Hg on hatchling survival in turtles. Ultimately, the lethal
effects of Hg on offspring could affect turtle population viability and may serve as a source of undesirable
phenotypic variation within turtle populations inhabiting Hg contaminated areas.



Hopkins, Gareth (Department of Biology, Utah State University); Susannah, French; Edmund, Brodie
(Department of Biology, Utah State University, Logan, UT, United States)

Embryonic survival in salt among Rough-skinned Newt (Taricha granulosa) families

Osmotic balance is a constant physiological challenge for amphibians, having highly permeable skin, and
as such, tolerance to salt is rare in this group of animals. High concentrations of salt are, however, often
ubiquitous in amphibian breeding habitats, originating either from natural (e.g., estuarine water) or
anthropogenic sources (e.g., road de-icing salt). While much work has been conducted on the responses
of larval and adult amphibians to salt, considerably less is known about the responses of earlier life-
history stages. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effects of two common road salts, NaCl and
MgCl2 on the embryonic survival and development of Rough-skinned Newt (Taricha granulosa) eggs.
We raised eggs from 16 different females separately in three different randomly assigned concentrations
of each salt as well as in a control solution and measured egg survival, time to hatching, and
developmental stage and size at hatching. Treatment, female, and the interaction of treatment and
female all had significant effects on survival, time to hatching and stage and size at hatching. While
increased salt concentration caused higher egg mortality, quicker hatching timing, and lessened
embryonic development at hatching, it also caused the variation in effects among different female‘s
offspring to increase significantly. Broad-sense heritability calculations also revealed that the variation
among females in the hatching timing and embryonic development of their offspring is genetically
heritable in nature. This significant heritable variation in embryonic survival and development in salt
water among the offspring of different females from a single inland population appears to provide the raw
material upon which natural selection may act for the evolution of salt tolerance in this amphibian species.
Our results have important implications both for the conservation biology of early amphibian life-history
stages as well as the evolution of tolerance to stressful and novel environments in this osmotically
sensitive group of animals.




                                                                                                        323
Hoskins, Tyler (Miami University); Boone, Michelle (Miami University, Canada)

Fine-tuning mesocosms: effects of shallow water access on the metamorphic response of two
Anuran species

Aquatic mesocosms are widely utilized in amphibian ecology because they offer a hybrid approach
between tightly controlled laboratory experiments and realistic field experiments, but the realism of
findings from mesocosm experiments has been repeatedly questioned. If the goal of mesocosm design is
to mimic natural breeding ponds, then current designs may be lacking easily emulated features that could
increase the realism of mesocosm experiments. One such feature is the presence of shallow water;
observations of tadpoles in the field indicate that some species, such as toads, preferentially utilize
shallow areas at the pond margin, but many mesocosm designs lack this feature. In order to test whether
access to shallow regions affects the metamorphic response of Anuran larvae in experimental
mesocosms, we raised American toads ( Bufo americanus ) and Northern leopard frogs ( Rana pipiens
pipiens ) together in mesocosms with shallow platforms, a sloped bottom providing access to shallow
water, or with no shallow refuge. We measured survival, time to metamorphosis, and mass at
metamorphosis, with the prediction that the metamorphic response of B. americanus would be affected
by access to shallow water, but that R. pipiens pipiens would not respond to access to shallow regions.
We also tested whether the presence of a crawfish predator ( Procambarus clarkii ) affects metamorphic
response differentially depending on access to shallow regions. We predicted that shallow water would
serve as a spatial refuge from predation for both Anuran species, and that survival for both species would
be higher in mesocosms providing shallow refugia.



Hossack, Blake (Univeristy of Montana); Lowe, Winsor (University of Montana, Canada); Corn, Stephen
(US Geological Survey, Canada)

Interactive effects of wildfire, forest management, and isolation on amphibian and parasite
abundance

Projected increases in wildfire and other climate-driven disturbances will affect populations and
communities worldwide, including host–parasite relationships. These effects may be magnified by
interactions with human disturbances, including forest management that fragments habitats and alters
microclimates. Research in temperate forests has documented that wildfire can negatively affect
amphibians, but this research has occurred primarily in protected landscapes. Parasites represent a large
component of biodiversity and can affect host fitness and population dynamics, yet they are rarely
included in studies of how vertebrate hosts respond to disturbance. Furthermore, how changes in host
populations and habitat affect directly-transmitted amphibian parasites is unknown. To determine how
wildfire affects amphibians and their parasites, and whether effects differ between protected and
managed landscapes, we compared population sizes of 2 amphibians and 2 nematodes relative to
wildfire extent and severity around wetlands in neighboring protected and managed forests (Montana,
USA). Population sizes of long-toed salamanders ( Ambystoma macrodactylum ) decreased with
increased burn severity, with stronger negative effects on isolated populations and in managed forests. In
contrast, population sizes of Columbia spotted frogs ( Rana luteiventris ) increased with burn extent in
both protected and managed protected forests. Path analysis showed that the same factors that affected
amphibian abundance also affected parasite abundance. Burn severity directly and indirectly reduced
abundance of Cosmocercoides variabilis in adult salamanders, and burn extent indirectly increased
abundance of Gyrinicola batrachiensis in spotted frog larvae. These results show that effects of wildfire
on amphibians depend upon burn extent and severity, isolation, and prior land use. Through subsequent




                                                                                                       324
effects on the abundance of amphibian parasites, our results also reveal how changes in disturbance
regimes can affect communities across trophic levels.



Houlahan, Jeff (UNB Saint John); Edge, Christopher (UNB Saint John, Canada); Thompson, Dean
(Canadian Forest Service, Canada)

Barriers to predicting pesticide effects: An amphibian perspective.

One important objective of pesticide research is identifying what application rate results in unacceptable
risk to non-target species. A common component of              risk assessment involves comparing predicted
worst case environmental exposure concentrations to median toxicity values (e.g. LC50) derived from
laboratory and mesocosm studies. These median toxicity values provide useful bench posts for setting
water quality guidelines. However, LC50 and LD 50 estimates can vary widely for the same pesticide due
to i) differences among formulations, ii) interspecific differences in sensitivity, iii) among-population
differences, iv) individual-level differences in sensitivity, v) exposure history, and vi) experimental venue
(i.e. laboratory, mesocosm, and field).      We will present a review of amphibian toxicity studies with an
emphasis on glyphosate-based herbicides, and attempt to partition variability in estimated LC 50‘s among
these potential sources. We will discuss how this variability is potentially relevant to water quality
guidelines.



Hoverman, Jason (University of Colorado); Johnson, Pieter (University of Colorado, Canada); Blaustein,
Andrew (Oregon State University, Canada); Briggs, Cherie (University of California, Santa Barbara,
Canada); Rohr, Jason (University of South Florida, Canada)

Beyond single pathogens: significance of co-infections and pathogen communities for amphibian
conservation

In nature, animal hosts are exposed to a ‗cocktail‘ of different pathogens that ultimately form a dynamic
community within the host. While research has traditionally focused on interactions between single hosts
and single pathogens, growing evidence suggests that coinfections can fundamentally alter disease
patterns in humans and wildlife. A central question therefore concerns how interactions between co-
occurring pathogens affect disease severity and pathogen transmission in host communities. However,
one of the persistent challenges in coinfection research is predicting when and how pathogens are likely
to interact. A promising approach for understanding pathogen interactions involves applying the principles
of community ecology to within-host pathogen communities. We will discuss recent attempts to apply
community ecology theory to intra-host dynamics, including the roles of both ‗bottom-up‘ (e.g.,
competition for host resources) and ‗top-down‘ effects (e.g., effects mediated through host immunity).
Based on this conceptual framework, we also discuss a research program directed towards expanding
our understanding of coinfection within amphibian communities. Emerging infectious diseases are one of
the most important causes of amphibian population declines and extinctions, yet few studies have
examined the contributing role(s) of pathogen interactions in driving these effects. In North America, the
chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), ranaviruses, and trematodes ( Ribeiroia ondatrae
and Echinostoma spp.) are highly virulent pathogens known to infect amphibians.

Field surveillance in the East Bay region of California, USA, for example, has revealed that these
pathogens commonly co-occur within wetlands and within individual hosts, with 68% of sites supporting
≥2 pathogens and 36% with ≥3 of these pathogens. Using information from this system and




                                                                                                         325
epidemiological theory, we explore the conditions in which coinfections are likely to influence disease
outcomes, either positively or negatively, including the role of dispersal, host immunity, pathogen
virulence, and parasite life history. We conclude that, in light of the extensive opportunities for interactions
among amphibian pathogens in nature, future work in both the empirical and conceptual realms is needed
to investigate how changes in complex ecological communities – including both hosts and pathogens –
interact to influence disease risk and conservation priorities.



Howard, Katie (Arthur Rylah Institute, Department of Sustainability and Environment); Beesley, Leah
(Arthur Rylah Institute, Department of Sustainability and Environment, Canada); Joachim, Lee (Yorta
Yorta Nation Aboriginal Corporation, Canada)

Cultural conservation of freshwater turtles in Australia: an aboriginal and scientific collaboration
to assist ecosystem management

Environmental values in floodplain ecosystems in south-eastern Australia are typically managed for fish,
birds and vegetation. Although turtles can act as indicators of ecosystem health, they are often
overlooked, as is local indigenous knowledge. In south-eastern Australia, three species of turtle occupy
the Murray River and its associated wetlands. One species, the Broad-shelled Turtle (Bayadherra,
Chelodina expansa) is classified as threatened in Victoria but has historically been overlooked in
management plans. It is also the totem species for the Yorta Yorta people, who traditionally occupied the
Barmah-Millewa Forest region. The Broad-shelled Turtle is associated with their dreamtime stories, being
their protector and provider. Barmah-Millewa Forest is an internationally recognised (RAMSAR)
floodplain wetland complex. The Forest historically experienced regular winter and spring flooding, but
now receives relatively little water, often at un-natural times of the year. This reduction in flow into the
Forest, coupled with a long term drought, led Yorta Yorta to raise concerns for turtle health.

YortaYorta knowledge has directed the research aims and goals of this project. The current research will
build on historical cultural mapping of nesting sites. Three years of scientific research have spanned the
shift from drought to flood within the Forest. During drought, turtles were found in relatively high
abundance in refuge habitats and displayed poor body condition; species occupying ephemeral habitats
showed evidence of high mortality. After flooding, turtle abundance fell as species dispersed, body
condition improved, and there was evidence of increased nesting. The findings of this study highlight the
importance of flooding for the health of turtle populations. It is recommended that environmental and
cultural water allocations be used to sustain ephemeral habitats during drought. This project has married
both scientific and local indigenous knowledge and facilitated a‗reconnection to country‘ for the Yorta
Yorta people. The research recommendations will guide on-ground management by Yorta Yorta Rangers.



Howey, Christopher (Ohio University); Roosenburg, Willem (Ohio University, Athens, OH, United States)

The Effects of Prescribed Burning on the Landscape and Reptile Abundance

Prescribed burning has become a popular management tool throughout North America; a tool that
creates a landscape representing an earlier successional forest. Typically, prescribed burning has
resulted in more open landscapes with warmer ambient temperatures. However, little is known regarding
how reptile abundances may respond to these landscape changes. Over the past two years (2010 and
2011), we measured habitat characteristics and the abundance of reptiles in four burned plots and four
control/unburned plots at the Land-Between-The-Lakes National Recreational Area, Kentucky. Burned




                                                                                                            326
plots were subjected to prescribed fire twice in the recent past; once in 2007 and after the first field
season in September 2010. We compared habitat characteristics and reptile abundances within plots
between years and among plots within years using nonmetric multidimensional scaling and ANOSIM. We
determined that habitat characteristics differed both within plots between years and among plots within
years (P < 0.001). There was a reduction in leaf litter depth between years, which may be attributed to
increased rainfall prior to the 2011 field season. Burn plots had an increased percentage of grasses and
forbs and less canopy cover than control plots. There was no difference in reptile abundance among
treatments (burn vs. unburned; P > 0.05). Despite this lack of a difference, some reptile species were
more abundant in certain plots regardless of treatment, and these abundances were correlated to the
habitat characteristics of those plots. As abundance of leaf litter and percent canopy cover increased in a
plot, abundance of Agkistrodon contortrix , Thamnophis sirtalis , Pantherophis spiloides , and Scincella
lateralis increased. Additionally, as percent canopy cover and vegetation density decreased and percent
grass, percent bare ground, and ground temperatures increased, abundance of Diadophis punctatus ,
Storeria dekayi , and Sceloporus undulatus increased. We suggest that reptiles may not respond to
whether a forest was burned or unburned, but to the habitat characteristics present within the landscape.
In the future, if prescribed burning is to be used as a management tool, then wildlife biologists must
understand how the quality of the landscape is altered in order to understand how wildlife may be affected
by these habitat altering techniques.



Howey, Christopher (Ohio University); Roosenburg, Willem (Ohio University, Athens, OH, United States)

The Effects of Prescribed Burning on the Thermal Landscape

Prescribed burning has become a popular management tool throughout North America; a tool that
typically creates a landscape with more open canopy cover and warmer ambient temperatures. This
warmer environment has been suggested to be more favorable for ectothermic species; however, it is
unknown how warm body temperatures may become in burned sites. To understand what body
temperatures an ectothermic species could achieve, we measured operative body temperatures (T e ) of
the Black Racer ( Coluber constrictor ) using biophysical models that represent the width and reflectivity
of an average adult Black Racer. Biophysical models were deployed in four burned plots and four
adjacent control plots. Models recorded T e every 15 minutes from May to August of 2011; one year
following a prescribed burn. T e ‘s in each site were compared to a range of preferred body temperatures
(T set = 28 - 32°C) to determine the thermal quality of each site. T set was determined in the lab by
measuring the preferred body temperature of Black Racers in a thermal gradient. We averaged T e for
each site for every hour to determine the thermal quality of each site throughout the day. Additionally,
model temperatures were used along with interpolation methods in ARC GIS 9.0 to determine spatially
the thermal quality of each site. Early in the year, both burn and control sites provided favorable thermal
conditions spatially and throughout the day, but T e ‗s in burn plots were within T set ranges more often
than in control sites. During early July, burn sites typically exceeded T set and approached maximum
voluntary temperatures of the Black Racer; these sites were not only spatially limiting but Black Racers
would have to exhibit a bimodal activity pattern in order to avoid poor quality thermal habitat. During late
July and early August, T e ‘s in both burn and control sites exceeded maximum voluntary temperatures
and T e ‘s in burn plots were warmer and exceeded critical thermal maximum temperatures more often
than T e ‘s in control plots. Based on these data, burn sites may be more thermally favorable earlier in the
summer, but will typically become much warmer than control sites which could lead to increased spatial
and time constraints for the Black Racer if it were to avoid thermally unfavorable sites.




                                                                                                        327
Howey-Jordan, Lucy (Microwave Telemetry, Inc.); Brooks, Edward (Cape Eleuthera Institute, Ft.
Lauderdale, United States); Brooks, Annabelle (Cape Eleuthera Institute, Canada); Abercrombie, Debra
(Abercrombie and Fish, Canada); Williams, Sean (Stuart Cove, Canada); Jordan, Lance (Microwave
Telemetry, Inc., Canada); Chapman, Demian (Stony Brook University, Canada)

Time well spent: Substantial use of the Bahamas shark sanctuary by mature female oceanic
whitetip sharks revealed by pop-off satellite archival tags

Once considered among the most abundant pelagic predators, the oceanic whitetip shark (Carcharhinus
longimanus) has drastically declined in the last few decades due to overexploitation. This species is
especially impacted in the western Atlantic Ocean, where it is currently listed as ―Critically Endangered‖
by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN). Cat Island in The Commonwealth of
The Bahamas is one of the few places where this species is regularly observed. After banning longline
fishing in the mid-1990s, The Bahamas recently prohibited commercial shark fishing in its 630,000 km 2
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). The goals of our study were to: 1) quantify the time oceanic whitetips
spend within this EEZ, 2) determine long-term movements of individuals as they moved away from The
Bahamas, and 3) characterize the vertical and thermal habitat use of this understudied pelagic species.
We deployed pop-up satellite archival tags on 11 adult female sharks near Cat Island in May 2011 as a
pilot effort to achieve these goals. Another female shark was opportunistically tagged 420 km south of
Cape Hatteras, USA. Eleven tags reported, collecting a total of 1,563 days of tracking data. Four tags
were physically recovered, adding greater resolution to the dataset – 1,146,959 depth and temperature
records combined. Mean depth used by tracked sharks was 43.9 m (± 10.34 SD) and the mean
temperature encountered was 26.1 °C (± 0.55 SD). The deepest dive observed was 1081.9 m and the
coolest temperature experienced was 7.75 °C. Reconstructed tracks revealed that tagged individuals
moved long distances (some more than 1,000 km from tagging site) over a wide area but spent
substantial amounts of time (approximately 58 % of days tracked) within the Bahamian EEZ. It therefore
appears likely that the Bahamas longline ban and newly implemented shark sanctuary has and may
continue to provide a significant refuge for this threatened species.



Hoyos, Julio Mario (Pontificia Universidad Javeriana);

Phylogenetic analysis whithin the Pristimantis unistrigatus (Anura, Starbomantidae) group from
Colombia based on hand and foot muscles and external characters

We present a phylogenetic analysis within the Pritimantis unistrigatus group (Anura, Strabomantidae) of
Colombia. Characters from the superficial muscles of the hands and feet as well as external characters
were taken for analysis. Muscle characters were observed directly and taken from the literature. The
external ones were taken mainly from the original descriptions . Two matrices were constructed: one
based on Lynch and Duellman (1997) unistrigatus group (LD), and a second one based on Hedges et al.
(2008) unistrigatus group (HEA). We found three potential synapomorphies inside the group but not for
the group: two inside the LD unistrigatus group ( First finger shorter than second and the origin of the m.
adductor policis is not covered by the aponeurosis palmaris) and one inside the HEA unistrigatus group (
Origin of the tendo superficialis hallucis from the aponeurosis plantaris including some fibers of the m.
lumbricalis brevis hallucis). These results lead us to conclude that the group is not monophyletic, although
there are some relationships that are worth to survey because they are kept in the very last cladograms
obtained for both proposals. It is suggested that these last relationships should be explored in particular,
and the overall group in general, increasing the number of characters and taxa belonging to the P.
unistrigatus group. An open question we left: Is it actually worth to keep these informal taxonomic
hierarchy called group within the genera of anurans?



                                                                                                        328
Hraoui-Bloquet, Souad (Faculty of Sciences II, Lebanese University,); Sadek, Riyad (Biology
Department, American University of Beirut, P.O.Box 11-0236, Riad El Solh 1107 2020, Beirut, Lebanon;,
Canada); Hleihel, Walid (Faculty of Science, University of Holy Spirit, Kaslik-Jounnieh, Lebanon;
(walidhleihel@usek.edu.lb), Canada); Fajloun, Ziad (Azm Center for the Research in Biotechnology and
its Applications, Doctoral School for Sciences and Technology, Lebanese University, Tripoli, Lebanon.,
Canada)

Biogeography and ecology of the Lebanon Viper Montivipera bornmuelleri with some notes on its
venom.

Montivipera bornmuelleri is one of three viper species in Lebanon along with. Daboia palaestinae and
Macrovipera lebetina.The latter two species are widely distributed in a variety of habitats excluding high
altitudes. M. bornmuelleri is endemic to the Lebanese mountains and found only at altitudes above
1800m (Hraoui-Bloquet et al. 2002). It is a relatively small viper with an SVL around 60 cm. It is viviparous
delivering a maximum of 6 live young.

M. bornmuelleri is found in high-altitude rocky terrain characterized by sparse montane thorny and
cushion plants. In Oyoun Al Simane area in the Sannine mountainin theMount Lebanonchain, M.
bornmuelleri exists in association with two endemic lacertid lizards, Phoenicolacerta kulzeri and
Parvilacerta fraasi and the bridled skink, Trachylepis vittata. No other snake species was observed in that
area. In the other Mount Lebanon study site, the Bcharre Makmel mountain it is associated with other
snake species (such as Platyceps najadum and Hemorrhois ravergieri) in addition to Phoenicolacerta
kulzeri, Parvilacerta fraasi and T. vittata.

Preliminary analysis of the viper‘s venom was conducted for characterization of bioactive molecules,
using Liquid Chromatography coupled to Electrospray Ionisation Mass Spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS). A
physiological study on the venom was also conducted to evaluate lethal dose, hemorrhagic and necrotic
activities



Hua, Jessica (University of Pittsburgh); Relyea, Rick (University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United
States)

It's a complicated world: A community ecotoxicology perspective on pesticides and amphibian
declines.

Understanding the contribution of anthropogenic chemicals to declining amphibian populations is a
pressing concern in need of attention. Amphibian sensitivity has traditionally been determined using
simplified single-species lab tests. While this reductionist approach has been paramount in determining
the direct effects of pesticides on amphibians, it overlooks much of the complexity found in natural
amphibian habitats. For instance, amphibian habitats are often exposed to complex mixtures of pesticides
that lead to unanticipated interactions. Further, pesticides can interact with community-level processes
(i.e. predation and competition) to indirectly shape amphibian abundance and diversity. Surprisingly, our
understanding of how pesticides shape amphibian populations in community scenarios is
underdeveloped. Critical next steps are to (1) develop generalizations about different pesticides and their
mixtures on different amphibian species and (2) incorporate realistic community-level interactions in
studies of amphibian susceptibility.

We examined the effect of insecticides on aquatic communities using two mesocosm experiments. In the
first, we tracked the long-term (3-yrs) direct and indirect consequences of four commonly used



                                                                                                         329
insecticides and a mixture on six amphibian species (Lithobates sylvatica, L. pipiens, L. clamitans,
Pseudacris crucifer, Hyla versicolor, and Anaxyrus americanus). The consequences of individual
insecticide applications were not generalizable across the six species of amphibians and the mixtures
were significantly more lethal compared to insecticides applied individually. Insecticides had both positive
and negative effects on amphibians and this pattern was largely driven by oviposition phenology. In the
second study, we investigated whether insecticides with similar versus different modes of action were
generalizable across three amphibians (L. pipiens, L. clamitans, and H. versicolor) living in communities
with 17 species. Amphibian susceptibility was generalizable across insecticides with similar modes of
action but not across different modes of action. Finally, the insecticide, malathion, interacted with
predation threat to facilitate amphibian survival. These studies indicate that the effects of insecticides on
amphibians are more complicated than would be detected in simplified lab studies and incorporating
community-level interactions is critical to understanding of the contribution of pesticides to amphibian
declines.



Hudson, Cameron (University of Guelph);

Reproductive behaviour and male combat in the Emei Moustache Toad (Leptobrachium boringii)

We describe the natural history and reproductive behaviour of the Emei Moustache Toad (Leptobrachium
boringii) with an emphasis on male combat. Between February and March of 2011 and 2012, L. boringii
specimens from Mount Emei UNESCO World Heritage Site, Sichuan, China, were observed throughout
the breeding season. This species exhibits male-biased sexual size dimorphism (SSD) with limited
evidence of paternal care (nest guarding by males). Prior to the breeding season males grow 10 – 16
keratinized spines on their upper lip which are used for aggressive interactions. Throughout the breeding
season males construct and defend aquatic nests where they produce advertisement calls to attract
females. Territory take-overs are frequent, and egg masses from multiple fathers are present in nests. We
are currently investigating the factors which influence male victory, and the implications of different
breeding strategies. Our evidence for male competition and aggression, along with observed paternal
care are potential mechanisms to explain the evolution of male-biased SSD observed in this species.



Huey, Raymond (University of Washington); Sinervo, Barry (University of California Santa Cruz, Canada)

Lizard extinctions and climate change: physiological vulnerability and additive role of vegetation
dieback

Climate models forecast distributional shifts or extinctions of many ectotherms in upcoming decades [1-3].
Some recent models predict that tropical species in particular will suffer elevated extinctions [2, 4].
However, tropical models remain un-validated, focus only on single-species, and ignore vegetational
context of climate changes. We review models predicting tropical extinctions, present data validating
aspects of those models, and argue that climate-induced dieback of vegetation will exacerbate
physiological stress in many habitats, not just in tropical forests. The prediction tropical forest ectotherms
are vulnerable to warming might seem surprising because rates of climate warming are relatively low in
the tropics [5]. However, tropical forest species are vulnerable because many are thermal specialists and
sensitive to temperature change, have low heat tolerance, already live in environments that are
physiologically warm for them, and have limited behavioral options [4, 5]. Evaluating extinction models
requires integrating behavior, thermal performance curves, operative temperatures, and climate models.
We test and validate extinction models with newly observed extinctions of temperate zone lizards in North



                                                                                                          330
America and Europe. We then extend a prior model [3] by incorporating ecosystem impacts of climate
change on plants. In some areas, recent heat waves have caused tree death and branch die-back, which
in turn increased operative temperatures and was associated with observed lizard extinctions. If climate
warming often triggers tree death and branch die-back events, these ecosystem level changes will
exacerbate the direct physiological challenges (heat and water stress) of warming and in turn challenge
the persistence of lizards and other ectotherms around world, particularly those dependent on vegetation.
1. Dunham, A.E. 1993. In Biotic Interactions and Global Change , P.M. Kareiva, J.G. Kingsolver, and
R.B. Huey, Eds. Sinauer Assoc.: Sunderland, MA. p. 95-119. 2. Kearney, M., R. Shine, & W.P. Porter.
2009. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106:3835-3840. 3. Sinervo, B., et al. 2010. Science 328:894-899. 4.
Huey, R.B., C.A. Deutsch, J.J. Tewksbury, L.J. Vitt, P.E. Hertz, & H.J. Álvarez. 2009. Why tropical forest
lizards are vulnerable to climate warming. Proc Roy Soc B 276:1939-1948. 5. Dillon, M.E., G. Wang, &
R.B. Huey. 2010. Global metabolic impacts of recent climate warming. Nature 467:704-706.



Hulsey, Darrin (University of Tennessee);

Transcriptome Sequencing of 150 Nuclear Loci Reveals Ages for Cichlid Radiations

Using Illumina sequencing of the pharyngeal jaw transcriptome of the Texas cichlid, Herichthys
cyanoguttatus, as well as published data from other model cichlid species, I examined molecular-clock
based age estimates of several cichlid radiations. After creating alignments of 83 million paired-end 125
base pair sequence reads using the program Trinity, I obtained contigged sequences of over 4000
protein-coding loci. For this analysis, these loci were narrowed to 150 protein-coding sequences. Each of
these 150 nuclear loci were at least 600 base pairs in length and all could be confidently aligned and
annotated in all of the species examined. Using a well-established fossil date, I determined the
divergence times for the African Great Lakes cichlid radiations as well as the biogeographic divergence
between South America and Africa.



Hunter, David (NSW Office of Environment and Heritage); Marantelli, Gerry (Amphibian Research
Center, Canada); Scheele, Ben (NSW Office of Environment and Heritage, Canada); Marantelli, Erica
(Amphibian Research Center, Canada); Scroggie, Michael (Arthur Rylah Institute for Environmental
Research, Canada); Gillespie, Graeme (University of Melbourne, Canada)

Can captive breeding and reintroduction be used to re-establish frog populations following
extinction caused by chytridiomycosis? The case of the spotted tree frog (Litoria spenceri) in
south-eastern Australia.

Ex situ intervention has been touted as a key tool in addressing amphibian declines. However, the
feasibility of using ex situ intervention to successfully re-establish populations extirpated by the amphibian
chytrid fungus (Bd) has not been investigated. We attempted to re-establish a population of the spotted
tree frog ( Litoria spenceri ), an obligate stream-dwelling species from south-eastern Australia, which
rapidly declined to extinction as a result of a sudden outbreak of chytridiomycosis. We hypothesised that
selection for increased immunity and reduced pathogen transmission may allow population
establishment, as the founder stock for the captive breeding colony were from streams with endemic Bd,
and the population was being re-established at a relatively low density. We released one and two-year-
old captive bred frogs (750 frogs in total) over a four year period to a section of stream which historically
supported a large population of L. spenceri . Despite the continued presence of Bd, a post-release mark-
recapture study initially documented relatively high survivorship to sexual maturity, with successful



                                                                                                          331
breeding and recruitment occurring in the wild. However, seven years after the first re-introduction, the re-
established population declined rapidly to a few individuals following a chytrid outbreak, which coincided
with a particularly cool/wet season. The results suggest that the successful re-establishment of self-
sustaining frog populations may require actively mitigating chytridiomycosis, rather than passively
assuming selection for resistance will occur in the short to medium term.



Hutchinson, Mark (South Australian Museum); Lee, Michael (University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA,
Australia)

Bharatagama: acrodont lizard or rhynchocephalian?

The early fossil history of the Squamata, especially the highly diverse terrestrial clades, is patchy, both in
the comparatively small number of localities and the mostly fragmentary specimens. Inevitably there is a
large component of uncertainty concerning the relationships of all but the most complete finds. Thus,
molecular approaches for dating the evolutionary radiation of living Squamata (≥10 000 species) still rely
on relatively few, and often poorly supported, calibration points. In the process, the ambiguities that
surround the paleontological data are often overlooked. A significant example of this is the repeated use
of a Jurassic fossil, Bharatagama rebbanensis, as a calibration point for the origin of the Acrodonta, the
living Agamidae and Chamaeleonidae. We review the identification of this, one of the earliest putative
squamate fossils, through the first formal phylogenetic analysis of Bharatagama among all Lepidosauria
(squamates plus rhynchocephalians). We especially revisit the uncertainty expressed at the time of its
description concerning its precise relationship to the acrodont squamates and whether it might be better
placed within Rhynchocephalia. We combine morphological and molecular data and analyse the data
using parsimony and likelihood methods. At the time of its description the precise relationships of
Bharatagama were not specified beyond membership of the Acrodonta. Our reassessment shows that
even this cautious stance is unlikely to be correct.



Hutchinson, Melanie (University of Hawaii); Anderson, James (University of Hawaii, Canada);
O'Sullivan, John (Monterey Bay Aquarium, Canada); Holland, Kim (Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology,
Canada)

A multiple instrument approach to elucidate the movement and dive behavior of scalloped
hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna lewini) in Hawaii

Hammerhead sharks, Sphyrna lewini, use coastal embayments such as Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii, as nursery
grounds. Although considerable insights have been gained into the behavioral ecology of the pups in
these nursery areas, little is known about the behavior of the adults after they leave the bay or the extent
of the ‗catchment area‘ from which these adults come. To elucidate the behavior and dispersal of these
seasonal visitors to Kaneohe Bay we fitted seven adult male hammerhead sharks with electronic tags;
four with archiving pop-up (PAT) tags, four with position only (SPOT) satellite transmitters and one double
tagged with both a PAT and a SPOT. All seven fish were also implanted with acoustic transmitters.
Results from the PATs show offshore vertical ranges exceeding depths of at least 1250 m, which are
previously un-documented for this species. Vertical profiles showed very clear diel dive activity. Tagged
hammerheads also exhibited previously unrecorded thermal tolerances to at least 3°C, spending an
average 34.7% of their time in temperature ranges from 3° - 6° C. Horizontal movement data suggest
that these adults stay close to the Hawaiian Islands – an interpretation supported by the acoustic tag data
which revealed repeated visits to Kaneohe Bay over an extended period of time. However, these data




                                                                                                          332
are not yet extensive and are limited to males. Nevertheless, these early results reveal an unexpectedly
large vertical range for this species in the offshore waters of Hawaii and indicate that hammerheads have
a wide ecological niche that probably includes deep water prey.



Hutter, Carl (Stony Brook University); Esobar-Lasso, Sergio; Rojas-Morales, Julían Andrés; Gutiérrez-
Cárdenas, Paul David Alfonso (Universidad de Caldas, Canada); Imba, Henry (Reserva Las Gralarias,
Canada); Guayasamin, Juan (Universidad Tecnológica Indoamérica, Canada)

Territoriality of the Red-Spotted Glassfrog, Nymphargus grandisonae (Cochran & Goin, 1970)
(Anura: Centrolenidae)

Resource-defense mating systems in anurans are hypothesized to have arisen in response to limited
availability of resources for reproduction. In many anuran species, males will actively defend a territory.
This defense may be associated with direct male-to-male conflict and aggressive calling behavior. In
many species of Centrolenidae, territoriality has been hastily hypothesized, utilizing only anecdotal
observations. Herein, we provide substantial evidence that the stream-breeding species Nymphargus
grandisonae is territorial. We confirm and describe important components of territoriality — the combat
behavior, use of vocalizations in aggression, and quantify the degree of site fidelity within this species.
Three unreported variations in Centrolenid combat are described; indicating combat behavior is much
more varied than previously hypothesized.         Additionally, we show quantitative temporal and spectral
differences (call duration, dominant frequency, and frequency modulation) between various aggressive
call types and their usage in male-to-male aggression before, during, and after combat. Finally, we
utilized a novel non-destructive method for anuran mark-recapture, where we photographed the
individualized red-spotted pattern on the species‘ dorsum for identification. We marked their locations
nightly, measured distance travelled and reconstructed their three-dimensional territory size based on
these movements. We found that males demonstrated high site fidelity, with many remaining at the same
site for the three-month duration of the study. We also observed that females frequently moved between
these sites and reproduced with the male territory holders. Additionally, territory-possessing males met
invading males with aggression. In addition to combat behavior and aggressive vocalizations, the high
site fidelity, reproduction within these sites, and the display of aggression towards transient con-specific
males support our hypothesis that N. grandisonae is a territorial species.



Hykin, Sarah (University of California, Berkeley);

Morphology of cardiac ontogeny in Dermophis mexicanus (Amphibia: Gymnophiona:
Dermophiidae), with emphasis on a transient spiral valve and perforation of the interatrial septum

Caecilians are an understudied clade of elongate, limbless, often fossorial amphibians restricted to
tropical regions around the globe. Evolutionary modifications of the caecilian body-plan associated with
fossoriality include various degrees of lung reduction and loss. This, in conjunction with the structure of
the heart, including elaborate semilunar valves in the conus arteriosus and highly variable interatrial
septation across the order, raises questions about the extent of separation of oxygenated and
deoxygenated blood within the caecilian heart. Heart development and function have been much
speculated on but little explored, and the ontogeny of only a few caecilian species has been studied. To
assess aspects of the dominant respiratory mode, development, and evolution of this clade, I examined
histological sections of the heart in an ontogenetic series of Dermophis mexicanus . D. mexicanus is
viviparous and has an 11-month gestation period. Adults have a fully functional right lung, a much



                                                                                                        333
reduced left lung, and a perforated interatrial septum. To study heart development and possible
mechanisms of blood separation, I examined individuals at three embryonic stages, four fetal stages, one
newborn and several mature adults. My study establishes that the heart loops in a counterclockwise
direction approximately one month into the 11-month gestation period. The interatrial septum commences
development shortly after heart-tube looping completes. Once established, this septum remains complete
through much of the gestation period. No evidence of vestigial interventricular septum development is
seen, but it is noteworthy that a spiral valve in the conus arteriosus, resembling that seen in anurans,
appears during early development of the semilunar valves. The development of a complete interatrial
septum and then its perforation, and of the transitory spiral valve, indicate that caecilian heart
development shares many elements of a common amphibian developmental pattern. The functional
attributes of the highly modified caecilian heart, however, remain unknown. The question of how much
blood separation occurs requires further study, and the atrioventricular funnel, semilunar valves and/or
flow pressure remain possible mechanisms of blood separation.



Ibrahim, Adel (Suez Canal University);

The Herpetology of the Suez Canal Zone, Egypt

Banks of the Suez Canal (east and west) were surveyed for herpetofauna between 1999 and 2009. Study
site was comprised of (1) western bank of Suez Canal from Port Saïd to Suez (168 km) and within a
range of five km westward (occasionally up to 10 km) from the canal, covering a minimum total area of
1000 km2, and (2) the eastern bank of Canal from Port Fuad to Ash-Shatt (opposite Suez city) including
the old city Al-Qantara East and newly established villages. Observations on the west bank included
seven roads and highways and all possible habitats were surveyed. The survey revealed 34
herpetofaunal species from the west bank (three amphibians, 20 lizards, 10 snakes, and one sea turtle),
and 22 east bank species (three amphibians, 13 lizards, and six snakes), with several new records
documented in the Suez Canal zone―one amphibian, Pelophylax bedriagae; and four reptiles, Tarentola
annularis, Psammophis sibilans, Ramphotyphlops braminus, and Chelonia mydas. Several species were
recorded for the first time from each of the Suez Canal provinces―two species, Chalcides ocellatus and
Natrix tessellata reported in Port Saïd; six species in Ismailia, Acanthodactylus boskianus, Cyrtopodion
scabrum, Hemidactylus flaviviridis, Malpolon monspessulana, Cerastes cerastes and C. vipera; and three
species in Suez, Trachylepis quinquetaeniata and Trapelus pallidus and Natrix tessellata. On the eastern
bank, all species were recorded for the first time except for Cerastes cerastes, C. vipera; Varanus
griseus, and Acathodactylus scutellatus. Natrix tessellata, inhabiting freshwater canals east of Bitter
Lakes, represents the first record for the Sinai Peninsula. Additional new records for amphibians and
reptiles of the Suez Canal area, especially on the east bank, are apparently a result of recent major
changes to reptile habitat (urban expansion and land cultivation with Nile freshwater supply). In some
cases these new environmental changes have resulted in more invasive herpetofaunal taxa expanding
their ranges into new territories over the past three decades. The number of species occurring on the
west bank was greater than on the east bank presumably due to greater variety of habitat, increased
urbanization and huge web of irrigation canals which have allowed several species to move from the
River Nile to the Canal zone. This study suggests the Suez Canal acts as passage for herpetofauna from
west to east, but in parallel with the creation of new suitable habitat on the east side for invasive species.
Several species such as A. regularis, P. mascareniensis, H. flaviviridis, and N. tessellata were transported
via the Suez Canal and colonized on the east bank. On the west bank, the subspecies of chameleon was
Chamaeleo chamaeleon chamaeleon, whereas on the east bank, Chamaeleo chamaeleon musae.
Trapelus savignyi recorded on the west bank with smooth ventrals was not previously known for the
species.



                                                                                                          334
Iizuka, Koji (Takashima 2nd Junior High School); Sessions, Stanley (Department of biology, Hartwick
College, Canada); Poyarkov, Nikolay (Department of Vertebrate Zoology, Biological faculty, Lomonosov
Moscow State University, Canada); Koishi, Hiroyuki (Housei University Daini Junior High School, Canada)

Comparative study of limb development in hynobiid salamanders (Developmental evolution of
limbs, Hynobiidae)

A comparative study of limb development was performed among Japanese hynobiid salamanders
including both those with pond-type larvae (Hynobius lichenatus, H. nigrescens, H. tokyoensis) and those
with stream-type larvae (H. kimurae, Onychodactylus japonicus). Early limb development of H. lichenatus
with pond-type larva is characterized by the transient formation of a prominent, pointed interdigital
membrane (IM) which is resorbed as the limb completes its development. Stream-type Hynobius and
Onychodactylus have a vestigial IM (vIM) and/or an interdigital web (IW). A phylogenetic analysis, using
our information along with that available for other hynobiid and non-hynobiid salamanders, leads us to
conclude that 1) an IM is probably characteristic of cryptobranchoid salamanders, 2) the IM probably has
some functional significance in pond larva habitat, a function that is absent in stream larva habitat, and 3)
the IM has been reorganized or reduced two or three times independently in cryptobranchoid lineages.
Evolutionary developmental implications of the IM within the cryptobranchoid salamanders is also
discussed, especially in regard to cytogenetics.



Ilgen, Emily L. (Department of Biology, Edinboro University of Pennsylvania); Hartson, Carissa A.;
Zaleski, Olivia S. (Department of Biology, Edinboro University of Pennsylvannia, Same, United States);
Lindeman, Peter V. (Edinboro University of Pennsylvania, Edinboro, PA, United States)

Map Turtles of the Mermentau: Status Surveys of Forgotten Populations

The Mermentau River drainage in Louisiana has been largely ignored by turtle biologists. In particular,
very little is known about the range and distribution of the Sabine map turtle (Graptemys sabinensis) in
the drainage. Specimens were collected from the upper Mermentau in 1893-94, but the species has not
been studied in the drainage since then. We determined the basking density and relative abundance
among basking turtles for Sabine map turtles in the Mermentau drainage, including the Mermentau, Lake
Arthur, and five major tributaries bayous: Plaquemine Brule, des Cannes, Nezpique, Queue de Tortue,
and Lacassine. We recorded all turtles seen during boat surveys and in point counts from bridges and
other access points. The Mermentau and Bayou Plaquemine Brule had the highest basking densities in
boat surveys, ranging from 14.0–34.5 G. sabinensis per river kilometer. Bayous des Cannes and
Nezpique had intermediate average densities of 5.0-6.3 G. sabinensis per river kilometer. The river below
Lake Arthur and the downstream tributaries Bayou Queue de Tortue and Lacassine Bayou had the lowest
average basking densities, ranging from 0.7 to 1.4 G. sabinensis per river kilometer. Sabine map turtles
were the most abundant basking turtle on the Mermentau drainage, accounting for 74.2% of all turtles
seen. Graptemys pseudogeographica, the Mississippi map turtle, accounted for only 0.2% of all turtles
seen.




                                                                                                         335
Ilves, Katriina (Academy of Natural Sciences); Taylor, Eric (University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
BC, Canada)

Comparative Cenozoic biogeography of marine Holarctic fishes: towards an integrated
understanding of geological and climate driven divergences

Biogeographers have long searched for common processes responsible for diversification in the Holarctic
region. Terrestrial flora and fauna have been particularly well studied, with a vast literature on patterns of
diversity for taxa ranging from plants, invertebrates, land vertebrates, and freshwater fishes. Marine
organisms have also been extensively studied; however, much of this work addresses patterns and
processes occurring over a relatively recent timescale, such as the effects of the late Miocene trans-Arctic
interchange and the Pleistocene glaciations. We aim to examine questions of Cenozoic Holarctic
biogeography in a comparative context by integrating the phylogenetic histories of multiple co-distributed
groups of fishes with models of Northern Hemisphere geology and climate. We present updated
phylogenies and estimated divergence dates of the smelts (Osmeridae), salmon (Salmonidae),
sticklebacks (Gasterosteidae), sturgeon (Acipenseridae), and rockfishes (Sebastes) from available
genetic data analyzed in a species tree framework. These phylogenies formed the foundation of
subsequent biogeographic analysis. Biogeography was modeled at multiple scales: for entire phylogenies
using LAGRANGE, which integrates time-calibrated phylogenies with geographic and climatic models of
the species‘ distributions, and at particular nodes across phylogenies where sister species span a
putative biogeographic break (e.g., trans-Arctic, trans-Pacific, trans-Atlantic) using powerful approximate
Bayesian computation methods. Based on well-supported phylogenies the hypothesis-driven analysis of
congruent evolutionary patterns across co-distributed marine fishes identified geologic and climatic
processes likely to have promoted diversification in the Cenozoic Holarctic.



Ingram, Travis (Harvard University); Mahler, D. Luke (University of California: Davis, Canada); Revell,
Liam J. (University of Massachusetts - Boston, Canada); Losos, Jonathan B. (Harvard University,
Canada)

A new comparative method that does not require pre-assigned ecomorph categories confirms
exceptional morphological convergence in Caribbean anoles.

Convergent evolution is a powerful line of evidence for the efficacy of natural selection, and the replicated
evolution of habitat specialist ecomorphs in Anolis lizards is among our best-known examples of
convergence. Most statistical tests for convergence suffer from a potential circularity: species are
assigned to categories (such as ecomorphs) based of their appearance or ecology, then methods are
used to determine whether ecomorphs cluster together in phenotype space. Here, we introduce a new
comparative method that identifies cases of convergence using a phylogenetic tree and multivariate trait
dataset, without any a priori classification of species to ecomorphs. The method, called SURFACE, first
uses stepwise AIC to fit increasingly complex models assigning regions of the tree to distinct stabilizing
selection regimes. The second stage of the method assigns independent regions of the tree to shared
selective regimes until the model fit ceases to improve further. We apply this method to ecomorphological
data from 100 Greater Antillean Anolis species. SURFACE settles on a model with a large number of
evolutionary regimes, close to half of which are convergent with regimes in other parts of the tree.
Comparison with data simulated under a variety of null models indicates that the method is unlikely to
recover this degree of convergence by chance. Many, but not all, of the cases of convergence identified
by SURFACE correspond to classically recognized ecomorph designations. This finding supports the




                                                                                                          336
long-held view that natural selection has driven exceptional evolutionary convergence in the adaptive
radiation of anoles.



Islam, Mohammed Mafizul (Hiroshima University); Tokimitsu, Haruka (Hiroshima Prefectural Women's
University, Canada); Uchida, Misato (Hiroshima University, Canada); Iwanari, Miki; Fuji, Tomotsu
(Hiroshima Prefectural Women's University, Canada); Sumida, Masayuki (Hiroshima University, Canada)

Genetic divergence and postmating isolation among the brown frogs from Ryukyu Archipelago,
Japan, elucidated by allozyme and mitochondrial gene sequence analyses, crossing experiments
and cytological observations.

In order to elucidate the genetic divergence among brown frogs from the Ryukyu Archipelago, we
conducted allozyme electrophoresis using 27 loci and mitochondrial gene sequencing of 16S rRNA and
Cyt b genes using frogs from Okinawa and Kumejima Islands of Okinawa prefecture and Amami and
Tokunoshima Islands of Kagoshima prefecture. To understand postmating isolation, we did crossing
experiments between brown frogs from Okinawa and Amami Islands, and subsequently observed
histology of testes and spermatogenesis using the reciprocal male hybrids. Although brown frogs of the
Ryukyu Archipelago have been considered to be a single species Rana okinavana, Matsui (2012)
recently suggested that these frogs from Okinawa and Amami Islands should be considered as R. ulma
and R. kobai respectively. Thus we used R. ulma from Okinawa and Komejima Islands and R. kobai
from Amami and Tokonoshima Islands. Based on the allozyme data, Ryukyu‘s brown frog from Okinawa
prefecture significantly diverged from the frogs from Kagoshima prefecture by means of large genetic
distances (up to 0.43) and presence of diagnostic alleles, although some degrees of divergence was
found at populational level between frogs of Amami and Tokunoshima Islands with a genetic distance of
0.23. Molecular data also indicated significant divergence between frogs from two prefectures, while 3
population of each prefecture made a single clade, where Tokunoshima population comparatively
diverged from the other two Amami populations. Based on both allozyme and molecular data, they can
reasonably be regarded as different species. Although crossing experiments revealed that they are not
completely isolated by hybrid inviability; but the reciprocal hybrids show abnormal testes by presence of
picnotic nuclei, and abnormal spermatogenesis due to presence of higher ratio of rod shaped bivalent and
univalent chromosomes. These results conclude that although all the Ryukyu brown frogs are similar in
external morphology, the Amami and Okinawa groups are regarded as separated species as noticed by
Matsui (2012), where some populational variations are found within the species, especially between
Tokonoshima and Amami populations.



Iwai, Noriko (University of Tokyo);

Morphology and functions of the"fifth finger" in the Otton frog, Babina subaspera

The existence of an extra ―finger‖ is known in several vertebrate taxa, including anurans. Frogs and toads
normally possess four toes on the forelimbs, but ―fifth fingers‖ occur in species in some families around
the world. The extra ―finger‖ is often formed as a prepollical spine. Many functional roles have been
suggested for ―fifth fingers,‖ such as for hunting food, male-male combat, amplexus, or as an anti-
predator adaptation, but no study has closely examined the morphology and function of a ―fifth finger‖ in
any frog species. The Otton frog, Babina subaspera, endemic to the Amami Islands, south Japan,
possesses ―fifth fingers‖ which originate as pseudothumbs. I used measurements and intensive field
observations, to investigate the morphology and use of pseudothumbs in Otton frogs and compared them



                                                                                                       337
between the sexes. I found that there is sexual dimorphism: males have larger bodies with relatively
longer and thicker pseudothumbs than females. Pseudothumbs encase prepollical spines in both sexes,
and the tip of the spine sometimes emerges from the sheath; this occurred more often in males. When
something irritated the chest, some Otton frogs promptly pulled their arms toward the chest and jabbed
their spines at whatever came within their embrace, a behavior that was observed more often in males. I
suggest that this response is a reflex related to male-male combat; I observed males fighting over
females and breeding nests, and during those fights they employed the same arm movements. Males
often have scratches over their bodies, supporting the idea that males jab their spines into their
opponents in male-male combat. The pseudothumb was not used only in male-male combat; during
amplexus, males were observed to jab their pseudothumbs into females. Females had stab wounds on
their sides under the arms where they had been jabbed, which showed that males use their
pseudothumbs and associated spines for more secure coupling. I did not observe Otton frogs using their
pseudothumbs in hunting food. The results indicate that the pseudothumb of the Otton frog is used by
males in two main ways: male–male combat and amplexus. Which of the dual functions evolved first as
well as why females possess the pseudothumbs will be interesting questions for the future study.



Jackman, Todd (Villanova University); Rocha, Nicole; Bauer, Aaron; Koolpe, Rachel (Villanova
University, Canada)

Multilocus phylogeography of the Pachydactylus serval and Pachydactylus weberi complexes.

Once considered to be subspecies of Pachydactylus serval, Pachydactylus montanus and Pachydactylus
purcelli have only been recently described. Both gecko species have a relatively wide distribution,
spanning the Cape Province of South Africa up into the southern half of Namibia, with their ranges
overlapping in the northern end of the distribution of P. purcelli. Representative samples of these species
as well as all species that are members of the P. serval/weberi clade were taken from an array of
localities across their ranges. Patterns of genetic variation were analyzed by obtaining molecular data for
the mitochondrial gene ND2 as well as five nuclear protein coding loci. Results from mitochondrial DNA
data for P. purcelli showed significant geographical substructure, with northern populations being fairly
distinct from the more southern localities. P. montanus also showed a fair amount of geographical
substructure, although the correlation was not as obvious as for P. purcelli. In comparing mitochondrial
and nuclear genes, there is clear evidence of either deep coalescence or introgression between P.
carinatus and nearby and sympatric P. montanus populations. Results indicate that the Orange River
appears to present a geographical barrier, which can be seen by the division between P. montanus
populations north and south of the river and the distinctiveness of the sole P. purcelli population sampled
north of the river. Species tree approaches are compared to various concatenation configurations.



Jackson, Laura (Southeastern Louisiana University);

Investigating primordial germ cell (PGC) development using germ cell-specific genes in fish

Primordial Germ Cell (PGC) determination is one of the most important feats of vertebrate embryonic
development because it allows the continuation of life among future generations. In vertebrates, at least
two different mechanisms exist that allow species to develop cells that later form the eggs and sperm. In
the predetermined mechanism of PGC development, cells are specified by maternal determinants that
are located within the germ plasm. In the induced mechanism, cells must be induced by external
regulating factors that initiate germ cell development. Preliminary evidence suggests that different groups



                                                                                                        338
of fish may use different mechanisms of PGC development. The main objective of this project is to
determine the mechanism of germ cell development in several fish species using conserved sequences
of germ-cell genes, specifically vasa and oct-4. Focus will be on the 3‘ untranslated region of vasa for
localization signals, and eventually for localization of germ cells to the cytoplasm, which will allow the
mechanism of germ cell development to be determined. Currently, oct-4 has been identified only in the
induced mechanism of PGC development. Therefore, using phylogenetic analysis for those species that
show the expression of oct-4 can determine a common gene mechanism for germ cell development in the
presence of oct-4. The data will be used to test whether there is a correlation between body patterns,
specifically fin position, and mechanism of germ cell determination.



Jacobson, Elliott (University of Florida);

Chelonian Herpesviruses, Translocation, and the Reptile Pet Trade

Large numbers of turtles and tortoises are moved around the world as part of the pet trade and tortoises
in particular are also moved about as part of translocation projects to mitigate for displacement due to
land development. On a smaller scale, captive breeding and reintroduction projects also contribute to
these movements. While chelonians make up a relatively small component (approximately 3%) of the
total trade in pet reptiles imported into the US, when you look at ownership of reptiles, turtles and tortoise
are the most popular of all reptiles kept as pets. In the pet trade there is often a mixing of species from
different geographic locations, which often continues into private collections. Large numbers of gopher (
Gopherus polyphemus ) and Agassiz‘s desert tortoises ( Gopherus agassizii ) have been relocated or
translocated in Florida and in the Mojave Desert of California and Nevada respectively. Along with the
movement of these animals, numerous infectious agents are potentially transported with them. Of the
pathogens known to infect tortoises (and other chelonians), an extremely problematic group are the
herpesviruses (members of the family Herpesviridae).              For some unexplained reason, more
herpesviruses have been identified in chelonians than all other reptiles combined. Of chelonians,
numerous reports of herpesvirus infection exist for members of the families Testudinidae and
Cheloniidae. Herpesvirus-like particles and lesions have also been observed in tissues of dead Emydine
turtles. Where sequencing data are available, all chelonian (and other reptilian) herpesviruses belong to
the subfamily Alphaherpesvirinae. The genus Chelonivirus has been proposed to include the
monophyletic group of herpesviruses that use chelonian hosts. Using molecular sequencing technology,
four distinct genotypes of tortoise herpesviruses (THVs) are currently recognized: THV1, THV2, THV3,
and THV4. We expect new genotypes of herpesviruses to be described as different species of tortoises
from different geographic regions are examined. The first indications of a possible herpesvirus in wild
populations of desert tortoises appeared in the early 1990s, shortly after the desert tortoise was federally
listed as a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act, as amended, in California, Nevada,
Utah, and northwestern Arizona. The appearance of newly emerging diseases was one reason for the
federal listing. As a result, a multi-year research project on health and diseases of wild desert tortoises
was established in California between 1990 and 1995. Tortoises with clinical signs compatible with those
seen with herpesvirus infection were observed during this study. Serological data for desert tortoises in
the central Mojave Desert of California indicated a widespread distribution of antibodies that bind to
TeHV3 isolates. Recently, the first molecular evidence for natural herpesvirus infections in two wild
desert tortoises from the Mojave Desert of California and Nevada were reported. Because of the difficulty
in ante-mortem diagnosis of herpesvirus infection, strict protocols need to be developed that ensure that
these pathogens are not accidentally introduced into naïve populations.




                                                                                                          339
Jacoby, David (Marine Biological Association of the UK); Brooks, Edward (Cape Eleuthera Institute,
Bahamas, Canada); Croft, Darren (Centre for Research in Animal Behaviour, Exeter, United Kingdom);
Sims, David (Marine Biological Association of the UK, Plymouth, United Kingdom)

Developing a deeper understanding of shark movements and spatial dynamics through novel
application of network analyses

Understanding how and why sharks move within their environment is fundamental for the effective
management and conservation of many threatened elasmobranch species. With site fidelity and home
ranging behaviour common in sharks, there is a need to determine how fine-scale space use changes
with ontogeny, sex, phenotype and a variety of abiotic variables. For some time, passive acoustic
telemetry techniques employing static arrays have been used to gather discrete packets of data
pertaining to the presence or absence of individually tagged sharks at known receiver locations. A major
limitation of current approaches for analysing these data is that they rarely account for the
interconnectivity of these locations as the sharks move freely between them. As a result, traditional
analyses do not integrate graphically or statistically a temporal component to spatial changes. Hence, the
spatio-temporal structure of movements and habitat use is often hard to extract and compare for large
numbers of individuals using the same habitats. Here we present the novel application of network theory
to passive acoustic telemetry data which describe the movements of two very distinct species, the
Caribbean reef shark ( Carcharhinus perezi ) and the small spotted catshark ( Scyliorhinus canicula ).
This approach treats specific locations as network nodes and the movement of sharks between receivers
as network edges. Some descriptive and quantitative analyses that are possible with this new technique
are highlighted and assessed in relation to their application to enhanced management and conservation
strategies.



Jadin, Robert (University of Colorado Boulder); Campbell, Jonathan (University of Texas Arlington,
Canada)

Recognizing cryptic snake diversity in the Middle American highlands: A systematic revision of
the Montane pitvipers

Montane pitvipers of the genus Cerrophidion are endemic to highland regions of Middle America from
Mexico to Panama. Until recently, four species were allocated to this genus (i.e., C. barbouri, C.
godmani, C. petlalcalensis, and C. tzotzilorum ), all but one, C. godmani, restricted to isolated highland
regions of Mexico. We conducted a thorough systematic revision of this genus incorporating both
molecular phylogenetic analyses and morphological data. Our phylogenetic analyses consist of a
mitochondrial data set [12S, 16S, cytochrome b (cyt b), NADH dehydrogenase subunit 4 (ND4)] and used
both Bayesian and maximum parsimony criteria. We re-examined nearly all known museum specimens of
C. barbouri and the type-series of Agkistrodon browni , this name previously considered a junior
synonym of C. barbouri . Our investigations revealed that both names represent valid species and we
therefore resurrected A. browni . Additionally, our phylogenetic analysis of New World pitvipers strongly
supports a clade consisting of A. browni, C. barbouri, and Ophryacus melanurus, which has a distant
sister relationship to Ophryacus undulatus. Based on the deep phylogenetic divergences amongst these
species and distinctive morphology, we described a new genus, Mixcoatlus, to accommodate A. browni,
C. barbouri, and O. melanurus, rendering O. undulatus monotypic. Finally, our phylogenetic analyses
reveal that C. godmani as previously recognized represents three deeply divergent lineages and is
possibly paraphyletic. Our analyses reveal that these three divergent evolutionary lineages are separated
geographically. Based on our phylogenetic analyses and an examination of more than 200 specimens of
C. godmani, we recognize C. godmani sensu stricto as to the taxon occurring in Mexico and Guatemala



                                                                                                      340
and describe two additional species of      Cerrophidion from Honduras–El Salvador and Costa Rica–
Panama, respectively.



Jaeger, Collin (Northern Illinois University); King, Richard; Duvall, Melvin (Northern Illinois University,
Canada)

Initial Characterization of MHC Class IIB Variation in the Eastern Massasauga (Sistrurus catenatus
catenatus)

The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) plays a key role in the vertebrate immune system by
recognizing pathogens. Genes associated with the MHC are often highly variable due to the effects of
balancing selection, but genetic drift can also influence MHC variability within small, isolated populations.
MHC variation has been characterized in a range of species, representing most of the major vertebrate
lineages. However, the MHC of snakes remains poorly understood—no snake MHC sequences have
been published to date. The Eastern Massasauga ( Sistrurus catenatus catenatus ) is listed as threatened
or endangered throughout most of its fragmented range. As such, this species represents an ideal model
for assessing the relative effects of selection and drift in small, isolated populations. Previous genetic
analyses of S. c. catenatus have examined selectively neutral loci (i.e., microsatellites, mtDNA), yet
variation in a functional trait (i.e., pathogen resistance) may provide a more meaningful assessment of
adaptive potential and long-term population viability. We amplified, cloned, and sequenced a 166-bp
fragment (excluding primers) of exon 2 MHC Class IIB, including many of the functionally significant
antigen-binding sites. Preliminary results based on a limited number of snakes reveal as many as four
unique sequence variants per individual, suggesting the presence of at least two loci. These sequences
contain a number of conserved amino acid residues characteristic of functional MHC Class IIB molecules
and do not include any in-frame stop codons, indicating they are functional loci. Pairwise differences
among the sequences exceed 10% and 25% at the nucleotide and amino acid levels, respectively.
Further, we consider the relative roles of selection and drift in shaping MHC variation in Illinois S. c.
catenatus in comparison to seven microsatellite loci. These data represent the initial steps towards
developing an effective marker of MHC variation in S. c. catenatus. This marker may also provide useful
information for conservation efforts involving other snake species of concern and will contribute to our
understanding of MHC evolution in an under-represented lineage.



Jaime, Mario (CIBNOR); Caraveo, Javier (CIBNOR, Canada); Galvan, Felipe (CICIMAR, Canada);
Hoyos, Mauricio (Pelagios-Kakunjá, Canada)

Relative contributions of feeding in the different regions to the long-term diet of the white shark
Carcharodon carcharias from Isla Guadalupe inferred by analysis of stable isotopes d15N and
d13C

Movements of white shark in the Eastern Pacific and the link with its feeding ecology were inferred from
stable carbon and nitrogen stable isotopic analysis. Dermis and epidermis samples of white sharks that
aggregate at Isla Guadalupe were obtained to determine isotope composition. Average isotope signature
for dermis tissue of white shark were δ 13 C (–14.5‰) and δ 15 N (19.1‰). Average isotope signature for
the epidermis was δ 13 C (–14.1‰) and δ 15 N (18.3‰). Tissue samples of prey (northern elephant
seals, Guadalupe fur seals, California sea lions, and dolphin) were obtained. Isotope signatures of
probable white shark prey within its migration range were obtained from the literature (h arbor seals,
northern elephant seals, northern fur seals, harbor porpoise and fishesfrom the coast of the California,



                                                                                                         341
yellow fin tuna, bigeye tuna and albacore from Hawaii and yellow fin tuna values near the Shark Offshore
Forraging Area) We considered the marine mammals as indicators of near shore environments and tunas
as indicators of off shore environments. Guilds by regions instead of species were grouped. To compare
the definition pattern of the distribution of feasible contributions from each source to the white shark we
developed mixing models using IsoSource and MixSIR software. The isotope signature of white shark
dermis from Isla Guadalupe suggests movements of individual sharks between Isla Guadalupe and the
coast of California. Results of models indicated a greater contribution of prey from nearshore
environments than those of offshore environments.



James, Kelsey (San Diego State University); Ferretti, Francesco (Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford
University, Canada); Moore, Jeff (Southwest Fisheries Science Center, NOAA, Canada); Lewison,
Rebecca (San Diego State University, Canada); Curtis, K. Alexandra (Acadia University, Canada);
Dillingham, Peter (Clark University, Canada)

Global Chondrichthyan Catch and Bycatch: Status and Sustainability

Chondrichthyan populations are at risk from fisheries catch and bycatch worldwide. However, assessing
the impact of fishing mortality on sharks and rays is difficult given severe data limitations. As a result, few
fisheries management organizations have applied management models to identify limits or reference
points that could address chondrichthyan catch sustainability. In collaboration with colleagues, we are
addressing this challenge by creating a global catch database linking catch and bycatch data with
chondrichthyan life history, and developing reference point based models to guide management of
chondrichthyan catch. This project is a continuation of the Project GloBAL bycatch database and builds
on this foundation with ongoing work by Stanford‘s Reconstructing Shark Baselines project. Here, we will
review the structure and content of our chondrichthyan catch database and its links with demographic
information, and discuss the application of management models using these data. This collation and
synthesis of chondrichthyan catch and bycatch data will improve our ability to assess and manage the
impact fisheries are having on chondrichthyan populations.



Jañez, Julieta (Fundacion Temaiken); Zalazar, Raul; Falzone, Martin; Abraham, Carolina (Fundacion
Temaiken, Canada)

Preliminary observations on the reproductive cycle of Myliobatis goodei in captivity

Elasmobranchs can be grouped in three types of reproductive cycles. Continuous breeders are
reproductively active throughout the year, seasonal breeders are reproductively active for only a portion
of the annual cycle, and species that undergo punctuated cycles are pregnant for approximately a full
year, but an intervening year or two is spent non-pregnant. The Southern eagle ray ( Myliobatis goodei )
is widely distributed along the Atlantic east coast, from USA (36° N, South Carolina) to Argentina (36° S,
Patagonia). The mode of reproduction is aplacental viviparity (Matrotrophic-histotrophe). However the
basic reproductive parameters are yet unknown. Preliminary data of the reproductive cycle obtained from
adult females in captivity are presented. Observations in five females of M.goodei , maintained under
controlled conditions during the period 2003-2011, allowed us to determine that the elapsed time between
births is about one year. These occur in late spring-summer and copulation occurs immediately after
parturition. A minimum of 4 months gestation was estimated by ultrasound. Parturitions in consecutive
years were recorded for two reproductive females. From the ultrasound monitoring of two females that
were isolated from the rest of the specimens for one year, follicular development was observed, with a




                                                                                                           342
peak in the diameter reached in May-June (winter). Estrogen levels in blood showed a peak in early
summer and another in late spring. During the rest of the year (autumn-winter) estrogen concentration
was maintained at low levels. Testosterone showed several oscillations during the year with a marked
decrease in late summer and two peaks between late winter and spring. As for the progesterone, values
were below the detection limit of the measuring equipment (<0.1 ng/ml). Observations to date allow us to
affirm that M.goodei presents an annual reproductive cycle, and to discard the punctuated cycle as its
reproductive strategy. However, further studies are needed to determine whether the reproductive cycle
of the species is seasonal or continuous.



Jass, Christopher (Royal Alberta Museum); Gardner, James (Royal Tyrrell Museum of Palaeontology,
Drumheller, AB, Canada)

Taxonomic Stability of Amphibians and Reptiles in the Quaternary in Canada

Much of our current understanding about the response of North American Quaternary herpetofaunas to
climatic changes, glacial advance, and glacial retreat is founded on fossiliferous localities in the USA
and eastern Canada, many of which were beyond the maximum advance of the ice sheets. Localities
from regions that were covered by ice are critical for understanding the histories of herpetofaunas that
were directly impacted by glaciation. Much of western Canada was covered by ice by during the Last
Glacial Maximum, yet Quaternary herpetofaunas from that region have received scarce mention in the
published literature, likely due to a research emphasis on Quaternary mammals. Here we summarize
recent investigations on Quaternary herpetofaunas from western Canada that significantly improve our
understanding of Ice Age amphibians and reptiles from northern latitudes. We examined Quaternary
specimens from eight paleontological and archaeological localities in the provinces of British Columbia
and Alberta (British Columbia: Bear Flat; Alberta: Eagle Cave, January Cave, Rat‘s Nest Cave,
Hand/Wintering Hills, Fletcher Site, Stampede Site, and Little Fish Lake). These localities include cave
deposits in the Rocky Mountains and localities on the open prairie. Some localities contain fossils that
pre-date the Last Glacial Maximum (e.g., January Cave ), whereas others post-date that event (e.g.,
Rat‘s Nest Cave). Identified taxa include frogs (Rana sp., Bufo sp., and Anura indet.), salamanders (
Ambystoma sp.), and snakes (cf. Thamnophis sp. and cf. Pituophis sp.). With those additional records
there are now at least 26 localities known to contain Quaternary amphibian and reptile remains in
Canada, with the majority of known localities situated in the west. Taxonomic records presented in our
study reflect a morphology-based approach to identification that resulted in less taxonomic resolution than
commonly found in the literature concerning Quaternary amphibians and reptiles. Despite a lack of
species-level identifications, the resultant data set is useful for establishing a framework indicative of
taxonomic stability of late Quaternary herpetofaunas in western Canada. We hypothesize that the
observed stability likely is related to evolutionary adaptations (e.g., cold-tolerance) in specific lineages.



Jaworski, Kortney (Ohio University); Lattanzio, Matthew; Miles, Donald (Ohio University, Canada)

Effects of diet variation on body condition, color expression, and performance of ornate tree
lizards, Urosaurus ornatus

Colored patches among many lizards are often implicated as badges of intraspecific communication.
Indeed, many studies have found support for badges of varying colors and sizes as signals of status or
condition, at least among males. In the ornate tree lizard ( Urosaurus ornatus ), males possess dual
badges (throat and abdominal) which are displayed during social interactions. Throat badges exhibit



                                                                                                         343
discrete variation among males whereas abdominal badges are consistently blue in color. Furthermore,
throat color variation is concordant with variation in social behavior and dominance hierarchies in this
species. Physiologically, these different colors represent both structural (blue) and diet-derived (yellow
and orange) coloration, and as such are expected to exhibit varying degrees of condition-dependence.
Previous research investigating the information content of these badges has generated mixed results with
respect to the links between male quality or condition and variation in male color. These studies were
likely limited in their approach however by 1) not accounting for the capability of color expression to vary
quantitatively (e.g., within a particular male phenotype) and 2) not experimentally varying body condition
and monitoring its effects. In order to fully understand the condition dependence of a trait, it is necessary
to see how variation in that trait responds to phenotypic perturbation. Here we present results from a
controlled feeding experiment examining how variation in diet regime (food availability, three levels)
affects body condition, and consequently how that variation in body condition predicts quantitative
variation in color expression by tree lizards. In addition, we also measure changes in whole-organism
performance (endurance capacity) throughout the experiment. Thus far we have found that body
condition declined significantly in the low-availability treatment compared to the medium- and high-
availability treatments (P=0.002). We are currently analyzing our color and performance data. Overall we
intend to provide key insight regarding the degree to which multivariate color expression by tree lizards is
informative of male quality and locomotor capacity.



Jenkins, Chris (The Orianne Society);

The Orianne Society: A snake conservation success story

The world‘s reptile and amphibian populations are declining at an alarming rate. As more species decline
and face extinction it is important that partnerships are formed to prevent further declines. The Orianne
Society was created to conserve reptiles and amphibians in the wild. We use a science-based approach
to the range-wide conservation of our flagship species, the Eastern Indigo Snake. Our programs are
designed to form the first comprehensive effort to save a snake species in the wild. Our Conservation
Science Program provides the critical information needed to implement our applied programs and has
successfully completed or is currently conducting research on many topics including but not limited to
inventory, monitoring, spatial ecology, genetics, population modeling, habitat and modeling. Our research
programs have informed many of our applied conservation programs (e.g., Land Protection, Land
Management, Captive Breeding, Education, and Conservation Planning). Some of our conservation
successes include developing a Preserve dedicated to maintaining a viable population of indigo snake
indefinitely, reintroducing indigo snakes to Alabama and plans to expand reintroductions into Florida and
Georgia, revising the recovery plan, developing conservation plans, educating 1000s of students, and
raising general awareness of the conservation needs for the species. We will continue to strive to achieve
conservation successes, and are using our efforts with Indigo Snakes as a model to develop programs for
other species in need. We are dedicated to providing future generations the opportunity to know and
experience these amazing animals.




                                                                                                         344
Jewell, David (Stowers Institute for Medical Research); Kupronis, Rick; Schieszer, Jill; Piraquive,
Christina; Winter, Kristy; Baumann, Diana (Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Canada)

Innovative Strategies for Maintaining a Large Colony of Aspidoscelis Species

Whiptail lizards of the genus Aspidoscelis (formerly Cnemidophorus ) provide many unique
opportunities for biological research. Arguably the most fascinating aspect of their biology relates to the
fact that approximately one third of the species reproduce in the complete absence of males; a process
known as parthenogenesis. Here we describe the set-up and captive husbandry of our colony where we
house both sexual and asexual species which readily reproduce year-round. The colony is primarily used
to study the mechanism of asexual reproduction, speciation and the effects of hybridization on gene
expression pattern and development.

A number of innovative strategies have been utilized to effectively house a colony of over 600 animals.
Custom-built runs with movable dividers allow for thermoregulatory behavior, foraging, tunneling and egg
laying. UV heat bulbs are tested for intensity and output using an Ocean Optics Jaz spectrometer and
associated SpectraSuite software for radiometric analysis. Hygiene is monitored using ATP swabs which
use bioluminescence to detect residual ATP as an indicator of substrate or surface contamination.
Lunaire environmental chambers are used for egg incubation under constant temperature and humidity
levels, leading to a high hatch rate.

We employ various techniques to facilitate animal identification. All lizards are photographed at hatching
and at regular intervals throughout growth, permitting identification based on pattern recognition. For
those species without distinctive patterns, both VIE (Visible Implant Elastomer) and PIT (Passive
Integrated Transponder) tagging have been successfully utilized over a period of years. A set of
microsatellite markers is used to track identity and parentage. All colony management and research data
is tracked through an in-house database.



Jiménez Robles, Octavio (Biodiversity and Evolutionary Department, National Museum of Natural
Sciencies (CSIC)); Guayasamin, Juan M. (Centro de Investigación de la Biodiversidad y el Cambio
Climático, Universidad Tecnológica Indoamérica, Canada); Ron, Santiago R. (Museo de Zoología,
Escuela de Ciencias Biológicas, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Ecuador, Canada); De la Riva,
Ignacio J. (Biodiversity and Evolutionary Department, National Museum of Natural Sciencies (CSIC),
Canada)

Herpetofauna Assemblages of a Locality in the Slopes of the Cordillera del Cutucú, Southeast
Ecuador, with Biogeographic Comparisons with other Amazonian Rainforest Localities

The Amazon is the most extensive area of tropical rainforest and the richest in amphibians and reptiles in
the world. We present an inventory and an ecological description of the herpetofauna in the Wisui
Biological Station (WBS), in seven habitats of different disturbance levels, ranging from 600 to 1400 m of
elevation. This site, never prospected before, is located in the eastern slopes of the Cordillera del Cutucú
(Ecuador), a mountain range east of the Andes.

After several visits from 2008 to 2011, 57 species of amphibians and 43 of reptiles were recorded at
WBS, through visual encounter surveys and incidental captures. Some of these species are new to
science (e.g.: one Osteocephalus which breeds in phytotelmata and two Pristimantis ), while others
represent interesting records ( e.g. : Bolitoglossa altamazonica s.l., Pristimantis katoptroides, P.
rubicundus ). According to accumulation curves and richness estimators, there are still many species to
be registered in most of the habitats. Comparing the herpetofauna of WBS with other inventories across



                                                                                                         345
the Amazon basin, it shows higher similarity with other Ecuadorian localities (sharing around 50 and 60%
of anurans and squamates). If the diversity at WBS is as high as that described for other nearby
Amazonian communities, it would mean that species richness is high above the predictions by
mathematical estimators.

Sampling efficiency was variable within and between assemblages, and especially low for reptiles in
general. Diversities across habitats were unevenly distributed, but generally higher in lowland forests.
There was a high turnover in species composition between assemblages (30-80% between amphibians
of forest habitats and 60-100% for rest of comparisons; 65-100% and 30-100% in reptiles). These
differences might be explained through microclimate, topographical and structural features (e.g.: up to
40% of the variation between the amphibians of forest habitats is due to nested absences along the
altitude gradient). At least in amphibians, we found patterns according to life history traits such us
breeding strategies (e.g.: increasing dominance of direct developers with altitude while species breeding
in ground level water disappear).

Currently, the herpetofauna communities of WBS are threatened by the construction of a road in the
vicinity. As a consequence, land use changes may cause a reduction of the local biodiversity through loss
of primary forests and an increase of anthropogenic habitats.



Jirik, Katherine (Birch Aquarium at Scripps Institution of Oceanography);

Reconciling professional values: a foundation to improve collaboration and communication in
elasmobranch scholarship

Elasmobranch researchers participate in numerous roles within scientific and public spheres.
Researchers commonly give public lectures, serve as technical consultants, confer with managers, and
encourage community projects in addition to their scientific and institutional responsibilities. Despite
advances in technology and communication, much responsibility falls on individual researchers to
disseminate their findings and sustain a public presence. This often requires not only explaining
research, but interpreting research – a practice influenced by the values of science and society. To
what extent do elasmobranch researchers feel comfortable doing this? What types of engagement are
appropriate for ‗the objective scientist‘? As elasmobranch scholarship continues to diversify, how can the
limitations of disciplinary values be recognized, and yet, be used to complement one another in order to
solve problems? This paper revisits the object-subject debate and aims to help elasmobranch scholars
reflect on whether different professional values are needed in their scientific and public roles, and how
values may affect cross-disciplinary scholarship and collaboration. Survey results of scientists‘ attitudes
towards engagement in the public sphere will be presented.



Joger, Ulrich (State Natural History Museum); Stumpel, Nikolaus (State Natural History Museum,
Braunschweig, Germany); Zinenko, Oleksandr (Museum of Nature, Kharkiv, Russian Federation)

Speciation and species borders in palaearctic vipers.

Palaearctic viper taxa occur mainly parapatrically, or, if sympatrically on a broad scale, will be found
ecologically separated on a fine scale. Species recognition and species borders in these vipers have
been under debate until present, especially in the genera Vipera and Montivipera.




                                                                                                       346
We studied these genera using mitochondrial and nuclear gene sequences. The resulting phylogeny did
not support all nominal taxa. In Montivipera, lineage sorting appeared incomplete in several nominal
species. Some Vipera ‗species‘ or populations turned out to be composed of heterozygotes of two
accepted species. This phenomenon seems to be not uncommon in Vipera, and the morphological
distinctiveness of these putative hybrids initiates a discussion about species borders and species
constancy in Vipera.

Are there stable hybrid zones between species, or have species been formed by hybridization? How does
speciation work in Vipera when species borders break down in contact zones?



Johnson, G. David (National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution); Baldwin, Carole
(National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, Canada)

A beautiful perplexing larval fish specimen from the Florida Straits (Liopropomini?:Epinephelinae:
Serranidae)

We recently noticed an unlabeled color image of a striking larval fish in a paper on connectivity in marine
populations (Cowen et al, 1998). Superficially, this larva resembles that of the Indo-Pacific diploprionin,
epinepheline serranid, Belonoperca chabanaudi, currently known from a single specimen that we
described in 1991 from the historic ZMUC Dana Collections, sharing with it similar dorsal fin-ray counts
(IX, 11 in the new larva, usually IX,10 in B. chabanaudi) and, most notably, the extreme filamentous
extension of the majority of its dorsal fin spines. Our initial surmise that this specimen was Indo-Pacific in
origin proved wrong, when an inquiry established that it was collected in the Florida Straits. With the
specimen in hand, we have determined that it exhibits larval head spination characteristic of the tribe
Liopropomini, of which there are three recognized genera. Liopropoma is known from five Atlantic and
21 Indo-Pacific species, Bathyanthias from two Atlantic, and Rainfordia from one Indo -Pacific species.
With the exception of Bathyanthias, all known species have VIII or fewer dorsal-fin spines. Bathyanthias
has 13-15 dorsal-fin soft rays, so the dorsal fin-ray count of our specimen is unique among liopropomins.
Furthermore, all known liopropomin larvae have no more than two elongate filamentous dorsal spines,
and the unidentified larva has seven. At this writing, we suspect that this larval specimen represents an
undescribed liopropomin genus. Fortunately, our specimen was fixed in 95% ethanol, so we hope to
extract DNA and subsequently clear and stain it. Stay tuned...



Johnson, Steve (University of Florida);

Early detection of invasive reptiles in Florida

The state of Florida (USA) holds the dubious distinction as being the global capital for herpetofauna
introductions. As of early 2012, there are more than 55 species of non-native reptile and amphibian
species known to be breeding in the Sunshine State. The vast majority, which are reptiles, persist in
relatively small, localized populations with no obvious negative impacts on native species or human
quality of life. However, some have significantly expanded their ranges with negative impacts on the
state‘s ecology, economy, and the quality of life of Floridians. Prominent among this latter group are
several species of large snakes and carnivorous lizards. Specifically, these include pythons, anacondas,
monitor lizards, and tegu lizards. Although prevention is always the best policy, once a species has been
introduced outside its native range, Early Detection and Rapid Response (EDRR) becomes an important
management tool. The Introduced Reptile Early Detection and Documentation program, or ‗REDDy‘, is a



                                                                                                          347
free, online educational program to train observers to identify and report sightings of several species of
large, invasive reptiles. Thus, REDDy is the crucial Early Detection component of a growing EDRR
network of natural resource managers and concerned citizens in Florida that is targeting particular
species of invasive reptiles. I will describe the REDDy training module, provide summary statistics for
program participation, and explain how REDDy is integrated with rapid response efforts in Florida.
Production of the REDDy program was a cooperative effort among the Everglades Cooperative Invasive
Species Management Area, the National Park Service, The Nature Conservancy, and the University of
Florida‘s Cooperative Extension Service. Funding for REDDy was provided by the South Florida National
Parks Trust, the Ferris Greeney Family Foundation, and the USDA Natural Resources Extension Act. To
learn more about REDDy and to take the online training module please visit http://ufwildlife.ifas.ufl.edu/
and click the ―Are you REDDy?‖ link.



Jones, Lawrence (Southwest PARC);

Tracking changes in a lizard assemblage at an ecotone in southeastern Arizona, USA.

The lower Marijilda Canyon area near Safford, Arizona, has among the highest diversity of lizards in the
United States, with 20 species being recorded in a small area. The reason for the high diversity is due, in
part, to the study site‘s location at an ecotone between the Sonoran and Chihuahuan deserts, two
montane ecoregions, and Mexican highland grasslands. The high diversity and ecotonal setting make it
an ideal venue for tracking changes in lizard assemblages over time and testing hypotheses about effects
of climate change, weed species and other other environmental influences. This study site was
qualitatively surveyed in the late 1960‘s by previous researchers, then I conducted systematic road-
transect surveys in 2003, 2010, and 2011. A total of 59 systematic surveys were conducted along a 4.2
km stretch of road. A total of 3,884 lizards were detected, representing 14 species (the other 6 species
were opportunistic records). Detections ranged from 0 to 179 individuals/visit (mean = 65.8 lizards/visit or
14.5 detections/km). Lizards were detected year-round, with a bi- or trimodal distribution in the spring and
summer to early fall. Peak surface activity occurred after the arrival of monsoonal precipitation, although
only some species responded to these summer rains. The most commonly detected species were
Urosaurus ornatus (n = 1,560, 40%), Uta stansburiana (n = 804, 21%), Sceloporus magister complex (
S. magister / bimaculosus /hybrids; n = 611, 16%), Aspidoscelis tigris (n = 277, 7%), Crotaphytus
collaris (n = 191, 5%), Cophosaurus texanus (n = 187, 5%), S. clarkii (n = 94, 2%), and A. uniparens
(37, 1%). Detections were not evenly distributed along the transect; most detections were in the first few
kilometers of road sand near the creek, although distribution varied spatially and temporally by species.
Although these data primarily serve as a baseline for long-term monitoring, observed trends differed
between the 2003 and the 2010/2011 survey periods. For example, there was a marked increase in U.
stansburian a and decrease in Cophosaurus texanus between the 2003 and 2010/2011 survey periods.
Based on early data returns, it is likely that tracking changes in environmental, behavioral, and
phenological attributes will be critical in accounting for population shifts over time.



Jones, Marc (UCL, University College London); Meloro, Carlo (University of Hull, Canada); Humphries,
Emma; Evans, Susan (UCL, University College London, Canada)

Why the fossil record is crucial for understanding the evolutionary context of the New Zealand
tuatara (Lepidosauria: Rhynchocephalia: Sphenodon)




                                                                                                        348
Sphenodon is famed for being the only living member of Rhynchocephalia, the sister taxon of Squamata,
a phylogenetic position that makes it the best available extant outgroup taxon for comparative studies of
squamates. Moreover, Sphenodon is frequently referred to as a ―living fossil‖ and as ―unchanged for
150-250 million of years‖. This perception is closely linked to the common assumption that Sphenodon
represents a ―basal‖ or ―primitive‖ lepidosaur. Although very convenient this supposition is often made
without any reference to primary palaeontological literature or peer reviewed fossil data. Palaeontological
research over the last 30 years has shown that for much of the Mesozoic (227-90 million years ago [Ma])
Rhynchocephalia are far more diverse and ecologically important than is widely appreciated. There are
now over 50 fossil species known from all over the world and these include small robust terrestrial forms
(‗clevosaurs‘), short bodied aquatic forms (‗sapheosaurs‘), long bodied aquatic forms (Pleurosaurinae),
and large heavily built herbivores (Eilenodontinae). Thus the modern diversity of Rhynchocephalia and
taxonomic isolation of Sphenodon is a product of extinction rather than an absence of diversification or
evolution. There are some teeth and partial jaws from the Jurassic (160 Ma) that closely resemble those
of Sphenodon (Argentina, Mexico, UK) but it remains unknown as to whether these animals resembled
the modern Sphenodon in their entirety. Perhaps more importantly the most ancient and plesiomorphic
Rhynchocephalia (e.g. Gephyrosaurus, Diphydontosaurus, Triassic-Jurassic, about 205 Ma, UK) differ
from Sphenodon in a number of ways. These early forms are much smaller (skull length = 15-40 mm),
more lightly built, have relatively long limbs, long snouts, and possess a greater number of more
acuminate teeth on the dental margins and palate. The structure of their temporal region also shows that
the absence of an external ear and presence of a lower temporal bar is secondary in Sphenodon and
not primitively retained as historically supposed. Therefore, although Sphenodon is the best available
living outgroup for Squamata it should be used with caution and the morphology of fossil lepidosaurs
should also be considered to provide a more holistic total evidence approach.



Jones, Melissa (Texas State University); Vandewege, Michael (Mississippi State University, Starkville,
MS, United States); Forstner, Michael (Texas State University, San Marcos, TX, United States)

Habitat suitability and head-start efficiency and effectiveness: Tested in the endangered Houston
toad (Bufo houstonensis)

The Houston toad, endemic to the State of Texas, was first described in Houston, Texas in 1953. In 1970,
the Houston Toad was the first animal in Texas and the first amphibian federally listed as an endangered
species. Houston toad populations have remained in a continual decline consequent of multiple
stressors, including habitat fragmentation, continued urban growth of the city of Bastrop, red imported fire
ants, fertilizers and chemical run off, agricultural practices, wildfire, and drought. As consequence of
prolonged drought and habitat loss a head-starting program was developed and implemented for Bastrop
County, Texas. Since 2007, thousands of head-start tadpoles and juveniles have been released in
Bastrop County. A preliminary study in 2010 used a suite of genetic markers to test and monitor head-
start success of tadpole and juvenile Houston toads. Results from this study conclude that head-starting
does increases early life stage mortality and survivorship ship estimates are comparable to wild toad
populations. Head-starting efforts themselves will not be sufficient to achieve success in the recovery
efforts. Therefore we used mesocosom exclosures to evaluate our best options for habitat recovery
consequent of drought and catastrophic wildfire induced changes and decades of fire suppression. We
tested and compared adult survivorship within six different habitat types to gain insight on habitat
suitability for the Houston toad. As head-starting efforts continue we will use our habitat suitability results
to further implement and refine our management efforts.




                                                                                                           349
Jones, Michael (University of Massachusetts Amherst); Willey, Lisabeth (University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Canada)

Distribution and Ecology of Box Turtles (Terrapene carolina bauri) in the Ten Thousand Islands,
Florida, USA

We studied the distribution and ecology of Florida Box Turtles (Terrapene carolina bauri) in the Ten
Thousand Islands, an estuarine mangrove ecosystem encompassing 300 square km in southwestern
Florida. We surveyed fifteen islands, including both natural barrier islands and anthropogenic shell-works
islands constructed by the Calusa Indians approximately 2000 ybp. We detected 147 box turtles on seven
offshore or riverine shell-works islands. We did not detect any box turtles during cursory surveys of
natural barrier islands, suggesting that box turtles are absent from these sites or less abundant than on
the shell islands. We evaluated differences in detection rates and morphometrics across the seven shell-
works islands where box turtles were detected. We estimate population size on one 26 ha shell island to
be approximately 54 turtles (42.8– 76.3); equivalent to a density of 2.1 turtles/ha (1.7 – 3.0), lower than
estimates from islands in Tampa Bay and the Florida Keys. Our surveys suggest that density and
demography may vary significantly between the anthropogenic shell islands. Box turtle populations on
shell islands may be suppressed by raccoon depredation, collection by humans, and/or adverse
environmental conditions. Box turtle populations on the Calusa shell mounds of the Ten Thousand
Islands provide interesting examples of box turtle populations living on manmade islands and provide the
opportunity to evaluate metapopulation dynamics and density-dependent behavioral ecology in a long-
lived vertebrate.



Jones, Michael (University of Massachusetts Amherst); Willey, Lisabeth (University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Canada); Sievert, Paul (USGS Massachusetts Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit,
Canada); Akre, Thomas (Longwood University, Canada); Castellano, Christina (Orianne Society,
Canada); Erb, Lori (Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife, Canada); Grgurovic, Mark
(Swampwalkers Wetland Ecosystem Specialists, Canada); Johnson, Glenn (State University of New York
Potsdam, Canada); Koch, Stephanie (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Canada); Marchand, Michael (New
Hampshire Fish and Game, Canada); Mays, Jonathan (Maine Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Department,
Canada); Ross, Angelena (New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, Canada); Urban,
Chris (Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission, Canada); Windmiller, Bryan (Hyla Ecological Services,
Canada)

Regional Planning and Monitoring Programs for Two Rare Turtle Species in the Northeastern USA

Blanding‘s turtle ( Emydoidea blandingii ) and wood turtle ( Glyptemys insculpta ) are long-lived emydid
turtles that rely seasonally on both wetland and upland habitats, are of regional conservation concern in
the northeastern United States, and are listed as ―Endangered‖ by the IUCN. Both species are apparently
threatened by habitat loss and elevated adult mortality rates, and local population declines have been
documented for both species. To improve the effectiveness of regional conservation efforts, formal
working groups composed of land managers, state biologists, and researchers were established to
prioritize and coordinate conservation, management, and monitoring activities for both species throughout
the northeastern United States. In 2011, the Blanding‘s Turtle and Wood Turtle Working Groups received
funding through State Wildlife Grants programs (USFWS Competitive SWG, and NEAFWA Regional
Conservation Needs, respectively). Key contributors to both projects include biologists and land
managers from agencies, universities, NGOs, and private industry from 5 and 12 states, respectively. We
are identifying priority sites for conservation and management, developing management plans for priority




                                                                                                       350
sites, implementing standardized regional monitoring programs, and establishing meaningful and
productive partnerships with additional agencies, land-trusts, and managers. As part of this effort, we
have devised a two-tiered regional monitoring strategy that utilizes 1) broad-scale occupancy and
abundance sampling to detect population trends across the region, and 2) spatial mark-recapture
methods to estimate population density at key sites. We will discuss the details of these plans, as well as
preliminary results from spring 2012 sampling, and we seek critical feedback on our monitoring and site
prioritization approaches.



Jones, Peter (Northern Illinois University); King, Richard (Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL, United
States)

Integral projection modeling as a technique for the demographic analysis of species with
indeterminate growth

The commonly used matrix population projection technique depends on breaking the population of study
into discrete classes frequently based on body size. For many species, however, the divisions between
size-based classes are arbitrary given that body size is a continuous variable and this can lead to
imprecise and inaccurate population models. An alternative to matrix models that shares many of their
useful features is the integral projection model (IPM). Rather than separating individuals into discrete
classes each with its own set of vital rates, IPMs utilize continuous functions based on the state of an
individual (e.g. body size, age). These states can be continuous or discrete. Thus, IPMs are ideal for the
population modeling of species with indeterminate growth (e.g. fish, amphibians, and reptiles). IPMs
retain some useful characteristics of matrix projection models such as the projected population growth
rate from the dominant eigenvalue, stable size distribution and reproductive value from the eigenvectors,
and sensitivity and elasticity analysis. Because IPMs do not require the division of individuals into
classes, fewer data are necessary for the parameterization of an IPM compared with a matrix projection
model. Here we investigate geographic-scale variation in the demography of the Eastern Massasauga
(Sistrurus catenatus catenatus) via IPMs. We parameterized IPMs with growth functions from two
populations at opposite ends of the Eastern Massasauga‘s distribution (southern Illinois and southeastern
Ontario). Stable size distributions from the IPMs showed a greater abundance of large adults (>800 mm
SVL) in the Ontario population than the Illinois population, a pattern consistent with observed size
distributions. This difference is also reflected in the model elasticities, which showed that the highest
elasticities for the Ontario population were at a larger adult size than for the Illinois population. IPMs can
also be parameterized with different survival and fecundity functions to facilitate more complex
comparisons among populations or to explore alternative management strategies.



Jones, Susan (University of Tasmania); Awruch, Cynthia (University of Tasmania, Hobart, T, Australia)

Steroid production by maternal and embryonic tissues in a viviparous lizard

Hormones have important organisational and activational roles during embryonic development. These
hormones may have maternal or embryonic origins. In viviparous (live-bearing) vertebrates, the embryo is
exposed to maternal hormones via the placenta, which forms an interface between maternal and
embryonic endocrine systems. Environmental influences on the maternal endocrine system may therefore
be transmitted to the embryo. We examined steroid production by embryonic and maternal tissues in the
viviparous lizard Niveoscincus ocellatus. We hypothesised that patterns of steroid production would vary
between tissues, with embryonic stage, and between different temperatures in this ectothermic species.



                                                                                                          351
Females were collected in mid to late gestation and sacrificed. Embryos were removed and staged:
samples were allocated to groups according to embryo stage (Stage 30-37; Stage 39 or Stage 40 = pre-
birth). Their adrenals and gonads were incubated at 16° or 28°C (species‘ preferred body temperature)
for three hours, with or without the steroid precursor pregnenolone; for younger embryos, the entire
embryo trunk was incubated. Maternal tissues (oviduct, placenta, corpus luteum, non-luteal ovary, and
muscle = non-endocrine control tissue) were also incubated at 16° or 28°C with or without pregnenolone.
Incubation media were assayed for testosterone, progesterone, estradiol and corticosterone using
radioimmunoassay. Of the maternal tissues, the corpus luteum produced the most progesterone, with
greater production in the presence of pregnenolone (F1, 48=89.85, P<0.001). Temperature had little
effect on hormone production, contrary to expectations. Progesterone production by corpora lutea was
significantly lower at stage 40 (F2, 48=59.17, P<0.001). Placenta and uterus were also steroidogenic,
producing low levels of estradiol, and progesterone. This suggests the potential for local regulation of the
hormonal environment in which the embryos are developing. In older embryos, the adrenals produced
measurable corticosterone. Corticosterone production did not vary between incubation temperatures (16
and 28°C) but was significantly higher in the presence of pregnenolone (F1, 76=17.51, P<0.001). These
results suggest the potential for maternal-embryo endocrine signaling in a viviparous reptile.



Joyce, Walter (University of Tübingen);

New Insights from the Fossil Record into the Basal Evolution of Turtles

Turtles have an exceptional fossil record, because they typically live in aquatic habitats, are relatively
large bodied, possess a heavily ossified shell, and therefore have great potential to enter the fossil
record. Yet, surprisingly little was known as recently as 20 years ago about the early evolution of turtles,
including the origin of the turtle shell, the origin of various modern subclades and their morphological
adaptations, and basic biogeographic patterns. Although many evolutionary questions remain far from
resolved, new fossils and global approaches to phylogeny are providing first glimpses at a cohesive
evolutionary history for the group. The purpose of this contribution is to introduce some of the more
relevant fossil finds and summarize their impact on the study of turtle evolution. Points of particular