rved. Thirty-six populations (n=30) from eight different drainages were genetically charactenzed at five
microsatellites and mtDNA. The mtDNA homogeneity indicated a common refugial origin of all populations. In
contrast, extensive polymorphism was observed at microsatellites. Eleven evolutionary lineages were identified and
their divergence apparently predated the postglacial recolonization of the park, suggesting that ‘f’® P®*J?®®
recolonized by multiple population waves from a single yet fragrriented glacial refuge. Multivanate statisbcal analysis
highlighted the role of hydrographic systems, altitude, and stocking as the mam explanatory factors for the obsenrad
genetic structure. Altogether, these results suggest that the use of microsatellites may reonent our views about
problems of temporal and geisgraphical scales considered in conservation genetics.




Slowly-evolving proteins and higher-level snake phylogeny: a reanalysis.         L. Buckley, Biology Department,
 Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623-9932 USA; M. Kearney, Ge^e Washington University.
 Department of Biological Sciences, Washington, DC 20052 USA; K. de Queiroz, Departrnent of Vertebrate Zoology,
 National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington. DC 20056 USA.
 We reanalyzed the data of a recently published study of higher-level snake relationships, which was based on a
 UPGMA analysis of alleles at four "slowly-evolving" protein-coding loci. The distance matnx denyed from these data
 contains a large number of ties, which are not explicitly revealed in many UPGMA programs. Our analyses of these
 date reveal teat the single, well- resolved phenogram presented in the published study is only one among at least
 9,999 equivalent UPGMA phenograms supported by the data, the consensus of which is largely unresolved.
 Additive distance analysis and character-based parsimony analysis of the same data yield even less resolution.
 Thus, regardless of one's preference regarding analytical approaches, the date in question are highly ambiguous
 concerning higher-level snake phylogeny. The highly resolved tree presented in tee published study is an analyt cal
 artifact that was obtained only because the analysis failed to consider equivalent trees resulting from ties in the
 distance matrix.

   136______________          16:00 Saturday                                ■P2                               PCH
Microsatellite variation in wild populations of lake trout {Sah/elinus namaycush) from Lake Superior. EJ^
Leder and R.B. Phillips. Department of Biological Sciences. University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wl
ijSA; M Burnham-Curtis, Great Lakes Science Center, USGS, Ann Arbor, Ml USA; C.R. Bronte. Great Lakes Field
Station, USGS.Ashland, Wl USA.
Microsatellite variation was surveyed in six populations of lean lake trout and two populations of siscowet lake trout
from Lake Superior using heterologous primer pairs developed for brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis) and Atlantic
salmon (Salmo safari. The number of alleles varied from 4 to 21 at different loci. Mendelian inhentance was
confirmed for all loci. Significant differences in allele frequencies were found for leari populabons from
qeoqraphically distant regions and for leans and siscowets from the same regions. Genetic differences betoeen
southern and northern populations which were found in a previous study using allozyme loa were confirrned with the
miorosatellite loci. Comparison of our results with previous allozyme surveys and a recent study of microsatellite
frequencies in lake trout hatchery stocks and populations from inland Cariadian lakes suggests that there is more
within lake variation in large lakes compared to small lakes and wild populations compared to hatchery stocks.




   137                         16:00 Saturday                         .      P2
Stock Identification of dolphin, Coryphaena hippurus, in the western raritral Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico and
eastern Caribbean using molecular genetic techniques. R.S. Wingrovg, University of Charleston, Grice Manne
Lab, 205 R. Johnson Rd... Charleston, SC 29412.
The dolphin, Coryphaena hippurus, is a fast swimming, migratory, pelagic fish that supports irnportantcomrnercial
and recreational fisheries throughout the tropical and subtropical waters of the world. Oxenford and Hunte (1986)
suggested two distinct stocks exist in tee western central Atlantic. The southern stock migrages from Greriada
northwards to tee Virgin Islands and then returns souteeastwards in the Atlantic. The northern stock migrates frorn
Puerto Rico northwards to North Carolina and returns via Bermuda. The purpose of my study is to test Oxenford and
Hunte's (1986) two stock hypothesis and investigate the possible presence of additional stocks using rnitochondnal
DNA analysis. Dolphin samples were obtained throughout their range in the western central Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico,
and Caribbean by port sampling and attending offshore fishing tournaments. Preliminary results from restnction
fragment length polymorphisms of the ND-1 region of tee mitochondrial genome will be reviewed. Significant genetic
differences between geographic localities provides strong evidence of demographic isolation arid indicates tee need
for independent management of individual stocks (Dixon 1992, Moritz 1994). In August 1997, tee Soute Wlanbc
Rshery Management council proposed management options for tee highly migratory dolphin fishery. Date provided
by this study on the stock identification of the dolphin should be beneficial to the management of this fishery
throughout the western Atlantic. Gulf of Mexico, and Caribbean.




    138          __________ 16:00 Saturday                            .       P2
The structure of basking shark Cetorhinus maximus populations in the North-East Atlairtte- development of
genetic markers. T.J. Thom. A.R. Hoelzel, MJ. O'Connell and M.C. Lucas, Department of Biological Sciences,
 University of Durham, DH1 3LE, England, UK.
 Basking shark populations have been subject to exploitation for many years and are currently con^dered Jo be
 endangered in European waters. However, little is known of their population structure. In the recent past, population
 structure assessments have been made on tee basis of oapfure-mark-recapture studies or differentiation of menstio
 and morphological characteristics of different stocks. However, for a species such as the basking shark, which are
 not easy to tag in large numbers, and which little is known about their ecology, a new approach is required.
 Molecular genetic methods are increasingly being used with success in determining tee stock structure of
 commercially important fish species in bote marine and freshwater environments. In particular, the use ot
 microsatellite DNA sequences is finding increasing use in fisheries stock assessment. This poster presente reports
 on work to develop miorosatellite DNA markers for use in assessing the population structure and migratory behaviour
 of basking sharks in the north-east Atlantic.Ad^ve distenci           Srf dJaStortiSS paTSr^ronyliFalysis of the same data yield even less resolution
Thus reaardless of one's preference regarding analytical approaches, the data in que^on are highly ambrauous
c^cernTnffier “evePfna^e ph^ogeny.® The liighly msolve?tree presented in the published ^dy is an
artfaTthaf was obtained only^ b^use the analysis failed to consider equivalent trees resulting from ties in the
distance matrix.




Funduhja tUtiphamia la tho maternal parent of the clonal hybrid minnow FunOulua haltfocitus x Fimdutua
diaphanua. B.M. Nath. R.O. Hopkins, K.A. Goddard and R.M. Dawley, Department of Biology, Ursinus College,
Collegeville, PA. USA, 19426.
Fundulus hetemcIHus is an abundant estuarine fish found along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts of the United States.
This species has been the subject of numerous investigations of its own biology and has been used as a fool to
study zenobiotio metabolism, development, and ecology. Hybrids between Fundulus heteroclitus and F. diaphanus
from Nova Scotia reproduce clonally, and thus all individuals are genetically identical. Heterozygosity al
codominantly expressed enzyme loci is detectable for ell enzymes for which the parental species differ, with the
exception of isocitrate dehydrogenase for which the F, diaphanus is not expressed. We have amplified the
c^ochrome b gene from the mitochondrial genome and cut it with restriction enzymes for which the two parental
species have distinct restriction patterns to determine if the lack of expression of the F. diaphanus IDH allele is due
to Inactivation of a paternal allele, a phenomenon occasionally observed in hybrids. The hybrids share the
restriction patterns of F. diaphanus, indicating that F. diaphanus is the rnatemal parent of the hybrid lineage. Lack of
expression of the F. diaphanus allele must therefore be due to a mutation that inactivated this allele or another rare
event.




   140                         16:00 Saturday      ....          ...          P2                                PCH ..
Assessment of randomly amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) for use as genetic markers in studies of the
sailfin molly (PoeclUa latipinna). A.T. Quinones. K. Nakamura and J.C. Trexler, Department of Biological Science,
Rorida International University, Miami, FL 33199, USA.
RAPD markers are powerful tools in the analysis of genetic relationships and genetic diversity. Recently, however,
questions have risen concerning the inheritance patterns and the reproducibility of the RAPD markers. In this study,
fragments generated by RAPD primers were tested for Mendelian inheritance in sailfin mollies. Mollies were
collected from three locations in Rorida, and over 25 single-pair matings of parents with known RAPD genotypes
were made. Progeny from each mating were used to test patterns of inheritance. Of the sixty RAPD primers
initially screened, 18 amplified polymorphic bands and two showed no variation. Repeatable, identical bands were
amplified from both fin clips and muscle samples providing a mechanism for non-destructive genotyping of laboratory
fish. Frequencies of alleles in natural populations were determined to measure the degree of population stnicture.




   141                         '16:00 Saturday                                P2                                PCH
Evolution of germ-cell determining genes in amphibians. M.E. White and B.l. Crother. Department of Biology,
Southeastern Louisiana University, Hammond, LA 70402; A.D. Johnson, Rorida State University, Dept, of Biology,
Tallahassee, FL 32306.
Amphibians have been widely used as model systems for studying the early embryonic development of vertebrates.
Although much of the early development of all amphibians is very similar, frogs and salamanders differ strikingly in
the way they determine the germ cell lineage (the cells that will form eggs and sperm). The pattern observed in frogs
is quite different than the one seen in other vertebrates; the salamander mechanism is apparently much more similar
to that of birds and mammals. Although the pattern of germ cell formation has been elucidated in a wide variety of
species, little is known about the genes governing this process. Because most major embryological events are
controlled by genes that have been highly conserved evolutionarily, it is logical to conclude that genes involved in
germ cell determination will also be similar in a wide variety of species. Three genes- daz, oct-3/4 and vasa- have
been shown to be critical for germ cell determination in mammals. We have used phylogenetic methods to analyze
the homologous genes from frogs and salamanders to investigate whether the evolution of germ cell specific genes
reflects the mode of germ cell determination (salamanders being more similar to mammals) or the phylogenetic
relationships of the organisms (salamanders and frogs being more closely related). Our preliminary results suggest
that germ cell determining genes from two different salamanders are more closely related to the mammalian
homologues than to anuran ones, supporting the idea that the evolution of the genes tracks the mode of cell
determination rather than the anlm^ phylogeny.

“a«^^iN?.sequencesTsfin^^                                                               This poster presents reports
on work to develop microsatellite DNA markers for use in assessing the population structure and migratory behaviour
of basking sharks in the north-east Atlantic.




Genetic relationsbipe among disjunct populations of Waccamaw kiMIflah,               C.R. Young. Department of
Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA; J.M. Quattro, Department
of BiSogical Sciences, Marine Science Program, Baruch Institute, and School of the Environment, University of
South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA; J.M. Grady, Department of Biology, University of New
Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA; F.C. Rohde, North Carolina Division of Marine Rsheries, 127 Cardinal Drive
Extension, Wilmington, North Carolina 28405, USA.

Tho Waccamaw killifish (Fundulus waccamensis), a derivative of F. diaphanus, was originally thought to be endemic
to Lake Waccamaw and tributaries. Recently, however, samples thought to be F. waccamensis have been collected
in Lake Phelps. These samples differ morphologically from those found in Lake Waccamaw implying that they are
not the product of an accidental introduction of F. waccamensis into Lake Phelps. The large geographical distance
between Phelps and Waccamaw and the absence of F. waccamensis in intervening bay lakes, suggests that these
populations might be remnants of a once widespread species, or, alternatively, might have arisen independently from
F. diaphanus. Vie investigate these hypotheses using phylogenetic analyses of mtDNA control region sequences
sampled from F. waccamensis (Lakes Phelps and Waccamaw) and F. diaphanus.




   143                         16:00 Saturday                               'P2 .                             PCH
Fine-scale genetic population structure in wood frogs (Rana sylvatica). R.A. Newman and T. Squire, University
of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND USA.
The prairie pothole region of North Dakota contains numerous wetlands of varying habitat quality. As part of a study
of the consequences of environmental heterogeneity for population dynamics and life history evolution, we have
attempted to determine the spatial scale of gene flow using microsatellites, a highly polyrnorphic class of molecular
markers. We also plan to compare genetic population structure of wood frogs in the prairie pothole region with a
more ‘typical’ woodland population that breeds in wetlands around Lake Itasca, Minnesota. In addition to
documenting patterns of genetic differentiation in relation to spatial separation and habitat variation, we ultimately
hope to demonstrate the general utility of this information in studies of metapopulation dynamics and adaptive
evolution on a heterogenous landscape.




   144                         16:00 Saturday                                P2                               PCH
Genetic variation in the least brook lamprey, Lampetra aepyptera. M.M. While and S.M. Reilly, Department of
Biological Sciences, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701, USA.
Lampetra aepyptera is a widespread species of non-parasitic lamprey found throughout the eastern United States.
Previous studies have shown that certain populations of this lamprey exhibit heterochrony, by acheiving sexual
maturity without completing metamorphosis. A preliminary survey of allozyme variation was performed to evaluate
the extent of genetic differentiation among populations exhibiting either normal metamorphosis or tmncated head
development. The products of 22 loci were surveyed. Highly significant differentiation was observed among
populations. A population from western Kentucky (Terrapin Creek) was highly differentiated from eastern Kentucky
and Ohio populations, included several fixed allele differences. Because no metamorphosed adults have ever been
collected from Terrapin Creek, if appears to be a new paedomorphic species. Furthermore, allele frequencies
among the Terrapin Creek size classes were not different, suggesting variable time to reproduction in this
population. The eastern Kentucky population (Big Sinking Creek) exhibits some evidence of incomplete
metamorphosis. The presently recognized least brook lamprey appears to contain multiple species with a complex
paffem of intra- and interspecific heterochrony. Additional allozyme and morphological studies are underway.   145                        '16:00 Saturday       .    .   .                P2                             PCH
Assessment of fish community structure tn s.e. Brazilian rocky reefs and visuat census methods. C. Buitron.
Universidade Federal da Paraiba, CCEN - Departamento de Sistematica e Ecologia , 58059-900 Joao Pessoa, PB -
BRAZIL; L. Buitron, Socledade de Defesa do Litoral Brasileiro, Rua Cipriano Tavares, 55, 06010-100 Osasco, SP -
BRAZIL.
Reef fish assemblages are strongly Influenced by reef structure. In areas where visibility is poor, specific visual
census methods are necessary to determine the fish community structure. This work, part of a broader study of
Brazilian reef fishes community structure, aimed to establish specific visual census methods to detemmne ths fish
community stnjcture in rocky reefs, areas characterized by high turbidity, strong currents and irregular substrate.
Ave strip-transect protocols (5m depth dives) were made; 5 x 2m/intensive search without defined time, 10 x
2m/5min, 20 x 4rn/5min, 40 x 4m/10min and 50 x 4m/10min. An inventory of the fishes and a comparative study of
the community structure was made at Marine State Parks Laje de Santos (24° 19' S and 46° 11' W) and at
Alcatrazes Archipelago (24° 06' S and 45° 42' W), off Sao Paulo State. Diversity index indicated fliat the transect 50
X 4m/1 Omin is the most adequate for the studied areas, and that species number nearly stabilized at 40 x 4m/1 Omin.
28 species were censused and protocols were produced for each one. Laje de Santos showed 19 species and
Alcatrazes 21 species. Twelve censused species occurred in both areas.




   146                        16:00 Saturday                                  P2                              PCH
The influence of limiting resources on growth and survival of stream-dwelling cutthroat trout. S.M. Boss and
J.S. Richardson, Centre Tor Applied Conservation Biology, Dept, of Forest Sciences, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, V6T1Z4.
Two key resources are generally thought to limit salmonid populations in streams: the supply of food and the amount
of suitable space within the channel. However, the relative Influence of these limiting factors can change
seasonally. Both food and habitat availability can affect individual fitness, but to what extent does each factor
influence salmonid growth and sun/lval on a seasonal basis? I performed a summer field experiment to directly test
the effect of food and cover on growth and survival of stream-dwelling coastal cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki
clarM). Using a 2x2 factorial design, I manipulated food and cover in stream enclosures containing individually
marked trout. Fish receiving food addition experienced growth rates more than 25 times higher than those of unfed
fish. There was no effect of cover on either growth or survival. These results indicate that trout were severely food­
limited during summer. During winter. I combined a mark-recapture study of fish with stream habitat sunreys to
determine the extent to which habitat complexify limits growth and survival. Anally, to address how summer growth
affects over-winter survival, I monitored fish released back into the stream from the summer experiment throughout
winter.




   147                         16:00 Saturday                             .   P2                              PCH
The home range of a hognose snake (Heterodon platirhinos}. K.C. Hunsinger. The University at Albany, Albany,
New York.
Hognose snakes were studied in the Albany Pine Bush, a unique pine barrens community in Albany County, New
York. During June of 1997, a large female was captured and received a radio tag implant. For the remainder of the
season, this animal s movements were followed. This female moved around in a 64 square acre area and was
observed using small mammal burrows, making its own burrows, and mating. The longest distance between two
points of observation was 880 meters.




Impacts of Bufo bareaa and Rana futa/vanCrto tadpoles on algae and snaHs In ponds of Yeflowstons Naihmal
Park. W.E. Roberts. Mountain Research Center, P.O. Box 173490, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717.

  Decline in frog and tadpole populations may alter trophic structures and ecosystems. During summer 1997 I
investigated impacts of tadpole populations on food webs in ponds of Yellowstone National Park. The field

   148                        . 16:00. Saturday                                 P2                                PCH
Reef fish recruitment patterns off southeast Florida. D.S. Gilliam. R.L. Sherman, L.K.B. Jordan and R.E. Spieler,
Nova Southeastern University, Oceanographic Center, 8000 N. Ocean Dr., Dania, FL 33004 USA
Reef fish recruitment processes were examined using small model patch reefs (approximately Im’) off the southeast
coast of Florida. Three years of monthly visual census data was collected from three model reef designs and
analyzed for temporal patterns in recnjitment. Peak recruitment for most fishes occurred during the summer months
(June - September) although several abundant species (e.g. bluehead wrasse, TTialassoma bifasdatum) recruit in
^e winter. This type of information on the recruitment patterns of reef fishes aids in the understanding of processes
that structure reef fish assemblages.




   149                          16:00 Saturday                                 P2                                PCH
Trophic structure of the fish assemblages of the Agua Nancl creek, upper Parang river basin. S.S. Abes.
Programs de Pos-GraduagSo em Ecologia de Ambientes Aquaticos Continentals, Nupdiia - Nucleo de Pesquisas em
Limnologia Ictiologia e Aquicultura, UEM - Universidade Estadual de Maringa; A.A. Agostinho, Nupdiia - Nucleo de
Pesquisas em Limnologia Ictiologia e Aquicultura, UEM - Universidade Estadual de Maringd.
Spatial and temporal patterns in trophic stnjcture of fishes from Agua Nanci creek, upper Parana river basin (Brazil)
were assessed. Three monthly samples were taken from May 1996 to January 1997 using electrofishing, in three
segments of the creek (near the spring, middle of its extension, and near the mouth). Food spectrum was obtained
by analyzing gastric contents, with occurrence and volumetric methods, using the alimentary index. Trophic
categories were established based on: the main food item, the interpretafion of the Detrended Correspondence
Analysis - DCA, and Average-linkage clustering (Euclidean Distance-UPGMA). The relative abundance of the food
resources was estimated based on stomach content analysis. Diversity and food resources increased towards the
mouth and were related to the conservation of riparian vegetation and to longitudinal hydro-morphological gradients
of ths creek. Temporal variations in food resources were associated with seasonal prey and hydrological cycles,
thereby influencing the proportions of dominant trophic categories. Omnivores predominated in the upper part and
benthivores near the mouth. Piscivores and detritiypres presented low biomass. Longitudinal distribution of ths
trophic categories did not follow the river continuum concept, but was more related to food resources, habitat
heterogeneity and the conservation conditions in each segment of the creek.




   150                          16:00 Saturday                                 P2                                PCH
Preliminary observations on radiated tortoises (Geochelone radlata) in south western Madagascar. T.E.J.
Leuteritz. Department of Biology, George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia, 22030, USA.
Radiated tortoises are found within a limited range of spiny forest habitat in South Vifestem Madagascar. Specific
observations on the tortoises were made from November 23, 1997 to December 4, 1997. The majority of observed
tortoises were found along a 75-km stretch of road between Route 10 near Betioky, and the fishing village of
Beheloka. A total of 32 live tortoises, ranging in age from a juvenile that was a few years old (CL=12 cm) to a large
adult mala (CL=37.5 cm), were recorded. The mean carapace length was 25.5 cm. Tortoise weights ranged from
0.59 to 10 kg (mean=4.5 kg). The tortoises appeared healthy with no visible deformities or ecto-parasites. Some of
the data collected include temperature, size, gular scute length, and anal scute length. The latter two were collected
in order to examine sexual dimorphism. The author spent most of November 1997 in Madagascar as part of a
preliminary fact-finding trip sponsored by Conservation International (Washington, D.C.).




Structure and altitudinal pattern of fish communities and their regulation by biolic and abiotic factors tn two
streams In the Atlantic rainforest. C.P.D SHva. INPAAJNICAMP; M. Petrere Jr., UNESP.

We assessed how biotic and abiotic factors influence the local diversity (alpha diversity) of fish communities in two
rainforest streams (Itingugu e Tetequera) in the southeastern Brazil., These two streams rise in Itatins mountain,
------------ ' - I- - *4 «U.» *1414. __ _ __ _4I_______ I—!__ °______________                         •  ............ . ’ . TS1                        -16 00 Saturday            .    ..              P2                               PCH
Impacts of Bufo boreas anti Bana lutalventrla tadpoles on algae and snails In ponds of Yellowstone National
Park. W.E. Roberts. Mountain Research Center. P.O. Box 173490, Montana State University. Bozeman, MT 59717.

  Decline in frog and tadpole populations may alter trophic structures and ecosystems. During summer 1997 I
investigated impacts of tadpole populations on food webs in ponds of Yellowstone National Park. The field
component of this project involved two phases - experimental manipulations in enclosures and landscape-level
comparison of unmanipulated ponds with and without tadpoles. In separate experiments, I stocked three blocks of
enclosures with or without tadpoles of Rana luteiventris and Bufo boreas. In the experiment with Bufo boreas
tadpoles, I compared their impacts with those of freshwater snails. Every two weeks until tadpole metamorphosis I
measured tadpole and snail length, and collected samples of algal biomass. Results showed the Rana luteiventris
tadpoles depressed algal biomass after two weeks of growth, but not after four weeks. Bufo boreas tadpoles did not
depress algal biomass, but snails did. In the landscape-level project I compared eleven unmanipulated ponds, five
with tadpoles and six without. This comparison did not show a statistically significant impact of tadpoles on algal
biomass. Results of the two phases of this projed suggest that enclosures accurately mimicked conditions in whole
ponds, and that tadpole grazing had a complex influence on algal biomass, rather than a direct negative impact.




   152                         16:00 Saturday                                 P2                               PCH
Low-head dams impede upstream movements of fishes. D.L.G. Noakes and R.L. McLaughlin, Department of
Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada NIG 2W1.
Low-head dams are a possible means to control spawning migration of parasitic sea lamprey,Pefromyzon marinus,
in tributary streams of the Laurentian Great lakes. This would reduce the need for chemical control. We studied the
effects of low-head dams on stream fish communities by comparing streams with dams to paired reference streams
without dams. We used electrolishing to sample streams above and below dams, and corresponding sections of
barrier streams at three different seasons during ths year. Fish were marked according to the location offirst capture.
The dams appear to block upstream movements of sea lamprey. Movements of fish above and below the locations
of dams, or corresponding sites on reference streams, did not differ among streams. Upstream movements of fish
over dams was reduced, compared to reference streams. The longitudinal decrease In fish species diversity from
downstream to upstream sections Is greater for streams with dams than for matched reference streams. Our study
identified fish species most vulnerable to the effects of low-head dams and suggested likely mechanisms for this
impact.




   153                        16:00 Saturday                                 P2    ..                         PCH
Microhabitat selection and social organization of overwintering juvenile coho salmon {Onoorhynchus
klsutch) in a lake superior tributary. D.G. Lonzarich and D.B Healy. University of Wisconsin, Eau Claire,
Department of Biology, Eau Claire, Wl 54702.
Little is known about the ecology of stream-dwelling coho salmon {Oncortiynchus kisutch) in the Lake Superior
drainage. Unlike in their native range of the Padfic Northwest, Lake Superior coho salmon inhabit streams
charaderized by low winter flows and highly variable summer flows. Because high stream flows can profoundly
Influence fish behavior and distribution, we hypothesized In this study that the winter ecology of coho in Lake
Superior streams would differ from patterns described for pacific populations. In snorkeling surveys completed in
winter 1998, we examined the distribution and social organization of over-wintering coho in simple (no cover) and
complex pools of a Lake Superior tributary In Wisconsin. In all habitats, coho occupied focal positions In the main
channel; however, fish were more tightly distributed and closer to the streambanks In simple pools. Aggressive
Interactions also were more common in simple pools although dominance hierarchies were observed in the majority
of all pools. These results are in sharp contrast with research findings from pacific streams, which generally show
coho moving to protected habitats and becoming less aggressive with the onset of high flows in winter. This study
provides new insights into the behavioral plasticity of coho salmon and should aid In efforts to manage Great Lake
populations.

   154..                       16:00 Saturday                                  P2                            ..       PCH
Structure and altitudinal pattern of fish communities and their regulation by biotic and abiotic factors In two
streams In the Atlantic rainforest. C.P.D Silva. INPA/UNICAMP; M. Petrere Jr., UNESP.

We assessed how biotic and abiotic factors influence the local diversity (alpha diversity) of fish communities In two
rainforest streams (Itingugu e Tetequera) in the southeastern Brazil. These two streams rise in Itatins mountain,
approximately at the altitude of 800 m and run into other plain rivers near the ocean. Tide influences is noticed at the
lower stretches in both streams. Four sampling sites were chosen in each stream based on local physiographic
features along the overall length. Ashes were collected by fykenets, dipnets, sieves and glllnets. Physico-chemical
parameters (pH, temperature, conductivity, water current velocity, dissolved oxygen) and altitude were measured
using portable equipment. The total of 40 species were obtained. Twenty-nine are typical of freshwater whereas 11
are considered marine species. We collected 33 species in Itingugu stream, being 22 restrict to that area. In
Tetequera 18 species were captured but only 7 were of local occurrence. The Ichthyofauna of both communities
showed altitudinal gradient ano were formed through the processes of species addition and substitution. Species
addition is more evident In the upper and medium stretches of ths streams and Is influence by biotic factors (vacant
niche occupation and resources partitioning) and abiotic factors (physico-chemical parameters variations). On the
other hand, ths substitution process was more evident in the streams lower stretches as a consequence of
ecological equivalence. Therefore, in these patches, abiotic factors are the main agent influendng the structure of
^ese communities. The species diversity of each community was analyzed based on the relation between species
abundance and number. The Whittaker Plot analysis of both communities suggest that they follow log series and log
normal distribution.



  .155                          16:00 Saturday                                  P2                                    PCH..
Organisation of the forest snake assemblage of the Manaus region. Central Amazon, Brazil.                     M. Martins.
Departamento de Ecologla Geral, C. P. 11481, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 05422-970, Sao Paulo SP, Brazil; M.E.
Oliveira, Departamento de Zoologia - ICB, Universidade Estadual Paulista - C.P. 199, 13506-900 Rio Claro SP,
Brazil.
The assemblage of rainforest snakes of the Manaus region. Central Amazon, was studied from 1991 to 1995.
Fieldwork resulted in nearly 800 snakes of 66 forest species. Snake activity was markedly lower during the dry
season. Of the 61 species for which Information is available, 43% were primarily terrestrial, 31% fossorial and/or
cryptozolc, 20% arboreal, and 6% aquatic. Nearly all inactive snakes were found on the vegetation. In relation to time
of activity, 41% of 62 species seem to be strictly diurnal, 21% strictly nocturnal, and 38% both diurnal and nocturnal.
The commonest prey were lizards (consumed by 58% of the species), frogs (39%), mammals (23%), birds (18%),
and snakes (16%). A cluster analysis combining data on microhabitat use, diel activity and diet resulted in 'guilds"
encompassing mostly closely related species, but also distantly related ones that converge in habits. These patterns
dearly reflect the relative contribution of colubrid lineages in the assemblage. Indicating that historical factors
(phylogeny and biogeography) may have played and Important role In determining the current organisation of this
forest snake assemblage. However, current predation pressure and differential prey availability in the forest
tridimensional space seem to be important in determining current patterns of microhabitat use.




   156                          16:00 Saturday                            . . .PZ .     , . .                     .   PCH
Feeding habits of neotropical pitvipers, Bothrops spp.: a comparative study. M. Martins. Departamento de
Ecologla Geral, C. P. 11461, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 05422-970, Sao Paulo SP, Brazil; I. Sazima,
Departamento de Zoologia, C. P. 6109, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, 13083-970 Campinas SP, Brazil;
O.A.V. Marques, Laboratorio de Herpetologia, Institute Butantan, 05535-900 Sao Paulo SP, Brazil.
The genus Bothrops is composed by at least five monophyletic clades. We present original data on the feeding
habits of 12 species, encompassing all five clades. All species In the altematus group seem to be mammal
specialists, whose juveniles are relatively large and stout and lack pale tall tips (used to lure ectothermic prey In
other species). All species of the four remaining groups are euryphagic and ontogenetic shift in prey types seems to
occur in all: juveniles feed mostly on frogs and lizards, adults mainly on mammals (except for the isolated B.
Insularis, whose adults feed mostly on birds). Juveniles of these euryphagic species are relatively small and thin, and
their tall tips are distinctly coloured (retained in adults of B. bilineatus and B. insularis}. The sit-and-wa'rt foraging
tactic is the most commonly used by Bothrops, although all species may occasionally forage actively. Our results
indicate that euryphagy, sif-and-wait foraging, ontogenetic shift in prey type and distinctly coloured tail tips
associated with caudal luring are all pleslomorphic characters In the genus Bothrops. Mammal specialisation and the
absence of distinctly coloured tall tips associated with caudal luring In juveniles may be autapomoqihles of the
altematus group. (Supported by the FAPESP.)   157                          16:00 Saturday                                  P2                                PCH
Does the salt marsh snake (Nerodia clarkii} really utilize fiddler crab burrows?               And how much?         W.B.
Blihovde. University of Central Rorida, Biology Department, Orlando, H 32816 USA.
The Nerodia c/arfdf complex is one that ranges from Eastern Texas, along the Gulf Coast to Volusia County, Rorida.
Although the evolution and taxonomy of salt marsh snakes has received a great deal of attention, little is known
about ffie general ecological relationships. The endangered subspecies, Nerodia clarkii taeniata, and the mangrove
salt marsh snake, Nerodia clarldi coropressicauda, were studied to determine the percentage of snakes that were
injured by the Rddler Crab (Uca pugilatof), apparently from entering the burrows. Results showed a low percentage
of Nerodia that had tail injuries attributable to the fiddler crab, but support observations of snakes retreating into the
crab burrows (Carr and Goins 1942, Koohman 1992, and Meier's 1993). The data also suggest that due to the
behavior and frequency of injuries, Nerodia clarkii may depend on Uca pugiilator as a burrow associate, for shelter
during extended periods of harsh weather. I propose that more of the behavioral ecology of Nerodia clarkii needs to
be examined to understand the association of these two species.




   158.    .                    16:00 Saturday                                 P2                                 PCH
Seasonal variation in hatchling sex ratios of Chrysemys picta from eggs incubated near a pivotal
temperature. R.M. Bowden. M.A. Ewerf and C.E. Nelson, Dept of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN
47405 USA.
Seasonal variation in sex ratio is well documented for many species of turtles, and is largely attributable to a
seasonal increase in temperature. In contrast, we found a seasonal decrease in the proportion of males for
Chrysemys picta even though all of the eggs were incubated at or near the pivotal temperature. This trend occured in
each of the four years examined and at each of up to three sites per year. Although this trend was not always
significant for the individual samples, it was significant (p = 0.005) when the years and sites were combined. If this
trend were due to a minor systematic shift in incubator temperature, the lower proportions of males should have been
associated with a decrease in incubation time (laying to hatching) as both incubation time and proportion of males
decrease with increasing temperature. However, the sex ratio of the individual clutches was not significantly
associated with incubation time in either the site or individual year samples, nor in the samples combined (p = 0.84).
The slight trend for all samples combined was toward more (not fewer) males with no change in incubation times (p =
0.83). The seasonal shift in sex ratio here thus appears to be independent of temperature.




   159                          16:00 Saturday                          P2                          PCH
Latitudinal trends in wood frogs: size and age.     R. LeClair and M.H. Caetano, Departamento de Zoologia e
Antropologia, Faculdade de CiSncias de Lisboa, C2 Campo Grande, 1700 Lisboa, Portugal.
Length and age of 53 wood frogs, Rana sylvatica, from Kuujjuarapik in northern Quebec (55-17' N) was compared
with similar data from populations of other southern latitudes. Age was estimated by skeletochronology. Mean body
size and age were 47.1 mm and 6.1 yr in adult males (n = 41) and 50.9 mm and 7.7 yr in adult females (n = 8).
These data compared with those of Berven (1982) and Bastien and Leclair (1992) from Maryland and Trois-Rivieres
respectively, contradict the Martof and Humphries (1959) trend of a reduced size of wood frogs at northern latitudes.
Mean physiological longevity of adult male wood frogs from Kuujuarapik was 397 days (mean age in yr multiplied by
annual number of days without freezing temperature). This value compared to those of other populations does not
support the theoritical relationships between age at maturity and potential lifespan.




BtemaM «*. abuttdanee measures erf varfatfon ki stream fteh commtirrfty structure. KA. Chandler, D.M.
McElroy and R.D. Hoyt, Department of Biology, Western Kentucky Universky, Bowling Green , Kentucky 42101
USA; D. Stiles, Department of Agriculture, Western Kentucky University, Bowling Green, Kentucky 42101 USA.
Both biomass and abundance data are commonly utilized in characterization of ecological system dynamics;
however, questions exist as to which approach is best-suited for long-term studies. While potentially providing more
information than abundance data, biomass sampling may be more detrimental to ecosystem stability. We examined
thie             AAmrtariivi rAoailte doriimfl  akim/jaMA         kiAmaee                         mnl           Lvum

    160                         16:00 Saturday                               . P2                                 PCH
Correlates between dorsal color pattern and anti-predator behavior in snakes. R.J.F. Kink. Dept, of Zoology,
1735 Neil Ave., The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210 USA.
Dorsal color pattern in snakes is remarkably variable within and between species, providing a good opportunity to
study the adaptive significance of coloration. Pattern may function in a variety of anti-predator strategies, from
crypsis to aposematecism to optical illusionary effects, and it seems likely that different types of dorsal color patterns
would be correlated with different predator-avoidance behaviors. To investigate this hypothesis, wild-caught
colubrids of all available species were tested shortly after capture in a 1.2 x 1.2 m arena. Each was allowed to
acclimate in a hide-box in the center of the arena, and was then uncovered, whereupon the behavior in response to a
simulated predator was recorded. Where possible, data were also taken on the animals' behavior during the initial
capture. Four pattern types were studied: blotched, banded, striped, and unicolored. Preliminary results indicate
clear differences in escape and/or defensive behavior. All animals were released again after testing.




   161                          16:00 Saturday                                  P2                                PCH
The evolution of herbivory in modern fishes. R. Winterbottom. Department of Zoology, University of Toronto &,
CBCB, Royal Ontario Museum, 100 Queens Park, Toronto, Ontario; F. Santini, Department of Zoology, University of
Toronto &, CBCB, Royal Ontario Museum, 100 Queens Park, Toronto, Ontario.
Herbivory is a derived feeding characteristic that has evolved independently several times in all the major phyla and
classes of metazoans. Bony fishes are no exceptions to this. In fact herbivory might have evolved up to 7 times
independently in the percomorph fishes in a very short span of time at the beginning of the Cenozoic era and another
time in the Ostariophysans. Given the fact that herbivory has evolved in lineages that used to have different trophic
habits, and that it is performed in different ways, it is hypothesized that there has been a physiological preadaptation
that has allowed the evolution of this new feeding strategy. The available data are presented and discussed. In
additions, the evolution of herbivory is strongly connected to the evolution of modem coral reefs. The implications of
tttis association are also discussed.




   162                          16:00 Saturday                                  P2                                PCH
Spatial and temporal patterns in the distribution, composition and fish assemblages structure in the Agua
Nanci creek, upper Parana river basin. S.S. Abes. Programs de Pos-Gradua^ao em Ecologia de Ambientes
Aquaticos Continentais, Nupelia - Nucleo de Pesquisa em Limnologia, Ictiologia e Aquicultura, UEM - Universidade
Estadual de Maringd; A.A. Agostinho, Nupelia - Nucleo de Pesquisas em Limnologia, Ictiologia e Aquicultura, UEM -
Universidade Estadual de Maringa.
Spatial and temporal patterns in the distribution, composition and fish assemblage structure and their relation to
physical gradients were assessed. Samples were collected quarterly in three segments of the creek: near the spring,
midway along its extension, and near the mouth. Comparisons among creeks of the upper Parana river basin show
high heterogeneity in the ichthyofauna composition, attributed mainly to differences in creek morphology. This fact is
highly relevant to the determination of the regional biodiversity. Rsh density and biomass in the extension of the
creek were affected by seasonal factors, especially the rain regime. The upper part (spring) was more affected by
increment in discharge. Species richness, diversity, and evenness increased from spring to mouth, showing
correlation with creek width, pH increase, and the presence of riparian vegetation. These stnicture indicators also
were influenced by events related to the flood regime of the Parana river. Abundant species showed correlation with
some environmental factors, showing a certain degree of segregation among them, in relation to preference and use
of habitats. The faunal heterogeneity in the creeks combined with the high number of similar habitats and their
fragility to increasing degradation justify investigation of their structure and functioning, the understanding of which
improve management actions.




Sexual dimorphism in P^i^gtKtolheo sirtta (Pisces, Perciformse, NotothsnMae). A.E. Gosztonvi. Centro
Nadonal Pat^<o>nico, Boulevard Brown s/n, (9120) Puerto Madryn, Chubut, Argentina; A. Lopez Arbarello, Dep.
Ciencias Marinas, Fac. Cs. Naturales, (7600) Mar del Plata, Argentina.
A marked sexual dimorphism was obsenred in the height of the second dorsal fin in the Patagonian shore fish
Patagonotothen sima . In order to explore whether other morphometric features would also contribute to sexual
dimorphism in the species, a non-parametrio multivariate analysis (Rsher's Linear Discriminant Function) waswith similar data from populations of other southern latitudes. Age was estimated by skeletochronology. Mean body
size and age were 47.1 mm and 6.1 yr in adult males (n = 41) and 50.9 mm and 7.7 yr in adult females (n = 8).
These data compared with those of Berven (1982) and Bastien and Leclair (1992) from Maryland and Trois-Rivieres
respectively, contradict the Martof and Humphries' (1959) trend of a reduced size of wood frogs at northern latitudes.
Mean physiological longevity of adult male wood frogs from Kuujuarapik was 397 days (mean age in yr multiplied by
annual number of days without freezing temperature). This value compared to those of other populations does not
support the theoritical relationships between age at maturity and potential lifespan.




Biomass vs. abundance measures of variation In stream fish community structure. KA. Chandler, D.M.
McElroy and R.D. Hoyt, Department of Biology. Western Kentucky University, Bowling Green , Kentucky 42101
USA; D. Stites, Department of Agriculture, Western Kentucky University, Bowling Green, Kentucky 42101 USA.

Both biomass and abundance data are commonly utilized in characterization of ecological system dynamics:
however, questions exist as to which approach is best-suited for long-tenn studies. While potentially providing more
information than abundance data, biomass sampling may be irxrre detrimental to ecosystem stability. We examined
this trade-off by comparing results derived from abundance and biomass indicators in ichthyofaunal samples from
Buck Creek, an Order III tributary of Drakes Creek in southcentral Kentucky, collected twice yearly from Fall 1992 to
Spring 1996. Principal components analysis was used to summarize patterns of spatial and temporal variation
among samples for both biomass and abundance data. Correlations in patterns of loadings on corresponding PC
axes were used to compare the two approaches. PCI-Ill from the biomass data accounted for 59.1 % of the total
variation; eigenvalues for each axis were comparable to those obtained from abundance data. Both biomass and
abundance measures suggested season, station and year effects on community structure; however, taxa driving
seasonal differences in biomass were responsible for station differences in abundance, and vice-versa. These
contrasting patterns suggest a potentially complex life history patterns in species within this community. Mors
importantly, our results indicate that different sampling strategies may lead to qualitatively distinct impressions of
community dynamics.




   164 ....                     16:00 Saturday       ...   ••                 P2                                PCH
Hierarchical factors structuring fish communitfes in floodplain systems (Upper Parang River, Brazil). E.E.
Maroues*’'*. "Unitins - Universidade do Tocantins; C.V. Minte-Vera and A.A. Agostinho, Nupelia - Nuoleo de
Pesquisas em LImnologia, Ictiologla a Aquiculture, UEM - Universidade Estadual de Maringd; A.E.A.M. Vazzoler,
CNPq - Conselho Nadonal de Desenvolvimento Cienfifioo e Tecnologico, Senior Researcher; “’Programa de P6s-
Graduapao em Ecologia' de Ambientes Aquaticos Continentals, Nupelia - Nijcleo de Pesquisas em LImnologia
Ictiologla e Aquiculture.
Central to the hierarchical theory is the concept that organisation results from differences in process rates. The
structure imposed by differences in rates its sufficient to decompose a complex system into organizational levels and
into discrete components within each level. Floodplain ecosystems are complex systems which main force function is
flood regime. The structure of fish communities is said to depend on abiotic factors and biotic relations among
species.The importance of those factors depends on the scale of observation. Thus, for the Upper Parand fish
communities we determined the factors responsible for its structure using the hierarchical concept or ecosystem. On
the regional level the main structuring factor is the dynamic of Hood and drought, the scale of that process is a year.
On the local level, some abiotic factors and the presence of predators are the structuring one's.




   165                         16:00 Saturday                                  P2                               PCH
Timing of reproduction in oviparous and viviparous species in the scalarls group (genus Sceloporus}: an
intermediate step in the evolution of viviparity. F.R. Mendez. N.L. Manriquez and M. Villagran, Universidad
Nadonal Autonoma de, Mexico, A.P. 70-515, C.P. 04510, Mexico, D.F., Mexico; R.M. Andrews, Department of
Biology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg,, VA 24060, USA.; O. Hernandez,
Universidad Nadonal Autonoma de, Mexico, A.P. 70-515, C.P. 04510, Mexico, D.F., Mexico.
The evolution of viviparity in the genus Sceloporus is assodated with a shift from the spring mating and late summer
hatching observed for oviparous species to fall mating and spring birth obsenred for viviparous species. The scalaris
group provides a model system to evaluate this transition, as the sister spedes S. aeneus and S. bicanthalis are
oviparous and viviparous, respectively. We studied the reproductive cydes of two populations of S. aeneus and
three of S. bicanthalis. Ths timing of ttie reproductive cycle of S. aeneus was as expected for an oviparous species.
The timing of the reproductive cycle of S. bicanthalis, was, however, intermediate between oviparous and typical
viviparous species. Like S. aeneus, hatchlings of S. bicanthalis are produced in late summer. More like typical
viviparous spedes, however, mating by S. bicanthalis occurs in the winter. In the scalaris group, thus, the evolution
of viviparity is associated with an earlier initiation of the breeding season (spring to previous winter), but the shift
from fall to spring parition occurs after viviparity becomes stablished. The benefit of spnng birth by viviparous species
is that female hatdilings reach sexual maturity and breed by fall.

Universidade Estadual de Maringa.
Spatial and temporal patterns in the distribution, composition and fish assemblage structure and their relation to
physical gradients were assessed. Samples were collected quarteriy in three segments of the creek: near the spring,
midway along its extension, and near the mouth. Comparisons among creeks of the upper Parand river basin show
high heterogeneity in the ichthyofauna composition, attributed mainly to differences in creek morphology. This fact is
highly relevant to the determination of the regional biodiversity. Rsh density and biomass in the extension of the
creek were affected by seasonal factors, especially the rain regime. The upper part (spring) was more affected by
Increment in discharge. Species richness, diversity, and evenness increased from spnng to mouth, showing
correlation with creek width, pH increase, and the presence of riparian vegetation. These stnrcture indicators also
were influenced by events related to the flood regime of the Parana river. Abundant species showed correlation with
some environmental factors, showing a certain degree of segregation among them, in relation to preference and use
of habitats. The faunal heterogeneity in the creeks combined with the high number of similar habitats and their
fragility to increasing degradation justify investigation of their structure and functioning, the understanding of which
improve management actions.




Sexual dhnorpbism In Patagonotottwn alma (Pisces, Perciformes, NotothenHdae). A.E. Gosztonvi. Centro
Nadonal Patag<o>nico, Boulevard Brown s/n, (9120) Puerto Madryn, Chubut, Argentina; A. Lopez Arbarello, Dep.
Ciencias Marinas, Fac. Cs. Naturales, (7600) Mar del Plata, Argentina.

A marked sexual dimorphism was observed in the height of the second dorsal fin in the Patagonian shore fish
Patagonotolhen sima . In order to explore whether other morphometric features would also contribute to sexual
dimorphism in the species, a non-parametric multivariate analysis (Fisher's Linear Discriminant Function) was
applied to a matrix of 16 body part measurements of 20 male and 20 female specimens (a random sample taken
from of a total of 62 specimens) of P. sima obtained in Argentine Patagonian waters. A polynomial was obtained
whereby the above specimens could be assigned to the correct sex, using eight body measures besides the height
of the dorsal fin, with 100 % accuracy. The polynomial was tested in a random sample of 10 males and 12 females
with 97 % accuracy. Patagonotolhen sima lives in Patagonian inshore waters, usually breeding in the tidepools of
the intertidal zone, showing parental care of the egg masses, as other notothenioids are known to do. The much
higher dorsal fin might probably help males to lure females during courtship and spawning.
A polynomial was obtained whereby specimens could be assigned to the correct sex, using two measures apart from
the height of the second dorsal fin, with 100% accuracy. The polynomial was validated in a random sample of 10
males and 12 females with 92 % accuracy.




   167                         16:00 Saturday                                 P2                               PCH
Hatching success of Bog Turtle (Clemmys muhlenbergO} eggs in a Pennsylvania population under natural
and laboratory conditions. R.T. Zappalorti. M.E. Torocco and P.J. Drake, Herpetological Associates, Inc, Plant
and Wildlife Consultants,, 536 Seaman Avenue, Beachwood, New Jersey 08722 - USA.,,.
The hatching success of bog turtle (Clemmys muhlenbergO) eggs from a single population was examined at a site in
eastern Pennsylvania. Between 1993 and 1994 we compared naturally incubated hatching success with artificially
incubated eggs. Bog turtles lay their eggs in various types of Carex grass tussocks within their marshy habitat. In
1993,17 eggs in four clutches (four separate nest locations) were discovered. Seven eggs (two clutches) from two
separate nests were left in the field to incubate naturally. Eggs were hatched in the laboratory at ambient cycling
temperatures between 32.5 °C. during the day and 19.0 °C. at night (Mean 25.5 °C.}. Of the seven eggs, 3 hatched
(42.8%) and 4 (57.2%) were removed by an unknown predator prior to hatching, whereas 90% of the 10 eggs
incubated in the laboratory hatched successfully with only one infertile egg. In 1994, seven nests containing 10
clutches (33 eggs) were discovered. Twenty-one eggs at seven nests were left in the field and 12 were removed to
ths laboratory. All eggs removed from the field in 1994 were replaced with exact-size paraffin wax eggs. Ten
(47.6%) of the real eggs left in the field were removed from the nests by a predator (possibly a small mammal), two
(9.5%) were broken (presumably by another nesting female at the same site), and three (14.3%) failed to hatch. In
addition, four of the wax eggs were removed by a predator. All of the eggs incubated in the laboratory hatched
(100%). The results of this study suggests that predation on eggs by an unknown small mammal is a contributing
source of mortality at this colony. Natural hatching success may also be reduced by infertility and poorly understood
developmental problems.



   168                        16:00 Saturday.                                P2                                PCH
Clutch size and reproductive effort of oviparous (S. aeneus} and viviparous (S. bicanthalis} sister species of
Sceloporus. F.R. M6ndez. Universidad Nadonal Autondma de Mexico,, A.P. 70-515, C.P. 04510, Mdxico, D.F.,
Mdxico; R.M. Andrews, Department of Biology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State, University, Blacksburg, VA
24061, USA; F. Rodriguez and M. VillagrSn, Universidad Nadonal Autonoma de Mdxioo,, A.P. 70-515, C.P. 04510,
Mdxico, D.F., Mdxico.
The evolution of viviparity in reptiles Is presumably associated with a reduced dutch size and increased relative
clutch mass. We tested this idea by comparing the clutch size and relative dutch mass of one population of S.
aeneus and three populations of S. bicanthalis. Clutch size and reproductive effort varied among populations of S.
bicanthalis, but not between S. aeneus and S. bicanthalis. Therefore, the evolution of viviparity has not been
assodated with shifts in reproductive allocation by S. bicanthalis. The only life history difference between these two
yiecies is that the viviparous S. bicanthalis reaches sexual maturity at a smaller size and sooner than the oviparous
S. aeneus.   169                       . 16:00 Saturday                                 P2                                 PCH
Unusual gonad structure In the little known, cryptic coral dweller, Caracanthus maculatus (Pisces;
Caracanthidae). K.S. Cole, Deptof Biology, U. of Southwestern Louisiana, Lafeyette, LA, 70504-2451, USA.

The Indo-Pacific soorpaeniform family, Caracanthidae, contains a single genus of tour or five known species. These
fish are small-sized and live cryptically within highly branching corals. A histological examination of the gonads of
nine specimens of C. maculatus, collected in Papua New Guinea, revealed an unusual and possibly unique gonad
architecture. In females, the ovigerous tissue within each ovarian lobe is centrally located and surrounded almost
entirely, except most anteriorly, by a peripheral lumen. Early-stage oocytes are located in the center of the gerrninal
tissue; vifellogenio oocytes are situated on the periphery or extend into the lumen on a tissue pedicel. In spermiated
testes of males, the spennatogenic tissue is also centr^ly located and surrounded peripherally by a lumen but the
lumen appears afunctional, since spermatozoa are only found in spenn sinuses located in the testis wall. In addition,
the testis contains numerous early-stage oocytes. These latter features suggest that C. maculatus is hermaphroditic.
Currently, I am examining a congener, C. lypicus for the possibility of similar gonad structure and the capacity to shift
sexual function; and also closely related scorpaeniforms, including velvetfishes, for the possibility of similar unusual
gonadal structure.




   170                         13:00 Saturday                                . 18
Neuroecology of elasmobranch fishes:           Relating the brain to the real world.     T.C.Tricas, Department of
Biological Saences, Florida Institute of Technology, 150 W. University Blvd., Melbourne, FL 32901-6988 USA.
Ethological studies on elasmobranch fishes have attempted to explain the adaptive value of specific behaviors. For
example, laboratory studies have characterized the taxis responses duritig orientation to acoustic, olfactory, electric
and visual stimuli. These studies complement field research that describes the motor patterns involved^ in natural
behaviors such as reproductive interactions and feeding. Although lab and field studies have provided good
descriptions of behavioral motor patterns, relatively little infonnation is obtained on how sensory and central
processing systems initiate and form these often complex behaviors. The ampullary electrosense of the
elasmobranch is presented as a model system in which the peripheral morphology, neural response prrpperties and
central neuroanatomy can be interpreted in relation to the ecological factors that shape their behavior^. Vector
analysis of the peripheral organization of the ampullary canal system and neural response properties provide useful
tools for predicting different ecological functions for the ampullary clusters. Chronic recording of electrosensory
neurons in the alert swimming animal permit integration of neural activity with motor behavior. The mechanisms by
which sensory input and central processing shape elasmobranch behavior can bo better understood when
interpreted in relation to the natural ecology of each species.




   171                         13:30 Saturday                                  18
Elasmobranch movement patterns: simultaneous tracking of five white sharks with radio-acoustic
positioning system at Ano Nuevo Island. P.A. Klimley and B.J Le Boeuf, Bodega Marine Laboratory, University
of California, Davis, P.O. Box 247, Bodega Bay, California 94923.
We will briefly review the development of the radio-acoustic positioning system (RAP) and describe the
simultaneously tracking of five white sharks by the RAP over a three-week period during Oct.-Nov.1988. The RAP
determined the positions of these sharks tagged with beacons based on the arrival times of acoustic pujses at a
triangular array of three sonobuoys. These were linked via radio to a field station in view of the buoys on Ano Nuevo
Island, where tracks of the five sharks were displayed in real-time on a computer mcxiitor. We will show computer-
animated examples of movement patterns as well as graphical an^yses of the spatial and temporal inter­
relationships between sharks. The sharks spent a mean XX% of their time within the range of the buoys located
near the island, remaining there both during day and night. Trajectories suggesting active pursuit of prey occurred al
both times along a corridor leading from the island. Similarities in when three sharks tagged on the same day visited
the island versus two others tagged on subsequent days indicated that the former had some srxial affiliation. When
at the colony, the sharks usually moved independently of each other, except when attracted to a kill evident from a
cluster of short and non-directional movements. Individuals at times spent much of the day in a small area, possibly
lying on the bottom resting or waiting to ambush prey. During fall 1988, sharks will be tagged with transmitters that
record their swimming depths and stomach temperatures in order to unequivocally determine when they teed (based
upon stomach warming by endothermic prey) and describe the sequence of events associated with prey capture.

   172_________________ 14:00 Saturday_____________________ J8
Orientation and navigation in elasmobranchs: Which way forward? J.C. Montgomery and M.M. Walker, School
of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland New Zealand.
Elasmobranchs possess a multiplicity of mechanisms controlling posture and short distance orientation. Vestibular
contributions to posture and locomotion are well documented. So too, are the contnljutions of vision, olfaction and
the octavolateralis senses to short distance orientation, particularly orientation to specific environmental stimuli such
as those generated by prey. Less well understood are the mechanisms guiding orientation over longer distances.
Anecdotal and systematic observations of behavior show tidal, daily, repeat long distance, and even seasonal
movement patterns. Tnje bi-coordinafe navigation has not been demonstrated in elasmobranchs. The mechanisms
underlying the above movement patterns are largely speculative, however, they are likely to include responses water
currents, physical parameters such as temperature and pressure, and the geomagnetic field. Of particular interest in
elasmobranchs is that geomagnetic orientation could be mediated directly via a magnetite based sensory system, or
indirectly via ttie electrosensory system. Systematic studies of movement patterns, and experimental studies of the
underlying mechanisms of orientation are required to gain an understanding of orientation and navigation in this
intriguing group.




   173                         14:30 Saturday                 .            18
Elasmobranch behavioral ecology: oxymoron or opportunity? W.R. Strong. Dept, of Evolution, Ecology and
Marine Biology, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9610, USA.
Behaviorally and ecologically, sharks and their allies exhibit remarkable diversity. Over the past several decades,
Don Nelson and his contemporaries made enormous progress in the understanding of shark behavior. The vexing
task of relating this behavior to species and community ecology now stands in plain view. The study of behavioral
ecology can, in the broad sense, be construed to include almost anything the animal does within the context of its
environment. As a discipline, however, behavioral ecology has specific stated goals, principally to understand the
evolution of animal behaviors. Sharks in general are not well suited to these goals. As a result, empirical work is
often limited to descriptions of life history, distribution and abundance and basic investigations of morphological and
behavioral adaptations. Critically assessing how the latter affect survivorship and fitness is a formidable task, one
that largely remains in the domain of those who study teleosts, birds, etc. Nonetheless, elasmobranchs possess a
number of unique traits. And given their long-held positions as apex predators of the world ocean, much work
remains to be done in the area of predation. Understanding sharks' roles in the ecosystems they inhabit is central to
species management and, ultimately, to the "holy grail" of successful, system-wide management.




   174                          15:30 Saturday                                  18
The reproductive behavior of elasmobranchs. H.L. Pratt Jr.. NOAA/NMFS, Naragansett Lab, 28 Tarzwell Drive,
NanagansetL Rl 02882, USA; J.C. Carrier, Department of Biology. Albion College, Albion, Ml 49224, USA.
The study of elasmobranch reproductive behavior, a relatively new endeavor, has emerged from four overlapping
areas: inferences from fresh caught animals, captive observations, undera/afer and field observations of live
animals, and laboratory studies of reproductive structure and function. Several common behaviors have been
described from various species which include: sexual segregation, courtship behavior and copulation. Sexual
segregation is the seasonal aggregating behavior common to many elasmobranch species such as: Squalus
acanthias, Sphyrna lewinl, and Prionace glauca. Courtship behavior has been inferred for. Carcharhinus plumbeus,
C. limbatus, P. glauca, Odontaspis taunis, Dasyatis centroura, D. sabina, and others through the appearance of
tooth cuts on the female's body and noted in more detail with underwater observations on C. melanopten^,
Trianodon obesus, Ginglymostoma cirratum, among others. Copulation has been directly observed in captive
settings in: Scyliorhinus canicula, S. torazame, T. obesus, Aetobatus narinari, Rhinoptera javanica, Raja eglanteria,
and Heterodontus francisd, and in the wild for three species of urolophids, and for T. obesus, and G. cirratum.
Ongoing studies in G. cirratum are continuing with research into paternity, sperm competition and social stnjcture by
characterizing members of the population through diver identified tagging, acoustic telemetry, and DNA fingerprinting
of wild animals. Two wild, freshly-mated females are captured annually for laboratory observations on gestation and
associated changes in reproductive steroid hormones.simultaneously tracking of five white sharks by the RAP over a three-week period during Oct.-Nov.1988. The
determined the positions of these sharks tagged with beacons based on the arrival times of acoustic pulses at a
triangular array of three sonobuoys. These were linked via radio to a field station in view of the buoys on Ano Nuevo
Island where fracks of the five sharks were displayed in real-time on a computer monitor. We will show computer-
animated examples of movement patterns as well as graphical analyses of the spatial and temporal inter­
relationships between sharks. The sharks spent a mean XX% of their time within the range of the buoys located
near the island, remaining there both during day and night. Trajectories suggesting active pursuit of prey cxcurred at
both times along a corridor leading from the island. Similarities in when three sharks tagged on the s^e day visited
the island versus two others tagged on subsequent days indicated that the former had some social affiliation. When
at the colony, the sharks usually moved independently of each other, except when attracted to a kill evident from a
cluster of short and non-directional movements. Individuals at times spent much of the day in a small area, possibly
lying on the bottom resting or waiting to ambush prey. During fall 1988, sharks will be tagged with transmitterc that
 record their swimming depths and stomach temperatures in order to unequivocally determine when they feed (based
upon stomach warming by endothermic prey) and describe the sequence of events associated with prey capture.




Conv«ntional tagging method* a* applied to aharka: paat. praaent, and future. N.E. Kohler and P.A. Turner,
28 Tarzwell Drive, Narragansert, Rl 02882 USA.
Tagging programs provide valuable means to Increase our biological understanding of sharks and to obtain
information for rational resource management. Shark tagging programs throughout the wortd have been directed
toward several objectives, including collecting data on movements and migration, abundance, stock identity, age
and growth, mortality, and behavior. Results of these studies include recaptures from tagged Australian school
sharks over a 40 year period, recaptures from sandbar sharks and spiny dogfish after 19 years, and recaptures of
Greenland sharks after 16 years. An extensive shark tagging program has been conducted by the National Marine
Rsheries Service in the North Atlantic. This continuing study, covering 36 years, currently involves over 6,500
volunteer fishermen and scientists along the North American and European coasts. Under this program, 142,384
sharks representing 51 species were tagged between 1962 and 1997. In the same period, 7,276 sharks of 33
species were recaptured by fishermen. Results of the US program include: movements of blue sharks between
North America and Europe, Africa and South America (maximum distance ~ 3740 nmi.), transatlantic movements of
tiger sharks between North America and Africa, and a recapture of a sandbar shark after 28 years. A review of
tagging methods and summary of results of the major tagging programs on large sharks are provided.




   176                         16:30 Saturday                                 I8
Ultrasonic telemetry, tracking and automated monitoring technology. F. Voeaeli. VEMCO Limited, 100 Osprey
Drive, Shad Bay, Nova Scotia, Canada, B3T-2C1.
The tools for remote monitoring of marine animal behaviour have grown significantly In the last few years. The
availability of micro-controllers In smaller low power packages has enabled the development of more sophisticated
ultrasonic transmitters and battery powered automated monitoring sites. A brief historical perspective is presented
leading to description of new systems that combine archived sensor data with ultrasonic data download. These
systems provide multiple years of data gathering with the ability to gather the data and reprogram the device without
recapture of the animal.




   177 .                       17:00 Saturday                                 18
Physiological telemetry of elasmobranchs: taking the laboratory to the field. C.G. Lowe. Hawaii Institute of
Marino Biology, PO Box 1346, Kaneohe, HI 96744, USA; K.J. Goldman, VIMS Fisheries Dept., PO Box 1346,
Gloucester Point, VA 23062, USA.
 Physiological telemetry is a powerful tool in studying elasmobranchs in the laboratory and field. Controlled
laboratory studies of the physiology of elasmobranchs has increased our understanding of the behavior, life history,
and ecology of many species. However, extrapolating results from laboratory studies alone may misrepresent these
biological aspects of animals in the field. Additionally, some elasmobranchs are too large, logistically difficult to
maintain, or have low survivorship in captivity making them extremely hard to study in the laboratory. Physiological
telemetry offers a bridge between the laboratory and the field providing an opportunity to elucidate similarities and
differences. Previous studies have coupled a variety of sensors to acoustic transmitters to remotely relay information
on swimming speed, tailbeat fr^uency, muscle contraction rate, heart rate, muscle, cranial and stomach
temperature, and neural activity. These techniques have been used on elasmobranchs ranging from stingrays to
white sharks, but have been restricted by the size of the electronic components, attachment methods, or logistical
difficulties in conducting long-term tracks. Recent developments in sensor technology and miniaturization of
electronics have increased the diversity and applications of physiological telemetry. Acoustic modem and satellite
telemetry may offer a means of downloading archived data collected from animals in the field.

animals, and laboratory studies ot reproouctive sirucTure ana luncnon. oeverai curnrnun                         uwh
described from various species which include: sexual segregation, courtship behavior and copulation. Sexual
segregation is the seasonal aggregating behavior common to many elasmobranch species such as: Squalus
acanfhias, Sphyrna lewini, and Prionace glauca. Courtship behavior has been inferred for. Carchairiinus plumbeus,
C. limbatus, P. glauca, Odontaspis taurus, Dasyatis ceniroura, D. sabina, and others through the appearance of
tooth cuts on the female's body and noted in more detail with underwater observations on C. melanopterus,
Trianodon obesus, Ginglymostoma cirratum, among others. Copulation has been directly observed in captive
settings in: Scyliorbinus canicula, S. torazame, T. obesus, Aetobatus narinari, Rhinoptera Javanica, Raja eglanlena,
and Heterodontus francisd, and in the wild for three species of urolophids, and for T. obesus, and G. cirratum.
Ongoing studies in G. cirratum are continuing with research into paternity, sperm competition and social structure by
characterizing members of the population through diver identified tagging, acoustic telemetry, and DNA fingerprinting
of wild animals. Two wild, freshly-mated females are captured annually for laboratory observations on gestation and
associated changes in reproductive steroid hormones.




Tetometry, and the setoHlto tracking of the whale shark, ahtncttdon typua In the Sea of Cortez, Mexico. SA.
Eckert and B.S. Stewart, Hubbs Sea World Research Institute,, 2595 Ingraham St., San Diego, CA 92109 USA.

One of the greatest challenges to shark researchers is determining migration and long-range movements of sharks.
While reports of seasonal presence of the Whale Shark, Rhincodon typus in coastal waters are common, no
information has been available on where those sharks dwell during the "off season". Further no information is
available on whale shark activities or environmental preferences outside of the time when they are observed near
shore. In 1993 a project to determine movements and behavior of the Whale Shark was initiated by us in the Sea of
Cortez, Mexico. Working with commercial satellite transmitter manufacturers we developed a number of specialized
transmitters for whale sharks. Between 1993 and 1996 -17 of these PITs (of 3 different types) were deployed and
monitored. Results of this research, including the successful tracking of one shark for 13 months will be described.
Data as to preferred depths and water temperatures were also relayed by some of the transmitters and will be
presented. Finally, a description of the technological status of satellite telemetry as it applies to whale sharks will be
provided.




   179 ,              .   .   , 13:00 Saturday                                  14                               THN
The energetics of calling in frogs. K.D. Wells. Dept of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, University of Connecticut,
Storrs, CT 06269-3043.
The investigation of calling energetics in frogs provides an opportunity to integrate studies of behavioral performance
with whole animal physiology, muscle structure, and muscle biochemistry. Measurements of oxygen consumption by
calling males have shown that metabolic rates increase by up to 25 times resting rats. Structural features of the
trunk muscles that provide the power for call production, including mitochondrial density, capillary density, and
abundance of lipid reserves, are all positively correlated with calling rate. Activities of enzymes that are important in
aerobic metabolism and fatty acid metabolism are much higher in species with high calling rates than in those with
low calling rates. Pairwise comparisons of dosely-related species show the same pattern: those with high calling
rates have muscles that can sustain higher levels of call production than do those with low calling rates. Patterns of
energy substrate use reflect patterns of call production. Species with high calling rates depend more heavily on
stored lipids for call production than do species with low calling rates, and species with short breeding seasons
deplete their energy resenres more rapidly than do those with prolonged breeding seasons and long chorus
tenure.hysiology, muscle structure, and muscle biochemistry. Measurements of oxygen consumption by calling
males have shown that metabolic rates increase by up to 25 times resting rate. Structural features of the trunk
muscles that provide the power for call production, including mitos that are important in aerobic metabolism and fatty
acid metabolism are much higher in species with high calling rates than in those with low calling rates. Pairwise
comparisons of closely-related species show the same pattern: those with high calling rates have muscles that can
sustain higher levels of call production than do those with low calling rates. Patterns of energy substrate use reflect
patterns of call production. Species with high calling rates depend more heavily on stored lipids for call production
than do species with low calling rates, and species with short breeding seasons deplete their energy resen/es more
rapidly than do those with prolonged breeding seasons and long chorus tenure.

   180                         13:45 Saturday                                 14                              THN
Auditory Tuning and Phonotactic Preferences in Anurans.               H.C. Gerhardt. Division of Biological Sciences,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 USA.
Advertisement calls of anurans usually have one or two emphasized frequency bands, which match fairly well with
the maximum frequency sensitivity of one or the other, or both, of the two auditory organs, the basilar and amphibian
papillae. At a finer scale of analysis, however, mismatches often occur between their mean frequency of conspecific
calls in a species or population and the maximum frequency sensitivity of the auditory system. Such discrepancies
could be a mechanistic basis for sexual selection, but the question arises: How well do the usual threshold measures
of frequency sensitivify reflect frequency selectivity at the much higher signal levels at which anurans normally
communicate? Although threshold measures and frequency preferences estimated from the same individuals
correlate poorly with respect to small, but behaviorally effective, differences within a single frequency band, such
estimates do predict reliably which of the two frequency bands is preferred by females in species that have calls with
bimodal spectra. In some of these, thresholds determined centrally and preferences correlate well with estimates of
frequency sensitivity ar ther peripheral level, but this is not true of other species. Examples from behavioral and
neurophysiological studies of several species of treefrogs will be discussed.   181            _________ 14:30 Saturday_______                              14
Acoustic communication and neural processing in the Pacific treefrog. E A. Brenowitz, Depts. Psychology and
Zoology Univ of Washington, Seattle WA 98195 USA; G.J. Rose and T.B. Alder, Dept, of Biology, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City UT 84112 USA.
Male Pacific treefrogs, Hyla regilla, use advertisement and encounter calls to regulate inter-male spacing within
breeding chonjses. Encounter calls are produced when the advertisement calls of a neighbor exceed a threshold
amplitude. These aggressive thresholds are plastic; i.e. males resume advertisemenl.calling (areommodate) to
repeated presentation of advertisement calls at amplitudes 4 dB above their aggressive threshold. Correspondingly,
a male’s aggressive threshold for the advertisement call is positively correlated with the maxirnurn amplitude of
advertisement calls of neighbors, measured at the focal male's position. The aggressive thresholds of males for the
encounter call also are plastic but are not significantly correlated with the maximum call amplitude of their neighbore.
This disjunction stems from the fact that males in stable choruses are not exposed to supra-threshoW encounter
calls Accommodation to one call type fails to significantly alter a male’s aggressive threshold to the other call type.
Plasticity of aggressive thresholds, like plasticity of aggressive signalling, appears to be important in balancing the
costs and benefits of aggressive behavior.                                             .     ,,       . .. .
The capacity of males to selectively accommodate to the advertisement or encounter call supports the hypothesis
that these two call types are processed, in part, by discrete neural 'channels'. Because these two call types are
hlohly similar spectrally, selective accommodation cannot result from sensory adaptation in the penphery. ine two
c^l types however, differ markedly in their temporal structure, particularly their pulse repetition rate. These
obseivatio'ns support the notion that separate temporal filters exist in the central nervous system for processing
these two call types. Recent neurophysiological studies have provided insight into the mechanisms that underlie this
temper^ pattern recognition and discrimination.

   182                         15:30 Saturday                                  14
Ectothermy’s last stand: hearing In the heat and cold. P.M. Narins. Department of Physiological Science, UCLA,
405 Hilgard Avenue,, Los Angeels, CA 90095 USA.
Ectothermy is the norm among animals. It is known that aspects of both acoustic signal production and reception in
ectotherms are temperature-dependent. Since female preference in some ectothe^s is also temperature­
dependent, understanding the genesis of this dependence in detail becomes cruaal. The inner ear of ariurans is
unique in that it contains three organs which are specialized for sound reception. The amphibian papula (AH), the
basilar papilla (BP) and the saccule (S) are anatomically distinct, spatially-separate organs each with its own
complement of sensory hair cells and overlying tectorial structure. The feP and portons of the AP respond
exclusively to airborne sounds whereas other portions of the AP and the S exhibit sensitivity both to airborne sounds
and to substrate-bome vibrations. Measurements from the auditory periphery of Rana pipiens pipiens suggest that in
contrast to BP fibers, AP fiber tuning is highly temperature-dependent. Moreover, hair cells from the rostral AP and
S e>diibit a clear temperature dependence in their intracellular current step response, unlike caudally-l^ated AP and
BP cells. Finally, spontaneous otoacoustic emissions, which presumably reflect hair cell motility, are highly
temperature-dependent despite the fact that the upper portion of the emission frequency range (600-1600 Hz)
corresponds to the domain of the BP. A model is presented that attempts to reconcile these disparate results.




    183                      .. 16:15 Saturday                                  14
Integrating behavior and physiology:        hormones and the advertisement vocalization of male frogs.               S,B,_
Ernerson. Dept. Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.
 In this paper I present an integrative model that accounts for the relationship between intra- and interspealic
variation in male advertisement call characteristics in frogs and intra- and interspecific differences iri androgen and
corticosteroid levels. As androgen levels increase to a breeding baseline, size and rnyosin heai^ chain isofonn
composition of the call-producing muscles of the males change. These characteristics are relat^ to vocalization as
they determine (1) force of contraction and thus call intensity and (2) contraction veloaties and thus pulse repetition
rates. As the males call, energy is expended and depending on the length and iritensity of the vocalizations,
corticosteroids are released during the vigorous exercise. Additionally, the nightly calling has a feedback effect on
the production of androgens so that vocalization itself increases androgen levels. Individual differences iri nightly (all
effort are reflected in the variation of androgen and corticosteroid levels among calling males. Interspecific
differences in call characteristics result in interspecific variation in corticosteroidlevels as well.




 Female choice in cave Ifvtng and epigean populetlons of Poecifa mexicana (Pisces, PoecMHdae). J. Parzefall.
 Zoologisches Institut und Zixilogisches Museum, Univ, of Hamburg Martin Luther King. Pl.3 D-20146 Hamburg
 Germany.
 Males and females in Poecilia mexicana form mixed shoals in small rivers and ponds establishing a body lenght
 dependend hiearchy. Dominant males competing for females exhibit striking behaviour and color patterns. Small
 subdominant males conteract by an inconspicous female-like coloration and by sneaking copulations. The cave
 population from Tabasco/Mexico has smaller but functional eyes, reduced color patterns and the size differences

   184                         13:15 Saturday                                 12                                MCN
Genetics of cave fish evolution. H. Wilkens. Zoologisches Institut und Zoologisches Museum, Martin-Luther-King-
Pl. 3,20146 Hamburg, Germany.
Molecular analysis of the eye opsin genes reveals high rates of nucleotide substitution arid C to T transitions.
Nevertheless part of them is still functional and in the cave fish larval rudimentary visual cells a limited number or
opsin genes is even briefly transcribed. Only one opsin gene containing a deletion was found to be probably out of
function. The gamma s- and alpha A crystallin genes are not active during cave fish lens development although they
do not show mutative alterations. The genes being responsible for eye and melanophore reduction are in part rion-
allelic in the different cave populations. Fi-hybrids between different cave forms show larger eyes and exhibit darker
pigment than the parental specimens. These phenomena are positively correlated with the geographical distance
between the specifio cave populations.




   185                       .14:00 Saturday       .                           12                                MCN
The phylogeny, historical biogeography, and evolution of troglobitism in Amblyopsls rosae (Ozark cayefish)
and Typhlichthys subterraneus (southern cavefish). D.E. Bergstrom. Fisheries Research Sedion, M'ssoun
Department of Conservation, Fish and Wildlife Research Center, 1110 S. College Avenue Columbia, Missoun 65201
USA; D.B. Noltie, Fisheries and Wildlife Program, University of Missouri-Columbia Columbia Missoun 65211 USA;
T.P. Holtsford, Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri-Columbia Columbia, Missouri 65211 USA.
The phylogeny, biogeography, and evolution of troglobitic characters were investigated in the Amblyopsidae using
DNA sequence data from the mitochondrial gene ND2. The ND2 phylogeny is incongruous with current amblyopsid
taxonomy implying that the genera Amblyopsis and Typhlichthys are artificial taxa. The genus Amblyopsisi appears
polyphyletic A. rosae is monophyletic but not sister to A. spelaea. Genetic divergence among A. rosae from tour
different watersheds is equivalent to or greater than the divergence among different species and genera in the
family. Typhlichthys subterraneus is paraphyletic among four lineages, two of which are more closely related to
Chologaster cornuta, Forbesichthys agassizi, and Amblyopsis spelaea than they are to the remaining wo T.
subterraneus lineages. Mapping morphological traits onto the ND2 phylogeny suggests that convergent evolution of
troqlobitio traits (e.g., reduction of eyes and pigmentation) was common in the Amblyopsidae. Brooks Parsimony
Analysis (BPA) shows that the ND2 phylogeny corresponds closely to geological fragrnentation of the East-Central
North American Highlands, beginning as early as 8 mya. However, evidence of late Pleistocene dispersas was also
apparent. Phylogeography of the Amblyopsidae suggests that vicariant speciation resulting from karst deformation
may have influenced patterns of biodiversity in other groups inhabiting the Central Highlands.




    186    ._                  .14:25 Saturday         .                     .12                                 MCN
Blindcats of the genus Prietella (Ictaluridae) of northeastern Mexico: an overview of recent explorations and
studies. DA. Hendrickson. Texas Memorial Museum, Texas Natural History Collections, R4000 / PRC176,
University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712-1100 USA.
Explorations last year revealed a second locality for Prietella lundbergi, or a closely related form, in an isolated, 50 m
deep sump about 50 km north of the type locality in southernmost Tamaulipas. Four specimens frorn here bnng the
total number of specimens of this taxon to 5. Water quality and the aquatic invertebrate community of this sump
cleariv indicate lack of connections to a large spring that surfaces nearby. The sump is apparently perched alongside
large flows that discharge at the nearby spring. Blind populations of Astyanax mexicanus are known frorn nearby
caves, but none were found in this sump, nor in the type locality of P. lundbergi. Repeated attempts using cave
divers to obtain additional specimens from the type locality have failed. It is hypothesized toat the single specimen
known from the type locality had been displaced by flooding from a normally isolated habitat, similar to the new
locality. Mitochondrial DNA sequence data Indicate that P. lundbergi is distantly related to P. phreatophila, now
knowri from at least 6 localities in central and northern Coahuila, but support monophyly of the genus. Sequence
data support conspecificity of all Coahuila populations, and probable extensive interconnections of aquifers
throuqhout the range of the species in that state. Distributions of troglobitic invert^rates wmich broadly overlap wth
 Priet^la and extend further north, as well as some hydrogeologic data, indicate that P. phreatoptvla may reside in
 south Texas caves as well but It has not yet been taken there. Lab stocks have not res funded to attempts finctu^ng
 ^monal Injections) to Induce reproduction, but recent experiments with temperature fluctuations have resulted in




 The taxonomic status of the SSemrua frontalis complex (Serpentes: Etapbfes).                  NJ. Da Sifva (Jr.).
 Departamento de Biologia, Universidade Catolica de Goias - Ave. Universitaria, 1440 - Setor Universitario - 74605-
 010 - Goiania, GO - BRAZIL.; J.W. Sites (Jr.), Department of Zoology and Monte L. Bean Museum, Brigham Young
 University, Provo, UT 84602 - USA.

 The Micrurus frontalis complex is an assemblage of poorly defined taxa ranging from the Cerrado regions of Central
 Brazil, through eastern Bolivia and the temperate areas of southeastern Brazil, to the Pampean regions of south
 Brazil, Uruguay, Paraguay, and Argentina. It Is also a very diverse group with up to seven entities (subspecies)                                                      and depending on th© length and intensity of the vocalizations,
corticosteroids are released during the vigorous exercise. Additionally, the nightly calling has a feedback effect on
the production of androgens so that vocalization itself increases androgen levels. Individual differences in nightly rail
effort are reflected in the variation of androgen and corticosteroid levels among calling males. Interspecific
differences in call characteristics result in interspecific variation in corticosteroidlevels as well.




Female choice In cave living and epigean populations of PtMcHfa mojricma (Pieces, Poecillldae). J. Parzefall.
Zoologisches Institut und Zoologisches Museum, Univ, of Hamburg Martin Luther King. Pl.3 D-20146 Hamburg
Germany.

Males and females in Poedlia mexicana form mixed shoals in small rivers and ponds establishing a body lenght
dependend hiearchy. Dominant males competing for females exhibit striking behaviour and color patterns. Small
subdominant males conteract by an inconspicous female-Iike coloration and by sneaking copulations. The cave
population from Tabasoo/Mexico has smaller but functional eyes, reduced color patterns and the size differences
are less prominent. Aggression and shoaling have been reduced quantitatively. All these differences are genetically
based as demonstrated by hybrid studies. Doing female choice tests we offered males of different size in
perforated tubes. Tested in light cave and epigean fish showed a significant preference for the bigger males. In
darkness with infrared a preference could only be demonstrated for the cave fish with the two males being active in
their perforated tubes. In a second type of choice tests we excluded all other signals except visual ones by offering
ths males in neighboring compartments. In these tests cave and epigean fish preferred bigger males. So, the
preference for bigger m^es on the basis of visual signals is still present and in addition female choice can be
performed in darkness in the cave dwelling population.




    188                         15:55 Saturday .                               12                               MCN
Maintenance of visual pigments in a cave living population of Poedlia mexicana (Pisces: Poeciliidae). K.E.
Koerner. Zoologisches Institut & Museum, 20146 Hamburg, Germany: E.R. Loew, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA.
A population of P. mexicana successfully colonized a lime stone cave in Tabasco, Mexico. Despite of the complete
darkness in the cave, the cave living fishes have almost normal developed eyes. Using multispectrophotometry, our
study compared the visual pigments of cave living individuals, raised in dark and light, with the pigments of an
epigean clear-water population and an epigean milky-water population. Our results do not show any appreciable
differences in ths absorption maximum of the pigments. Although some regressive and constructive adaptations to
the cave live can be found in the cave populaion, it seems, that the population does not exist long enough to reduce
colour vision. To compare intraspecific and interspecific variation, the visual pigments of the close related species P.
latipinna and P. formosaviere also examined.




    189                         16:20 Saturday                                 12                            MCN
Mapping a cave fish genome; polygenic systems and regressive evolution.                  R.L. Borowskv. Department of
Biology, New York University, Washington Square, NY 10003, USA.
To enumerate and identify the genes involved in cave fish evolution, we are mapping the genome of Astyanax
mexicanus. A blind depigmented Pachon Cave fish was crossed with an eyed pigmented surface fish. One of the
hybrids was back-crossed with a Pachon fish to produce progeny (BC) for analysis. The BC progeny exhibited
phenotypic variation in eyeball diameter, pigmentation (number of melanophores and presence of melanin), and
relative condition factor (RCF or length corrected weight). Anonymous DNA markers were generated by AP-PCR
(RAPD) and used to create a genomic linkage map (MapMaker). Factors for trait variation were placed on the
framework map using MapMaker QTL. So far, we have identified 63 markers which coalesce into eighteen linkage
groups. (The haploid number is 25 in this species.) On this map, we have placed three quantitative trait loci (QTL)
for RCF, and one each for eye size and melanophore number, in addition to the locus for albinism. At 1000 Cm total
length, the map is about 50% complete. The QTL detected already account for 44% of the variation in the mapped
traits. The results so far confirm that multiple loci are involved In troglobitic evolution for each trait, although they
suggest that the total number of major genes controlling the regressive traits in any population may be lower than
expected based on a classic quantitative genetics approach. Past work suggests that cave populations of blind
tetras may have different QTL for eye size variation. This hypothesis will be tested directly as we extend mapping to
different populations. This work is in collaboration with Horst Wilkens, Hamburg.

large flows that discharge at the nearby spring. Blind populations of Astyanax mexicanus are known frorn nearby
caves, but none were found in this sump, nor in the type locality of P. lundbergi. Repeated attempts using cave
divers to obtain additional specimens from the type locality have failed. It is hypothesized that the single specimen
known from the type locality had been displaced by flooding from a normally isolated habitat, similar to the new
locality. Mitochondrial DNA sequence data indicate that P. lundbergi is distantly related to P. phreatophila, now
known from at least 6 localities in central and northern Coahuila, but support monophyly of the genus. Sequence
data support conspeoificity of all Coahuila populations, and probable extensive interconnections of aquifers
throughout the range of the species in that state. Distributions of troglobitic invertebrates which broadly overlap with
Prietella and extend further north, as well as some hydrogeologic data, indicate that P. phreatophila may reside in
south Texas caves as well, but it has not yet been taken there. Lab stocks have not responded to attempts (including
hormonal injections) to induce reproduction, but recent experiments with temperature fluctuations have resulted in
soma behaviors suspected to be related to reproduction.




Tbo taxonomic status of the Atfcrurus frontalis complex (Serpentes; Elapktae).                 NJ. Da Silva fJr.t.
Departamento de Bioiogia. Universidade Carolica de Goias - Ave. Universitaria, 1440 - Setor Universitario - 74605-
010 - Goiania, GO - BRAZIL.; J.W. Sites (Jr.), Department of Zoology and Monte L. Bean Museum, Brigham Young
University, Provo, UT 84602 - USA.

The Micnmjs frontalis complex is an assemblage of poorly defined taxa ranging from the Cerrado regions of Central
Brazil, through eastern Bolivia and the temperate areas of southeastern Brazil, to the Pampean regions of south
Brazil, Uruguay, Paraguay, and Argentina. It is also a ve^ diverse group with up to seven entities (subspecies)
recognized. This study reports the results of morphological analysis including scutelation, color, triad pattern,
hemipenial morphology, and cranial osteology of 1,890 specimens from museums in Brazil, Argentina, Uroguay,
Paraguay, and Bolivia, including all type specimens. A fragment of 812 base pair of mtDNA including part of the ND4
protein coding gene and Histidine, Serine, and Leucine tRNAs was used to estimate phylogenetic relationships of the
South American triad coral snakes. The morphological data support the specific recognition of Micrurus frontalis,
Micrurus altirostris, Micrurus brasiliensis, Micrurus baliocoryphus, Micrurus diana, Micrurus pyrihociyptus, and
Micrurus tricolor. The recovered phylogeny supports the morphological-based division of the Micrurus frontalis
complex into the frontalis and pyrrhocryptus groups and their relationship with other taxa from the Brazilian dry­
lands.




   191                          13:15 Saturday                               CR12                               CHM
A reevaluation of the subspecies within the western hognose snake, Heterodon nasicus. C.M, Eckerman.
Department of Zoology and Genetics, Iowa State University, Ames, lA 50011 USA.
The western hognose snake {Heterodon nasicus) has been separated into three subspecies (H. n. nasicus, H. n.
gloydi, and H. n. kennerlyi) based on various morphological features. However, the status of these subspecies has
been question by different authors. This study examined >1000 specimens of H. nasicus and evaluated geographic
variation in the traits originally used to separate the subspecies. Contour maps of morphometric and meristic
characters over geographic space were generated to assess their concordance with geographic ranges of the
nominal subspecies. Analysis of variance and discriminant function analyses indicated that H. n. nasicus and H. n.
kennerlyi should be the only recognized subspecies of H. nasicus, with H. n. gloydi subsumed within H. n. nasicus.




   192                       . 13:30 Saturday                                CR12                               CHM
Multivariate morphometric variation in the coffee snake, Ninia sebae. B.E. Smith. Department of Biology, Black
Hills State University, USB #9044, Spearfish, SD 57799-9044, USA.
Traditional studies of snake systematics emphasize univariate variation in some characters, and often ignore
multivariate differentiation.   I utilized discriminant function analysis to examine multivariate morphometric
differentiation in head shape among four putative subspecies of Ninia sebae, a small semi-fossorial colubrid snake
found at intermediate elevations in Central America. Linear discriminant function analysis can be used only if
covariance matrices are the same amongst groups. If this assumption is not met, then quadratic discriminant
fonction analysis can be used, however, this test is less powerful. Techniques which compare the structure of
covariance matrices can be used to construct matrices constrained by commonality of matrix components, which
may then be used in linear discriminant function analysis to more powerfully lest a hypothesis. Using these
methods, I found that the described subspecies of Ninia sebae are not well differentiated. The species appears to
consist of two distinctive subspecies, with one wide-ranging group spread throughout southern Mexico southwards to
Costa Rica, and another narrowly confined to the Pacific versant of southern Mexico and Guatemala, isolated by the
Guatemalan highlands. These races can be distinguished using multivariate analyses, differences in dorsal
coloration, and some univariate measures. Further studies may show them to be specifically distinct.   193                        13:45 Saturday                                 CR12               ....
                                                                                              CHM
Phylogenetic relationships among populations of               the ridge-nosed rattlesnake {Crotalus willardl).
                                                                                                  I^Bi.
Zamudio and H.W. Greene, Museum of Vertebrate Zoology. UC Berkeley, 3101 Valley Life Sciences Building,
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA.
The ridge-nosed rattlesnake [Crotalus willardi) is a small montane pitviper endemic to woodlands and forests of fte
Sierra Madre Occidental. Five subspecies of C. willardi are currently recognized; the two northernmost subspecies
are restricted to patches of suitable habitat in the Madrean Archipelago or 'sky islands' of southern New Mexico and
Arizona. Due to limited distributions and strict habitat requirements, the two subspecies within the U.S. are
recognized as threatened or endangered either at the federal or state level. Crolalus willardi offers a special
opportunity to investigate the biogeography of populations inhabiting the Madrean archipelago. Previous work using
allozyme analyses and morphoTogical differentiation suggested two possible hypotheses for the evolution and
radiation of C. willardi populations: a shallow history model, implying that the northernmost populations result from a
recent evolutionary divergence, and a deep history model suggesting that the first divergences were between the
northernmost subspecies and all others. VVe used mtDNA characters to explore relationships among populations of
C. willardi and reconstruct a phylogeneSo tree for this species. Our phylogeny implies a combination of deep and
shallow histories for the differentiation of sky-island reptiles, and raises questions about current conservation
measures and their implication for the prioritization of intraspecific variation in this species.




   194                         1.4:00 Saturday           ..          CR12      ..                   CHM
Within-lsland phylogeography of Canary Island skinks.     R.P, Brown. School of Biological & Earth Sdenc^s,
Liverpool John Moores University, Uverpool L3 3AF, UK; J. Pestano, ) Depto. de Genetica, Fac. de Ciencias,
Medicas y de La Salud, Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, 35080 Las Palmas, Spain..
The pattern of geographical variation in morphology of the endemic skink Chalcides sexlineatus is highly correlated
to ecological variation within the small (1532 km^ oceanic Island of Gran Canaria. Sequencing of a fragment from
the 12S rRNA region of the mtDNA indicated considerable wtthin-island sequence divergence, and revealed the
presence of three ancient lineages. Substantial geographical structuring of these lineages explains the
morphological variation, thus refuting the prima facie case of differentiation in situ arising through climate-mediated
variation in selection pressures as the cause.
Very little introgression occurs between the principal Northern and South-Western mtDNA lineages, while
Introgression of mtDNA into foreign’ nuclear backgrounds also appeare to be limited. The time of divergence and
spatial distribution of these lineages coincided with intense volcanic activity known to have occurred dunng the past
2.8 million years In the North of Gran Canaria, indicating that they reflect ancient population refugia which
expanded to a secondary contact zone when conditions Improved. Ancient within-lsland lineages are also found in
the skink on the neighboring Island of Tenerife {Ch. viridanus), the distribution of which are similarly related to the
island's volcanic history.




   195                        14:15 Saturday                                 CR12       .                      CHM
Palm pitviper (Bothrlechls) phylogeny and the phylogenetic utility of mtDNA. T.W. Taggart, B.l. Crother and
M.E. White, Department of Biological Sciences, SLU 736, Southeastern Louisiana University, Hammond, LA 70402
USA.
Characters from the mitochondrial genome have become the most commonly used source of data in phylogenefic
analyses, despite arguments that these data are inappropriate and can result in misleading relationships. As a single
empirical test of the phylogenetic utility of mtDNA data, 12S rDNA sequences were collected, aligned, and
cladistically analyzed for all Bothriechis taxa (7 species) and the outgroup Ophyracus undulatus and compared with
a highly corroborated phylogenetic hypothesis for the same taxa based on characters derived frorn the nuclear
genome (morphology and ailozymesj. Based on our knowledge of the biology of mtDNA, the predirrted point of
incongruence was realized between the mtDNA tree and the nuclear tree. The results add to the mounting data that
indicate systematic decisions based on mtDNA phylogenies should be considered with caution.

   196 .                       14:30 Saturday ....                          CR12              ..               CHM
Multiple data sets, congruence, and hypothesis testing for the phylogeny of the basal groups of the lizard
genus Sceloporus (Squamata, Phrynosomatidae). O. Flores-Villela, Museo do Zoologia, Oniversidad Nacional
Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico; K.M. l^er. Department of Entomology, Rutgers University, New Bnrnswick, NJ USA;
M. Benabib, Institute de Ecologia, UNAM, Mexico; J.W. SitesfJr.l. Dept, of Zoology. Brigham Young University,
Provo, UT 84602 USA.
Several data partitions, including nuclear and mitochondrial gene sequences, chromosomes, isozymes, and
morphological characters, are used to test previously published hypotheses about the phylogenetic positions of basal
clades of the lizard genus Sceloporus, and the relationships of Sceloporus to the former genus Sator. Our results
confirm a recently published phylogeny (Wiens and Reeder, 1997) which groups Sator internal to Sceloporus, and
both support a hypothesis of 'transgulfian vicariance' for the origin of the former genus Sator on islands in the Sea of
Cortez. Support for internal nodes in our best tree is established through widely used indices (bootstrap proportions,
decay values), but also through congruence among different data partitions, and the consistent recovery of these
nodes by several tree-reconstnjction methods based on different assumptions. Many nodes which are supported by
a combination of several methods, including maximum and weighted parsimony, maximul likelihood, and minimum
evolution models, are only weakly supported by the traditional indices, and this "methodological concordance' is
taken as strong evidence for their placement.




   197                         14:45 Saturday                    ..         CR12                                CHM
Genetic polymorphism and taxonomic revision of the Caucasian rock                    lizard Lacerta saxicola.      R,D,_
MacCulloch. F. Jinzhong and R.W. Murphy, Centre for Biodiversity and Conservation Biology, Royal Ontario,
Museum; I. Darevsky, Zoological Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences.
Genetic diversity at 35 allozyme loci was examined in 9 populations of the taxa currently placed in Lacerta saxicola.
The data support the elevation of the subspecies Lacerta s. lindholmi and L. s. saxicola to species. The subspecies
L. s. brauneti, L. s. darevskii and L. s. szczerbald remain conspecific, although they can no longer be referred to
Lacerta saxicola. Considerable population substructuring among the latter three taxa suggest that they may now
occupy unique evolutionary tracks. Indices of genetic variability of all taxa were consistent with those of other
Caucasian Lacerta.




   198                          15:30 Saturday                               CR12                               CHM
Molecular phylogenetics and biogeographical history of pitvipers. C.L. Parkinson. Dept, of Biology, Indiana
University, Bloomington. IN 47405 USA.
Using mitochondrial DNA (12S & 16S rDNA and ND4) sequences, I investigated the biogeographical history and
phylogenetic relationships of the snakes in the subfamily Crofalinae (SerpenfesiViperidae). I have included
members from all proposed genera and, where possible, more than a single taxon to represent each genus.
Ph^ogenetic analyses were conducted using both maximum parsimony (MP) and maximum likelihood (ML) as the
optimality criteria. Monophyly of New World pitvipers is tested and determination of their sister group is presented.
Biogeographical hypotheses as to the number of invasions into South America is explored and questions concerning
the proposed paraphyly of the genera Crotalus and Bothrops are addressed. Taxonomic validity of certain Old World
genera (Protobothrops artd Ovophis} are determined, and their phylogenetic relationships are described.                             15^45 Sat jraay. . .                   CR12 ...         .
A phylogenetic enalysle of the evolution of sexually dimorphic coloration In the Yarrow's Spiny Lizard
{Scttloporus jarrovifj complex. J.J. Wiens. Section of Amphibians and Reptiles, Carnegie Museum of Natural
History,, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-4080; T.W. Reeder, Department of Biology, San Diego State University, San Diego,
CA, 92182-4614; A- Nieto Montes de Oca, Museo de Zoologia, Facultad de Ciencias, UNAM, Mexico.
As currently recognized, the Yarrow's Spiny Lizard (Sceloporus jairovii complex) exhibits amazing intraspecific
variation in male dorsal coloration, such that the range of basic colors among populations is nearly as great as that
among all reptiles (e.g.,. green, black, red, blue, yellow, gray, brown). In this study, we use phylogenetic methods to
address two basic questions; (1) how much of the color variation is intraspecific versus interspecific? and (2) what is
the evolutionary history of color variation in the S. jarrovii complex ? Parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses of
DNA sequence data (1.8 kb) from the mitochondrial 12S and ND4 genes for 17+ populations of Sceloporus jarrovii
(including the type localities of all seven subspecies) and several related species, along with morphological data,
suggest the following preliminary results: (1) Sceloporus jarrovii is polyphyletic within the torquatus species group
and consists of at least four evolutionary species, (2) striking color variation exists both within and between the
evolutionary species currently referred to S. jarrovii, (3) most of the conspicuous male color morphs seem to have
evolved independently from relatively dull colored monochromatic ancestors, and the blue color morph has evolved
twice.




   200                         16:00 Saturday                               CF112                             CHM
Molecular systematics and phylogeography of the salt marsh snakes, Nerodia clarkii, using mtDNA d-loop
sequences. K.P. Jansen. S.A. Karl and H.R. Mushinsky, Department of Biology, University of South Florida,
Tampa, FL 33620-5150 USA.
The salt marsh snake, Nerodia clarkii, is the only North American snake species restricted to brackish water habitats
and has evolved unique physiological and behavioral specializations associated with a saline environment. Two of
the three subspecies (A/, c. compressicauda and N. c. taeniata} are endemic to Florida and are threatened by
progressive destnjction of coastal wetland habitat. By using the subspecies as the focal taxonomic division in
consen/ation and management programs, we imply that the subspecies Is an independent evolutionary lineage worth
protecting. As such, the taxonomic status and evolutionary history of subspecies must be ascertained prior to
implementing conservation or management programs. Markers used in delineating two of the three subspecies have
been vague or highly variable and have failed to consistently differentiate individuals of known identity Into their
respective taxonomic group. Further, the divergence of the salt marsh snakes from an ancestral freshwater form
near the end of the Pliocene has been theorized, but with varying models. We sequenced the mtDNA control region
of individuals from the Nerodia clarkii subspecies, Nerodia fasciata subspecies, and several outgroup taxa in order to
elucidate the relationship among the salt marsh snakes and to better understand the evolutionary history of the
group.




   201               . . .   . 16:30,Satufday                               CR9                               CHM
Comparison of helminth communities in montane and lowland populations of the western fence lizard,
Sceloporus occldentalls from Los Angeles County, Califomia. S.R. Goldberg. Whittier College, Department of
Biology, Whittier, CA 90608 USA; C.R. Bursey, Pennsylvania State University, Department of Biology, Shenango
Campus, Sharon, PA 16146 USA; H. Cheam, Whittier College, Department of Biology, Whittier, CA 90608 USA.
Five hundred seventy two Sceloporus oeddentatis from two nearby populations in Los Angeles County, Califomia
were examined for helminths: 200 from the San Gabriel Mountains (montane ca. 1584 m elevation) and 372 from the
Puente Hills, Whittier (lowland ca. 150 m elevation). The component helminth community of the montane fence
lizard population consisted of four species: two species of cestodes, Mesocestoides sp. and Oochoristica scelopori
and two species of nematodes, Physaloptera retusa and Spauligodon giganticus. The component helminth
community of the lowland fence lizard population contained three species: Mesocestoides sp., Physaloptera retusa
and unidentified acuariid larvae. The two helminth communities were dissimilar in composition. Each host
population must be examined; helminth community composition cannot be assumed.

   202                         16:45 Saturday                                CR9               .       .        CHM
Trematode parasitism of the Canadian red-sided garter snake {Thamnqphls sirtalls parletalis): A study in
prevalence and Intensity. D.R. Kelly and R.W. Krohmer, Science Department, Saint Xavier University, 3700 West
103 Street, Chicago, Illinois 60655 USA.
One-hundred and ninety-four Canadian red-sided garter snakes were collected from the Interiake region north of
Winnipeg, Manitoba, over a two year period, in the spring and fall seasons of 1996 and 1997. This snake is host to a
lung inhabiting digenetic trematode of the family Pfagiorchiidae. The infection is acquired by the comsumption of
tadpoles and frogs. These intermediate hosts harbor the metacercarial cysts that may further develop into mature,
egg producing adults, when consumed. It has been reported that the minimum time requirement for the appearance
of an adult trematode in the lung is greater than eight weeks. All snakes examined for trematode infection were
preserved, measured for length, and gender determined. The adult trematodes were counted and removed, with their
locations being recorded. The data were used to evaluate ths prevalence (percent rate of infection) and intensity
(number of parasites per host). The prevalence of the trematode infection was higher in females (35%) than in males
(15%). The mean intensity was also higher in females (10+2, range: 1-65) than in males (5+1, range: 1-13). No
significant correlation between intensity and snout-vent length was found in either sex. However, there is evidence to
suggest that prevalence increses with snout-vent length. A group of long term captive (> 12 weeks) snakes were
compared to the sample of wild snakes. There were no significant differences in the mean intensities of the wild and
long-term captive animals. However, the prevalence in the females increased from 35% to 53% and increased in
males from 15% to 30%.




   203                         13:00 Saturday                                CF3                                AXL
The Influence of moonlight, temperature, hydrostatic pressure and zooplankton abundance upon the vertical
distribution and relative abundance of mesopelagic fishes in the epipelagic zone at night. T.C. MacDonald.
Florida Marine Research Institute, 100 8th Avenue S.E., St. Petersburg, FL USA , 33701; T.L. Hopkins, Department
of Marine Science, University of South Florida, 140 7th Ave. S., St. Petersburg, FL USA 33701.
Four cniises, with a 4-m’ Multiple Opening/Closing Net and Environmental Sensing System (MOCNESS), were
conducted to investigate the influence of moonlight, temperature, hydrostatic pressure and zooplankton abundance
upon the nighttime vertical distribution and relative abundance of mesopelagic micronekton in the epipelagic zone of
tile eastern Gulf of Mexico. Two hundred and fifteen trawl hauls, sampling discrete 25-meter depth strata between
the surface and 175 meters, were completed. Environmental parameters (temperature, hydrostatic pressure and
moon phase) and zooplankton abundance were recorded for each trawl haul. Additionally, measurements of ths
nighttime light field and diffuse attenuation coefficient were recorded during two 1989 cruises. Vertical distributions
fertile abundant fish species tended to be shallower during new moon phases. Two statistical methods (Canonical
Correspondence Analysis and Analysis of Covariance) indicated that hydrostatic pressure, temperature and moon
phase influenced the relative abundances of fishes and that light at depth was especially important in influencing
relative abundances during the 1989 cruises. Despite the importance of light at depth, the abundant species were
not limited to specific levels of ambient light




  '204                         13:15 Saturday                                CF3 .    .                          AXL
Effect of liqht on juvenile walleye pollock shoaling and their Interaction with predators. C.H. Rver. Alaska
Fisheries Science Center, NMFS, NOAA, Hatfield Marine Science Center, Newport, Oregon 97365 USA.
Under a 12 hr light/12 hr dark photoperiod, juvenile walleye pollock displayed a diurnal schooling and activity
pattern, characterized by cohesive shoaling during the day, with a cessation of shoaling and decreased swimming
speeds at night. Juvenile walleye pollock were not characterized by a distinct light threshold for shoaling; shoals
gradually dispersed as light levels decreased and gradually recoalesced as light levels increased. At light levels
below 2.8x10 ° mEs 'm’^ juvenile walleye pollock were so dispersed as to no longer constitute a shoal.
Exposure to simulated predation had differing effects upon fish behavior under light and dark conditions. Brief
exposure to a model predator in the dark, caused fish to swim faster than fish which had been exposed in the light.
Chronic exposure to a living predator produced similar results; fish tended to swim slower when a predator was
present in the light, but faster when a predator was present in the dark. In the light, predation can result in cohesive
shoals, but in the dark. Increased activity may accelerate shoal dispersal, suggesting that perceived predation risk
has opposite effects upon the spatial distribution of shoaling fish under light and dark conditions.   205                       , 13:30 Saturday                                CF3                                AXL
Prey-type effect on raking behavior In the osteoglossomorph fish ChHala chltala.                  B.J. Frost and C.P.J.
Sanford, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY 11549 USA.
Fishes of the subdivision Osteoglossomorpha ("bony tongues") posses a functional novelty the "tongue-bite
apparatus," located between the mandibular jaw apparatus anteriorly and the pharyngeal jaw apparatus posteriorly.
Previous work on this group described a distinct behavior known as "raking" associated with this novel feeding
mechanism. Using high-speed video (250 fields s ') and stop-frame kinematic analysis, raking behavior for two prey
types (earthworms and goldfish) was characterized in the clown knifefish {Chitala chitala}. Kinematic data will be
presented that reveals raking is a modulated behavior.




   206                         13:45 Saturday.                               CF3                   ..             AXL
Feeding ecology, activity patterns and spatial distribution of Siluriformes in a stream of Atlantic rainforest in
south-eastern Brazil. S. Buck. Universidade de Sao Paulo - Instifufo de Biociencias, Departamento de Zoologia,
PO BOX 11461, ZIP 05422-970, Sao Paulo - SP, Brazil.
The Atlantic rainforest ichthyofauna is rich in siluriforms, with many endemic species. Seyenly percent of the species
recorded in the Betari stream. Upper Ribeira Valley, Eastern Brazilian basin, are siluriforms belonging to the
following families: Loricariidae (eight species), Pimelodidae (four species), Trichomycteridae (two species) and
Callichthyidae (one species). Between June 1996 and February 1998,1 studied spatial distribution, activity patterns,
and feeding ecology of these fishes in a stream section one lelometer long. Diurnal and nocturnal transects were
made at different sites using snorkelling. Half of the studied species are distributed in patties, which water current,
depth and type of substrate influencing their distribution patterns. Except tor Otocinclus gibbosus (Loricariidae) and
Thchomycterus davisi (Trichomycteridae) all other siluriforms studied are nocturnal. The loricariids graze on algae
covering rock, mosriy diatoms, organic detritus and sediment. Corydoras barbatus (Callichthyidae) feeds on aquatic
insects and algae. The pimelodids are generalists carnivores, with Rhamdia quelen preying on fish and crustaceans,
and Rhamdioglanis frenatus preying on aquatic invertebrataes, especially insects (Trichoptera). This study is a
contribution to the knowledge on me poorly known ichthyofauna from the Atlantic rainforest.




   207                         14:00 Saturday                                CF3                    AXL
Diet overlap and resource use by five species of butterflyfish (Family Chaetodontidae) in Fiji.  D. Goulet,
Department of Biological Sciences, SUNY at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260 USA; J. Mayer, Department of Natural
Sciences, Long Island University, NY 11968 USA; A.I. Mazeroll, Department of Life, Earth and Environmental
Sciences, West Texas A&M University, Canyon, TX 79016-0808 USA.
We investigated the applicability of five species of butterflyfish as biological indicators on the Great Astrolabe Reef,
Fiji. Availability and patterns of resource use by the butterflyfish were investigated. Individuals of 3-13 pairs of each
species were followed and feeding rates and foraging areas were recorded. For four of the five species of
butterflyfish, acroporid corals constituted the dominant food in the diet, Chaetodon pelewensis and C. citrinellus were
not obligate corallivores, feeding upon coralline algae and filamentous algae. The remaining species were obligate
corallivores. Chaetodon trifascialis and C. baronessa showed a preference tor acroporid corals and can be
considered feeding specialists. Chaetodon trifasdatus is a feeding generalist, with no clear preference for any of a
wide variety of corals in the diet. Among specialists and generalists diet overlap was high, but between specialists
and generalists there was less diet overlap. In addition, foraging areas of the different species overlapped, in some
cases almost 100%, suggesting that food resources are being shared.

   208              . .       .1,4:15 Saturday                               CF3                                AXL
Influences of an exotic cordgrass on estuarine fish diets in Willapa Bay, WA. D.J. Stouder. Ohio Cooperative
Rsh & Wildlife Research Unit, Department of. Zoology, The Ohio State University, 1735 Neil Ave., Columbus OH
43210 USA; K.L. Fresh, Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Olympia USA.
Invasions of introduced species as a result of human activities have had huge impacts on aquatic ecosystems.
Furthermore, introduced species may become permanent components of these ecosystems. As a consequence it
becomes important for scientists and managers to understand the physical and biological processes within these
rapidly changing environments. We examined the effects of Spartina altemiflora invasion within an estuary along the
Washington coast. Between April and September in 1994 & 1995, we sampled fishes over mudflats and within
differently sized Spartina clones (3m, 6m, 12m, and meadows). Distribution and abundance of native fishes varied
both temporally and spatially as a consequence of the presence or absence of Spartina, as clones grew seasonally
and as different fishes recruited to the area. Cymatogaster, Leptocottus, and Oncorhynchus diets failed to
correspond to habitat use differences. Instead, their diets reflected a mix of prey derived from mudflat and Spartina-