                           '° ®® "’•
                                                                                                   "’"’ '°‘^ W ‘’“^9
                                                                    that W9X°1994 sex rafio wlTlTba^ fecTndSy
 annScundty’wU                                                                                and 2BT/^4“"an‘X
 we^ all greate^ (a. fish lengft)“fo?                                                             SSS’S®
 differences are water femperafure, preservation, diet, length ofTpaw'ning season a-^d s^UlShnTues




   595                       09:15 Wednesday                            .   CF.12      .    .. .              MCN
Reproductive ecology of gulf toadfish (Opsanus beta). S.J. Allee and W.A. Bennett. University of West Florida,
Florida USA.

Gulf toadfish. Opsanus beta, are poorly represented in ecological studies and their reproductive strategies relatively
undefined. Our preliminary investigations into breeding seasons and mating behaviors of a Florida gulf toadfish
population have revealed several unique and previously undocumented strategies. Ten replicates, each with 5 nest
types, were placed in the field and observed from February until November for toadfish activities. Gulf toadfish
appear to participate in a bi-peaked breeding season. Males established nests and females oviposit during the month
of May, then all fish disappear until late July and breeding resumed in September. Male and female toadfish
apparently discriminate between nest types differently. Females preferred nests with one opening over those that
are accessible to the surrounding environment through multiple openings. Males, however, showed distinct
preferences between the five different nest types based on charactenstics of each nest. Males that occupy nests
adjacent to other male-occupied nests appear to have greater reproductive success than lone males, contradicting
the traditional view that toadfish are highly aggressive and territorial. Male gulf toadfish do not appear to
aggressively defend any territory beyond their immediate nest site, an obsenration which may explain why males in
groups experience greater reproductive success.




   596                       09:30 Wednesday                                CF12                             -.MCN
Reproduction of Pseudoplatlstoma corruscans (Silurfformes: Pimelodidae) in the Paranri River, State of Sao
Paulo, Brazil. N. Buck. Institution: Departamento de Educacao UNESP Campus de Assis, SP.

Pseudoplatlstoma corruscans is a migratory species of economic interest. It is widely distributed in South America (in
the basins of ths Parana, San Francisco and Paraguay Rivers) and reproduces in floodplain lagoons where it spends
the first phases of its life. Monthly collections, from January 1985 to January 1988, were done performed in 150km of
Parang River, State of Sao Paulo, Brazil. A total of 255 fish were examined (56% young and 44% adults) measuring
between 20.0 and 170.0 cm in total length. Data on body length at first sexual maturation was estimated to be 73.0
cm. This is larger than minimum capture size for this specie determined by the Brazilian Environmental Agency
regulating fishing. The reproductive period coincided with the flood period from October to January and schools of
mature fish were followed as far as Rio Pardo, a tributary of the Paranri River. In the next months P. corruscans
larvae were always collected in marginal ponds. These periodic floods promote the contact of the Parana River with
the marginal ponds and are a requirement to the maintenance of the reproductive processes of P. corruscans.




   597                      09:45 Wednesday                                 CF12                           .. MCN
Spatial and temporal patterns of reproductive and trophic divergence in bluegill sunfish. T.J. Ehlinoer.
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee, 3209 N. Maryland Ave, Milwaukee, Wl
53111 USA.

A study of bluegill populations from 12 Wisconsin lakes revealed significant differences among lakes in the degree of
trophic specialization and sexual dimo^hism. Morphological and behavioral variation within and among populations
suggested that males compete most intensely for nesting sites in lakes with limited breeding area. Subsequent
studies discovered additional bluegill colonies located in deeper areas of lakes for 4 of the most sexually-selected
populations. Comparisons between deep-spawning and shallow-spawning colonies showed that deep-spawning
bluegill possessed a trophic morphology typical of limnetic specialists and were less sexually dimorphic than bluegill
from shallow colonies. Deep- and shallow-spawning bluegill did not differ in mean size or age, however there was
greater variation in both age and size among males from the shallow colonies. The relative abundance of cuckolder
males was significantly higher in shallow colonies. The mean number of eggs per nest did not differ between colony
types, but variation in the number of eggs spawned per nest was greater in the shallow colonies. These data are
consistent with the hypothesis that the intensity of sexual selection is greater in the shallow colonies, and that the
deep colonies reflect an evolutionary aitemative.

 ^lS^^s»rigger°^:C                            X? bre^Jino"                                            ®P®™         <='“'V
 found phenotypic males for thVfwSlTit^ar                                                        our laboratory now. we
 are fuScBon^IPoecilia foXa mX S ca?evS?%Sce                                                      the masculinized fish




 glSt«:>SSW«
 males and Poedlia formosa females since September last year              ®                              Poealia formosa




   598                        10:30 Wednesday                 .               CF12                               mcN
Morphology and life history of the marine threesplne stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus). R.W. Kino. Dept,
of Biology, Clark University, 950 Main St.. Worcester, MA 01610, USA.

At the dose of the last gladal period, only some 15,000 years ago, numerous and varied freshwater aquatic habitats
were formed. The threesplne stickleback was one of the first fish to colonize these habitats, and these populations
have undergone a spectacular adaptive radiation. The threesplne stickleback inhabiting nearby coastal marine
habitats is the stock from which these freshwater populations were founded. Thus, both the direction and degree of
change following freshwater Isolation can be inferred by comparing freshwater and marine stickleback. However, the
marine form actually may comprise two types: one living and breeding only in marine waters; and a second,
anadromous typo. At present we know relatively little about whether these types differ in any substantive way.
Further, we know little about variation within these types. I present preliminary morphological and life-historical data
showing that these types may not be as similar as previously thought, and I compare the level of apparent
phenot^ic variability with that exhibited by freshwater populations.




   599                        10:45 Wednesday.                                CF12                               MCN
Evaluating the relationship between organismal trait values and body size, with an example from life-history
data for the threesplne stickleback, Gasterosteua aculeatus. J .A. Baker. Department of Biology, Clark
University, Worcester, Massachusetts 01610, USA.

The form of the relationship between values for organismal traits (e.g. clutch size) and organism body size has been
of interest to biologists for >150 years. This interest has two, somewhat independent foci: to estimate the slope of
the relationship itself, and to estimate size-free trait values for comparison across groups. Despite this long interest,
there remains considerable controversy over the appropriate statistical model to use in each instance. Most studies
use ordinary least squares regression for both, but this is only appropriate when the correlation between the trait of
interest and size is quite high (i.e., > 0.9). Such high correlations are infrequent in life-history data sets. Presently,
two alternatives for slope estimation appear to be gaining support: major axis regression, and reduced major axis
regression. I apply all three methods to a data set for 50 threesplne stickleback populations in order to illustrate the
considerably different conclusions that cran be generated for slopes. Size-adjustment is only appropriately performed
using ordinary least squares procedures. Nevertheless, I use a subset of populations to illustrate how faulty
conclusions can be generated hero, also. No present statistical resolution to this latter problem is apparently in view.




   600                      '11:00 Wednesday                                  CF12                              MCN
Inter-and Intra- latitudinal variation in life history traits in migrating silver-phase American eels, Anguilla
rostrata. K. Oliveira and J.D. McCleave, University of Maine, School of Marine Sciences, 5741 Libby Hall, Orono,
ME 04469-5741 USA.

Migrating silver phase American eels were collected from two geographically separated pairs of rivers in Maine. Size
at migration, age at migration, mean annular growth, and sex ratios were compared to existing data from other
locations to test for the presence of latitudinal changes in life history traits. Comparisons of traits within and among
river pairs were also made to examine intra-regional variations. 'The correlation between latitude and female life
history traits resulting from the addition of data from Maine female eels does not support established relationships,
reducing the correlation coefficients from 0,64 to 0.28 for length and 0.88 to 0.26 for age. The analysis of mate data
from Maine eels, however, yields significant correlations between latitude and these traits (size: r=0.94: and age:
0.65). Comparisons of traits among Maine rivers revealed several possible sources of variation that could account
for the low relationship between latitude and female traits. Variations observed in these four Maine rivers can be
associated with drainage characteristics, methodological differences, and fishing pressure.   601                        11:15 Wednesday                         .   . . CF12                              MCN
Phenotypic plasticity In life history traits of Gambusia puncticulata puncticulata (Poecllildae) from the
Cayman Islands, BWI. M.A. Abnev and C.F. Rakocinski, Gulf Coast Research Laboratory, Fisheries Ecology
Program, 703 East Beach Drive, Ocean Springs, MS 39564 USA.

 Gambusia p. puncticulata is a common resident of saline ponds which show high spatio-temporal variability in
physico-chemical conditions. We examined variability in reproductive traits of Gambusia p. puncticulata from eight
ponds among the ttiree Cayman islands during both rainy and dry periods, In August 1996 and January 1997,
respectively. Life-history traits examined included: (1) size at maturiW; (2) number of propagules per brood; (3) mean
individual weight of propagules; and (4) reproductive allotment, ihe average standard length of mature males
increased significantly between August and January due to the influence of either post-maturation growth or late-
maturing males. The mean standard length of mature females was often significantly greater during the dry period
than during the wet period. Also, females were nonsuperfetating and provided continual nourishment during
propagule development. There was an inverse relationship (r=-.63; n=171) between body-weight adjusted number of
propagules and mean individual propagule weight, although both traits increased with somatic weight. This
relationship signifies a phenotypic life-history tradeoff. Mean individual propagule weight varied significantly between
months and among ponds, whereas reproductive allotment only varied among ponds in Two-Way ANOVAs.
Plasticity in life-history traits of these populations may be tied to the dynamic nature of their environment.




   602                       -11:30 Wednesday                                CF12                               .MCN
Phenotypic plasticity In Gambusia hispanlolae from Lake Enriquillo, Dominican Republic, Hispaniola Island.
C. Mir and C.M. Rodriguez, Museo Nacional de Historia Natural, Plaza de la Culture, Santo Domingo, Dominican
Republic; F. Nunez, Institute Dominicano de Investigaciones Biologicas.

Extreme phenotypic plasticity of the lip was discovered in a population of Gambusia hispaniolae during a survey of
fishes to Lake Enriquillo, southwestern Dominican Republic, Hispaniola Island. Las Azufradas, a pool of sulfurous
water, is tributary to the main lake (Enriquillo). It is the only known habitat for a population of G. hispaniolaa
characterized by cxinspicuously enlarged and papillose lower lip that has not been observed in any other member of
the genus (although it is superficially similar similar to the lip of Cyprinodon labiosus, a member of Cyprinodontidae
and also to Poecilia sulphuraria, a member of Poedliinae). In a sample of more than 200 spedmens from Las
Azufradas, the enlarged lip was present in 100% of individuals, but no specimen of G. hispaniolae from elsewhere
exhibits the character. The hypothesis that the population comprises a new species was tested by morphometric
analysis of individuals from Las Azufradas versus individuals from other populations in the island. Other than the
modified lip, no morphological differences were found. Common garden experiments conducted to test for plasticity
showed that the enlarged lip dissappeared after short periods of time under laboratory conditions. At the end of the
experiment, no differences in lip size or shape were detectable among samples from Las Azufradas and other
localities. Feeding habits and effects of food type were also studied. We discuss the possible driving forces that
produce the phenotype.




   603                        11:45 Wednesday                                CF12        .                      MCN
Ethnolcthyology of Piracicaba River fishermen (Southeastern Brazil). R.A.M. Silvano and A. Begossi, Nucleo
de Estudos e Pesquisas Ambientais, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.

Ethnolcthyology is the part of science that studies the relationships between people and fish, including folk
knowledge. Fishermen usually have knowledge on fish biology and behavior, which is often useful to ichthyologists.
We conducted an ethnolcthyological study with fishermen from the impounded portion of the Piracicaba River
(Southeastern Brazil), interviewing 22 fishermen (17 men and 5 women) using questionnaires based on pictures of
ten fish species. We showed the pictures at random, in the same order for all people interviewed. Fishermen showed
a detailed knowledge about diet, predators, spacial and temporal distributions, reproduction and migratory patterns.
Many Information provided by fishermen fitted well with the biological observations from the scientific literature.
Fishermen exhibit a great knowledge on diet, predators, migratory movements and habitat requirements of fishes.
This could be due to the constant observation of these phenomenons by fishermen and due to Hie Importance of this
Infonnatlon to the fishery. Fishermen known more about common and commercially valuable fish species, and
known less about rare species. The value and abundance of the fishes, the usefulness in the fishery, as well the
frequent observation of the biological attributes of abundant species are Important factors influencing the Piracicaba
River fishermen Imowledge about fish.




  ,607 .. .                  09:45 Wednesday                                 CAS                                 AXL
Molecular phylogeny: Resolving the taxonomy of the Hyperolius virlditlavus complex. A.M. Wieczorek.
Department of Biochemistry, University of the Western Cape, Private Bag XI7, Bellville 7535, South Africa , ; A.
Channing, Department of Zoology, University of the Western Cape, , Private Bag X17, Bellville CAPITAL B 7535,
South Africa; R.C. Drews, Department of Herpetology, California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, California .
94118, USA.

The H. viridiHavus complex is considered to comprise a number of sub-species, based on dorsal colouration
patterns. The reliance on morphological characters for taxonomic purposes has resulted in some taxonomic
confusion regarding this complex, with some researchers recognizing few, and others many subspecies.

The aim of the present study is to use molecular techniques to resolve this problem. Frogs were collected from
various localities throughout Africa and their DNA extracted and subsequently sequenced ( 12S and 16S rRNA
mitochondrial gene).

Results indicate that H. viridiflavus consists of two clades, each of which is a sister group to a different grouping of
other species of Hyperolius. The more basal clade are from inland central Africa (Zambia, Zimbabwe), and the

   604                       08:45 Wednesday                                CA6                             .. AXL
The sand frog saga. Calls and chromosomes on a molecular tree. A. Dawood and A. Channing. University of
the Western Cape, Private Bag XI7, Belleville 7535, South Africa; J.P. Bogart, Department of Zoology, University of
Guelph, Guelph, Ont. N1G 2W1.

African sandfrogs of the genus Tomoptema have previously been thought to consist of six species, one of which is a
tetrapioid. A fieldtrip to Namibia, Zimbabwe and Zambia provided material which shows that the widespread T.
cryptotis consists of three species. The previously restricted tetrapioid, T. tandyi, is now known to be present
throughout much of Africa. We present a phylogeny of the diploid species, and show that tetrapioid populations are
accumulating genetic differences.




   605 .                     09:00 Wednesday                               CA6                                AXL
Genetic composition of supernumerary chromosomes In the Pacific giant salamander, Dicamptodon
tenebrosua. J.N. Brinkman and S.K. Sessions, Redpath Museum, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2K6.

Supernumerary, or B, chromosomes are morphologically distinct chromosomal elements that are found in addition to
the normal chromosome complement. They may show numerical variation within and between individuals and are
highly variable in their effect, morphology, and inheritance pattern. These chromosomes, thought to arise either from
the autosomal chromosome set or through interspecific hybridization, appear to evolve independently of the normal
chromosome set. Supernumerary chromosomes are present in the Pacific giant salamander, Dicamptodon
tenebmsus. Individuals of this species that we examined possessed up to 8 supernumeraries, with population means
ranging from 0.5 to 2.67 per individual. Supernumerary chromosomes from two D. tenebrosus individuals were
microdissected, cloned and partially sequenced to analyze their genetic make-up. We used these DNA segments as
probes tor use In Southern blots to determine whether or not homologies exist between supernumerary
chromosomes and the normal chromosome set. The DNA composHon of these supernumerary chromosomes and
their origin and evolution in D. tenebrosus will be discussed.




   606                      09:15 Wednesday                                CA6                                AXL
Allozyme analysis of salamanders (genus: Desmognathus} In northeastern Pennsylvania. R.M. Bonett. Dept,
of Biology, East Stroudsburg University, 200 Prospect St., East Stroudsburg, PA. 18301, USA; S.G. Tilley, Dept of
Bology, Smith College, hiorthampton, MA 01063, USA; T.C. LaDuke and T. Whitford, Dept, of Biolcgy, East
Stroudsburg University, 200 Prospect St., East Stroudsburg, PA. 18301, USA.

The mobilities of six protein loci were Investigated in ten populations of salamanders (Genus: Desmognathus} in
Northeastern Pennsylvania near the edge of the Pleistocene glacial boundary. Salamanders were collected from two
watersheds that transverse the range of Desmognathus ochrophaeus and are within the range of D. fuscus.
Heterozygotes were found for three of the six loci Investigated in six of the ten localities sampled. Based on
comparisons with similar studies heterozygosity Is attributed to influence from genetically diverse southern
populations, rather than interspecific gene exdiange.




   610                      11:00 Wednesday                                CA6                               AXL
Phylogenetic relationships among Neotropical tree fro^ of the 30 chromosome clade.       AA. Chek
Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, NIG 2W1; S.C. Lougheed and PT Boag'
Department of Biology, Queen's University. Kingston, Ontario, K7L 3N6.

The phylogenetic relationships among tropical taxa are poorly known when compared to temperate counterparts. In
frogs, this situation is compounded by a notoriously conserved morphology which yields tew readily-apparent
characters. Thus hypotheses of speciation and character evolution have often been constrained to limited rfoa or
relied upon gross similarity and contemporary biogeography. We have used DNA sequence data to investigate the
phylogenetic affinities among the '30 chromosome group" of tree frogs of the genus Hyla. This group has
representatives from Central America through the Andes, across the Amazon basin and Into the Atlantic forests of
Brasil. We compare the existing view of this group with the picture revealed by DNA sequence data.    603                       11:45 Wednesday                                 CF12                               MCN
 Ethnolrthyol^ of PiraciMba River fishermen (Southeastern Brazil). R.A.M. Sitvano and A. Beoossi Nucleo
 de Estudos e Pesquisas Ambientais, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.

                 '®            °L ®®'®,"‘re *h®* studies the relationships between people and fish, including folk
                               ®®iS!                  *'®h biologv and behavior, which is often useful to ichthyologists.
 rcniJh f »®*®^D®^ ethnoicthyologicd study with fishermen from the impounded portion of the Piracicaba River
»fn                                      fisheimen (17 men and 5 women) using questionnaires based on pictures of
1 riefened knn^i^n/=h*             pictures at landoni, in the same order for all people interviewed. FishermSi showed
                            d ?®’-PJ®'^®’°^®i®P?®rel and temporal distributions, reproduction and migratory patterns.
                   Pf°''''l®d hy fishermen fitted well with the biological observations from the scientific literature.
This ^ifi? he d^o tn                        ?®’’              relgratoty movements and habitat requirements of fishes.
infnm^nn^tn^thp rsh!rS                             ‘^ese phenomenons by fishermen and due to the importance of this
kndl^^                   J*' ^®^®rreen known more about common and commercially valuable fish species, and
5'"°™" ®®?         rare Meaes. TTie value and abundance of the fishes, the usefulness in the fishery, as well the
                                                           ffifish.^”                  ’®®‘°^® ’"n®®n®ing ‘h® Piracicaba




   607                       09:45 Wednesday                                  CA6                                AXL .
Molecular phylogeny: Resolving the taxonomy of the Hyperolius vlridiflavus complex. A.M. Wieczorek.
Department of Biochemistry, University of the Western Cape, Private Bag XI7, Bellville 7535, South Africa , ; A.
Channing, Department of Zoology, University of the Western Cape, , Private Bag X17, Bellville CAPITAL B 7535,
South Africa; R.C. Drews, Department of Herpetology, California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, California,
94118, USA.

The H. vlridiflavus complex is considered to comprise a number of sub-species, based on dorsal colouration
patterns. Ths reliance on morphological characters for taxonomic purposes has resulted in some taxonomic
confusion regarding this complex, with some researchers recognizing few, and others many subspecies.

The aim of the present study is to use molecular techniques to resolve this problem. Frogs were collected from
various localities throughout Africa and their DNA extracted and subsequently sequenced ( 12S and 16S rRNA
mitochondrial gene).

Results indicate that H. vlridiflavus consists of two clades, each of which is a sister group to a different grouping of
other species of Hyperolius. The more basal clade are from Inland central Africa (Zambia, Zimbabwe), and the
advanced dade from coastal South Africa, and east Africa (e.g. Tanzania, Kenya).




   608                       10:30 Wednesday                      .   .    . CA6      .                         AXL
Phylogeny of neotropical horned frogs, genus Hemiphractus (Anura: Hylldae: Hemiphracfinae) based on
evidence from morpholom. J.R. Mendelson. Dept, of Biology, Utah State University, Logan, UT. 84322-5305
USA; CA. Shell and H.R. da Silva, Natural History Museum and Department of Systematics & Ecology, University
of Kansas, Lawrence, KS USA.

The Neotropical genus Hemiphractus comprises 5 species. Frogs in this genus have long been assumed to
represent a natural group of species. Their bizarre appearance, with hom-like, fleshy protrusions from ftieir upper
eyelids, massive skulls, and serrated lower jaw bones, dearly distinguishes this group from any other Neotropical
frogs. Previous work by us corroborated the monophyly of Hemiphractus and placed if within the genus Gastrotheca-
-i.e., Gastmtheca is paraphyletic with respect to Hemiphractus. Herein we present some recent work on ths
phylogeny of Hemiphractus based on data from osteology, external morphology, and behavior. Parsimony analysis
of 48 characters generated a single tree that fully resolves relationships among these species. This tree is highly
congruent with Trueb’s (1974) hypothesis of relationships among these species and allows us to discuss aspects of
their biogeography and behavior.




   609     .                 10:45 Wednesday                                 CA6                                 AXL
Testing of amphibian dispersal scenarios with hypervariable DNA. J.W. Amtzen. ICETA, Campus Agrario de
Vairao, Rua de Monte, Crasto, Vairao, 4480 Vila do Conde, Portugal.

In pond-breeding amphibian species, dispersal between demes reduces the chance for local extinction. I aim to
show that the level of dispersal is determined not only by the distance of ponds, but also by the quality of the
terrestrial habitat between them. Toads (Bufo bufo) and newts (Triturus cristatus} in the United Kingdom and France
were surveyed for their presence or absence in large numbers of ponds. Environmental data were obtained in the
field and from topographical maps and satellite imagery. A stepwise logistic regression procedure was used to
identify ths ecological parameters associated with the presence/absence of both species. Dispersal scenarios were
generated on ths assumption that good habitat to livs in is good habitat to disperse through. The several dispersal
hypotheses are currently being tested against gene-flow estimates obtained from a variaty of genetic markers
(allozymes, mini- and micro-satellites).

    606                       09:15 Wednesday                                 CA6                                AXL
   mJSSS                                                                      PA.Pennsylvania.
                                                                   northeastern
                 ^roudsburg University, 200 Prospect St., East Stroudsburg,       18301. USA- SR.M.         Deot
                                                                                                     BonettDeot^f
                                                                                                  G Tillev
 e^^’u           C°"09S> Northampton, MA 01063, USA; T.C. LaDuke and T Whitford Deot of BiSmv EaS
 Stroudsburg University, 200 Prospect St., East Stroudsburg, PA. 18301, USA.                   P’’ ’

           ®“,Pf°*.®‘n 'ooi were investigated in fen populations of salamanders (Genus- Desmoanathus} in
SrehedTtM"u^sveree"the‘^?nnt®nf^^^^                   glacial boundaiy. Salamanders were collect^ from L>
                                             °®?'’^°5na<hus ochrophaeus and are within the range of D. fuscus
Hefero^otes were found for three of the six loci investigated in six of the ten localities sarn^pled Based on
                 ’’heterozygosity is attributed to influence from genetically dwerse southern
populations, rather than interspecific gene exchange.




   610 .    ..               11:00 Wednesday                                CAS                                AXL
Phylogenetic relationships among Neotropical tree frogs of the 30 chromosome clade.      AJK. Chek.
Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, NIG 2W1; S.C. Lougheed and P.T. Boag,
Department of Biology, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, K7L 3N6.

The phylogenetic relationships among tropical taxa are poorly known when compared to temperate counterparts. In
frogs, this situation is compounded by a notoriously conserved morphology which yields few readily-apparent
characters. Thus hypotheses of speciation and character evolution have often been constrained to limited data or
relied upon gross similarity and contemporary biogeography. We have used DNA sequence data to investigate the
phylogenetic affinities among the "30 chromosome group" of tree frogs of the genus Hyla. This group has
representatives from Central America through ths Andes, across the Amazon basin and into the Atlantic forests of
Brasil. We compare the existing view of this group with the picture revealed by DNA sequence data.




   611                       11:15 Wednesday                                 CA6                               AXL
 Evolutionary systematics of european newts. J.W. Amtzen. ICETA, Campus Agrario de Vairao, Rua de Monte,
Crasto, Vairao, 4480 Vila do Conde, Portugal.

 Six taxa of crested and marbled newts (subgenus Triturus] have largely parapatric distributions across Europe, with
or without hybridization taking place between them. A combination of morphological, protein and mtDNA sequence
data is applied to resolve the taxonomy of the group. In France, western Europe, hybridization between crested and
marbled newts is unidirectional. This hybrid zone is spatially-temporally unstable and affected by environmental
criiange, giving rise to a typical geographical pattern. Comparison of this zone with a cluster of hybrid zones in four
taxa of crested newts in 'ex-Yugoslavia', eastern Europe, reveals remarkable similarities between them, suggesting
that the same forces are operational across Europe in hybrid zone dynamics.




   612                       13:00 Wednesday                                 AVI                              QVC
The reproductive biology of the mouthbrooding cardinalfish Pterapogon kaudemi (Perciformes,
Apogonidae). A. Vagelli. New Jersey State Aquarium , 1 Riverside Drive. Camden, NJ 08103 USA,; M. Kind, New
Jersey State Aquarium, 1 Riverside Drive, Camden, NJ 08103 USA.

The Banggai cardinalfish, Pterapogon kaudemi Koumans 1933 has been the focus of the pet trade since its
"rediscovery" a few years ago. Very little is known about the population status of this is species which seems
restricted to the sandy shallows of the Banggai Islands in the Indo-Pacific ocean. In an attempt to alleviafe the
collecting pressure on this species, a captive breeding program was successfully developed. The reproductive
biology of P. kaudemi differs from most Apogonids in several aspects. The spawn consists of a few large eggs,
about 40 of 3 mm in diameter. Eggs are incubated by the mate for approximately 19 days (25°C) until hatching
occurs. The larvae hatch in a post-flexion stage measuring about 6 mm SL and remain in the male's oral cavity for
another ten days. At the time of release, Ban^ais measures 8 mm SL, their large yolk sac is mainly consumed and
they do not pass through a planktonic stage. Once released, alevines do not come back to seek refuge in the male's
mouth and no association between male and newly released alevines persists. Juveniles take four months to reach
30mm TL and they mature in another five to seven months. A summary of the ontogeny and larval development is
presented.                            13:20'Wednesday                                 AVI                               ovc
  .613
Functional and phylogenetic significance of trio spawning In redhorse suckers, Maxostoma. P.E.JenIgns
and A.A. Coons, Department of Biology, Roanoke College, Salem, VA 24153 UbA.
Moxostoma spawning acts involve one female and two or more males, and occur by intense quivering into gravel
and/or cobble. In primitive, mass-spawning M. collapsum and M. anrsun/m, usually 3-5 uontemtqnal males atterid
each act Advanced species typically trio-spawn, a male on each side of the fetnale. The most denved rep'u
M carinatum involves^two-mala defense of spawning sites and, upon approach by a female, synchronized leng^y
alignment (10-20 sec), undulation, and quivering (5-10 sec each). Nest-building and courtship a™ faise^ a^nbed to
in’carrnafum Svnapomorphies of anatomy, coloration, and behavior support recogriizing the clade. (Carolm
redhorse ((m'erj^nmm) (M. mbustwn, M. carinatum}}).
involved oreater numbers of eggs may be fertilized and buned, but earSeP-buned eggs may be unburied
 nXtinqIv In trio the female is s^metncally held and pressed laterally to doreolaterally dunng wipositiOT. In he
more Sed species, the two adjacent nest-holding (Dear Enemy) males repel intruders that perturb or dispel the
female from spawning. It takes two males to tango, perhaps best so in suckers.




                             13:40 Wednesday                                 AVI                               OVC
   614 .
Spatial learning and shelter selection by luyenile spotted®i^07“uSA% Afford’
Deoartment of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of, Rochester, Rochester, NY 14607 UbA, n, r-ora,
BlplrtSlnt of Biology, Universifo of Texas at Tyler, Tyler JX 75799 USA; OAdJoUanan. Department of Brain and
Cognitive Sciences, University of, Rochester, Rochester, NY 14607 USA.
Rnaiial abilities are important in mediating natural behaviors in snakes, such as localization of refuges. Eight snakes
Sratoed to find the Son of an escape hole in a circular arena, given a choice of eight ho es. Lejn^g was
riafarminaH hv qinnificant decreases in toe latency to find the goal and in the distance traveled to the goal. To date,
A^s&ha™ animus Sd noKthe task after 32 trainino sestons. Onfo two animals sh^ed a
sionificant change in behavior indicative of learning. These results differ from those obtained previously with com
snakes Elaphe g. guttata, which can leam toe same task within 16 trainirig sessions.                           SoH
sensorv cues after traininq indicates that subjects use different cues to find their goal. All animus were also test^
for shSter preferences. Snakes were given a choice of three different shelter sites (submerged, on
elevated) over a four day period to determine the relevance of the arena escape task. To date, six
oreferred elevated sheltere, and most animals show fidelity to shelters choseri on the first day. ^1®®® results
suggest that juvenile spotted pythons may be more motivated to seek elevated instead of submerged refuges.




                              14:00 Wednesday                                AVI                               OVC
    615
 Monitoring Idaho amphibian and reptile populations^through chafes> in
 Cooper Doering and J. Cossel Jr., Idaho State University, Box 8007, Pocatello, Idaho 83209 USA.

 Declines in populations of some formerly common, widespread amphibiaris and reptiles in Idaho indicate toe need
 for a statXide morlitoring program. Such declines show that v^e can no longer assume that amphibian and reptite
 oooulatfons are doing weU. The mark-recapture studies needed to document changes in numbers of animals are Ito
 eXsNe to^ndurt on a statewide basis. The best evidence that we have for amphibian                            d“^,'^®®
 comes frorn documenting changes in toe species occurrence over wide area. This suggests that ari ^^matiw
 anninach is to oeriodicallv survey selected study areas for changes In toe number of sites occupied by ea^
 secies. Such a^program could Involve selecting 20 study areas around the stale so that all           andeco^ons
 u^tild he reoresented at least twice. Every year, 2-3 study areas (with 20-30 separate sites each) could be surveyed
 JlSng standard"techniques so that all would be sampled once per decade. If a c^nsid^ble                     nX^g of
 of oMuoied sites for a species is detected, further studies could be conducted to determine me extent and n^re or
 toe^edfoes We are                    approach by repeating surveys conducted during toe 197O's at two areas in
 southern Idaho.




    619                       '13:00 Wednesday                               CR13                               THN
 The herpetofaunal assemblage of a unique south-central Rorida ecosystem. R.D. Owen and R. Franz, Florida
 Museum of Natural History, University of Rorida,, PO Box 117800 Gainesville, Rorida, 32611 -7800 USA.

 The Avon Park Air Force Range (APAFR) is a diverse 106,000 acre federal property in south-central Rorida. Many
 diverse wetland and upland habitats are embedded In a matrix of pine dominated communities. A major topographic
 feature of the property is a narrow central relict sand ridge (ie.. Bombing Range Ridge). During a two year vertebrate
 study, we documented the distribution and abundance of a large percentage of the amphibians and reptiles observed
 on the property. Many records were observations made during road cruising activities. Additional monitoring
 techniques included dip netting, field searching and examining gopher tortoise burrows using a mobile camera. Of
 the 77 species potentially occurring on the property we documented the presence of 62 species. Based on known
 distributions and the habitats present on APAFR toe absence of at least two species from this property is perplexing.
 Two xeric-upland endemics (Neoseps reynoldsi and Eumeces egregius ) were not documented during this study
 despite intensive surveys whereas other fauna of this community (eg., Hhineura Horidana , Sceloporus woodi,
 Tantilla relicta } were commonly encountered. Biogeography, not naoitat degradation or loss, is the most likely
 explanation for the absence of these species.

                               14:20 Wednesday                                 AVI                                OVC
  616
Piranha interrelationships. W.L. Fink, Museum of Zoology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079
USA.
The South America characiforms called piranhas comprise nearly 60 described species, all^ated to four genera,
Pvaopristis, Pristobrycon, Serrasalmus and ^gocentnjs. Pygopnstis is apparently monotype and
beJn^hown to include three species. Questions about the monophyly of Pnstobrycon and Serras^us have b^n
raised by several workers, and the general expectation is that Prrsfr^rgrori is paraphylebc. fo this
examine^ the identities of nominal species of Serrasalmus and Pnstobn^on, and discuss toe' P*?>^9e^bc
relationships among those shown to be valid. Features analyzed include skeletal, morphological, soft anatomy, color
pattern, squamation, and body shape.




                               14:40 Wednesday                                 AVI                                 OVC
   617
Rmmetric morohometrics of body shape in juvenile and adult Serrasalmus manueli and S. gmldingl.
Hill Department of Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079, U.S.A; M.L. Zelditch, Museum of
Paleontology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079, U.S.A: W.L. Fink, Museum of Zoology, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079, U.S.A.
 Juveniles of the black-water piranhas Serrasalmus manueli and Senasalmus gouldingi are virtually identi^ in body
shaoe oiamentation and meristic features. In contrast, adults of these species are markedly dflerent in body
sha^' pigmentation’ and to a lesser extent in meristic features, and are easily identifiable. Our objectives in this
study are% explore the use of some novel morphometric techniques in the analysis of body shape and ont^eriy^
One objective to particular is to determine whether small juveniles can be distinguished by body ®hapB using relafive
warns analysis. The second objective is to compare the ontogenetic transformations in shape that produce the
markedly different aduH body forms from the indistinguishable juvenile body forms.




                                15:00 Wednesday                                 AVI                                ovc
    618
 Scalation in caecilians: variation at the intra and interspecific level. A.P, Summers, Organismic ^d
 Evolutionary Biology, UMASS Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003 USA; R.A. Nussbaum, Museum of Zoology.University of
 Michigan, 1109 Geddes Avenue, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079 USA.
 Caecilians are circumtropically distributed amphibians eitoibiting rrany adaptations to a fo^orid'
 limblessness reduced eves and a strongly ossified skull. Perhaps none of their mqrphologi^ oddities is as
 enigmatic as’toe presence of dermal scales, a character found in neither of the other lissamphibian ord^.^d
 soecles of caecili^ have circumferential rows of tiny scales in some or all of top annular grooves that ring toe txfoY
 Ttoe size and shape of individual scales were once thought to be of systematic importance, ^o®9h'              "      a
 oarameters within a single individual may encompasses the range of variation seen in toe whole group. We used a
 clearino and stalninq technique to look at toe pattern of scalation rather than toe scales toems^ves. Data from
 fourteen Qrandison^ larvata showed less than 10% variation in a suite of rrtonstic characters.            J™'® ®,'®,9',®
 indivfouals of sixteen other species in all six families showed a wide range of variation from fully  _*®' ^^PLP
 naked Basal taxa such as Epicrionops and Ichthyophis are nearly completely covered, while some of toe most
 dlriwd^a h^f                    {Typhlo^ectes} or feiiv scales (Geoftypefes) The pattern of “al®/'®®J® ®®“
 distinouish between oenera and in some cases species. Data from several smaller individual G. lan^ata indicate that
 iaiX beg??^inX^P^tXr annXr grovespnd proceeds anteriorly, -^ere are two dorso-lateral centers of
 scalation in each annular groove from which scalation eventually grows around the body.




    622           .        .    13:45 Wednesday                                 CR13                                tHN
 Distribution and status of the alligator snapping turtle {Macroclemya temmincid!} in Georgia. J.B. Jensen.
 Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Nongame-Endangered Wildlife Program, 116 Rum Creek Drive, Forsyth,
 Georgia 31029, USA; S.C, Johnson, Natural Resource Senrices, Inc., 229 East Shore Drive, Americus, GA 31709,
 USA.

 Other than anecdotal information obtained from commercial turtle trappers, relatively little data relating to the alligator
 snapping turtle ^acroclemys temmincldi) in Georgia are available. Further, toe impact of toe commercial trade of
 this species on Georgia populations is largely unknown. Two separate studies, one completed in 1990 and toe other
 currently ongoing, were developed to enhance our knowledge of toe present day distribution and relative abundance
 of the species in Georgia, as well as to develop appropriate plans for its conservation, interviews with a commercial
 trapper extremely familiar with M. temminckii populations in Georgia, revealed that these turtles were trapped during
 toe 1970s and early 1980s in all major coastal plain stream systems in Georgia. M. femm/nck//populations were
 found in all watersheds which emptied into the Gulf of Mexico. Commercial trapping efforts during that period
 resulted in the capture and sale or 6000 to 7000 adult turtles averaging 32 kg each from toe Rlnt River system
 alone. Results from toe 1989-1990 study and the present study will be presented to compare current trapping
 success throughout the Georgia range of M. temminckii with that of toe Flint River drainage during the 197O’s.                                  Hfw< N* «imy uv niuiv niuiivuiuu lu KiuuK cicvaiQu II ijluuu




    615                       .14:00 Wednesday                                    AVI                           OVC
 Monitoring Idaho amphibian and reptile populations through changes in occurrence. C.R. Peterson S.
 Cooper Doenng and J. Cossel Jr., Idaho State University, Box 8007, Pocatello, Idaho 83209 USA.

 Declines in populations of some formerly comrnon, widespread amphibians and reptiles in Idaho indicate the need
 tor a statewide rnonitonng program. Such declines show that we can no longer assume that amphibian and reptile
 populations are doing well. The mark-recapture studies needed to document changes in numbers of animals are too
expensive to conduct on a statewide basis. The best evidence that we have for amphibian population declines
comes from documenting changes in the species occurrence over wide area. This suggests that an alternative
approach IS to penodically survey selected study areas tor changes in the number of sites occupied by each
species. Such a prograrn could involve selecting 20 study areas around the state so that all species and eooreqions
would be represented at least taco. Every year. 2-3 study areas (with 20-30 separate sites each) could be sunreved
using st^dardtechniques so that all would be sampled once per decade. If a considerable decrease in the number
01 OOTupied sites for a species is detected, further studies could be conducted to determine the extent and nature of
the declmes. We are testing this approach by repeating surveys conducted during the 197O's at two areas in
southern Idaho.




   619                        13:00 Wednesday                                   CR13                            THN
The herpetofaunal assemblage of a unique south-central Florida ecosystem. R.D. Owen and R. Franz, Florida
Museum of Natural History, University of Florida,, PO Box 117800 Gainesville, Florida, 32611-7800 USA.

The Avon Park Air Force Range (APAFR) is a diverse 106,000 acre federal property in south-central Florida. Many
diverse wetland and upland habitats are embedded in a matrix of pine dominated communities. A major topographic
feature of the property is a narrow central relict sand ridge (ie., Bombing Range Ridge). During a two year vertebrate
study, we documented the distribution and abundance of a large percentage of the amphibians and reptiles observed
on the property. Many records were observations made during road cruising activities. Additional monitoring
techniques included dip netting, field searching and examining gopher tortoise burrows using a mobile camera. Of
the 77 species potentially occurring on the property we documented the presence of 62 species. Based on known
distributions and the habitats present on APAFR the absence of at least two species from this property is peiplexing.
Two xeric-upland endemics (Neoseps reynoldsi and Eumeces egregius ) were not documented during this study
despite intensive surveys whereas other fauna of this community (eg., Rhineura Hondana , Sceloporus woodi,
Tantilla relicta ) were commonly encountered. Biogeography, not habitat degradation or loss, is the most likely
explanation for the absence of these species.




   620                        13:15 Wednesday                                   CR13                 .    .     THN
Post-nesting movements and dive behavior of the leatherback sea turtle (Dermochelys corlacea} in the
Atlantic Ocean. S.A. Eckert. Hubbs-Sea World Research Institute, 2595 Ingraham St. , San Diego, CA 92109,
U.S.A.

The island of Trinidad in the southern Caribbean Sea, supports one of the largest nesting aggregations of the
leatherback turtle. While the presence of this colony is well known, the post nesting distribution of these females is
not well understood. Studies into the dive behavior of female leatherbacks at this colony as well as in other colonies
is well defined, however little is understood about diving and foraging behavior of the species outside of ths nesting
season. In this study, I use satellite telemetry to follow the post-nesting movements and diving behavior of
leatherback sea turtles for one year. During that period the turtles swam in excess of 13,000 km and virtually
circumnavigated the northern Atlantic Ocean. Dive behavior was variable depending on region and was likely
related to food distribution. Maximum dive depths were in excess of 700 m. Detailed results of this study will be
presented including a description of where the turtles went after leaving, their diving behavior as well as possible
reasons for ths routing chosen.




   621                        13:30 Wednesday                                   CR13                            THN
The amphibians and reptiles of the upper Tocantins river, Brazil. NJ. DaSilvafJr.). Departamento de Biologia,
Universidade Catolioa de Goias - Ave., Universitaria, 1440 - Setor Universitario - 74605-010 - Goiania, GO, BRAZIL.

A four year collecting effort in the Minacu-Uruacu region of Goias, Brazil, produced 36 species of amphibians (2
orders and 6 families), 6 species of amphisbaenians (1 family), 25 species of lizards (9 families), 56 species of
snakes (8 families), 3 species of chelonians (3 families), and 2 species of crocodilians (1 family). Among ths
squamate reptiles there are 2 new species of amphisbaenians and 4 new species of snakes. This list is the first
compreensive herpetological survey of Central Brazil and the findings are being used for faunal comparisons
between the Cerrado region. Caatinga and Amazon regions. Despite low endemism the Brazilian dry-lands (Cerrado
and Caatinga) are closer in herpetoraunal similarities than any of them to the Amazon region. The Tocantins river is
the last tributary of the Amazon river on its right margin. Only at Tucurui, in the state of Para, over 800 miles north,
the herpetofaunal characteristics are typically Amazonian.

    618                        15:00. Wednesday                                 AVI                                 OVC
 Scalartlon In caecilians: variation at the Intra and interspecific level.              A.P. Summers      Oraanismic and
                       a''®®        USA: R.A. Nussbaum,
 Michigan.l 109 Geddes Avenue, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079 USA.                                                           ’

                                  distributed amphibians exhibiting many adaptations to a fossorial existence including
iSKSSXI                  eyes         a strorigly ossified skull. Perhaps none of their morphological oddities is as
                                 ‘1®'™^'scales, a character found in neither of the other lissamphibian orders. Most
            caecilian have cir^rnferential rows of tiny scales in some or all of the annular grooves that ring the body.
                        individual sc^es were once thought to be of systematic importance, though variation in these
parameters within a single individua may encompasses the range of variation seen in the whole group. We used a
cleanng ^d stoning technique to look at the pattern of scalation rather than the scales themselv^. Data from
                                showed less than 10% variation in a suite of meristic characters. Data from single
individu^s of sixteen other s|:^ies in all six families showed a wide range of variation from fully scaled to compietelv
naked, ^sal taxa such as Eptcnonops and Ichthyophis are nearly completely covered, while some of the most
denved t^a have no scales (TypWonecfes) or few scales {Geotrypetes). The pattern of scalation is sufficient to
distinguish between genera, and, in some cases species. Data from several smaller individual G. larvata indicate that
scalation begins in the postenor annular groves and proceeds anteriorly. There are two dorso-lateral centers of
scalation In each annular groove from which scalation eventually grows around the body




   622                        13:45 Wednesday                                 CR13                                 THN
 Distribution and status of the alligator snapping turtle {Macroclemya temminckli) In Georgia. J.B. Jensen.
•Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Nongame-Endangered Wildlife Program, 116 Rum Creek Drive. Forsyth,
 Georgia 31029, USA; S.C. Johnson, Natural Resource Services, Inc., 229 East Shore Drive, Americus, GA 31709,
 USA.

Other than anecdotal information obtained from commercial turtle trappers, relatively little data relating to the alligator
snapping turtle (Macrodemys temminckii) in Georgia are available. Further, the impact of the commercial trade of
this species on Georgia populations is largely unknown. Two separate studies, one completed in 1990 and the other
currently ongoing, were developed to enhance our knowledge of the present day distribution and relative abundance
of the species in Georgia, as well as to develop appropriate plans for its conservation. Interviews with a commercial
trapper extremely familiar with M. temminckii populations in Georgia, revealed that these turtles were trapped during
the 1970s and early 1980s in all major coastal plain stream systems in Georgia. M. femm/ncku populations were
found in all watersheds which emptied into ths Gulf of Mexico. Commerci^ trapping efforts during that period
resulted in the capture and sale or 6000 to 7000 adult turtles averaging 32 kg each from the Flint River system
alone. Results from the 1989-1990 study and the present study will be presented to compare current trapping
success throughout the Georgia range of M. temminckii with that of the Flint River drainage during the 1970's.




 ..623                        14:00 Wednesday                                 CR13                                 THN
Differences among the spatial distribution of sympatric amphibians. R.D. Brodman. Biology Department, Saint
Joseph's College, Rensselaer, IN 47978 USA.

Habitat segregation among related species has many ecological implications. However, the degree of spatial
distribution differences in regions of sympatry is not well known for amphibians. Three-hundred sixteen ponds were
monitored in three counties in northwest Indiana to determine if the spatial distributions of amphibian species
differed. Data on relative abundance of the eleven most abundant amphibian species were tested by the Cramer-
von Mises test, for differences between the way the populations of each species pair are distributed across the
study area. Thirty-eight (69%) out of the 55 possible species pairs had significantly different spatial distributions.
Distributions of all the species within families or genera were significantly different from each other, except among
toads and leopard frogs which tended not to differ from most other species. Ths biological significance of the
procedure in general and the results spedfically will be discussed.




   624 .                      14:15 Wednesday                                 CR13                                 THN
Are calling surveys the best method to use to monitor all frogs? B.E. Smith. Department of Biology, Black Hills
State University, USB #9044, Spearfish, SD 57799-9044, USA.

Concerns over population declines and reports of malformations have led many agencies to become interested in
inventory and monitoring of amphibians, especially frogs. Most of these programs rely primarily on calling surveys.
Volunteers are often used in these efforts, and they are not necessarily trained herpetologists. For two years, my
survey teams have conducted surveys of several species in a variety of habitats in western South Dakota. We have
found that calling surveys are not necessarily the best census method for all anurans, and they may result in
misleading conclusions. For federal lands in western South Dakota, we recommend calling surveys to monitor only
one species, the chorus frog (Pseudacris triseriata}. For most other species, calling surveys give misleading results
or their success may depend on detailed knowledge of anuran life histories. Species which breed at temporary
wetlands are easily overlooked when calling sunrey routes are designed. Calling behavior also appears to depend
on certain climatic factors which have yet to be fully understood. Limited funds may be better spent on life history
studies and on studies of chorusing behavior before calling surveys become favored as the primary method of
inventory and monitoring of anurans across North America.r

      625                       13:00 Wednesday                                CR3                                CHM
    Testing for treatment effects using home range; a herp^oiogist's perspective. g.R. de SoHa and R.J. Brooks.
    University of Gueiph, Department of Zoology. Guelph. Ontario. NIG 2W1.

    Home range analyses are commonly used by herpetologists to test aspects of behaviour, demographics,
    reproductive strategies, and other aspects of ecology. Unfortunately, herpetologists (and other ecologists) often do
    not use the same rigorous standards when analyzing home rarrges that they use for other statistical procedures.
    Home ranges are frequently estimated using different sample sizes, time intervals among observations, and total
    sampling periods, either among animals or among treatments. Using simulations and radiotelemetry data from
    snapping turtles (Chelydra serpentina), I demonstrate that home range estimates are dependent upon these three
    aspects of the sampling regime. In order to adequately test for treatment effects, home ranges must be analyzed
    using similar sample sizes and time intervals. Ironically, one aspect of home range analysis which ecologists have
    attempted to improve is autocorrelation. Traditionally, autocorrelation is believed to violate the assumptions of home
    range estimates, and so ecologists often subsample observations to reduce autocorrelation. However. I demoristrafe
    that the accuracy and precision of home range estimates may improve with increasing autocorrelation, and reducing
    autocorrelation may cause more problems than it solves.




       626                      13:15 Wednesday               . .              CR3                 .              CHM
    Home range analysis of the common musk turtle {Stemotherus odoratus) in fragmented habitat.                      J±L
    Edmonds and R.J Brooks. Dept, of Zoology. University of Guelph. Guelph. Ontario. NIG 2W1.

    We studied a population of common musk turtles {Stemotherus odoratus) in Georgian Bay. Ontario. These turtles
    occupy the shallow shoreline waters of the many small islands in this region. Their habitat is fragmented because
    most of the area is land or deep wafer, which is unusable. Animals occupying fragmented habitat appear to have
    larger home ranges relative to those that do not because unused space between and around fragments are included
    in the analysis. Two home range estimators, minimum convex polygon and hamionic mean, tend to overestimate
    home range in fragmented habitat. Cluster analysis is an estimator which reduces the amount of unused area within
    the estimate. Using radio-location data from the musk turtles we compared the accuracy of these three home range
    estimators. Cluster analysis was only more accurate than the harmonic mean estimator. However, the variability in
    accuracy was considerably less for cluster analysis relative to minimum convex polygon. We concluded that cluster
    analysis is a more appropriate home range estimator for animals in fragmented habitat than the minimum convex
    polygon or harmonic mean estimators.




       627                      13:30 Wednesday                                CR3         .   .                  CHM
    The influence of body size and kinship on aggression and contest outcomes In hatchling snapping turtles
    (Chelydra serpentina). J.K. Lochead and R.J. Brooks. University of Guelph. Department of Zoology. Guelph.
    Ontario. N1G2W1.
    Game theory has greatly improved our understanding of animal behaviour, and can be used to predict the outcomes
    of fights or contests between individuals. This theory predicts that an animal's role might be used as a cue for
    contest settlement, thus reducing the cost of contests. The objective of this study was to evaluate how role
    asymmetries in size and kinship affect the frequency of aggressive behaviours and the outcomes of male-male
    contests for food in hatchling snapping turtles (Chelydra serpentina). Snapping turtle hatchlings were randomly
    paired either with a dutch-mate (144 pairs) or with a non-relative (158 pairs) and were placed in an arena where they
    competed for 10 consecutive equal-sized food items. The number of Umes that each turtle acquired a food item as
    well as the frequency of two aggressive behaviours, biting and mounting, were recorded. The results indicate that
    ^solute body size, body size ratio between competitors and relatedness of individuals are not important
    detemiinants in the outcomes of contests or the frequency of aggression. Clutch identity was a significant predictor
    of frequency of aggressive behaviours, but not contest outcomes.




       631      ..              ..14.30 Wednesday                               CR3                              CHM
    Community composition of turtles in three habitats of the upper Mississippi River. R.V. Anderson. MA
    Ro^no and M.L. Gutierrez. Department of Biological Sciences, Western Illinois University, Macomb, IL 61455


    Populations of turtles were determined in three habitats of Pool 20, upper Mississippi River including an open river
    site, a slough, and a backwater. Baited turtle traps were used to collect turtles at each site between early June
    through September, 1997. Two hundred and eighty-three turtles in 7 species were collected during the study.
    Population estimates where highest for the slough habitat where over 430 turtles occurred compared to 155 in the
    open river site and 113 in the backwater area. Simpson's diversity of 0.80, were significantly higher in the slough
    habitat than other habitats sampled. Mark-recapture data from turtles collected in the slough showed red-eared
    sliders, painted turtles, and common snappers to have the highest population sizes in that order. Ths open river sits
    had ths lowest diversity but had the highest density of sort-shelled turtles. Only 3 species of turtles; common
    snapping turtle, painted turtle, and red-eared slider, were collected in the backwater area. While turtles were found
    in all habitat types in this reach of the river, the slough habitat provided adequate water levels, lower current
    velocities, and food sources thus high densities of turtles and a diverse community occur in this habitat type.

   628                    .   13:45 Wednesday                               CR3 .                             CHM
Is natal dispersal sex-biased in collared lizards? T.A. Baird and D.K. Timanus. Dept, of Biology. Univ, of Central
Oklahoma. Edmond. OK 73034 USA.
Theory predicts that in polygynous species males should disperse from natal sites more than females because
dispersal will promote the ability of males to compete for mates. We tested this prediction in a polygynous
population of collared lizards. Crotaphytus collaris, by determining the distance between the points of first and last
capture for male and female hatchlings, and the distance between hatchling location and where males and females
settled as yearlings. Distance between first and last sightings within the hatchling activity season was not different
in males and females. A similar percentage of both sexes dispersed > 20m from the hatchling to the yearling
season.* and the average hatchling to yearling dispersal distance was not different in males and females. These
data do not support the hypothesis of male-biased natal dispersal, even though our central Oklahoma poplation of
collared lizards displays a strongly polygynous social system.




   629                         14:00 Wednesday                              CR3                               CHM
Natural history of the terrestrial vipers Bitts gabonica and Bitts nasicomis in Cameroon: Preliminary results
from radiotelemetry. D.P. Lawson. Department of Biology. The University of Texas at Arlington. Arlington. Tx
76019 USA.
Reid observations and preliminary results of ranging patterns of the large, terrestrial Gaboon viper. Bids gabonica,
and rhinoceros viper. Bids nasicomis, will be presented based on information gathered during a two year
radiotelemetry study of these species in southwestern Cameroon.




   630                         14:15 Wednesday                              CR3                           .   CHM
Spotted turtle (Ctemmys guttata) hibernation near the northern range limit. J.D. Litzgus and J.P. Costanzo.
Department of Zoology. Miami University. Oxford. Ohio 45056. USA; R J. Brooks. Department of Zoology. University
of. Guelph. Guelph. Ontario N1G 2W1; R.E. Lee (Jr.). Department of Zoology. Miami University. Oxford. Ohio 45056.
USA.
Spotted turtles (Ctemmys guttata) are listed as ’Vulnerable" in Canada, and are similarly listed throughout the
eastern U.S. Not much is known about hibernation in this species, therefore information on site fidelity and
communal hibernaculum use may be important to the creation of conservation programs. We examined various
aspects of hibernation in a population of northern temperate spotted turtles residing on an island in Georgian Bay.
Ontario. Using temperature-sensitive radiotransmitters and miniature dataloggers, we monitored the phenology and
temperatures at entrance into and exit from hibernation over 4 winters (1993-97). Nineteen hibernacula occupied by
a total of 34 turtles were discovered; 12 hibernacula were apparently occupied by individual turtles and 7 were used
communally (minimum of 2-6 individuals). Many individuals returned to the same hibernaculum in subsequent
winters. Turtles entered hibernation in late September and October when body temperatures, were approximately
12°C. and exited hibernacula in late April when turtles experienced temperatures of about 4°C. Turtles were
protected from subzero temperatures in their thermally stable hibernacula (range 0.3 to 3.9°C), despite highly
variable and low winter air temperatures (average minimum of -33°C). Turtles lost little weight over winter (loss of 2-
4% of pre-hibemation mass).




   634                        . 15:45 Wednesday                           . CR3                               CHM
Corattus grenadensis revisited: population trends in a West Indian snake. R.W. Henderson, Milwaukee Public
Museum. 800 W. Wells St., Milw, Wl 53233, USA; R.A. Saidak. 4 Callingham Road, Pittsford, NY 14534, USA.

During the course of field work over a 10-year period with the arboreal boa Coratius grenadensis on the West Indian
island of Grenada, locals (e.g., farmers, forestry officials) invariably informed us that tree boas were not as common
as they had been in the past. During the same decade-long span we had recorded the numbers of snakes observed
during nocturnal timed searches at each of 5 sites situated from sea level to 460 m. At 3 of the 5 sites, we
encountered more snakes/man-hour (mh) of searching during our 1998 counts than we did in counts made in the late
1980s, although snakes/mh may have reached higher numbers during intervening years. Only one site exhibited a
steady decline in the number of snakes obsenzed, and one exhibited a steady increase; fluctuations occurred at the
other sites.

Coratius grenadensis is most common at elevations below 100 m in agriculturally disturbed sites (which provide
more edge habitat) with a high incidence of mango trees or trees with similar shape and foliage. In such favorable
habitats we have encountered it at rates of up to 8 snakes/mh (est. density of 61 snakes/hectare).

Marly factors can contribute to the differences in numbers we have obsenzed between and within localities: type of
habitat, habitat modification, elevation, moon phase, preciptation, etc. However, we have not in general observed
declines in boa numbers on Grenada.                                                         <«in wmiKuif Hl            Iiauiiai UlOII UlO IIIIIIIIIlUlll vonvex
 polygon or harmonic mean estimators.




    627                .     13:30 Wednesday                                CR3                       .          CHM
 Ti?                               Wnship on aggression and contest outcomes In hatchling snapping turtles
 ^netyara ^rpMtina).       J.K, Lpchead and RJ. Brooks, University of Guelph, Department of Zoology. Guelph,
 nnfanft    9\Ar^                                                                                          ’

Game theory has greatly improved our understanding of animal behaviour, and can be used to predict the outcomes
of fights or contests between individuals. This theory predicts that an animal's role might be used as a cue for
contest s^lemerit, thus reducing the cost of contests. The objective of this study was to evaluate how role
asymrnetnes in size and kinship affect the frequency of aggressive behaviours and the outcomes of male-male
contests for food in haWjling snapping turtles (Chelydra serpentina). Snapping turtle hatchlings were randomly
paired        wm a clutch-mate (144 pairs) or with a non-relative (158 pairs) and were placed in an arena where they
competed for 10 consecutive equal-sized food items. The number of times that each turtle acquired a food item as
well as the frequency of two aggressive behaviours, biting and mounting, were recorded. The results indicate that
absolute body size, body size ratio between competitors and relatedness of individuals are not important
determinants in the outcomes of contests or the frequency of aggression. Clutch identity was a signifioant predictor
of frequency of aggressive behaviours, but not contest outcomes.




   631                       14:30 Wednesday                                CR3                                   CHM
Community composition of turtles In three habitats of the upper Mississippi River. R.V. Anderson. M.A.
Romano and M.L. Gutierrez, Department of Biological Sciences, Western Illinois University, Macomb, IL 61455
USA.

Populations of turtles were determined In three habitats of Pool 20, upper Mississippi River including an open river
site, a slough, and a backwater. Baited turtle traps were used to collect turtles at each site between early June
through September, 1997. Two hundred and eighty-three turtles in 7 species were collected during the study.
Population estimates where highest for the slough habitat where over 430 turtles occurred compared to 155 In ^e
open river site and 113 in the backwater area. Simpson's diversity of 0.80, were significantly higher in the slough
habitat than other habitats sampled. Mark-recapture data from turtles collected In the slough showed red-eared
sliders, painted turtles, and common snappers to nave the highest population sizes in tfiat order. The open river site
had the lowest diversity but had the highest density of soft-shelled turtles. Only 3 species of turtles; common
snapping turtle, painted turtle, and red-eared slider, were collected in the backwater area. While turtles were found
in all habitat types in this reach of the river, the slough habitat provided adequate water levels, lower current
velocities, and food sources thus high densities of turtles and a diverse community occur in this habitat type.




   632                       14:45 Wednesday                                CR3                                  CHM
Predation on Clemmya guttata and Chelydra serpentina nests In a dolomite prairie.                 T.P. Wilson. Biology
Department, George Mason University, Fairfax, Va, 22030-4444, USA.

Fifteen turtle nests of two species were located during the summer of 1997 and monitored until evidence of
emergence or predation was observed. The two species involved in this pilot study were Clemmys guttata and
Chelydra serpentina. Ten C. serpentina nests were located in juxtaposition to ecological or man-made edges. All of
these were predated within seven days. The five C. guttata nests were located in areas distant from ecological or
man-made edges. None of these have been predated at the time of this writing. Preliminary data suggest that nest
predation is more frequent near ecological or man-made edges. Conversely, nests located in more heterogenous
habitats have increased survivorship. This increase may result from these nests being less frequently encountered
by predators.




   633                       15:30 Wednesday                                CR3                                  CHM.
A population study of painted turtles, Chrysemya picta: the effects of timing of nesting on nest temperatures
and sex ratios. C.E. Backe. Illinois Natural History Survey-607 E. Peabody Dr. Champaign,, IL 61820.

I am currently studying a population of painted turtles, Chrysemys picta, in Dewitt Co., IL to gain insight into
population structure, timing of nesting, nest cavity temperatures and overwintering temperatures. As of 24
September, 1997, 99 turtles were marked, 102 were recaptured, and the population was estimated to be 115 (95%
C.l. 106< n <137) using the Schumacher-Eschemeyer regression modification to the Schnabel estimator. Five
completed nests were found and protected from predation with a wire mesh cage. Temperature data loggers
recorded nest cavity temperatures, which will be used to infer sex ratios of each nest. Because painted turtles
exhibit temperature-dependent sex determination, the timing of nesting may affect nest temperatures and thus skew
sex ratios. Underground temperatures were also taken using data loggers buried in abandoned or predated nest
cavitites. This data will be useful in determining if metabolic heat has an effect on the ambient temperature of nest
cavities, and possible implications for overwintenng strategies.

    630                        14:15 Wednesday                                 CR3                                CHM
 Spotted turtle (Clemmys gt^ta) hibernation near the northern range limit. J.D. Litzous and J.P. Costanzo
 S        ?                                                      "•J- »«*»• Departiiert of Zoology, Universitj;
 USA^®                     G 2W1, R.E. Lee (Jr.), Department of Zoology, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio 45056,


Spotted turtles (Qemmys guttata) are listed as Vulnerable" in Canada, and are similarly listed throughout the
eastern U.S. Not rnuch is knowri about hibernation in this species, therefore information on site fidelity and
communal hibemaoulum use may be important to the creation of conservation programs. We examined various
aspects of hibernation in a population of northern temperate spotted turtles residing on an island in Georgian Bay
Ontano. Using temperature-sensitive radiotransmitters and miniature dataloggers, we monitored the phenology and
               a* entrance info and exit from hibernation over 4 winters (1993-97). Nineteen hibernacula occupied by
a total of M turtles were discovered; 12 hibernacula were apparently occupied by individual turtles and 7 were used
communally (minimum of 2-6 individuals). Many individuals returned to the same hibernaculum in subseguent
                           hibernation in late September and October when body temperatures were approximately
         u exrted hibernacula In late April when turtles experienced temperatures of about'4®C. Turtles were
protated from subzero temperatures in their thermally stable hibernacula (range 0.3 to 3.9®C), despite hlahiv
vanable and low winter air temperatures (average minimum of -33’C). Turtles lost little weight over winter (loss of 2-
4% of pre-hibemation mass).                                                                                '




   634                  .     15:45 Wednesday                                 CR3                               .CHM.
Corallus grenadensls revisited: population trends In a West Indian snake. R.W. Henderson, Milwaukee Public
Museum, 800 W. Wells St., Milw, Wl 53233, USA; R.A. Saidak. 4 Callingham Road, Pittsford, NY 14534, USA.

During the course of field work over a 10-year period with the arboreal boa Corallus grenadensls on the West Indian
island of Grenada, locals (e.g., fanners, forestry officials) invariably informed us that tree boas were not as common
as they had been in the past. During the same decade-long span we had recorded the numbers of snakes observed
during nocturnal timed searches at each of 5 sites situated from sea level to 460 m. At 3 of the 5 sites, we
encountered more snakes/man-hour (mh) of searching during our 1998 counts than we did in counts made in the late
1980s, although snakes/fnh may have reached higher numbers during intervening years. Only one site exhibited a
steady decline in the number of snakes obsenred, and one exhibited a steady increase; fluctuations occurred at the
other sites.

Corallus grenadensls is most common at elevations below 100 m in agriculturally disturbed sites (which provide
more edge habitat) with a high incidence of mango trees or trees with similar shape and foliage. In such favorable
habitats we have encountered it at rates of up to 8 snakes/mh (est. density of 61 snakes/hectare).

Many factors can contribute to ths differences in numbers we have observed between and within localities; type of
habitat, habitat modification, elevation, moon phase, preciptation, etc. However, we have not in general observed
declines in boa numbers on Grenada.




   635                        16:00 Wednesday                                 CR3                                CHM
Refuge-site selection and fidelity by Gila monsters in the Chihuahuan Desert at New Mexico. D.D. Beck.
Department of Biological Sciences, Central Washington University, Ellensburg, WA 98926, USA; R.D. Jennings,
Department of Natural Sciences, Western New Mexico University, P.O. Box 680, Silver City, NM 88062, USA.

We investigated the role of underground refugia in the ecology of Heloderma suspectum, which spends over 95% of
its time in shelters. Using radiotelemetry, we monitored eight lizards from April 1992 through June 1998, and
characterized over 400 shelters. We addressed two questions 1) Does availability of refuges influence the habitats
selected by Helodermsi? 2) How commonly are shelters reused? We also explored whether shelter reuse
contributes to population social structure. We found that Gila monsters spend more time in areas containing a higher
density of potential shelters (high-use) than in adjacent areas with lower densities of potential shelters (low-use).
Shelters in high-use areas were in rockier substrata, and more frequently on slopes with SE orientations than those
in low-use areas. Over 25% of total shelters were reused by Gila monsters, many by two or more lizards, especially
in the spring. Some individuals reused over 65% of their shelters. Certain revisited shelters appear important in
intraspecific interactions, whereas others are more important as refuges from harsh environmental conditions. Gila
monster distributions appear to be strongly influenced by the availability and suitability of subsurface refugia, and
shelters play an important role in the social structure of this normally solitary venomous lizard.




   636                        16:15 Wednesday                                 CR3                               CHM
Effect of density on predation rate for turtle nests in a complex landscape. VJ. Burke. Vincent J Burkel ,
University of Missouri, School of Natural Resources, Columbia, MO 65211; S.L. Rathbun, J.R. Bodie and J.W.
Gibbons*'*’’", "Stephen L. Rathbun, Department of Statistics,, University of Georgia, , Athens, Georgia, USA 30602
USA; '’J. Russell Bodie, Division of Biological Sciences,, University of Missouri,, Columbia, Missouri 65211 USA; °J.
Whitfield Gibbons, Savannah River Ecology Laboratory,, Drawer E„ Aiken, South Carolina 29802 USA.

The relationship between the spatial distribution of turtle nest sites and nest predation was investigated in a
landscape encompassing a 12-ha freshwater wetland in west-central South Carolina. The goals of the study were to
detennine if nest predation is a function of nest density, and if two other spatial factors, habitat type and distance of
nests from the wetland, influence survival rate. Gravid females of three turtle species (Kinostemon subrubrum,
Pseudemys concinna Horidana, and Trachemys scripta) inhabiting the wetland were monitored from the time they
exited the wetland to nest until they returned from their nesting forays. A total of 145 nests were located during three
nesting seasons (1992 - 1994). Nests were monitored from the day of oviposition until they were deemed to have
successfully produced hatchlings or depredation was documented. The three-year mean predation rate was 84.2%
(80%, 88%, and 81% for 1992, 1993 and 1994, respectively). Modeling of the point pattern of nest locations
suggests that nests were distributed at varying densities. Logistic and autologistic regressions provided no evidence
indicating that nest survival is dependent on the survivorship ^)f neighboring nests. In summary, no evidence was
found that linked predation rate to any of the spatial characteristics of nest distribution that were examined. The lack
of density-dependent nest predation is contrary to findings from some previous avian and chelonian studies, but
supports the findings of other researchers.  ■ 637                     13:30 Wednesday                                CF1                                MCN
A quantitative comparison of fish communities from mangrove and seawaii habitats in a southeastern United
States estuarine system. K.Y. Guindon-Tisdel and D.L. Leffler, Honda Department of Environmental Protection,
Florida Marine Research Institute, 100 8th Ave. SE, St. Petersburg, FL 3370 USA.

Mangrove communities are important habitats for fishes, yet significant extents of mangrove shorelines are being
replaced by seawalls. Few studies have quantitatively described mangrove faunal communities or determined the
effects of mangrove habitat loss on fish communities. We used blocknets to quantitatively compare differences
between ichthyofaunal communities at two fringing mangrove islands and two seawall sites within the Tampa Bay
estuary, along the west coast of Florida. A total of 192 blocknet sets were made over two years, yielding 1,321,949
fish and selected invertebrates (99 species). Cluster and nonmetric multidimensional scaling (MDS) ordination
analyses revealed faunal community differences between mangrove and seawall habitats and identified four biotic
groups (mangrove 1, mangrove 2, seawalls, and spring- mangrove/seawalls). Community composition at seawalls
was dominated by Anchoa mitchilli and other transient, schooling species. Mangrove habitats harbored resident,
nonschooling forage fishes (e.g., Eucinostomus gula) and larger predatory species (Cenfropomus undecimalis}.
Water depth and water temperature significantly influenced the abundance and comrnunity structure of fishes
between mangrove and seawall habitats and between sites within these habitats. Groupings of day and nighttime
samples from seawall habitats indicated that diel variations in fish community assemblages were more prevalent at
the seawall sites than at the mangrove sites.




   638                       13:45 Wednesday                               CF1                                MCN
The community structure of fishes found on ecologically shifted patch reefs of Glovers Reef Atoll, Belize. J,_
Carter and G. Sedberry**, ■Department of Life Sciences, University of New England, Biddeford, ME 04005 USA;
'•Marine Resources Research Institute, SCDNR, Box 12559, 217 Ft. Johnson Rd.,, Charleston, SC 29412 USA.

Data and observations from recent studies of hard corals and algae indicate that lagoonal patch reefs have
undergone a major change in their ecology associated with the 99% loss in the cover of branching corals {Acropora
cervicornis and A. palmata}, a 75% reduction in hard coral, and a 315% increase in erect brown algae {Lobophora,
Dictyota, Turbinaria and Sargassurri). These changes are attributed to a variety of factors including disease-induced
loss of Acropora in the region and a reduction in herbivory by sea urchins and grazing fishes. Interestingly there is
no evidence that these major changes have occurred on the fore reef where branching corals are abundant and
erect brown algal abundance is low.       There also exist a few refugia-like patch reefs within the lagoon where
Acropora remains abundant and relatively free of algal cover. We present data on the diversity, relative abundance,
and basic community structure of fishes from ecologically shifted lagoonal patch reefs distributed throughout the reef
atoll and compare these findings with a similar data from patch reefs more typical of the lagoonal environment as
reported by scientists 25 years earlier. Finally these results are discussed as they relate to the effective
management and conservation coral reefs.




   639                       14:00 Wednesday                                CF1                               MCN
A comparison of fish assemblages between submerged Prefabricated Erosion (PEP) breakwaters and
natural re^s. D.T. Reinoold. Oceanography Department, Division of Marine and Environmental Systems, Florida
Institute of Technology, Melbourne, FL 32901 USA; W.G. Nelson, Coastal Ecology Branch, Western Ecology
Division, US EPA, Newport, OR 97365-5620 USA; J. Tabar, Indian River County, Coastal Engineering Division, Vero
Beach, FL 32960 USA.

Fish assemblages on submerged Prefabricated Erosion Prevention (PEP) breakwaters and natural nea^y reefs
were investigated in an attempt to determine the impact of submerged PEP reefs on natural fish communities. The
PEP breakwater was installed in the surf zone in an alternating inshore-offshore conformation of 11 segments on the
7 and 9 ft depth contours off Vero Beach, FL. Seasonal fish surveys were performed on three pairs of offshore and
inshore segments using visual census techniques with the aid of SCUBA. In June and August of 1997, random units
were sunreyed on each segment to count fish in the worm rock on the reef surface. In August SCUBA divers
surveyed nearby natural reefs. On the PEP segments, number of juvenile fish per unit, mainly Haemulidae and
Lu^'anidae, and species abundance were significantly higher in summer months. Blennies, the most dominant fish
on the PEP reef, were most abundant on the inshore segments and least abundant on the natural site. Although
there was no difference between species richness, density of adult or juvenile fish, on the PEP and natural sites,
there appeared to be a different assemblage of fish between the two habitats.




   643                       15:30 Wednesday                                CF1                               MCN
Using surrogate species to develop endangered species recovery plans: Conceptual and methodological
issues. C.C. Blanco. Department of Biological Sciences, Box 870345, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0345 USA.

The traditiohal approach in developing recovery plans for endangered species has been to directly sample the
imperiled species. Utilizing surrogate species, however, provides a direct estimate of the imperiled species' biology
while minimizing the impacts of direct sampling. For example, the Vermilion darter, Etheostoma chermocki, occurs
in 11.5 kilometers of Turkey Creek, Jefferson County, Alabama. Although relatively common throughout its range,
urban development continues to deteriorate conditions within the watershed. The surrogate method permits
construction of a habitat suitability model using the sister species. This model incorporates multivariate statistical
methods which identifies variables (e.g., discharge, habitat type, dominant substrate type, water pH, conductivity,
temperature, relative abundance) that will be entered into a GIS spatial database. This model will then be tested on
the surrogate prior to its application on the target species. Thus it is possible to construct a species recovery plan
within the context of the species requirements, and compare expected results against field observations obtained
with minimal sampling.

   640                         14:15 Wednesday                                  CF1                        .       MCN
Fish assemblage structure modification due to reservoir contruction (Itaipu, Parent, Brazil). A.A. Agostinho,
E. Benedicto-Cecflio^** and C.V. Minte-Vera, “Nucleo de Pesquisas em Limnologia, Ictiologia e Aquiculture,
Universidade Estadual de Maringa; ‘’Programa de Pos-Graduagao em Ecologia, Institute Nacional de Pesquisas da
Amazonia.

The distribution and abundance of fish species collected during the periods previous to the damming (1980), after the
formation of the resen/oir of Itaipu (Parana, Brazil) (1983-1989) and after 15 years the closing of the dam (1997)
were analyzed. The samplings were realized into the dammed segment of the Parana River (Itaipu reservoir), in two
of it tributaries, in the upstream portion and in four tributaries that run into the reservoir. Itaipu reservoir showed the
largest number of constant and persistent species. This fact, associated to the smallest variance of the abundance of
the species in this environment, indicates larger spatial and temporal homogeneity. The ordination analysis (DCA)
clear up annual alterations in the composition and abundance of the species in the 1983-1989 period, denoting
gradual modifications in the assemblage of fish in the reservoir influence area due to a possible temporary
substitution of the abundant species. The 1997 samplings of resen/oir influence area were more homogeneous than
the ones of the ofter years, indicating a homogenization of the assemblage. The first years after damming were
marked by the success of opportunist species, which, after the colonization process, were replaced by others, in a
slow, but seemingly definitive way.




   641                        14:30 Wednesday                          ....    CF1                                 MCN
Habitat isolation in streams: consequences on fish movement and pool assemblage dynamics.                  D.G.
Lonzarich and M.R. Lonzarich, University of Wisconsin, Eau Claire, Department of Biology, Eau Claire, Wl 54702
USA; M.L. Warren, U. S. D. A. Forest Service, Forest Hydrology Laboratory, 1000 Front St. , Oxford MS, 38655
USA; W.J. Matthews, University of Oklahoma, Department of Zoology, Norman OK 73019 USA.

Recent research has suggested that the dynamics of fish populations and assemblages within habitats can be
affected by the spatial distribution (i.e., isolation) of these habitats within streams. In this study, we determined the
extent to which pool isolation (determined by the distance between adjacent pools) influenced fish movement and
assemblage dynamics in two Arkansas streams. We marked common species from 14 pools assigned to two
treatment categories: pools isolated by long-riffles (> 40m) and those by short riffles (< 10m). Repeatedly snorkeling
each pool tor three days in 1995 and 1997, we discovered significant effects of isolation. Generally, fish moved
frequently among habitats (10-50%); however, combined movement from short-riffle into adjacent pools was six-
times higher (24%) than movement from long-riffle pools (4%). Further, fish in short-riffle pools moved up and
downstream with equal frequency, whereas those in long-riffle pools moved three-times more often downstream.
Consistent with these results, we also found that assemblages in long-riffle pools were more stable than those in
short-riffle pools (overall percent similarity, 87 vs 72%). Collectively, these findings strongly indicate that the spatial
distribution of habitats wittiin streams can have significant effects on the characteristics of fish assemblages and the
processes regulating populations within individual pools. Because land-use activities can alter habitat spacing, these
findings have important implications for fish conservation in degraded streams.




   642                       .14:45 Wednesday                                   CF1        . .                 .   MCN
Conservation of the bayou darter, Etheostoma rubrum (Percidae): larval ecology and population structure.
W.T. Slack, S.T. Ross and J.A. Ewing, University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, MS 39406-5018 USA,

Etheostoma rubrum is endemic to the Bayou Pierre system of west-central Mississippi and juveniles and adults are
virtually restricted to riffles underlain with coarse substrata. Streams in the Bayou Pierre system are experiencing
rapid headward erosion, resulting in the creation of new riffles upstream and the loss of riffles due to sedimentation
downstream. Viewed as a mefapopulation comprising linearly arranged local populations, we hypothesized that
downstream populations of E rubrum (characterized by lower density) might be maintained by more dense upstream
populations through larval drift or juvenile/adult movement.          Upstream riffles would thus constitute source
populations contributing individuals to downstream sinks. We tested two predictions of a source-sink hypothesis.
First, based on a longitudinal array of drift nets set above and below riffle habitats, we documented that both
protolanral and mesolarval stages of E. rubrum are common, although not abundant, components of the drift.
Drifting larvae were taken both downstream and upstream of riffles. Although a potential mechanism exists for
transport from source to sink populations, length-frequencies (and inferred age structure) did not differ between
upstream and downstream populations. Thus, predictions of the source-sink hypothesis are not fully supported and
local downstream populations may be self-sustaining.




   646                        16:15 Wednesday                                   CF1                                MCN
The role of artificial reefs in fisheries and ecosystem management.                    SA. Bortone. Horida Center for
Environmental Studies, 135 NE 19th Ave., Cape Coral, Florida 33909 USA.

Artificial reefs currently play only a minor role in fisheries or ecosystem management. The most notable example is
their use in the spiny lobster fishery. Further examination of the role that artificial reefs can play in fisheries
management needs to be explored. An example may be with regard to facilitating recruitment of juvenile and ydUng
adult serranid fishes (grouper and seabass) from inshore grassbeds to offshore, natural reefs. Further, artificial reefs
can play a significant role in sanctuary and marine resen/e programs. Moreover, purposeful and timed
exploitation/rehabilitation of fish assemblages through artificial reefs may help sustain both fisheries and fish
assemblages. Artificial reefs may not be effective in habitat mitigation where natural habitat has been destroyed.
Information on the complete role that reefs play in trophic dynamics therefore needed. Additionally, an understanding
of the time and spatial scales necessary to effect management objectives is essential. While, most artificial reef
research, to date, has been directed toward fish and fish assemblages, additional insight into ecological processes
and large scale ecosystem management may be gleaned through their study. In the future, artificial reefs
(xrnstruction and deployment design should be directed toward adding to our knowledge base to better manage
nearshore and coastal ecosytems. Interagency, interstate, and international cooperation are the cornerstones for this
endeavor. Both the positive and negative features of artificial reef deployment as a management tool need to be
understood before they are generally accepted as a ecosystem management alternative.       uy ociciiii5,ia   ye«irb earner,       rinaiiy mese results are discussed as they relate to the effective
management and conservation coral reefs.




   639 .                     14:00 Wednesday                                 CF.1                          .    MCN
                         assemblages between submerged Prefabricated Erosion (PEP) breakwaters and
natural re«8. p.T. Reingold, Oceanography Department, Division of Marine and Environmental Systems, Florida
fostitute of Technology, Melbourne, FL 32901 USA; W.G. Nelson, Coastal Ecology Branch. Western Ecoloav
Division, US EPA, N^port, OR 97365-5620 USA; J. Tabar, Indian River County, Coastal Engineering Division, Vero
DOacn, HL 32960 USA.

 Fish assernblages on submerged Prefabricated Erosion Prevention (PEP) breakwaters and natural nearby reefs
were investigated in an attempt to determine the impact of submerged PEP reefs on natural fish communities. The
                      installed in the surf zone in an alternating inshore-offshore conformation of 11 segments on the
7 and 9 ft depth contours off Vero Beach, FL. Seasonal fish surveys were performed on three pairs of offshore and
inshore segments using visual census techniques with the aid of SCUBA. In June and August of 1997, random units
were surveyed on each segment to count fish in the worm rock on the reef surface. In August SCUBA divers
surveyed nearby natural reefs. On the PEP segments, number of juvenile fish per unit, mainly Haemulidae and
Luqanidae, and species abundance were significantly higher in summer months. Blennies, the most dominant fish
on the PEP reeL were most abundant on the inshore segments and least abundant on the natural site. Althouqh
there was no difference between species richness, density of adult or Juvenile fish, on the PEP and natural sites
there appeared to be a different assemblage of fish between the two habitats.




  . 643                      15:30 Wednesday                                CF1                                MCN
Using surrogate species to develop endangered species recovery plans: Conceptual and methodological
Issues. C.C. Blanco. Department of Biological Sciences, Box 870345, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0345 USA.

The tradHiohal approach in developing recovery plans for endangered species has been to directly sample the
imperiled species. Utilizing surrogate species, however, provides a direct estimate of the Imperiled species' biology
while minimizing the impacts of direct sampling. For example, the Vermilion darter, Elheosfoma c/iermockf, occurs
in 11.5 kilometers of Turkey Creek, Jefferson County, Alabama. Although relatively common throughout its range,
urban development continues to deteriorate conditions within the watershed. The surrogate method permits
construction of a habitat suitability model using the sister species. This model incorporates multivariate statistical
methods which identifies variables (e.g., discharge, habitat type, dominant substrate type, water pH, conductivity,
temperature, relative abundance) that will be entered into a QIS spatial database. This model will then be tested on
the surrogate prior to its application on the target species. Thus it is possible to construct a species recovery plan
within the context of the species requirements, and compare expected results against field observations obtained
with minimal sampling.




   644                       15:45 Wednesday                                CF.I    .                          .MCN
The influence of the Dawesville Channel on the fish fauna of the shallows of the Peel-Harvey Estuary. G.C.
Young and I.C. Potter, Division of Science, School of Biological Sciences, Murdoch University, Perth, Western
Australia.

The Peel-Harvey Estuary, located in south-western Australia has become very eutrophic since the early 1970s. This
extreme eutrophication is reflected by a vast Increase in macroalgae and massive seasonal blooms of blue^reen
algae. Increases in macroalgal growth, particularly in the Peel Inlet, have been accompanied by increases in fish
abundance, whereas, in the Harvey Estuary, the spring blooms of foe blue-green alga Nodularia spumigena have
resulted in a movement of the more mobile fish species out of this area and to foe death of a number of inidividuals
of foe more benthic and less mobile species. In an attempt to alleviate the eutrophication problem, the Dawesville
Channel was constructed in 1994 between foe Harvey Estuary and the ocean to help discharge nurtients to the sea
anrf reduce algal growth. Intensive seine netting was undertaken in 1996 and 1997 at the same sites and using the
same net as foat used in previous studies of the fish fauna of ths Peel-Harvey Estuary 15-20 years earlier. The
results of the multivariate analyses used to determine patterns in species abundance and distribution of fish and the
influence of region and season on fish both prior to and after the construction of foe Dawesville Channel will be
presented.




   645                       16:00 Wednesday                                CFJ                                MCN
Biology of the greater redhorse (Moxoatoma valeiKletmesI^ - a neglected species. SJ. Cooke. C.M. Bunt and
R.S. McKinley, Waterloo Biotelemetry Institute , Department of Biology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON., N2L
3G1.

Biology of foe greater redhorse was studied in the middle reaches of the Grand River, Ontario from 1995 to 1997.
Spawning began in late May when water temperatures were above 13°C, and lasted for up to 14 days. Spaviming
occurred in shallow riffle areas comprised of pebble, cobble and gravel. Videographic observations indicated foat
males usually remained on or near foe spawning riffles and females were either attracted by the presence or
conspicuous behaviour of males. Males produced rapid snout vibrations which usually preceded spawning activity.
Post spawning movements and habitat use were determined using radio telemetry. After spawning, most fish moved
several kilometres downstream and occupied deeper margins of riffles, usually in aggregation with conspecifics. By
early summer, fish had dispersed evenly throughout foe 17 km study reach. An access point creel survey indicated
foat there was a significant recreational fishery targeting greater redhorse, although anglers were unsure of foe
correct name for foe species. Very little information is available on the greater redhorse, or any member of the
Moxostomatini tribe, although it is an important and conspicuous species in the middle reaches of foe Grand River,
and likely elsewhere.

 z*      • *   1   ..   •   ,7------ n.                                    aiiwvww wi(0o~u(iioo iiiuio Ullcil UUrViloireani
                        results, we also found that assemblages in long-riffle pools were more stable than those in
                                                           Collectively, these findings strongly indicate that the spatial
distnbution of habitats within streams can have significant effects on the characteristics of fish assemblaaes and the
pnxesses regulating populations within individual pools. Because land-use activities can alter habitat soacino these
findings have important implications for fish conservation In degraded streams.




       642                    .14:45 Wednesday                                 CF1                                 MCN
                                                         (Percldae): larval ecology and population structure.
W.T. Slack, S/LBoss and J,A. Ewing, University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, MS 39406-5018 USA.

                                5               Pierre system of west-central Mississippi and juveniles and adults are
                   to nffles uiiderlain with coarse substrata. Streams in the Bayou Pierre system are experiencing
 rapid headward erosion, resulting in the creation of new riffles upstream and the loss of riffles due to sedimentation
downstream. Viewed as a metapopulation comprising linearly arranged local populations, we hypothesized that
downstream populations of E■ rubrum (characterized by lower density) might be maintained by more dense upstream
populations through larval dnft or juvenile/adult movement           Upstream riffles would thus constitute source
populations contnb^ng individuals to downstream sinks. We tested two predictions of a source-sink hypothesis.
Rrel, based     a longitudinal array of drift nets set above and below nnle habitats, we documented that both
       ® 1      niesolanral stages of E. rubrum are common, although not abundant, components of the drift
Dnfling larvae were taken both downstream and upstream of riffles. Although a potential mechanism exists for
transport frorn source to sink populations, length-frequencies (and inferred age strucfure) did not differ between
upstream and downstrearn populations. Thus, predictions of the source-sink hypothesis are not fully supported and
local downstream populations may be self-sustaining.




      .646 .                  16:15 Wednesday                                  CF1                    . .         MCN
The role of artificial reefs in fisheries and ecosystem manamment.                    SA. Bortone. Florida Center for
Environmental Studies, 135 NE 19th Ave., Cape Coral, Florida 33909 USA.

Artificial reefs currently play only a minor role in fisheries or ecosystem management. The most notable example is
their use in the spiny lobster fishery. Further examination of the role that artificial reefs can play in fisheries
management needs to be explored. An example may be with regard to facilitating recruitment of juvenile and young
adult serranid fishes (grouper and seabass) from inshore grassbeds to offshore, natural reefs. Further, artificial reefo
can play a significant role in sanctuary and marine reserve programs. Moreover, purposeful and timed
exploitation/rehabilitation of fish assemblages through artificial reefs may help sustain both fisheries and fish
assemblages. Artificial reefs may not be effective in habitat mitigation where natural habitat has been destroyed.
Information on the complete role that reefs play in trophic dynamics therefore needed. Additionally, an understanding
of the time and spatial scales necessary to effect management objectives is essential. While, most artificial reef
research, to date, has been directed toward fish and fish assemblages, additional insight into ecological processes
and large scale ecosystem management may be gleaned through their study. In the future, artificial reefs
construction and deployment design should be directed toward adding to our knowledge base to better manage
nearshore and coastal ecosytems. Interagency, interstate, and international cooperation are the cornerstones for this
endeavor. Both the positive and negative features of artificial reef deployment as a management tool need to be
understood before they are generally accepted as a ecosystem management alternative.




      647                    16:30 Wednesday                                   CF1                                 MCN
Species at risk In the GuH of Mexico and adjacent coastal habitats: a website. S.G. Poss and A.M. O'Connell,
ASIH. Gulf Coast Research Laboratory Museum, P.O. Box 7000, Ocean Springs, MS 39566-7000, USA.

A website (htfp'y/www.ims.usm.edu/~musweb/endanger.html) has been created that provides information on
vertebrate and invertebrate species potentially at risk in the Gulf of Mexico and adjoining coastal habitats. Ths
website was developed as a means to disseminate the results of a workshop on ths identification of potentially
endangered species in the Gulf and to establish research needs for these species through a cooperative agreement
between the US Gulf of Mexico Program and Gulf Coast Research Laboratory Museum.

Detailed information is provided for 78 species, including 24 fish, 3 amphibians, and 8 reptiles. Data include
synonyms, nomenclatural remarks, distinguishing features, similar species, species photographs, summaries of
species biology, distribution, size, scientific basis for assessment of risk, status of gulf populations, and
bibliographies. For fishes, online distributional maps and extensive archival records for each-species were compiled
through foe assistance of many collections, most notably those of foe five gulf states. These compilations were used
to assess historical changes in species distributions. A bibliography of over 8,500 papers dealing with endangered
species and related topics is also available, as well as links to other related websites.

Extensions are directed toward more structured data collection, standardized online databasing, and inclusion of non-
indigenous species so that information can readily accessed for management and educational purposes.




      648                   13:15 Wednesday                           ..   . CF9                        ...        CHM
Fine structure of the notochord of the chestnut lamprey. R.J. Schmitz and H Roskins, Department of Biology,
University of Wisconsin Stevens Point, Stevens Point, Wl 54481 USA.

The notochord of foe lamprey is a solid cylindrical organ consisting of a cellular medulla surrounded by an
extracellular fibrous sheath and an elastic externa. The base of the medulla consists of a layer of columnar cells with
an extensive network of rough endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria. The cytoplasm of these cells also contains
distinct lipid droplets and a peripheral network of intermediate filaments. The vacuoles in the ceils located in foe
middle of foe medulla are reinforced with a peripheral network of intermediate filaments. These cells are
interconnected with numerous desmosomes. Lipid droplets and huge deposits of glycogen granules are also
obsenred in foe vacuolated cells. The fibrous sheath is made of several layers of collagen fibers. Interspersed
between the collagen layers are deposits of extracellular matrix similar to that found in the elastic externa. The
elastic externa is an amorphous layer of extracellular matrix foat appears to be secreted by the fibroblasts and
chondroblasts that surround foe periphery of foe notochord. There are several differences in the organization of the
lamprey notochord when compared to foe fine structure of foe sturgeon and lungfish notochord (J. Morphol. 1998).
These differences may have furrctional and phylogenetic implications foat remain to be determined.




4   649                        13:30'Wednesday                                  CF9                               CHM
Osteology of the remora (Echeneididae: Carangoidei) sucking disc. B. OToole. Center for Biodiversity and
Consen/ation Biology, Royal Ontario Museum, 100 Queen's Park, Toronto, Ontario M5S 2C6, Canada; and
Department of Zoology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1 Al, Canada.

Remoras (Echeneididae: Carangoidei) are medium sized, specialized pelagic fishes, inhabiting the warm water of
the world. Remoras are found in close association with certain marine animals and inanimate objects. In all cases
remoras use their sucking disc to attach to smooth surfaces. An osteological examination of cleared and stained
remoras reveals that the disc is homologous with the dorsal fin of other percoids. The disc is composed of 4
structures: proximal, medial and distal pterygiophores, and the dorsal spines. These 4 structures are serially
repeated to form the disc. The dorsal spine is reduced in size and enclosed in the fin membrane. The paired distal
pterygiophore forms the denticulated laminae, and also supports the spine. The medial pterygiophore forms the
perimeter of the disc, and supports the laminae fonning a hinged Joint which allows rotation. The proximal
pterygiophore supports the entire unit, it connects to both the laminae and the medial pterygiophore. Each of these
units IS connected to the previous one by the proximal pterygiophore. The remora attaches itself by pressing the disc
against a surface and rotating the dist^ pterygiophore around the hinged joint. This increases the volume of the
sealed chamber creating a partial vacuum.




   650                        13:45 .Wednesday                                 CF9                               CHM
Development of the cartilaginous cephalic skeleton in the sole, Solea solea (Pleuronectiformes, Soleidae).
F. Waaemans and P. Vandewalle, University de Liege, Institut de Zoologie, Laboratoire de Morphologie fonctionnelle
et evolutive, 22 Quai Van Beneden, B-4020 Lidge, Belgium.

The postembryonio development of the cartilaginous cephalic skeleton in Solea solea (Linne) was observed from
hatching to the juvenile stage. Fry were trypsin-cleared and alcian-blue stained. At hatching, S. solea displays no
cartilaginous structure. On day 3, the fry exhibit trabecular bars, Meckel's cartilages, palatoquadrates,
hyosymplectics, hyoid bars, the first two ceratobranchials and basibranchials 1-3. On day 4, ceratobranohials 3 and
4 fomi. On day 12, short taeniae marginales are formed on the well-developed otic capsules and the branchial
basket is nearly complete. On day 14, cartlage reduction begins as the posterior part of the trabecula communis
separates from the otic capsules. On day 18, metamorphosis begins. The tectum posterius completes posteriorly the
braincase dome. On day 20, the left eye moves to the median crest of the head and the right eye shifts a bit
downwards. Consequently, displacement of the right eye induces a deformation extending to the right pterygoid
process. On day 23, both eyes are located on the same side. On day 29, cartilage reduction affects 9ie
hyosymplectics; it continues with the first two ceratobranchials on day 32 and with the otic capsules on day 40,




   651                      ...14:00 Wednesday                                 CF9                      .       CHM
Volumetric study of brain regions in Xenopoecilius oophorus (Belonlformes:Adrianichthyidae). J.S. Albert,
Department of Anatomy;, Nippon Medical School;, Sendagi 1-1-5, Bunkyo-ku;, Tokyo 113 Japan.

Xenopoecilius oophorus is a member of the basal clade of Adrianichthyidae. In order to determine the size and
shape of brain regions in these fishes I used a 3-dimensional computer reconstruction system (TRI 3,10). To
preserve the original size of structures specimens virere immersion-fixed in 10% formalin and brains sectioned at 30
um (B on a cryostat. Outlines of 180 serial sections were traced to calculate the volume of one whole brain and six
brain regions; olfactory bulbs (BO), telencephala (TE). optic tecta (TO), inferior lobes (IL), cerebellum (CE), and facial
lobes (FL). Volumetric estimates from sampling every section were compared with estimates from sampling each
2nd, 4th and 8fh section, as well as from ocular micrometiy using linear measurements taken under a dissecting
microscope. Estimates from section sampling and ocular micrometry did not differ significantly from the complete
volumetric values. Estimates from ocular micrometry were derived from the ellipsoid model [V=1/6 pi’Iwdl (l=length,
w=width, and d=depth). except for the TO. which was estimated from [V=SA‘T] [SA=surface area, T=tnickness).
Estimates of total brain size derived by measuring the linear distance between the anterior margin of the
telencephalon and the obex did not differ significantly from estimates derived from weighing brains.




   655                        15:30 Wedresday                                  CF9                                CHM
Sturgeons and their parasites: the historical biogeography of a host-parasite association. A Choudhury.
Department of Zoology, University of Toronto, Toronto. Ontario, M5S 3G5; TJt. Teny, Department of Zoology,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg.

Sturgeons (Osteichthyes: Acipenseridae) are evolutionaiy relicts with a wide distribution in the northern hemisphere.
The historical biogeography of their association with their diverse assemblage of host specific parasites is exploreri
using phylogenetic systematics and information from geology, paleontology and paleogeogtaphy. The patterns
indicate historical exchanges with a variety of host taxa and low levels of conspeciation, resulting in small clades of
vyidely distributed parasite species. Sister taxa of parasites generally exhibit allopatric patterns associated with
discrete iandrnasses and basins. A trans-Atlantic track involving Adpenser oxyrhynchus and A. sturio and a trans­
pacific track invoivirig A. medimstris are evident. The parasite relationships also support a historical connection
between North America and North Asian freshwater sturgeons (A. fulvescens and A. baeri or their ancestors) and the
biogeographical and phylogenetic relationship of A. mlvescens and A. brevirostrum. Based on these parascript
studies, it is hypothesized that a former contiguous distribution of Palaeartic and Neartic sturgeons was fragmented
by climatic and tectonic events in ths Tertiary causing displacement of the lake sturgeon lineage and its association
with the Gulf of Mexico drainages.




   656                        15:45 Wednesday                                 CF9                                CHM
Biogeography of giant bacteria and their surgeonfish (Acanthuridae) hosts in the north Pacific. W.L.
Mo^gomerv. P.E. Pollak, S. Treutner and T. Scarborough, Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona
University, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA 86011- 5640 USA; KJ3. Clements, School of Biological lienees. University of
Aimldand. PrivatA Rnn QPniQ Air'ktand Naut 7oaland

   652                       '14:15 Wednesday                                CF9                            . CHM
Pleomerism of vertebrae, fin rays, and scale rows In the gobiid fishes: observations and possible
explanations. A.S. Golubtsov. Severtsev Institute of Ecology and Evolution, Moscow 117071, Russia.

According to Lindsey (1975), pleomerism is a correlation among related animal species between their numbers of
meristic parts and their characteristic body sizes. Lindsey found a striking tendency for vertebral number to be
positively correlated with maximum length in many families of fish; however, he did not find the same correlation
among 36 species of the family Gobiidae in his analysis. Data on the maximum recorded size, numbers of vertebrae,
fin-rays (in dorsal,anal, and pectoral fins), and scales in longitudinal row were taken from published reviews of the
gobiid species occurring in the Indo-West-Pacific (120 species). South African (107), North East Atlantic (73), Black
Sea (26) regions. Not only vertebral numbers, but ail other counts appeared to be positively correlated with size of
gobiid species in the four regions. Taxonomic applications of this phenomena and possible evolutionary explanations
(e.g., life history correlates, structure of heritable morphological variation) are discussed.




   653                       14:30 Wednesday                                 CF9                               CHM
Functional morphology of pectoral fin locomotion in basal actinopteryglans. J.E. Janovetz. Department of
Organismal Biology and Anatomy,, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637 USA; M.W. Westneat, Department of
Zoology,, Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, IL 60605 USA.

Fishes use their pectoral fins for a variety of locomotor functions including providing thrust for rectilinear movement
Most previous analyses of pectoral fin swimming in fishes have focused on the Peroiformes, a relatively derived
group. In this study we examine pectoral fin swimming in Polypterus palmas, Leplsosteus platostomus, and Amia
calva, representing three basal clades of ray-finned fishes. Both fonward and reverse swimming are analyzed to
reflect the wide range of behaviors during which fishes use their pectoral fins. Anatomical changes which have
occurred in the pectoral fin complex include duplication of musculature and the formation of a specialized fin ray to
act as the leading edge of the fin. Kinematically, the frequencies of fin beats and three-dimensional excursions of the
fin differ greatly between species. Electroinyograms reveal differences in the duration, relative timing, and amplitude
of activity in the pectoral muscles suggesting that motor patterns during swimming are not highly consenred in these
taxa. These data are compared with information from more derived taxa to trace the evolution of pectoral fin
swimming in actinopteryglans.




   654                       14:45 Wednesday                                CF9                               CHM
Geographic variation in the skeleton of the stoneroller, Campostoma anomalum. T.M. Cavender. Museum of
Biological Diversity. The Ohio State University, 1315 Kinnear Road, Columbus, OH 43212 USA.

Comparative osteology of the nominal species Campostoma anomalum was investigated across most of its
geographic range in North America. Considerable variation was found associated with the food cropping and food
processing mechanisms Qaws, pharyngeals) and bones associated with ths operation of these structures.
Transformations in character states (using Campostoma omatum and Dionda diaboli as outgroups) were found in the
laws, pharyngeals, suspensorium, opercular series, sphenotic, ethmoid, cranial roof and vertebral number. Results
from the skeletal analysis were interpreted as follows. Two broadly defined groups were recognized. One,
represented by Campostoma anomalum pullum, is widespread across the glaciated mid-section of North America
and southward in the plains region. The second is a complex of forms (represented in the upper Ohio Valley by
Campostoma a. anomalum) distributed in the Ohio River basin and peripheral areas to the east, south and west.
The sfonerollers found in the northern portions of the Ohio Valley can be pullum, anomalum or possible
intermediates between the two depending on the drainage system. The largescale stonerolier, C. 'oligolepid',
distributed in the Ozark uplands is a western component of the anomalum complex that is related to the similar but
slightly more derived Tennessee-Cumberland stoneroller.        The stoneroller that dominates the Tennessee-
Cumberland is the most derived form of the anomalum complex. It has peripheral (extensions?) in the Green River,
New River and on the gulf and east slopes. The name C. a. michauxi Fowler might apply to this form. Two of the
most recognizable populations within the anomalum complex have smaller distributional ranges. One is found in the
Roanoke-James and the other in the Ouachita drainage.




   653 ._________________ 13:15 Wednesday______________________ CF12                 _____________________ mcN
Sperm competition and the evolution of aRemative male life histories.              P. Fu. B.D. Neff and M.R. Gross,
University of Toronto, 25 Harbord Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G5,

Sperm competition is one vehicle by which males compete with each other for reproductive success. This paper
examines sperm competition between the specialized cuckolder and parental male life histories of bluegill sunfish
(Lepomis macrochirus). First, we find that the investment in total sperm production is higher in cuckolders frran
parentals and within cuckolders, males that have higher sperm production obtain higher fertilization success.
Second, the longevity of sperm is lower in cuckolders than parentals. The alternative male reproductive life histories
of bluegill therefore utilize sperm in different ways to compete for reproductive success. Cuokoiders invest in
quantity because they always face sperm competition, while parentals invest in quality because they only rarely face
sperm compeUtion. We compare these findings to those in other fishes by analyzing differences in sperni
competition intensities and sperm quantity-quality tradeoffs.   '651                       14:00 Wednesday                                CF9                               CHM
                                     Xmopoecilius oophorus (BelonIformesiAdrIanIchthyidae). J.S. Albed.
Department of Anatomy;, Nippon Medical School;, Sendagi 1-1-5, Bunkyo-ku;, Tokyo 113 Japan.’ ’

                                                                  Adrianichthyidae. In order to determine the size and
 shape of brain regions in these fishes I used a 3-dimensional computer reconstruction system (TRI 3.10) To
 preserve the original size of structures specimens were immersion-fixed in 10% formalin and brains sectioned at 30
 um (B on a cryostat. Onlines of 180 serial sections were traced to calculate the volume of one whole brain and
                                       te'en'^Phala (TE), optic tecta (TO), inferi!,^^lob!! (l™Sr!b™(CEL and
Pnrt 4th^inH RfhSection were compared with estimates from sarnpling each
                                      “ frat" ocular micrometry using linear measurements taken under a dissecting
                                section sampling and ocular micrometry did not differ significantly from the complete
                                      oSufo;.hi'S'’ometty were denved from the ellipsoid model [V=1/6 pi’Iwd] (telength
                           except for the TO, which vyas esbmated from [V=SA*TI [SA=surfdce area, T=fliicknessT
Estimates of tot^ brain size denved by measunng the linear distance between the anterior maroin of the
telencephalon and the obex did not differ significantly from estimates derived from weighing brains.




   655                       15:30 Wednesday                                CF9                  . .   .      CHM .
Sturgeons and their parasites: the historical biogeography of a host-parasite association. A Choudhurv.
Department of Zoology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G5; T.A. Teny, Department of Zoology,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg.

Sturgeons (Osteichthyes: Acipenseridae) are evolutionaiy relicts with a wide distribution in the northern hemisphere.
The historical biogeography of their association with their diverse assemblage of host spedfic parasites is explored
using phylogenesc systematics and information from geology, paleontology and paleogeography. The patterns
indicate historical exchanges with a variety of host taxa and low levels of conspeciation, resulting in small dades of
widely distributed parasite species. Sister taxa of parasites generally exhibit allopatric patterns associated with
discrete landmasses and basins. A trans-Atlantic track involving Adpenser oxyrhynchus and A. sturio and a trans­
pacific track involving A. medirostris are evident. The parasite relationships also support a historical connection
between North America and North Asian freshwater sturoeons (A. fulvescens and A. baeri or their ancestors) and the
biogeographical and phylogeneric relationship of A. fulvescens and A. brevirostrum. Based on these parascript
studies, it is hypothesized that a former contiguous distribution of Palaeartic and Neartic sturgeons was fragmented
by dimatic and tectonic events in the Tertiary causing displacement of the lake sturgeon lineage and its association
with the Gulf of Mexico drainages.




   656                       15:45 Wednesday                                CF9                               CHM
Biogeography of giant bacteria and their surgeonfish (Acanthuridae) hosts in the north Pacific. W.L.
Montgomery. P.E. Pollak, S. Treutner and T. Scarborough, Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona
University, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA 86011- 5640 USA; K.D. Clements, School of Biological Sciences, University of
Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealand.

Surgeonfishes harbor a group of gut symbionts that include the largest known Eubacteria (cell lengths of 30pm to
>500pm). Because the bacteria are acquired after larval surgeonfishes settle from the plankton, me fish/symbiont
system in the Hawaiian Archipelago and other north' Pacific locations provides an opportunity to address questions
about evolution of host and symbionts within and among hosts, within and among islands, and among island
systems. We have sunreyed microbes in host surgeonfishes from Hawaii, Maui, Oahu, Kauai, French Frigate
Shoals, Pearl & Hermes, and Midway Islands in the Hawaiian Archipelago, as well as from the Red Sea, Great
Barrier Reef, Tuvalu, Moorea (French Polynesia), Ishigaki Island (Japan) and Gulf of California. A variety of
structural morphs of the bacteria, differing in maximum size, cell shape, and the number and mode of formation of
daughter cells, have been recorded from all sites except the Gulf. There appears to be considerable consistency in
morphs occupying particular host species among the Hawaiian islands, but little consistency among island systems
in terms of morphs occupying given host species. Prelimin^ molecular studies suggest loca divergence of
microbes within a single host, at least for widely separated localities.