les are
aggregated in different areas; spermatogenesis starts earlier than vitellogenesis. After copulation in August,
ovulation may start three weeks later. The gestation period is about three months and new bom start to appear in
November. The embryos are nourished by yolk sac and trophonemata in ths uterus. New bom stay on top of
female for 3-4 days before they assume an independent life. During the reproductive season of 1996-97, females
had one gestation period. However, during the current El Nino year 1997-98, an earlier and prolonged drought has
occurred in the region, females have a second gestation.

   70                            14:30 Friday                                 CE12                          ..   OVC
Structure and evolution of shark ribosomal DNA Internal transcribed spacers.    M.S. Shivii. Nova Southeastern
University, Oceanographic Center, 8000 North Ocean Drive, Dania, FL 33004 USA; M,J. Stanhope, School of
Biology and Biochemistry, The Queen's University, Belfast, BT9 7BL„ N. Ireland, UK; S.O. Rogers, College of
Environmental Sdence & Forestry, State University of New York, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.
Internal transcribed spacers (ITS1 and ITS2) are DNA regions separating the multicopy, nuclear ribosomal RNA
genes. We have obtained complete ITS2 sequences from several sharks representing different lineages, and report
here on aspects of the comparative structure and evolution of this locus.
Shark ITS2 regions are ths largest reported for any eukaryote, a size explained in part by the insertion of sequence
elements strongly resembling group I introns. These insertion elements appear to be present in all major shark
lineages. They are, however, conspicuously absent from hammerhead sharks, arguing for an ancient origin of these
elements with subsequent loss in the presumably derived hammerhead lineage. The insertion element is also absent
from the ITS2 of the one stingray (Urolophus Jamaicensis) we have examined thus far.
We have also explored the phylogenetic utility of ITS2 sequences for resolving some relationships within the family
Carcharhinidae. The precise affinities of Prionace and Negaprion to Carcharhinus are currently unsettled, with
hypotheses proposed about Prionace being either a derived species within or sister taxon to Carcharhinus.
Preliminary phylogenetic analysis of 1TS2 sequences places Prionace well within the Carcharhinus clads, arguing
against ths current status of the blue shark as a separate genus.



   71                           . 14:45. Friday                               CE12                                OVC
Characterization of blue shark (Prionace glauca) mitochondrial genome control region sequences for
population genetic studies. B.A. Ertan. Oceanographic Center, Nova Southeastern University, 8000 N. Ocean
Drive, Dania, FL 33004, USA; L. Park, National Marine Fisheries Service, 2725 Montlake Blvd. East., Seattle, WA
98112, USA; M.J. Stanhope, Medical Biology Center, The Queen's University, Belfast, N. Ireland, UK BT9 7BL; M.S.
Shivji, Oceanographic Center, Nova Southeastern University, 8000 N. Ocean Drive, Dania, FL 33004, USA.
Blue sharks are highly vagile elasmobranchs with a circumglobal temperate and tropical distribution. This species
displays complex reproductive and migratory behavior, making it difficult to realize a clear picture of genetic stock
structure. Wo report here our examination of the utility of mitochondrial (mt) DNA control region sequences for
assessing blue shark genetic structure on a global scale. Complete control region (1069 bp in size) sequences were
obtained from 16 blue shark individuals collected from 5 globally distributed sites. Contraiy to ths case in most
vertebrates, this locus is remarkably conserved in blue sharks. The 11 haplotypes observed differed from each other
by 5 or less single nucleotide substitutions or indels over the entire control region. Most of the genetic variation (8 of
12 variable sites) was restricted to the 350 bp region adjacent to the tRNA-proline gene, with no variation observed
in the central 400 bp section of this locus. Phylogenetic analysis revealed no indication of geographic population
structuring. We infer from these data that either the blue shark mt control region may be too conserved to be useful
for population genetic studies, or that dispersal over a global scale is occum'ng, or has occurred in the recent past.




   72                             15:30 Friday                                CE11                               OVC
Distribution, evolution, and functional significance of gonadotropin-releasing hormone In the elasmobranch
brain. P.M. Forlano and K.P. Maruska, Department of Sologioal Sciences, Rorida Institute of Technology, USA;
J.A. King, MRC Regulatory Peptides Research Unit, Department of Chemical Pathology, University of Capetown
Medical School, South Africa; S.A. Sower, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of New
Hampshire, USA; T.C. Tricas, Department of Biological Sciences, Florida Institute of Technology, USA.
The basic structure of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) includes at least nine different forms found across
the vertebrates. Some forms are believed to serve extrapituitary functions, as indicated by their wide distribution
throughout the brain. Chicken II GnRH (cll) is considered the most evolutionarily conserved variant because it is
generally found to coexist with al least one other form in all the jawed vertebrate classes, while dogfish GnRH (df) is
found exclusively in elasmobranch fishes. This study examined the distribution of df and cll GnRH-immunoreactive
(ir) cell bodies and fibers in the brain of the Atlantic stingray, Dasyatis sabina, by immunocytochemical methods as a
first step to correlate anatomical distribution with possible functionality of the different forms in an elasmobranch.
Do^sh GnRH-ir cells and fibers were localized in the ganglia of the terminal nerve and throughout the ventro-caudal
telencephalon and preoptic area, while a large, discrete cll GnRH-ir cell nucleus was found in the midbrain
tegmentum with main projections to the diencephalon and hindbrain. This is the first study to show differential
distribution of cll and df GnRH in the elasmobranch brain, and supports the hypothesis of divergent function of GnRH
variants such as gonadotropin control and neuromodulation of sensory function.   73                            15:45 Friday                              CE11                                 OVC
Effects of splenectomy on the immune system of the nurse shark, Ginglymostoma cirratum, assessed by
changes in peripheral blood leukocyte populations and histology of lymphomyeloid tissues. C.A, Luer and
C.J. Walsh, Mote Marine Laboratory, 1600 Ken Thompson Pkwy, Sarasota, Florida 34236-1096 USA; A.B. Bodine
and J.T. Wytiels, Department of Animal and Veterinary Sciences, Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina
29634-0361 USA.
In the absence of bone marrow and lymph nodes, elasmobranch fish must rely on alternative lymphomyeloid tissues
for production of immune cells. Principle tissues include spleen, thymus, epigonal organ, and, in some species,
Leydig organ. To investigate the role of spleen in immune cell production, spleens were removed surgically from
juvenile nurse sharks, Ginglymostoma cirratum, (n=8). Sham operated (n=5) and non-operated (n=5) Juveniles
served as controls. Peripheral blood, from which hematocrits and differential white cell counts were obtained, was
sampled at varying intervals during the first week after surgery, then at weekly intervals for five weeks. Animals were
sacrificed at various times for histological examination of lymphomyeloid tissues. Hematocrits did not vary
significantly during the study. Circulating levels of lymphocytes decreased during the first three days, after which
levels gradually returned to normal ranges within two to three weeks. Granulocyte levels increased initially arid
recovered after approximately three weeks. Preliminary assessment of tissue imprints indicates an increase in
immature lymphoc;^s and granulocytes in epigonal oi^ans of splenectomized animals compared with controls,
suggesting that epigonal organ may increase its production of lymphocytes in the absence of spleen, but not at the
expense of its role in granulocyte production.




   .74                          16:00 Friday                               CE11                                  OVC
Hormonal regulation of growth in vertebral cartilage of the clearnose skate, Raja eglanteria. J. Gelsleichter
and J.A. Musick, Virginia Institute of Marine Science, School of Marine Science, The College of William and Mary in
Virginia, Gloucester Pt., VA 23062 USA.
In most elasmobranchs, growth of vertebral cartilage proceeds incrementally and forms periodic marks that are
extensively used in age and growth studies. Such research is essential for the management of these fishes, yet is
often limited by poor understanding of the physiological processes that regulate vertebral growth. Since skeletal
growth in most vertebrates is under strict control of file endocrine system, the goal of this study was to investigate
the hormonal regulation of vertebral growth in the clearnose skate. Raja eglanteria. Synthesis of cartilage matrix
glycosaminoglycans (GAG) was used as a marker for vertebral growth using an in vitro culture system. The effects
of growth hormone (GH), insulin-like growth lactor-l (IGF-I), tri-iodo-L-thyronine (T3), and corticosteroids on GAG
synthesis were assessed, due to their well-documented roles in cartilage growth. The effect of calcitonin (CT) on
vertebral growth was also investigated, due to its involvement in the skeletal physiology and mineral homeostasis of
terrestrial vertebrates. Finally, the effect of parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrp) on GAG synthesis was
examined, because of its critical role in mammalian skeletogenesis. PTHrp has recently been defected in the
perichondrium of elasmobranch vertebral cartilage, thus it may play a role in chondrocyte proliferation and
differentiation. The present study is the first investigation on the hormonal regulation of elasmobranch skeletal
physiology.




   75                            16:15 Friday                               CE11                           .     OVC
Mechanics of ventilation in the swellshark, Cephaloscyllium ventriosum (Scyliorhinidae).                       L.A. Ferry-
Graham. University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-2525 USA.
Most fishes are faced with one of two options for gill ventilation: physically moving their gills through the medium
(“ram" ventilation), or actively pumping the medium over their gills via “buccal pumping“. The basic pattern of
mechanical movements during buccal pumping was studied over 40 years ago. However, unique patterns of water
flow through the head of the swellshark during feeding suggested that the generation of respiratory currents might
not be as simple as once thought. Using pressure transducers implanted into the buccal and gill cavities of actively
respiring swellsharks, it was discovered that pressure traces vary within and among individuals. These data,
combined with both video and electrical impedance data for the displacement of the lower jaw and gill septum,
suggest that although the classic pattern of pressure generation regularly occurs, at least one novel pattern of
pressure generation exists. During this novel pattern, pressure reversals exist over a much longer duration than
previously thought possible, and at much larger magnitudes. It is questionable whether the classic alternating
“suotion“ and “pressure“ pumps are always used for moving water over the gills unidirectionally, and whether
continuous water flow over the gills exists for large intervals of time in this species.




   7tj___________________ 13-15 Friaay_____________________ CA2                                                 CHM
Age, growth and reproduction of the grtw triggarfish (Baftsfas e^riscuili in the eastern Gulf of Mexico. RK
Hood. Florida Marine Research Institute, Florida Department of Environmental Protection, 100 Sth Ave. S.E., St.
Petersburg, FL 33710 USA; A.K. Johnson, North Carolina State University, Department of Zoology, Box 7617,
Raleigh, NC 27695-7617 USA.

   76                            16:30 Friday                                CE11                               OVC
Ontogenetic changes in energetics and active and passive ventilation of the swell shark {Cephaloscyllium
ventnosum} egg capsule. S.R. Meehan. Department of Environmental Protection, Lignumvitae Key, Florida USA;
A.P, Summers, Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, UMASS Amherst, Massachusetts USA; T.J. Koob, Shriner's
Hospital for Children, Tampa, Florida USA.
The swell shark. Cephaloscyllium ventriosum, is an oviparous chondrichthyan fish. Each egg capsule contains a
single embryo that is incubated on the sea floor for 7.5 to 10 months. The homy capsule material is not sufficiently
permeable to oxygen to supply the needs of a late stage embryo, however, after about one third of development four
slits open in the sides of the egg case to admit seawater. We investigated ontogenetic changes in metabolic rate and
mechanisms of capsule ventilation. Mass specific rate of oxygen consumption decreases as the embryo grows. Early
stage embryos have a relatively large tail appendage that is used to generate a water current through the capsule.
During development this appendage decreases in relative size and just before hatching the embryo ventilates the
capsule by oropharyngeal pumping. In addition to the active pumping, the capsule is ventilated passively. When in a
current, pressure differences along the capsule induce flow through the capsule interior. Sufficient water to supply
the oxygen needs of a near term embryo will be induced to flow at current speeds of just 0.2 knots. This passive flow
comes at no metabolic cost to the embryo.




   77                            16:45-Friday                                CE11                          .. OVC
Electroreception in neonatal bonnethead sharks, Sphyrna tiburo.              S.M. Kaiiura. Hawaii Institute of Marine
Biology, PO Box 1346, Kaneohe, HI, 96744, USA.
Digital video analysis was used to quantify behavioural response of neonatal bonnethead sharks, Sphyrna tiburo, to
prey-simulating electric fields. Sharks less than twelve hours post-parturition failed to demonstrate a positive feeding
response to the electrodes, however, vigorous biting at the electrodes was observed in sharks greater than 24 hours
post-parturition. Orientation behaviours were classified as one of four types: straight approach, single turn, looping
return and spiral tracking where the shark appears to follow the voltage equipotential to the centre of the dipole.
Most orientations to the dipole were from a distance of less than 10 cm with a maximum orientation distance of 22
cm. The mean threshold for initiation of orientation was 0.14 iiV-cnr’ with a minimum of less than 0.001 pV-cm ’.
The mean value is almost double that obtained for juvenile scalloped hammerhead sharks, S. lewini, which require a
mean stimulus of only 0.08 uV-cnr’ to Initiate an attack- The greater sensitivity of S. lewini may be attributed to their
larger size and consequent longer ampullary canals.




 . 78                            13:00 Friday                                 CA2                               CHM
Validation of otolith age estimates for the rainbow darter, Etheostoma caeruleum, in the James River of the
southwest Missouri Ozarks. D.W. Beckman. Department of Biology, Southwest Missouri State University,
Springfield, Missouri 65714, USA.
In the past 15 years there has been an emphasis on validation of age estimates for fish population studies.
However, age estimates have been validated for few freshwater stream fish species; with a dearth of published age
validation studies for North American darters of the genus Etheostoma. Traditionally darter ages have been
obtained from scales or by length-frequency analysis, methods now known to be unreliable for many species.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate otolith and scale age estimates for the rainbow darter, Etheostoma
caeruleum, from the James River in the southwest Missouri Ozarks. Validity of age estimates was assessed by
following the progression of annulus formation at the growing edge of scales and otoliths in fish captured throughout
the year (edge analysis). Samples of 10-15 fish were taken by seine in each of 8 months from July 1996 through
May 1997. Otoliths were viewed whole and in transverse section, and scales were viewed mounted between glass
slides. Edge analysis of whole or sectioned otoliths indicated that one opaque annulus was formed per year in the
otoliths, primarily during summer months. High agreement between sectioned and whole otolith ages (75% exact
agreement, 99% within one year) indicates that consistent, valid ages can be obtained for Etheostoma caeruleum
using either otolith method. Otolith age estimates ranged from 0-4 years. There was no clear pattern discerned in
timing of scale annulus formation, and scale age estimates tended to be lower than otolith age estimates. Our
results suggest that scale age estimates for darters should be made with caution.




   82                            14:00 Frday                                  CA2:                              CHM
Development of the lateral line system in the shovelnose sturgeon, Scaphirhynchus platorynchus.                     MA
Gibbs and R.G. Northcutt, Dept. Neurosdences, UCSD, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093-0201, USA.

The shovelnose sturgeon, Scaphirhynchus platorynchus, normally develops over a 10 day period at 18 °C. During
the first 45 hours post-fertilization, three preotic (anterodorsal, anteroventral and otic) and three postotic (medial,
___ A_____ 1__ I__ *._ !_ \ l_A__ I I!___ I___ I_ __ S___ *■____ ___ 1_ ___ *_ ■__ ■ _»___ ■ •>_ ____ ____ ___ _ >  79                  .     13:15 Friday ,                           CA2                             CHM
Age, growth and reproduction of ths grm triggerfish (Ballstos capriscua} In the eastern Gulf of Mexico.
Hood. Florida Marine Research Institute, Florida Department of Environmental Protection, 100 Bth A,ve. S.E., St.
Petersburg, FL 33710 USA; A.K. Johnson, North Carolina State University, Department of Zoology, Box 7617,
Raleigh, NC 27695-7617 USA.
  Gray triggerfish (Batistes capriscus), commonN occur in the Gulf of Mexico recreational and commercial reef fish
fisheries. Yet life history information needed for proper fisheries assessment of this species is inadequate. We
sampled 679 gray triggerfish (103-725 mm FL) from the eastern Gulf of Mexico to assess their age structure, growth,
mortality, and reproduction. Marginal-increment analysis and oxy-tetracycline injected fish failed to validate annual
formation of rings in the dorsal spine; however, data from other studies indicates rings are formed once a year.
Assuming rings are annual, ages ranged from 0 to 14 years. The von Bertalanffy growth parameters were L* = 625
mm FL, k=0.152, and to=-1.9 for combined sexes. The age of full recruitment was 4 years to the commercial fishery
and 3 years to the recreational fishery. Estimates of total instantaneous mortality ranged from 0.742 to 0.836. The
mean length of males was significantly larger than females, and the overall sex ratio was 2.1:1 in favor of males. No
immature males were obsen/ed in our samples. Most females were mature by age 1 (87.5%) and 250 mm FL
(91%). Ovaries containing vitellogenic oocytes were observed from June to September indicating that gray
triggerfish spawn during the summer. Total fecundities ranged from 213,912 to 1,172,854 oocytes from females
ranging 194 to 489 mm FL.




   80                           13:30 Friday                               CA2                               CHM
Age and growth of sheepshead, Archoaargua probatocephalus, from the nearshore waters of Tampa Bay,
Florida. T.C. MacDonald. B.L. Winner and K.B. Arinendola, Florida Marine Research Institute, 100 8th Ave. S.E., St.
Petersburg, FL USA 33701.
Florida's Fisheries-lndependent Monitoring (FIM) program began collecting sheepshead, for life-history analyses,
throughout the nearshore waters of Florida in 1993. Mors than 1,050 sheepshead (653 females, and 430 males),
ranging in size from 107-522 mm FL, have been collected in the Tampa Bay estuary. Ages were estimated after the
annuli were independently counted six times from thin-sectioned sagittae. Marginal increment analysis
demonstrated that a single increment minimum occurred during May-June. Sheepshead reached a maximum age of
14 years. Analyses of the von Bertalanffy growth models showed that females and males grew at similar rates
through age five, but that after age five the predicted lengths for females were greater than those for males. A
previous Fisheries-Dependent (FD) study conducted in Louisiana waters indicated that sheepshead there grew faster
and achieved older Mes than did those from Tampa Bay. Although there may be subspecific (A. probatocephalus
probatocephalus in Tampa Bay and A. probatocephalus oviceps in Louisiana) differences in age and growth,
differences in sampling design (FIM vs. FD) most likely explain the disparity in growth model results.




  .81   .                      13:45 Friday                               CA2                               CHM
Age and growth of hardhead catfish, Arlus felis, and gafftopsail catfish, Bagre marinus. In Tampa Bay,
Florida. D.J. Harshanv and R.E. Cr^tree, Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Florida Marine
Research Institute, 100 8th Avenue SE, Tampa, FL 33701 USA.
We collected 1068 hardhead catfish (Anus felis) and 639 gafftopsail catfish (Bagre marinus) from Tampa Bay, FL. A.
felis fork lengths ranged 111-439 mm FL and ages ranged 0-23 years. B. marinus fork lengths ranged 140-577
mm FL and ages tanged 0-24 years. Based on these growth rates and preliminary estimates of length at maturity,
A. felis and B. marinus could reach sexual maturity at age - 5. Preliminary examination of gonads suggest that
female A. felis reach sexual maturity at about 250 mm FL and B. marinus females reach maturity at about 330 mm
FL. Males appear to be smaller at age than females. The von Bertalanffy growth equation for males and unsexed
age-0 and age-1 A. felis was FL=324.8 (1-e(-0.243(Age+1.462))) and for females and unsexed age-0 and age-1 A.
felis was FL=341.9 (1-e(-0.241(Age-r1.383))). The von Bertalanffy growth equation for males and unsexed age-0
and age-1 S. marinus was FL=501.4 (1-e(-0.167(Age+0.981))) and for females and unsexed age-0 and age-1 S.
marinus was FL=556.6 (1-e(-0.139(Age+0.974)) ). Age frequency distributions suggest relatively abundant age
groups through the age of 17 for both species.

  82                         14:00 Friday                         CA2                         CHM
Development of the lateral line system In the shovelnose sturgeon, Scaphirhynchus platorynchus. M.A.
Gibbs and R.G. Northcutt, Dept. NeurosciencQs. UCSD, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093-0201, LISA.
The shovelnose sturgeon, Scaphirhynchus platorynchus, normally develops over a 10 day period at 18 °C. During
the first 45 hours post-fertilization, three preotic (anterodorsal, anteroventral and otic) ano three postotic (medial,
supratemporal and posterior) lateral line placodes arise within the cephalic ectoderm. Lateral line ganglia are formed
in each placode from endogenous neuieblasts which migrate from the placodes at 60 hours post-fertilization.
Placodes begin to elongate into sensory ridges a few hours before hatching, and by the time hatching occurs, at
about 106 hours post-fertilization, neuromasts are erupting in the central zones of the otic and caudal anterodorsal
sensory ridges. By four days post-hatch, an exposed mechanosensory lateral line extends from the dorsal zone of
the anteroventral sensory ridge to the supra- and infra-orbital zones of the anterodorsal ridge. At 10 days post-hatch,
the larva is feeding and has a mechanosensory lateral line that extends from the rostrum to ths trunk and includes
neuromasts from all six dorsolateral placodes. Electroreceptive ampullary organs, which arise from ths
anteroventral, anterodorsal, otic and supratemporal placodes begin to enjpt just before the onset of feeding, and are
fully developed by the time canals begin to form around the neuromast lines at twelve days post-hatch.




   83                           14:15 Friday                                CA2                               CHM
Lack of negative effect of ambient ultraviolet radiation on development of eggs and larvae of the
southernmost anuran of the world near the ozone hole. S.F. Fox. Department of Zoology, Oklahoma State
University, Stillwater, OK 74078 USA; D.J. Bruggeman, Department of Zoology, Oklahoma State University,
Stillwater, OK 74078 USA; H. Nunez, Seccion Zoologfa, Museo Nacional de Historia Natural, Casilla 787, Santiago,
Chile; R.A. Van Den Bussche, Department of Zoology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078 USA; J.A.
Bantie II, Department of Zoology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078 USA.
One possible cause implicated in worldwide amphibian declines is increased ultravlolet-B radiation (UV-B) brought
on by anthropogenic thinning of the ozone layer. Due to the ozone hole, increased UV-B is most pronounced over
Antarctica in winter, but ozone-poor air drifts northward over the southern cone of South America in early spring
when frogs there begin to breed, thus potentially exposing their eggs and larvae to damaging amounts of UV-B.
Damage from UV-B at that time is expected to be intense, especially since UV-B levels there prior to the first
appearance of the ozone hole were not high. We report preliminary results from a multi-year study of potential UV-B
effects on survival, growth, malformations, and DNA damage of developing eggs and larvae of Pleurodema bufonina
in southern Argentina. In none of four populations studied so far have we found evidence of a negative effect of
ambient UV-B.




   84                           14:30 Friday .                          CA2                         CHM
Variability in exposure of amphibian embryos to uv-b radiation.       P.S. Com. USGS Midcontinent Ecological
Science Center, Aldo Leopold Wilderness Research Institute, PO Box 8089, Missoula, MT 59807 USA.
In ihe last 20 years, thinning stratospheric ozone has resulted in a 5-10% increase in UV-B radiation at the Earth's
surface, poleward above 40° latitude. Field experiments that have shown increased mortality of amphibian embryos
exposed to ambient sunlight, compared to those exposed to sunlight with UV-B removed, have lead to a hypothesis
that increased UV-B radiation has contributed to amphibian declines. However, measurements of incident UV-B are
missing from most of these studies, and variability in UV-B has not been examined. There are several sources of
variation in the UV-B radiation to which embryos may be exposed, including annual variation in UV-B, seasonal
gradients in UV-B, annual variation in amphibian breeding phenology, and local geographic variation in breeding
phenology. I used satellite-based estimates of UV-B radiation and observations of amphibian breeding phenology in
northern Colorado to estimate the range of variation in UV-B. Erythemal exposure (UV-B weighted by the action
spectrum for human skin irritation) increases by 80% from 1 May to 30 June, and breeding activity may vary by 30
days from year to year and 14 days across an elevation gradient. Mean 10-day erythemal exposure for two
populations of boreal chorus frogs, Pseudacris maculata, ranged between 192 and 388, and the mean exposure
between populations of P. maculata and boreal toads, Bufo boreas, on elevation gradients increased by 21 and 28%,
respectively. The increase in UV-B radiation due to ozone thinning is small relative to variation in UV-B to which
embryos may be exposed.   85                .           14:45 Friday                                 CA2                                CHM
Difference In growth rates among turtles b) Pool 20 of the upper Mississippi River.                  M.A. Romano. R.V.
Anderson and M.L. Gutierrez, Department of Biological Sciences, Western Illinois University, Macomb, IL 61455
USA.
Six species of turtles were collected at 3 sites from June through September 1997 to evaluate growth relationships
among turtles on Pool 20 of the Mississippi River. Length and weight data for the smooth softshell {ApoIone mutica,
n=48), spiny softshell (A. spinifera, n=8), painted turtles {Chiysemys picta, n=35), common map turtles (Graptemys
gaographica, n=34). common snapping turtles {Chelydra serpentina, n=29) and red-eared sliders (Trachemys
scripla, n=54). Analysis of Covariance (ANCOVA) was utilized to evaluate lines of log-trarisformed lengths
regressed against log-transformed weights among species and sexes within species. Significant differences amorig
slopes from different species were fou^ suggesting that growth rates vary among turtles. Significant differences in
growth rate between sexes was found for common map turtles and red-eared sliders. Another ANCOVA was carried
out between melanistic red-eared sliders and normally pigmented individuals to evaluate the possibility that dark
individuals might represent releases of turtles from elsewhere in United States by an Iowa turtle farm. No difference
was found in growth rate between melanistic and non-melanistic individuals; however, the elevations, of the
respective lines were significantly different.




   86                            15:30 Friday                                 CA2                                 CHM
Nest-site choice in a turtle with temperature-dependent sex determination. F.J. Janzen. Department of Zoology
& Genetics, Program in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Iowa State University, Ames, lA 50011 USA.
The role of nest-site choice in the population biology of species with temperature-dependent sex determination
(TSD) is virtually unexplored despite its importance in theoretical models for the evolution of sex ratio in such
species. In those models, the evolution of sex ratio is largely determined by heritable variation in maternal choice of
thermal qualities of nest sites. This ongoing 3-year field study examined thermally-dependent nest-site choice in a
marked population of painted turtles that has been the focus of long-term studies of TSD. Analyses to date indicate
that individual turtles exhibit significant fidelity to nest sites with similar amounts of surrounding vegetation cover. In
other words, some turtles consistently prefer unshaded sites and vice versa. Because vegetational cover is a
reasonable predictor of nest thermal environments and offspring sex ratios in this population, these findings suggest
that nest-site choice and, hence, TSD may be able to evolve in response to environmental change. Supported by
NSF grant DEB-9629529.




  ■87.                           15:45 Friday                                 CA2                       CHM  .
Modeling organismal growth In turtle populations:            assumption validation and practicality.M.J..Dce£lik,
Center for Biodiversity, iTlinois Natural History Survey, 607 East Peabody Drive, Champaign, IL 61820 USA; L.
Comerford, Department of Mathematics, Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, IL 61920 USA.
For the last decade, interest in modeling chelonian growth has increased and provided a framework for better
understanding of this life history trait. Modeling growth generates variables that can be used as life history
descriptors, and in unified comparative studies. With a long list of models, the question becomes which one to use?
To choose among models, we must first understand the basic assumptions of the typical linear, guadratio, allometric,
Johnson, Putter, von Bertalanffy, Gompertz and Logistic algorithms: 1) age is known, 2) growth follows the specified
algorithm, 3) seasonal effects are absent and 4) genetic effects are minimal. Assumption one is circumvented using
mark/recapture analogues of the aforementioned models, while assumption two is eliminated by using robust models
like the Richard's, Schunte, Baker and Francis. New insights into modeling have allowed us to include seasonality;
however, our knowledge of genetic effects does not presently allow us to correct existing models. We will discuss
and present the value of certain mark/recapture growth models, by fitting mock and actual data sets to the von
Bertalanffy, Gompertz, Logistic, Richard's and Schnute mark/recapture analogues.




Sensory biology of vision in the elasmobranchs. S.H. Gruber. Bimini Biological Reid Station. RSMAS/University
of Miami, 4600 Rickenbacker Causeway, Miami, FL 33149-1098; R.E. Hueter, Center for Shark Research, Mote
Marine Laboratory, 1600 Ken Thompson Parkway, Sarasota, FL 34236.
The visual system of elasmobranchs is reviewed with respect to stnjcture, function and behavior. As a general
review, the >flsual systems of eiasmob.ranchs and teleosts are compared and contrasted. Similar visual structures
and functions of phvioaeneticallv unrelated elasmobranchs are shown to occur in species oocuovinq similar habitats

   88   .   .                  .    16:00 Friday                           CA2                              CHM
Maternal effects, nest-site choice, and the maintenance of temperature-dependent sex determination. CX,.
Milne and F.J. Janzen, Department of Zoology and Genetics, 339 Science II, Iowa Stale, University Ames, lA 50011
USA.
The adaptive value, if any, of temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD) is uncertain in reptiles. Suggested
mechanisms include differential fitness between offspring sexes, dependent on maternal condition. Thus, females
with the ability to assess environmental conditions that produce the sex whose fitness benefits most from maternal
condition would have a selective advantage. This presentation reports a three-year field study on nest-site choice in
the painted turtle, Chrysemys picta, a species exhibiting TSD. No relationship was found between egg mass and
nest-site choice for the three years of the study. Although egg mass may not influence nest-site choice in painted
turtles, other maternal effects that remain unexplored may play a role in nest-site choice and the maintenance of
TSD.




   89                    . .       08:10 Saturday                            I8                              OVC
Don Nelson and the study of shark behavior. S.H. Gruber. Bimini Biological Field Station, RSMAS/University of
Miami, 4600 Rickenbacker Causeway, Miami, FL 33149-1098; T.C. Tricas, Department of Biological Sciences,
Rorida Institute of Technology, 150 W. University Blvd., Melbourne, FL 32901-6988 USA.




   90                              08:30 Saturday .                          18                              OVC
Hearing in elasmobranchs: a review. AA. Mvrbera (Jr.1. Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science,
University of Miami, Miami Florida 33149, USA.
A brief history is provided of the studies which established that elasmobranchs not only detect underwater sounds,
but respond to them in ways that suggested a rapid ability to locate specific sound-sources. The latter included
acoustical features that mimicked sounds produced by stnrggling prey as well as providing a point-source to observe
the behavioral activities of such predators. The rapid speed in locating sound-sources by free-ranging sharks
created controversy, however. An important theory, at the time, precluded fishes, and particularly sharks, from
directional hearing in the acoustical far-field (distances beyond one wavelength of a sound). Repeated confirmation
that sharks could accomplish such a feat during the late '60s - mid 70s resulted in several new theories that could
account for rapid directional hearing by these animals. These theories will also be briefly reviewed as will be the
findings that resulted from a renewed interest in the neural mechanisms of elasmobranch hearing in the '80s. The
report will end with ideas concerning future directions of hearing research in elasmobranchs.




What la the current status of chemical shark repellents? J A Sisneros. Department of Biological Sciences,
Florida Institute of Technoiogy, 150 W. University Blvd., Melbourne, FL 32901 -6968 USA.
Efforts by the US Navy to develop a chemical shark repellent during the post W.W.II years were unsuccessful and
later abandoned. Interest in chemical shark repellents was renewed by the discovery of pardaxin, a natural shark
repellent secreted by the Moses sole {Pardachirus marmoratus). The surfactant-like nature of pardaxin led
researchers to test the shark reoellencv of various surfactants. The most effective surfactant tested to date is the   91                            09:00 Saturday                                     18   ...                          OVC
Sensory biology of vision In the elasmobranchs. S.H. Gruber. Bimini Biological Field Station, RSMASAJniversity
of Miami, 4600 Rickenbackor Causeway, Miami, FL 33149-1098; R.E. Hueter, Center for Shark Research, Mote
Marine Laboratory, 1600 Ken Thompson Parkway, Sarasota, FL 34236.

The visual system of elasmobranchs is reviewed with respect to structure, function and behavior. As a general
review, the visual systems of elasmottranchs and teleosts are compared and contrasted. Similar visual structures
and functions of phylogenetically unrelated elasmobranchs are shown to occur in species occupying similar habitats
and often displaying comparable behaviors. For example, the vertical slit pupil Is found In active, pelagic and
epibenthic elasmobranchs as widely divergent as carcharhinid sharks and m^iobatid rays. Likewise, a strong
correlation is found between depth of occurrence and position of the peak spectr^ absorption of the visual pigment,
regardless of systematic affiliation. Performance testing of the visual system also reveals features adaptive to
behavior and environment. Since the majority of information on visual performance has been gleaned from the
lemon shark (Negaprion brevimstris}, that visual system is reviewed. Correlates between visual structure, function
and behavior show that the lemon ^ark has an ecologically broad period of activity and is able to carry out its
normal behavior throughout the entire diet period. The review ends with an unejpected finding relating the lemon
shark's visual pigments to habitat changes with aging. The final conclusion is that an understanding of how
elasmobranch visual structure and function are correlated with behavior and ecology is barely at a beginning stage,
and the field of elasmobranch vision, even after extensive study in recent decades, remains wide open. Supported
by a grant from the Florida Department of Education to SHG and N0AA/NMF€ grants to REH.




   92                            09:30 Saturday                          .18                               OVC
The elasmobranch mechanosensory lateral line system: form and function?                K.P. Manrska. Department of
Biological Sciences, Florida Institute of Technology, 150 West University Blvd., Melbourne, FL 32901 USA.
The biological function of the mechanosensory lateral line in relation to ecology and behavior is essentially unknown
in elasmobranch fishes. One function of the teleost lateral line is to facilitate prey detection, but does the
elasmobranch mechanosensory system possess the morphology and organization to support a role in prey
localization and c^ture? General organization of the ventral lateral line system was examined in several
representative batoid species (Dasyatis sabina, Raja eglanteria, Narcine brasiliensis,Gymnura micrura) in relation to
their food habits and feeding behavior. Batoid ventral lateral line systems consist of pored and non-pored canals,
and vesicles of Savi. The relative distribution of these mechanosensory structures differs between species and may
be related to function. It is proposed that the ventral lateral line system in most benthic feeding batoids functions in
the localization of invertebrate prey via a novel mechanotactile mechanism mediated by the non-pored canals and
vesicles of Savi around the rostrum and mouth. This presentation will summarize current knowledge of
elasmobranch lateral line anatomy, physiology and behavior; discuss relationships between batoid ventral
mechanosensory systems and feeding ecology; and propose future research on lateral line form and function in
elasmobranch fishes.




   93                            10:30 Saturday                                     18                                OVC
Electroreception: Mechanisms for detecting weak signals in noise. D. Bodznick. Dept, of Biology, Wesleyan
University, Middletown, CT 06459-0170 USA.
The elasmobranch electrosense is known for its extraordinary sensitivity which Is necessary for detecting the feeble,
behaviorally-relevant electric fields in the sea. But a cost of this sensitivity is vulnerability to electrical noise including
that produced by the fish's ovm behaviors. Behavioral, morphological and physiological specializations are ail
necessary for extracting the important weak signals from noise. Each of these types of specializations will be
discussed and recent work on the physiological mechanisms for extracting weak signals from noise will be reviewed.
Physiological adaptations include receptors that can operate over an extended voltage range without loss of
sensitivity, simple subtractive circuits in the hindbrain and sophisticated adaptive filter mechanisms that involve the
development of an expectation of the noise typically associated with each of the fish's different behaviors. The end
result of these mechanisms is that all traces of the noise can be eliminated in the hindbrain without any loss of
sensitivity to the signals important for behavior.

   94                           11 00 Saturday                                   18                               OVC
What is the current status of chemical shark repellents? J.A. Sisneros. Department of Biological Sciences,
Florida Institute of Technology, 150 W. University Blvd., Melbourne, FL 32901-6988 USA.

Efforts by the US Navy to develop a chemical shark repellent during the post W.W.II years were unsuccessful and
later abandoned. Interest in chemical shark repellents was renewed by the discovery of pardaxin, a natural shark
repellent secreted by the Moses sole (Pardachinis manmoratus}. The surfactant-like nature of pardaxin led
researchers to test the shark repellency of various surfactants. The most effective surfactant tested to date is the
alkyl sulfate surfactant sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). Swim-through repellency tests were conducted in a
roundabout test tank using swell sharks, Cephaloscyllium ventriosum, to determine if repellent efficacy of alkyl
sulfate surfactants was affected by carbon chain length, ethylene oxide (EO) groups, and counterions. Results
indicate repellency increases as all^ chain length increases from octyl to dodec^, decreases with the addition of EO
groups, and is not affected by counterions. SDS is the most effective known chemical repellent, but it does not meet
ttie Navy's potency requirement for a classic surrounding-cloud type repellent of 100 parts per billion. Thus, SDS is
only practical as a directional repellent such as in a squirt application. Recent work on semiochemicals may offer a
new prospective direction for the search of a more effective chemical shark repellent.




   95 .                         11:30 Saturday                                  18                                OVC
Comparative anatomy of the elasmobranch cerebellum: theme and variations of a sensorimotor interface.
J.G. New. Dept, of Biology and Parmly Hearing Institute, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, IL 60626 USA.
 The cerebellum of elasmobranch fishes denranstrates a wide range of variation in size and complexity across taxa.
Previous studies have demonstrated that he cerebellum of squaliform sharks is relatively simple, with a single
smooth corpus, whereas that of galeomorph sharks is relatively much larger and multilobate, with numerous sulci in
each lobe. The majority of previous studies have focussed on those taxa possessing smaller and simpler cerebelli.
The purpose of this paper is to examine in detail the anatomy of the cerebellum of carcharhiniform sharks,
particularly Caicharhinus limbatus and Spyma lewini and compare the structure and cytoarchitecture with those
previously described in elasmobranchs with smaller and simpler cerebellar structures. Models of cerebellar function
and sensorimotor integration in other vertebrates will be compared with what is known of the physiology and role of
the cerebellum in elasmobranchs to generate hypotheses explaining the wide variety of cerebellar morphologies in
elasmobranchs.




   96                           08:00 Saturday                                  14                                THN
Homage to A. S. Rand, or the Importance of taxon-centered research in biology.                      M.J. West-Eberhard.
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Unit 0948, APO AA 34002-0948.
Interpretation of a biological phenomenon, whether the structure of a molecule or the call of a frog, depends on
understanding its natural setting, environmental, ontogenetic, and phylogenetic. Lack of knowledge or intuition in
any of these areas will limit understanding. This means that progress in biology depends on knowing certain test
organisms literally inside out - on developing what has been called *a feeling for the organism* and a broad base of
detailed information about particular taxa, f will discuss how narrowly phenomenon-directed research may miss
opportunities to see pattern; why comparative biology must include the study of intraspecific variation as well as
inter-spedfic variation and phylogeny; and how the irrational and almost perverse affection of certain biologists for
snakes, lizards, crocodiles and frogs has contributed to the elucidation of principles of general significance in biology.  97         ______           08:45 Saturday
An historical perspective of frog communication studies A,S. Rand, Smithsonian Tropical Research Intitule,                   A
900 Jefferson Drive, Suite 2207, Washington DC 20560 USA.
Mv role in today’s symposium is to provide a broad brush review of studies on anuran communication in the p^t
TOs wfll fTCus on contnbutions that have summarized the state of the art or initiated new research directions. This
review will provide a basis against which the recent advances in anuran communication can be appreciated.




                               09:30 Saturday                                   14                                THN
   98


Institute, P.O. Box 2072, Balboa, Republic of Panama.
Fmns mmmiinicate oresence and male reproductive readiness with sound; temporal and spectral call measures
rarw information The acoustic communication system is anatomically constrained by a fnctional pulmonary v^Jy®
       toSSSTisSltato? The phjlfcs of emitterchannel, and receiyer.establish the boundary conditions wi hir,
which communication systems must have evolved. The uncertainty dissipated therein rernairis subject to natu^
selection Obligate aquatic associations punctuated by facultative terrestrial excursions required fax's                 L
aaareoations at uncertain seasonal foci. Sound transmission experiments within water gener^ion of
anrSdion of S±ome acoustic waveforms show the different potentials of advertising local bree^g
onnominities In vitro the larynx of the tungara frog (Physalaemus pustulosus) inflates under pneurnatocousbc
control such that heritable physical constraints must largely reside in elastic (potential energy) patterns of activation.
On the other hand, the vocal folds of Bufo are rigidly suspended, their kinetic tuning weights being
Here control emeraentiy concerns mass in motion (kinetic energy), and lacks a medial fold foospr mechanism.
contactinq friction^ folc^s of Scaphiopus are considered primitive. Female preference and
direction ?o acoustic parameters via sexual selection on the elaborated pulmonary valve, the male anuran larynx.




                                                                                 14                               THN
    99                          10:45 Saturday
 Design features and patterns of dlfferentlatioii of acoustic signals of anurans.          M.J, Littleiohn, Department of
 Zoology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia 3052.
 The structure of the male advertisement call, and of the encounter call where it has also b®®n described1 are



 Dr^u?ti“ of cX notes and pulses. The morphological attributes and behawore tha facilitate the effectwe
 Drooaaation of the sounds, and orientation and phonotaxis to them by the intended receivers .su^ as^^bre®ding
 consoedfio females are also considered. The ways in which the acoustic repertoire of a taxon is elaborated, how
 the soeoifioitv of a'signal is enabled (i.e,, through coding and redundancy), and the possible intraspecific and
 interspecific acoustic bases by which the effective choice of an appropnate mate is ipade, are discussed.




  Meadoan ewva chMs*! of         eonus fMaindta (JPImtiecifdaa}; notes on adaptaOons and dtotttbution. A. Weber.
  Zooioglsches In^tut und zoologisches Museum, Universiteet Hamburg, Martiri-Luiher-King-Platz 3,20146 Hamburg,
  Germany.
  Since the description of the first troglobitic Middle American Rhamdia in 1983 a lot of additional populations have
  been discovered in hitherto unet^lored cave waters of southern Mexico. Morphological investigations revealed that
  all known troglomorphic populations are related to the epigean species R. laticauda. However, several trcgiobitic
  populations are nowada^ separated from the ancestral epigean form. Two of them have already been described as
  species and the description of a third one is submitted. Constructive traits of cave adaptation are longer barbels and
  the accumulation of adipose tissue at the basis of the anal and the adipose fin. The preadaptations distinguishing R.
  laticauda as the ancestral form for successful cave rxlonization are discussed, focusing on ths mechano- and

                                                                                                                           3




                              08:45 Saturday                                 12                               MCN
  100
Keynote speaker; Biology of cave fishes: A retrospective and prospective w‘^ ■^?l?®RnRn7 vnan
Amblyopsidae. T.L. Poulson. UIC, Biological Sciences (m/c 066), 845 West Taylor Street, Chicago IL 60607 7060
USA.
Cave fish show convergence and parallelism in regressive and constructive traits in directed indirect response^^
absence of light. In addition to reduction in eyes and pigment, regressive losses mdude c ^dian
escape and alarm responses, and diversity and intensity of agonistic behaviors. Constnjctive 9^® J"?-V,?-
elaboration of extraoptic sensory systems (including proprioception) with neoteny,
increased egg size and decreased clutch volume, decreased metabolic rate, and increased foragwg                 .
Several issues should be considered more routinely. 1. the trap of a favonte hwothesis, ssP®®!®"*                 of
of regressive evolution; 2. scale, in the context of lifespans and importance of rare ®''ents, 3. me pos^bility ot
active invasion rather than isolation due to rigorous climate; & 4. molecular traits as complementary to other cave
independent traits in cladistics.
 I will show how new techniques and approaches are yielding and will yield surpii®ing and excibng '"sights.
 Molecular methods are relevant to rates of gene flow, problems of small population size, indeperiden _"^®'°"Si
 mechanisms of regression, and phylogeny. Mark recapture studies give more accurate rneasures of grov^ and
 population size. And community signatures for organic enrichment, acute vs. chronic toxicity, and siltation include
 differential effects on cave fish.



                                                                              12                              MCN
   101                         09:30 Saturday
Some aspects of the diversity and conservation status of the cave fishes of the world.
Deparmont of Language Engineering, University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, PO Box 88,
Manchester, UK.
nf tho f'a 9(;nnn enn nf fishes 79 soecies have so far been described that live their whole lives in caves and other
?nd™n^^habrtSs. Th^                                 57. 16%) and 17 families (of 482, 3.5%) 19 of the 50 genera
contafoinq cave fishes are monotypic cave-restricted (38% of genera, 24% of species). 4             genera are cave
SSrided^and^havTl ormoraTs^es (11 species in total, 8% of genera, 14% of spedes). There are therefore 23
cave-restricted qenera with 30 species (46% of genera, 38% of species). 44 species (56 ^) are kntwn only from th&r
w® iS Mos? hSan Xs haCa only ? species but there are 13 cases ^ere 2^d 3 cases wtoe 3,
Secies coexist at the same location. China has the most species (14,Mexico (9^2^), Br^il (A
9%1 USA (6 8%) and Thailand (5, 6%). These five countnes have 41 species, 52/o of the total. A turtner
countries have 1 or more species. These animals are found throughout the tropical andsubtropio^
and 25“S with the majority being found between 16and 35°N. Three ostanophysaivorders "orriain 36 9®"®^ m
bmiiioe fnf RO         and 56 soecies (of 79 71%) There are 5 non-ostanophysan orders with 14 genera in 5 farn^lies
K afd 23?o^ls (29%? Thl &esl lUCN Red List (1996) has 3 species as Critically Endangered, 2 as
E^ngTred and 46 as Vulnerable (71% of the 72 species described in 1996). All of these animals have very small
distributions will always be vulnerable to human impact.




                                10:30 Saturday                                 12                            . MCN
    102
 iSoo^ehavIou^n^elationships of the blind catfish, genus Taui^la, a distributirmal relict from
 nort^Ltern Brazil (Sllurlformes, Pimelodidae). E- Trajarg and F.A. Bockmann, Departamento de Zoologia,
 Institute de Biociencias da USP, C. P., 11461, 05422-970 Sao Paulo SP, Brasil.
 A new soecies of troglobitic heplapterine catfish, genus Taunayia, was recently found in a rjave ’ram Campo
 Formoso^. asemiX region in northern Bahia, NE Brazil. The genus, charactei;ued by several                          ®®
 such as wide’latero-sensory canals, was previously monotypic, with one species, T.
 UDoer^ete and Paraiba river basins, Atlantic Rainforest, SE Brazil. Taunapa new sp®ci®s diffe s frorn T.
 nSminala bv the smaller size anophlhalmy, depigmentation, extreme rerJuotion of lateral line, reduction of vertebral
 SX7coXn of the^'craniarfontan^el. TEe%enus belongs to the Nemproglartis aubdade^arac enzed by
 the reduction of gas bladder and some paedomorphic traits. The epigean drainage in Campo                   '® ^°®’'7
 temoorarv thus ttie blind catfishes are isolated in the hypoxic subterr^ean water taWe dunng jposf of j
 PotentiaPoredators such as Rhamdia catfishes, enter the cave with penodioal floods. Taunayia         is indifferent to
 lioht but tvahiv responsive to mechanical stimuli, rapidly hiding when disturbed. However, unlike T. marginate, it is
 not esDontaneouslv crvptobiotio, presenting periods stationary on the bottorn alternating        swimming near the
 eXm^ and in the^vate^ column. Piscivory, including cannibalism (for the first time recorded in Brazilian
 fishes), was observed in the laboratory.




  MterMateHfte evotatton. B.D. MbH. P. Fu and M.R. Grose, Depariinent of Zoology, Univefsity of Toronto, 25
  Haibord Street, Toronto, Ontario, MSS 3G5.
  This paper has two objectives: describing Centrarchid microsatellites and discussing microsatellite evolution.
  Centrarchids, native to North American, are one of our most important sport fish and are of great interest to
  evolutionary ecologists. We develop 20 new microsatellites (from the bluegill Lepomis macrochirus) and analyze
  their polymorphism, inheritance, and examine their conservation within the genus (L. Qibbosus), across genera
  (Micropterus), and across families (Percidae, Esocidae). Concerning microsatellite evolunon, we show that: (1) the
  rate of nucleotide substitution is not necessarily slower in fish than warm-blooded animals, (2) microsatellite length
  correlates with levels of polymorphism, and (3) null alleles may occur at a rate of 1 in 30 genotypes.concentration on groups in which there is little or no differentiation in specirai cnaraclGliyilUb
thus placed on the temporal aspects of the calls, which include duration, envelope shape, number and rate of
production of calls, notes and pulses. The morphological attributes and behaviors that facilitate the effective
propagation of the sounds, and orientation and phonotaxis to them by the intended receivers such as breeding
conspecific females, are also considered. The ways In which the acoustic repertoire of a taxon is elaborated, how
the specificity of a signal Is enabled (i.e., through coding and redundancy), and the possible Intraspecific and
interspecific acoustic bases by which the effective choice of an appropriate mate is made, are discussed.




Maxfcan cave catfish of the genus Rhamdia (PImetodIdae): notes on adaptations and distrttxttion. A. Weber.
Zoologtsches Institut und zoologisches Museum, Universitaet Hamburg, Martin-Luther-King-Platz 3, 20146 Hamburg,
Germany.

Since the description of the first troglobitic Middle American Rhamdia in 1983 a lot of additional populations have
been discovered in hitherto unexplored cave waters of southern Mexico. Morphological investigations revealed that
all known troglomorphic populations are related to the epigean species R. laticauda. However, several trc^lobitic
populations are nowadays separated from the ancestral epigean form. Two of them have already been described as
species and the description of a third one is submitted. Constructive traits of cave adaptation are longer barbels and
the accumulation of adipose tissue at the basis of the anal and the adipose fin. The preadaptations distinguishing R.
laticauda as the ancestral form for successful cave colonization are discussed, focusing on ths mechano- and
electrosensory lateral line system.




   104                         11:20 Saturday                                12                               MCN
Biology of ozark cavefish In Logan Cave national wildlife refuge, Arkansas. J.E. Johnson and J.Z. Brown,
Arkansas Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701 USA.
Amblyopsis rosaa is a threatened species endemic to the Springfield Plateau of Arkansas, Missouri, and Oklahoma.
One of the largest reported Ozark cavefish populations is in Logan Cave, Arkansas, and was surveyed 25 times
between 1993 and 1995. During the study, 113 cavelish were marked with visual implant tags. Half (56) of the
tagged fish were recaptured 163 times; 30 tagged fish were never recaptured, and the other 27 were unavailable for
recapture. Gross movement exceeded 1,000 m, with a mean movement of 1.2 mriish/d. Movement was positively
correlated with cavefish length. The Logan Cave population was open to migration, with a mean of 3.8 untagged fish
captured monthly. Jolly-Seber population estimates ranged from 12 to 93 fish monthly, with a mean of 32.3 fish and a
mean survival of 0.990/d. Most fish gained in length during April-October, the period a maternity colony of gray bats
(Myotis grisescens} also occupied the cave. The Logan Cave population of Ozark cavefish appears to be a subset
of a larger population, most litely inhabiting the recharge aquifer. Cavefish that moved through the aquifer and into
Logan Cave generally survived there less than two years. No cavefish were believed to have move upstream into
the aquifer or downstream out of the cave.




   105                        08:00 Saturday                                CF7     .   .          . ..        AXL
Genetic studies of Carolina darter populations In the southeastern US. K.J. Oswald. Marins Science Program,
University of South Carolina, Columb^, South Carolina 29208, USA; R.G. Arndt, Department of Biological Sciences,
The Richard Stockton College of New Jersey, Pomona, New Jersey 08240, USA; F.C. Rohde, North Carolina
Division of Marine Fisheries, 127 Cardinal Drive Extension, Wilmington, North Carolina 28405, USA.
The Carolina darter (Etheostoma collid) is generally regarded as a species of Special Concern. To address ths
genetic contribution of individual populations to the species as a whole, we have generated molecular genetic data
(sequences of mitochondrial and single-copy nuclear DNA loci) to estimate the degree of isolation among distinct
populations of E collis from throughout the species range (southern Virginia to central South Carolina). Furthermore,
we have partitioned the total genetic variance for each mitochondrial and nuclear locus into components within and
among drainages to determine the levels of population differentiation. These genetic data are interpreted in light of
the fractional contribution of individual populations to the total genetic variance remaining in E collis.

Upper^S^n^Paraib^v^^^^^^^^^^^^^H
marginata by the smaller size, anophthalmy, depigmentation, extreme reduction of lateral line, reduction of vertebral
nurriber and condition of the cranial fontanel. The genus belongs to the Nemuroglanis subolade, characterized by
the reduction of gas bladder and some paedomorphio traits. The epigean drainage in Campo Formoso is mostly
temporary, thus the blind catfishes are isolated in the hypoxic subterranean wrater table during most of the year.
Potential predators, such as Rhamdia catfishes, enter the cave with periodical floods. Taunayia sp. is indifferent to
light but highly responsive to mechanical stimuli, rapidly hiding when disturbed. However, unlike T. marginata, it is
not esponfaneously cryptobiotic, presenting periods stationaiy on the bottom alternating with swimming near the
bottom and in the water column. Piscivory, including cannibalism (for the first time recorded in Brazilian cave
fishes), was obsen/ed in the laboratory.




BlllcrosatetHte evolution. B.D. Neff. P. Fu and M.R. Gross, Department of Zoology, University of Toronto, 26
Harbord Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G5.

This paper has two objectives; describing Centrarchid microsatellites and discussing microsatellite evolution.
Centrarchids, native to North American, are one of our most important sport fish and are of great interest to
evolutionary ecologists. We develop 20 new microsatellites (from the bluegill Lepomis macmchirus) and analyze
their polymorphism, inheritance, and examine their conservation within the genus (L. gibbosus), across genera
(Micrcmtenjs), and across families (Percidae, Esocidae). Concerning microsatellite evolution, we show that: (1) the
rate of nucleotide substitution is not necessarily slower in fish than warm-blooded animals, (2) microsatellite length
correlates with levels of polymorphism, and (3) null alleles may occur at a rate of 1 in 30 genotypes.




   107                         08:30 Saturday                               CF7                                AXL
Genetics studies of endangered shortnose sturgeon (Acipenser brevlrostrum} populations in South
Carolina. J.M. Quattro. Department of Biological Sciences, Marine Science Program, Baruch Institute, and School
of the Environment, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA; D.K. Coykendall, Marine
Science Program, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA; J.D. Baldwin, Dept, of
Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, University of Rorida, 7922 NW 71 st Street, Gainesville FL 32653 USA; B.W.
Bowen, Dept, of Rsheries and Aquatic Sciences, University of Florida, 7922 NW 71 st Street, Gainesville FL 32653
USA.
The shortnose sturgeon (Acipenser brevirostnjm) has experienced dramatic reductions in population size over the
past century, and was added to the Endangered Spedes List in 1967. Despite their endangered status and
demographic attributes that might result in highly structured populations, genetic studies have not been undertaken
on remaining populations of this vulnerable species. We describe the results of genetic assays of shortness
sturgeon inhabiting four major river systems in South Carolina, part of a much larger study of genetic diversity among
shortnose sturgeon population throughout the Southeastern United States. We assay nuclear and mitochondrial
DNA loci for sequence variation and partition the genetic variation observed into within and among river
components. These components are used to address the null hypothesis that four rivers sampled do not harbor
genetically distinct populations of shortnose sturgeon.




   108                         08:45 Saturday                               CF7                                AXL
Population genetics study of the Central Stoneroller (Campostoma anomalum} from tributaries to Great
Miami River P. Dimsoski. G.P. Toth and M.K. Smith, U.S. EPA M/S 642, 26 West M.L. King Dr., Cincinnati, OH
45268.
Genetic distances and other parameters calculated from microsatellite allele frequencies were used to characterize
populations of Central Stonerollers in the Great Miami River basin. Six sampling sites were randomly selected from a
number of sites studied as part of a U.S. E.P.A. Regional Environmental Monitoring and Assessment Program
(REMAP) effort. These sites were located in two general areas, three in the upper part and three in the lower part of
^e river basin. Ten individuals per site were sampled. Alleles from seven loci were used to assign the genotype of
the fish. Genetic variation within populations varied from 27 to 46 percent. Four loci had high (greater than 0.15)
Wright's Fst values suggesting high variation of allele frequencies between the populations. This variation also
contributed to the larger range in values for Nel's genetic distances. Physically more distant sites exhibited greater
genetic distances. Cluster analysis using an unweighted pair group method divided the six populations into two
groups matching the geographical map of the sampling sites in the upper and lower part of the river. These results
provide evidence that genetic variation of the Central Stoneroiler which inhabit the Great Miami River basin is
spatially distributed.   109                          09:00 Saturday                                 CF7                  AXL
Allozyme variation in Etheostoma tippecanoe and Etheostoma denoncourtl.          S.A. Welsh. West Virginia
Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, Morgantown, WV 26506-6125 USA; S.A. Perry, Everglades National
Park, 40001 State Road 9336, Homestead, FL 33034-6733 USA; J.H. Howard, Frostburg State University,
Frostburg, MD 21532 USA.
 The Tippecanoe darter {Etheostoma tippecanoe} has an extremely fragmented range with isolated populations
widely distributed within the Cumberland and Ohio river drainages. Its range previously included the Tennessee
River drainage; however, these populations were recently described as a new species (golden darter, Etheostoma
denoncourS}, based on morphological data. To determine patterns of genetic variation within and between species,
22 loci in 12 populations of E. tippecanoe, and four populations of E. denoncourti, were examined with horizontal
starch gel electrophoresis. No fixed differences were observed between E denoncourti and E tippecanoe, and low
allozyme variation occurred across the range of both species. An alternate allele at Pgdh was present in 10 of the 12
populations of E. tippecanoe and absent in all populations of E. denoncourti. In addition, an alternate allele at Pgm
was present in all populations of E. denoncourti and absent in all populations of E. tippecanoe. All trees produced by
distance-Wagner analysis depicted the Clinch River population of E denoncourti as basal to an E. tippecanoe clade.
Although the species status of E. denoncourti was not supported by fixed differences, our allozyme data are
consistent with morphological differences between E denoncourti and E. tippecanoe.




   110                          09:15 Saturday                                CF7                                 AXL
Genetic variability of Eurasian and North American Perea. T.N. Todd. M.K. Bumham-Curtis and C.O. Hatcher,
Great Lakes Science Center, U.S. Geological Survey, 1451 Green Road, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA 48105; N.M.
Pronin, Russian Academy of Sciences, Eastern Sibenan, Institute of Rsheries, Ulan-Ude, Russia 670042.
Eurasian perch, Perea Huviatiiis, from Lake Baikal, Lena River, Volga River, and Poland, were compared with yellow
perch, Perea fiavescens, from the Great Lakes. Protein electrophoresis of 24 enzyme systems revealed a common
pattern of monomorphism. Of the loci scored, 27 were monomorphic. Five of the loci were nearly fixed for the
same common allele, but polymorphisms were observed in one or more of ths populations. Seven of the remaining
19 loci were polymorphic, but the Eurasian perch had a different common allele than the North American perch.
The remaining 12 loci had fixed differences between Eurasian and North American perch. A survey of variation in
the mitochondrial control region (D-loop) with PCR-RFLP discovered significant differences in haplotype presence
and frequency between Eurasian and North American Perea. Despite small sample size, the Polish perch
population (n:=10) was the most variable with five haplotypes and a mean number of painivise differences (Pi) of
1.47. In contrast, perch from Lake Baikal (n=104) had only three different composite mtDNA haplotypes ( Pi =
0.162). Such differences, coupled witfi morphological differences, strengthen the taxonomic validity of each
species. Perch from non-glaciated regions in both North America and Asia appear to have higher levels of
heterozygosity than those from glaciated regions.




   Ill                          09:30 Saturday                                .CF7                                 AXL
Population genetic structure, phylogeography, and spawning philopatry In walleye {StUostedion vibeum}
from mtDNA control region sequences. C.A. Steoien and A.I. Brokaw, Case Western Resenre University,
Cleveland, OH 44106-7080 USA; J.E. Faber, University of West Virginia, Parkersburg USA.
Mitochondrial DNA control region sequences (1200 base pairs) tested the genetic and phylogeographic structure of
230 walleye Stizostedion vitreum among spawning sites, lake basins, lakes, and glacial refugia in the Great Lakes
region. Polymorphisms included different copy numbers and sequences of tandem repeats, and base substitutions
in the left and right domains. Results indicated significant phylogec^raphic structure among glacial refugia, lakes,
basins, and spawning sites. Differences among spawning populations were consistent with reduced gene flow,
philopatry, and possible natal homing. Genotypic frequencies of spawning populations were consistent among years
and between males and females, supporting philopatry in both sexes. A population in the unglaciated plateau in
southern Ohio diverged prior to populations that differentiated in the Missouri (which was the next most ancestral
group), Mississippi, and Atlantic refugia during the Ice Ages. Haplotypes from the three refugia colonized the Great
Lakes after retreat of the Wisconsin glaciers and their distribution today reflects the geography of their prior isolation
and differential colonization. Populations that became associated with spawning localities appear to have diverged
further due to philopatry, resulting in fine-scale phylogeographic structuring.




Unexpected differences in the regulation of allozyme expression In a clonal hyiirid fish Ptioxinua aoa-
neogaeua. K.A. Goddard. T.H. Haws, D.L Letting, D.A. Fecteau, R.O. Hopkins and S.L Reed, Department of
Biology, Ursinus College, Collegeville, PA., USA 19426.
Phoxinux eos-neogaeus are all-female fish from the northern United States and southemCanada that reproduce by
gynogenesis, a form of clonal reproduction. These fish were formed by hybridization between a female of Phoxinus

  ■ 112    ..                   09:45 Saturday                                  CF7                                  AXL
Correlation, between the extent of reproductive Isolation and morphological specialization among sympatric
lake whitefish ecotypes {Coregonua sp.) as revealed by microsatellite and morphological analyses. GJjj
and L. Bematchez, University Laval Department de Biologie, GIROQ , Sainte-foy, Quebec, G1K 7P4.
Il is generally recognized that the evolution of sympatric fish ecotypes found in post glacial lakes is the result of
processes driving ecological and phenotypic changes. If the same forces driving phenotypic divergence are also
responsible for the development of reproductive isolation, one predicts a correlation between the extent of tropic
specialization and that of reproductive isolation being reached in a given environment. We test this hypothesis by
comparing morphological and genetic divergence between sympatric dwarf and normal whitefish ecotypes from six
different lakes of the St. John R. basin (eastern Canada and northern Maine). An analysis of molecular variance was
performed using 8 microsatellite loci while 9 meristic and 19 morphometric variables were selected to quantify
morphological differentiation. Significant differences in allele frequencies between ecotypes were found in 5 lakes,
confirming that they represent genetically distinct populations. This translated into significant but variable Fst
estimates between ecotypes, ranging from 0.041 to 0.225. Similarly, dwarf and normal ecotypes were significantly
different in morphological traits, the squared Mahalanobis distance (D) varying from 1.81 to 12.69. The extent of
morphological specialization reached between ecxjtypes in each lake was negatively correlated with the extent of
gene flow among them (Nm = 7.5265 - 0.2633 x D, r = - 0.67). These results supported our hypothesis that the
extent of reproductive isolation reached between ecotypes may be related to the potential for occupying distinct
tropic niches, and therefore to the same selective forces driving morphological specialization In each lake.




   113                          10:15 Saturday                                  CF7                                  AXL
A study of the North Atlantic redfish species complex (genus Sebastes}: usefulness of microsatellites for
inter- and intra- specific differentiation. S. Roques and L. Bematchez, GIROQ, Departement de Biologie,
Universitd Laval, Quebec.
Four species of redfish are potentially found in sympatry in the Atlantic Ocean: Sebastes marinas, S.vMparus,
S.fasciatus and S.mentetia. A combination of several characters can potentially distinguish these taxa at adult stage,
but no character alone can discriminate them, and none can be used for young stage identification. Low levels of
intraspecific and interspecific genetic variation have in general been found in those species.We developed specific
microsatellites loci, and the usefulness of 8 of them was investigated by measuring inter- and intraspecific genetic
diversity between two samples (n=30-50) of each of the four species. Results confirmed the high polymorphism of
these markers with a mean of 32 alleles per locus, and high overall heterozygosity from 0.65 to 0.82. Exact tests
revealed highly significant differences in alleles frequencies among species at all loci. Unique alleles or alleles size
ranges observed in a given species were absent or found at very low frequencies in the others. This resulted into a
highly significant interspecific genetic variance (up to 49%). At the intraspecific level, significant differences in allele
frequencies were obsen/ed between samples in all species. However, they translated into very small levels of
divergence.These results will be discussed in the context of both the evolutionary history and the management of
this species complex.




   114                          10:30 Saturday                                  CF7                                AXL
A mtDNA and microsatellite assessment of single vs multiple origins of landlocked Atlantic salmon (Salmo
salar L.) from Lake St-Jean, Quebec, (Canada). N. Tessier and L. Bematchez, Universite Laval, dept, biologie,
Ste-Foy, Quebec, G1K 7P4.
We r^orted inter-population genetic divergence among landlocked salmon associated with distinct tributaries in
Lake St-Jean. The erdent of differentiation between one of these populations from the others was more important
than that reported among any anadromous populations. Two alternative hypotheses may potentially explain these
observations: the lake was postglacially recolonized by a single founding population and subsequent founder events
with restricted gene flow, or they may have been recolonized by two ancestral populations that diverged prior to the
Wisconsinian glacial events. We tested these hypotheses by comparing the genetic composition with mitochondrial
DNA and microsatellites of these landlocked salmon with that of adjacent anadromous populations . We included a
landlocked population from Maine as an outgroup. Important differences in allele frequencies, Fst and Rst values
were obsen/ed among the landlocked populations, as well as between those and tne anadromous ones, which
contrasted with lower differences observed among the anadromous populations. Population clustering revealed that
all populations from Lake St-Jean grouped together and separately from the adjacent anadromous populations.
Genetic distance estimates between landlocked and anadromous population from the Saguenay system were as
important as those observed between them and the Maine population. These results support the hypothesis of a
single origin of landlocked salmon in Lake Saint-Jean. They also indicate that the divergence between anadromous
and landlocked populations of the Saguenay R. predates their recent physical isolation.




A microsaleHfts assessment of withki-river population structuring associated with the number of
spawningZnursery grounds in Atlantic salmon {Salmo aalat}. D. Garant. J.J. Dodson and L. Bematchez, CIRSA
Universite Laval, Pavilion Vachon, Departement de Biologie Quebec G1K 7P4.
It has been proposed that population structure of aquatic organisms is detennined by the number of environmental
settings allowing completion of their life cycles. In this study, we test the hypothesis that this leads to the         « xxJIi*w,piwiiiviwi* wwpj iiwiiwwiu ««wi
in the left and right domains. Results indicated significant phyiogeographic structure among glacial refugia, lakes,
basins, and spawning sites. Differences among spawning populations were consistent with reduced gene flow,
philopatry, and possible natal homing. Genotypic frequencies of spawning populations were consistent among years
and between males and females, supporting philopatry in both sexes. A population in the unglaciated plateau in
southern Ohio diverged prior to populations that differentiated in the Missouri (which was the next most ancestral
group), Mississippi, and Atlantic refugia during the Ice Ages. Haplotypes from the three refugia colonized the Great
Lakes after retreat of the Wisconsin glaciers and their distribution today reflects the gerjgraphy of their prior isolation
and differential colonization. Populations that became associated with spawning localities appear to have diverged
further due to philopatry, resulting in fine-scale phyiogeographic structuring.




Unexpectod dWfvrencee In tlw regulation of alha^me expresalon In a clonal hybrid ftah Phoxhug eos-
n»oga»us. K.A. Goddard. T.H. Haws, D.L. Letting, DA Fecteau, R.O. Hopkins and S.L. Reed, Department of
Biology, Ursinus CoHege, CoHegeviHe, PA. , USA 19426.
Phoxinux eos-neogaeus are all-female fish from the northern United States and southemCanada that reproduce by
gynogenesis, a form of clonal reproduction. These fish were formed by hybridization between a female of Phoxinus
neogaeus and a male of Phoxinus eos; they express one enzyme allele (allozyme) of P. eos and one allozyme of
P. neogaeus for each enzyme for which the parental allozymes can be distinguished by cellulose acetate
electrophoresis.      We have analyzed the expression of phosphoglucomutase(PGM) and glucosephosphate
isomerase(GPI) in heart, eye, muscle, and liver of ten or more diploid and triploid individuals (with 5-7 replicates of
each individual) of P. eos-neogaeus. Although a oneione ratio of expression is expected in diploid individuals, the
expression of the P. eos allele is statistically significantly greater than the P. neogaeus allele in some tissues for
PGM, and in other tissues for GPI. In triploid individuals, expression of the F. eos allozyme for GPI is expressed
significantly less than expected. These data indicate a difference in the regulation of the parental allo^mes by
tissue and enzyme that may effect the ecological role of the hybrid species, and may explain how polyploids survive
with three sets of chromosomes directing their cellular activities.




   116.                         11:00 Saturday                                 .CF7                                 AXL
Application of M-FiSH to fish chromosomes. R.B. Phillips and K.M. Reed, Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wl USA.
Multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization (M-FISH) is a new technique which allows localization of multiple DNA
probes on chromosomes from a single metaphase. We have used this technique to localize different families of
repetitive sequences to the chromosomes of zebrafish (Danio rerio) and several species of salmonid fishes including
rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) and lake trout (Salvelinus namaycush). Chromosome preparations were
obtained from a diploid cell line of zebrafish and from cultured blood of the salmonid species. Cloned probes were
labeled with either Spectnjm Organe or Spectrum Green using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and slides were
counterstained with DAPI. Images were captured with a CCD camera and analyzed with QUIPS software (Vysis,
Inc.). Different families and sub-families of repetitive DNAs were localized at different centromeric, subcentromeric,
and subtelomeric locations in each species. These probes will be useful for Identification of fish chromosomes in
gene localization experiments using M-FISH.




   117                          11:15 Saturday                                  CF7                                 AXL
Quantitative trait locus (QTL) for upper thermal tolerance (UTT) in rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss.
G.M.L. Perry. Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, N1G 2W1.
My research concerns the conservation of quantitativs trait loci (QTL) coding for the quantitative trait of upper
thermal tolerance (UTT) (resistance time in the zone of maximal thermal stress) in commercial rainbow trout
(Oncorhynchus m^'ss} populations. Previous research indicates the existence of four major QTL for UTT
segregating in inbred lines selected for response to this trait. Individuals used in this study are the result of intra- and
interstrain cross progeny of two unselecfed strains of commercial rainbow trout. Parental fish were derived from the
combination of two grandsires and 12 grandams within each strain. Preliminary analysis indicates that major allelic
variants are segregating in these hatchery strains for the previously identified UTT QTL. The ongoing survey of this
progeny generation may reveal additional QTL allelic variants. Later work will attempt to determine the physiological
mechanism by which the marked quantitative trait loci contribute to the total phenotype by assessing linkage
between candrdate coding loci (e.g. neat-shock proteins [hsps]) and variation in neutral microsatellite markers. The
discovery of QTL-associated variance for this trait in strains unselected for UTT suggests that QTL variants for upper
temperature tolerance may be fairly widespread in natural populations of rainbow trout.

wfth restricted gene flow, or they may have been recolonized by two ancestral populations thatoive^e^noHeHn?
Wisconsinian glacial events. We tested these hypotheses by comparing the genetic composition with mitochondrial
DNA and microsatellites of these landlocked salmon with that of adjacent anadromous populations . We included a
landlocked population from Maine as an outgroup. Important differences in allele frequencies, Fst and Rst values
were observed among ths landlocked populations, as well as between those and the anadromous ones, which
contrasted with lower differences observed among the anadromous populations. Population clustering revealed that
all populations from Lake St-Jean grouped together and separately from the adjacent anadromous populations.
Genetic distance estimates between landlocked and anadromous population from the Saguenay system were as
important as those observed between them and the Maine population. These results support the hypothesis of a
single origin of landlocked salmon in Lake Saint-Jean. They ^so indicate that the divergence between anadromous
and landlocked populations of the Saguenay R. predates their recent physical isolation.




A mforoMMeHlta aAsetMnftnt o< wttblr»-rfver popwtwHon strucbHing »s«oclst*d wftb ttw number of
spawnlng/nurse^ grounds in Atlantic salmon (Salmo saHar) . D. Garant J.J. Dodson and L. Bematchez, CIRSA
Universtte Laval, PaviNon Vachon, Ddpartement de Biologie Quebec G1K 7P4.
It has been proposed that population structure of aquatic organisms is determined by the number of environmental
settings allowing completion of their life cycles. In this study, we test the hypothesis that this leads to the
development of within-river population structuring associated with the existing number of spawning/nursery areas in
anadromcMJS Atlantic salmon. A total of 700 alevins sampled shortly after emergence (50 fish x 7 sites x 2 years)
were genotyped using five microsatellite loci. Heterogeneity in allele frequency distribution, translating into significant
Fst values among all pairwise comparisons of sites were c^served for the two consecutive years of sampling. These
parameters were lower among inter-annual samples of a same site than among sites. The majority of samples also
clustered by sites in a neighbor-joining tree built from chord-distance. These results therefore support the hypothesis
that genetic population substructuring in Atlantic salmon may develop at a very small geographic scale, as a
consequence of the existing number of grounds favoring survival of young life-history stages. TOcause salmon
associated with such population subunits may develop local adaptations, conservation and management policies
should be planned to preserve their genetic integrity.




   119                         -11:45 Saturday                                 CF7                                 AXL
Preliminary Investigation of microsatellite loci in red snapper (Lutjanus campechanus) in the northern Gulf
of Mexico. E.J. Heist and J.R. Gold, Department of Wildlife and Fisheries Sciences, Center for Biosystematics and
Biodiversity, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX USA.
The red snapper {Lutjanus campechanus} is one of the most economioally-important fishes in the Gulf of Mexico
(Gulf). Previous analyses of mitochondrial (mt) DNA in the northern Gulf detected no significant differences in
haplotype frequencry across a geographic gradient and no partitioning of uncommon haplotypes, indicating that red
snappers in the northern Gulf comprise a single genetic population. However, differences in mtDNA haplotype
diversity among several samples indicated that some level of genetic population structure exists, and that perhaps a
more rapidly-evolving genetic character might reveal that structure. We therefore developed a suite of highly
polymoq}hic DNA microsatellite loci to further examine the partitioning of genetic variation in this species. A
subgenomic library of restriction fragments was screened with di-, tri-, and tetra- nucleotide repeat and several
microsatellite loci were identified and sequenced. Oligonucleotide primers for amplification of loci via polymerase
chain reaction were developed. Polymorphism in microsatellite allele size was scored on denaturing polyacrylamide
gels. Microsatellite allele frequencies from different year classes and different regions were compared to further test
^e hypothesis that red snapper from the northern Gulf comprise a single genetic population.




  .120                         08:00 Saturday                                 GS3                                CHM
A review of the appendicular skeleton in amphisbaenlans (Reptilia; Squamata).                       M. Keamev. George
Washington University, Department of Biological Sciences, Washington, DC 20052 USA.
While reduction and loss of external limbs are hallmarks of amphisbaenian evolution, internal girdle and hindlimb
remnants in some amphisbaenian taxa have been known for many years. However, less than half of the known
genera have been surveyed for internal remnants of the appendicular skeleton and these structures have not been
systematically compared. I surveyed the appendicular skeleton in all extant genera of amphisbaenlans via the
preparation and study of radiographs, dry skeletons, and cleared and stained specimens and compared them to
eac^ other as well as to other non- and reduced-limbed squamates. This study revealed that relative reduction of
girdle and limb elements is diverse among the group. Variability in bony and cartilagenous components of the girdle
and limb remnants appears to contain useful information for ongoing phylogenetic studies of amphisbaenian
interrelationships. All amphisbaenlans retain at least one bony pelvic element but many amphisbaenlans have
completely lost the pectoral girdle. Among squamates, regardless of the degree of limb reduction or loss, the pelvic
girdle never completely disappears in amphisbaenlans or 'lizards' as it does in most snakes, and the pectoral girdle
never completely disappears in 'lizards' as it does in many amphisbaenlans and all snakes.   121                          08:15 Saturday                                 GS3                               CHM .
The phytogeny and evolution of viviparity in the alticolor and elongatus lineages of Uolaemus lizards. R.E.
Espinoza. Ecology, Evolution & Conservation Biology, MS 314, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557, USA.
The genus Uolaemus (Iguania: Tropiduridae) is the largest genus of lizards in the Southern Hemisphere. Partially
as a consequence of this diversity, the intrageneric relationships within Uolaemus are largely enigmatic.
Approximately half of the nearly 170 described taxa in the genus belong to the chiliensls group. Within this large
clade, several species groups nave been informally recognized including the alticolor and the elongatus groups. I
undertook an analysis of mitodiondrial DNA to ascertain the relationships among members of the alticolor and
elongatus species groups to (1) determine if members of each of these species groups formed monophylefio
lineages; and (2) address the evolution of viviparity within these groups. I sequenced about 700 bp (167
informative) of the mitochondrial 12S gene for nearly all described and several undescribed species within the two
species groups. A maximum parsimony analysis recovered three equally parsimonious trees. A consensus tree of
the mtONA results were then combined with additional evidence derived from morphological and ecological
studies. The combined phylogenetic hypothesis suggests that the two groups are indeed monophylefio.
Furthermore, viviparity appears to have evolved independently several times within the alticolor group, but only
once for the elongatus group, wherein, one species may have reverted to oviparous reproduction.




   122                        08:30 Saturday                                  GS3                               CHM
Genetic variation in Rana ephenocephala in response to an agricultural chemical: implications for
amphibian conservation. C.M. Bridges. 105 Tucker Hall, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 -7400, USA.

The amount of genetic variability present may indicate a species' ability to adapt to a stressful environment and can
be examined in a quantitative genetic analysis. Currently, numerous conservation efforts are being devoted to
determining whether amphibian spedes are in decline, as many studies would suggest. Therefore, because
amphibians ate amenable to quantitative genetic analyses and because their numbers may be declining due to
changes in their environment, mese organisms serve as an excellent model for examining the relationship between
the amount of genetic variability present in populations and adaptability in changing environments. Using tadpoles of
a single southern leopard frog (Rana sphenocephala} population, I examined the amount of genetic variability among
full- and half-sib families with respect to their sensitivity to both lethal (time-to-death) and subtotal (changes in
activity) levels of the agricultural chemical, carbaryl. Analyses of both time-to-deatn and activity data indicate
significant differences among full sib families, suggesting a great deal of variability, genetic or environmental, present
in the responses to this environmental stressor. There were also significant differences amorig half sib families in
the degree to which activity was reduced by sublethal carbaryl levels, indicating that this variability has a genetic
basis.




   123                          08:45 Saturday                                 GS3                       CHM
Conservation genetics of the Mojave fringe-toed lizard, Uma scoparia. In California.              T.L. Trepanier.
Department of ^xrlogy. University of Toronto and Centre for Biodiversity and Conservation Biology, Royal Ontario
Museum, 100 Queen's Park, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 2C6.
The Mojave fringe-toed lizard, Uma scoparia, is restricted to sand dunes in the Mojave Desert, existing in 25 known
localities. Because of this species' restriction to sand dunes, it has been considered a species of special concern.
Many populations are on the decline due to habitat destruction, misuse of off-road vehicles and possibly a significant
increase in raven numbers. The detennination of the extent and geographic distribution of genetic diversity among
the Mojave fringe-toed lizards is imperative for conservation and potential augmentation of endangered populations.
Augmentation of the Fort Inwin population is essential due to the rapidly declining population size, which is critical
since small populations are highly susceptible to stochastic events. If this population is to remain reproductively
viable, then genetic viability and integrity, including local adaptations must be maintained by introducing 'sister'
populations; individuals from populations that are most similar genetically. The mitochondrial genes ATPase 6 and
cytochrome b were sequenced for 27 U. scoparia from 8 localities, using U. notata as outgroup. In total, 1676
combined base pairs were sequenced, of which 170 were potentially phylogenefically informative. Results of
parsimony analysis revealed that the most closely related populations to NTC Fort Irwin are the dunes at Kelso and
Pisgah Crater, located southeast of the base.

   124                         09:00 Saturday                                 GS3                               CHM
Toward the phylogeny of the family Lacertidae: implications from mitochondrial DNA 12S, 16S and COI gene
sequences (Reptilia: Squamata). JJEu, Centre for Biodiversity and Conservation Biology, Royal Ontario Museum,
100 Queen's Park, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S2C6.
A phylogeny of the family Lacertidae was derived from mtDNA gene sequence data. Thirty-two species, representing
22 currently recognized genera and subgenera, were included in the analysis. A total of 3,600 base pairs was
obtained and aligned from 12S, 16S and COI gene sequences. A preferred tree was selected based on weighted
parsimony and functional ingroup and outgroup analyses. Decay analysis, bootstrap and permutation tail probability
were used to evaluate support for the recovered nodes. The genus Gallotia was resolved as the basal taxon and the
sister group of all remaining lacertids. Takydromus branched off next. All African lacertids grouped together, and
formed a monophyletic clade with the Eurasian genera Eremias and Ophisops. The remaining Eurasian lacertids
sequentially branched off near the base of the tree in a 'comb-like* fashion. The basal position of Gallotia and ths
monophyly of African lacertids are consistent with previous hypotheses. The European-origin hypothesis of lacertids
is favored, and the distribution of lacertids in Africa is likely a dispersal event.




   125                       . 09:15 Saturday                                 GS3                                CHM
Snake vertebrae do the twist. B.R. Moon. Dept Biology, Univ. Michigan, Ann Arbor Ml 48109, USA.

The zygosphene-zygantrum articulations of snake vertebrae are hypothesized to restrict or eliminate vertebral
torsion. This hypothesis is apparently based solely on the inference of function from structure, despite contradictory
evidence. Gasc (1974, Mem. Mus. Nat. Hist. Nat., Paris Ser. A Zool. 83:1-182) measured vertebral torsion of 1-
2°/joint in dried P^hon skeletons, but his results are seldom cited. I observed axial torsion during lateral undulation
and feeding in Pituophis melanoleucus. To determine whether apparent axial torsion results from differential
movement of the left and right body walls, combined lateral and vertical bending, or actual torsion at the vertebral
joints, I examined close-up video images of crawling P. melanoleucus and digitized macro video images of torsion in
fresh sections of the trunk. To measure vertebral torsion, I clamped sections of 10 vertebrae at one end and twisted
the free end by hand; the limits of twisting were clearly detectable and were reached before the movement produced
any axial bending. Freely crawling P. melanoleucus exhibited negligible lifting, moderate differential movement of
the left and right body walls, and apparent torsion of 0.02-2.4'’/vertebra. Fresh trunk sections allowed actual torsion
of 0.3-1.1’/vertebra, which produced substantial overall torsion when added over several vertebrae. Therefore, the
observed torsion was likely produced by differential movement of the left and right body walls combined with real
torsion at the vertebral joints. Despite the mechanical restrictions imposed by the complex articulations, vertebral
torsion occurs in snakes and appears to be functionally important in many kinds of snake movements.




   126                         09:30 Saturday                                 GS3                               CHM
Effects of an acetyl cholinesterase insecticide on amphibian communities under different levels of biotic
stress. M.D. Boone. 212 Tucker Hall Dept, of Biology, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO 65211 USA.

Widespread use of agricultural chemicals makes it increasingly likely that non-target wildlife could be exposed to
contamination. Many amphibian species utilize breeding habitats nested within or around agricultural areas, therefoi^e
population and community dynamics may bo influenced or altered by exposure to chemicals. The chemical used in
ttiis experiment, carbaryl. Is the active ingredient in the insecticide Sevin.This chemical acts through acetyl­
cholinesterase inhibition, and is known to affect amphibian activity and behavior. The objectives of this experiment
were to determine differentiai susceptibility to carbaryl among species, the effect of the chemical under different
biotic conditions, and the indirect effects of the chemical. To do this, I used three species of anurans in outdoor cattle
tanks: Hyla versicolor (gray treefrog), Bub woodhousii (toad) and Rana clamilans (green frog). Twelve experimental
treatments were manipulated for density (high or low), predator (presence or absence of Notophthalmus viridescens)
and chemical level (0, 3.5, or 7.0 mg/1 of carbaryl). Results showed that the chemical significantly affected size at
metamorphosis In H. versicolor. A predator by chemical effect in H. vers/co/or was significant; in the presence of
the predator, tadpoles at high chemical levels had a larger size at metamorphosis than other classes. Chemical
effects on survival at metamorphosis were significant in B. woodhousii and H. versicolor; higher chemical levels
significantly reduced survival. The chemical interacts with biotic factors in ways that would not be predictable from
two-factor experiments. Chemical by density interactions were significant in B. woodhousii and H. versicolor. This
experiment does indicate differential susceptibility among species and noted that differences in biotic conditions
affect the potency of the chemical.combined base pairs were sequenced, or wnicn 1/0 were potentially pnyiogeneticaiiy intormanve. nesuits oi
parsimony analysis revealed that the most closely related populations to NTC Fort Irwin are the dunes at Kelso and
Pisgah Crater, located southeast of the base.




BlogoographW area retattonatitpa of lowland naotropieal rainforaata baaad on dadlMIe anofyala of anurana
and llzarda. S.R. Ron. Division of Herpetology, Natural History Museum and ^o^verslty Research Center, and
Department of Systematics and Ecology, The University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-24^, USA.
In order to determine biogeographic relationships. Parsimony Analysis of Endemicity (PAE) was applied to
presence/absence of spedes of anurans in 14 localities of lowland Neotropical rainforests in the Chocoan Region,
Central America, Amazon Basin, and Brazilian Atlantic Forest Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (PAUP ^.1)
of 340 species led to two most parsimonious area cladograms (TL = 475, Cl = 0.705). The strict consensus showed
a basal polytomy among three regions: (1) Central America and Choco, (2) Amazon Basin, and (3) Atlantic Forest.
Within the Amazon Basin, the localities in the Upper Amazonian in Peru and Ecuador were separated from those in
the Lower Amazon Basin (Guianan Region + Belem). A PAE of presence/absence of 108 lizard species in 13 areas
in Central America and the Amazon Basin led to a single most parsimonious area cladogram (TL = 156, Cl = 0.692).
The Central American localities were separated from those of the Amazon Basin. Within the Amazon Basin, a
separation between Upper Amazonian in Ecuador and Peru and Lower Amazonian was observed. This pattern is
similar to the pattern obtained from the anuran PAE.




   128                         10:30 Saturday                                GS3                                CHM
Interactions among parental and hybrid leopard frc^ larvae in experimental ponds: implications for the
coexistence of genotypes. M.J. Parris. Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO
65211-7400, USA.
A major focus for contemporary studies of natural hybridization is experimental determination of the relative fitness of
parental and hybrid genotypes and measurements of the interactions between the genotype and environment.
Natural hybridization occurs between two anuran species, Rana blairi and Rana sphenocephala. To determine the
relative fitness of parental and hybrid genotypes in syrnpatric leopard frc^ populations in Missouri, I examined the
performance of parental and hybrid lanrae to measure differences in viability. Artificial crosses between R. blairi and
R. sphenocephala produced two parental and three hybrid genotypes. Resultant larvae were reared in experimental
ponds In single- and mixed-genotype populations. Analyses of variance indicated that R. sphenocephala decreased
Its larval period length when reared with F. backcross hybrid lan/ae relative to when reared alone. Fi backcross
hybrid ponds produced more metamorphs when lanzae were reared with either parental species relative to when
reared alone. When reared together, both R. sphenocephala and F, hybrids metamorphosed at larger body masses
than when reared separately. These results indicate ffiat parental and hybrid genotypes perfomi at equivalent or
higher levels when reared together compared to single-genotype ponds. Such evidence suggests that lanral
dynamics may play an important role in maintaining the coexistence of genotypes in this hybrid zone.




   129                         10:45 Saturday                                GS3                      CHM
The Rana llvlda complex: systematics of a group of Vietnamese waterfall frogs.          R. Bain. Centre for
Biodiversity and Crxiservation Biology, Royal Ontario Museum, & Department of Zoology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON M5S 2C6.
Remarkable morphological similarity among the cascade (waterfall) ranids of southeast Asia has made them a
taxonomic bane for 160 years. Central among this confusion has been the green cascade frog, Rana livida.
Inhabiting ths fast moving mountain rivers and forests of Indochina, this stink frog has long been suspected of being
composed of several species. Recently collected specimens from Vietnam keyed out to R. livida, but exhibited
evident morphological differences across populations. A combination of moqihology, morphometries, DNA content
analysis, and allozyme electrophoresis was used to investigate whether or not any of these morphotypes were
distinct species. The results from this investigation suggested the presence of 5 distinct species. A ph^ogeny for
the group using partial mitochondrial 16S gene sequences was estimated. A 537 base pair region yielded 91
potentially informative characters. Maximum parsimony was used to evaluate the data. Because these species
were identified over a very small portion of the geographic range of the Rana livida group, it is expected that this
phylogeny will be expanded as more species of this poorly understood complex are discovered.

tne predator, laopoies at nign cnemicai leveis naa a larger size at meiamorpnosis man omer classes, onemicai
effects on survival at metamorphosis were significant in B. woodhousii and H. versicolor; higher chemical levels
significantly reduced survival. The chemical interacts with biotic factors in ways that would not be predictable from
two-factor experiments. Chemical by density interactions were significant in B. woodhousii and H. versicolor. This
experiment does indicate differential susceptibility among species and noted that differences in biotic conditions
affect the potency of the chemical.




Aapecta of fh« ptiysfotogtoat eootogy of ttie desert horned Hzard, Fhzyvroeome ptMytMnoa.                    TX. Brown.
Department of Biology, Univ, of Los Angeles, California, Los Ar>ge>es. CA 90095 USA.
  Deserts are characterized by extreme environmental and resource variation, many desert reptiles have the ability to
tolerate these stresses through behavioral and physiological mechanisms. Desert homed lizards, Phrynosoma
platyfhinos, are one of the most common lizards in me Mojave desert Homed lizards are nxxphologically adapted
to exploit ants as their primary food source, and they are characterized by certain aspects of typical sit>and>wait
predators. It has been suggested that desert homed lizards should have relatively low energy requirements because
of their foraging strategy and because they inhabit an area typified by low resource availability. To address this
hypothesis, I used doubly labeled water to measure the energy and water turnover of a population of desert homed
lizards over a five year study period. The annual rainfall of the study area varied during the study period such that
there were normal, very wet and very dry conditions. This allowed me to examine the physiological plasticity of
homed lizards. The results of my research will be presented.




   131                          11:15 Saturday                                 GS3                                CHM
A comparison of ontogenetic and geographic variation of the Amazonian tree frog Hyla geographica. S.
Wolfson. Department of Biology, UNC Wilmington, Wilmington, N. C. 28405.
This study contributes to the knowledge of Amazonian herpetology by evaluating the mensurable and meristic
characters associated with ontogeny, sexual dimorphism, and geographic variation of the Amazonian tree frog Hyla
geographica. The taxonomic significance of the displayed variations was analyzed by evaluating external
characters. Four hundred eleven specimens from the following museums were examined: Museum of Comparative
Zoology at Hanrard, U. S. National Museum of Natural History, and Chicago Museum of Natural History.            This
analysis included population samples from the following political entities: Trinidad, Colombia, French Guiana,
Guyana, Suriname, Ecuador, Bolivia, Peru, and Brazil. Mensurable characters obtained were: head-length (HL) ,
head-width (HW), tympanum-diameter (TD), femur-length (FL), and snout-vent-length (SVL). These measurements
were used to calculate morphology ratios for analysis of ontogenetic growth variations. The means, standard
deviation, and range of all mensurable characters and growth ratios were determined. Distribution patterns of
pigments were coded and recorded for all specimens? The pigment patterns, or absence of pigments were recorded
for the snout, venter, dorsum, thigh, flank upper arm, and dorsal aspect of ths head. All specimens were examined
for sexual maturity. The variations of the mensurable characters, morphological ratios, and patterns of pigment
distribution suggest that the populations of H. geographica do not display significant geoclines and, therefore, are
one widely distributed species.




   132                          16:00 Saturday                                  P2                                PCH
Cytochrome b based gene genealogy of the common garter snake, Tltamnophis sirlalis. L. Rye. Department
of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario CANADA N1G 2W1; R. Lawson, California Academy of Sciences,
San Francisco, California 94118-4599 USA.
Thamnophis sirlalis is a widely distributed, highly variable, snake which is common throughout much of its North
American range. Historically, this species has been subdivided into many subspecies based predominantly on
geographical variation in colour pattern, although there is also variation in life history traits and meristic characters.
Of the twelve currently recognized subspecies, several meet in broad areas of intergradation which are forms of
hybrid zones where there is introgression between distinct gene pools. In order to infer the evolutionary relationship
of snakes on either side of these hybrid zones, a mitochondrial DNA gene genealogy was constructed. Cytochrome
b was amplified from over 123 snakes representing most of ths entire range. A 385 or 780 bp portion was sequenced
on a ABI automated sequencer at the GenAlyTic facility at the University of Guelph and yielded 45 distinct
haplotypes with 73 phlyogenetically informative characters. The heuristic search option of Paup was used to find all
equally most parsimonious trees (320 trees, length 126 steps, CI=0.71, RI=0.92, RC=0.65). The resulting strict
concensus tree revealed three distinct clades whose geographical distributions are not concordant with those of
currently recognized subspecies.                               16:00 Saturday.                                 P2                                PCH ■:
   133
Influence of hydrographic structure upon genetic structure in brook dwr {^Ivejinus fonf/naffs) populatioiw
in national parks of eastern Canada. C. Hebert £uid L. Bematchez, GIROQ, Departement de Biologie, University
Laval, Quebec, Canada G1K 7P4.
Despite the abundance of studies of genetic diversity in freshwater fishes, few of them spedfically addressed the role
of habitat stnioture in partitioning genetic variance within and among populations. Microsatellite loci have recently
been developed for Salvelinus fontinalis (Angers et al.. 1995) and successfully used to assess population structure
within the species. In this study, we analyzed the variability of six microsatellite loa among 25 brook charr
populations samples (n=30) in order to correlate hydrographic structure with genetic organization. These populations
originate from three Canadian National parks (Kouchibouguao. Fundy and Fonllon),^showing                     l^rogw^hic
structure. Considering the general characteristics of these habitats, we fomulated the hypothesis that the ratio of
interpopulation/intrapdpulafion genetic diversity will be inversly correlated with the potential for gene flow imposed by
those systems. Results obtained supported our working hypotheses. Thus, the hierarchical analysis_of rnolecular
variance revealed that the lower ratio of intefpopulation/intrapopulation genetic diversity was found in Kouchibouguao
(high migration potential) [0.0703 . P=0.01210] whereas an interrnediate value was observed m Fundy (interiTiediate
mioration potential) [0.1771 . P=0.00000]. The highest ratio was observed tn Fonllon (low migration potential) [1.6885
, P=0.00000]. We discuss the importance of habitat complexity on genetic structure in the context of management
and conservation.




   134                          16:00 Saturday           .                     P2
Genetic diversity of the La Mauricie National Park brook charr (Salvelinus fontinalis).                   L. Bematchez,
Departement de biologie. Universite Laval, Sainte-Foy QC G1K 7P4; B. Angers and P. Magnan, Departement de
chimie-biologie, Universit© du Quebec a Trois-, Rivieres QC.
The identification of brook charr conservation units and processes responsible for their evolution are prerequiates to
the conservation and management of the species in national parks. Iri this stud)4 we documented geitebcdiveraty
among brook charr populations from la Mauricie national park and investigated factors that can aorount for the
variation observed. Thirty-six populations (n=30) from eight different drainages were genetically charactenzed at five
microsatellites and mtDNA. The mtDNA homogeneity indicated a common refugial origin of all populations. In
contrast, extensive polymorphism was observed at microsatellites. Eleven evolutionary lineages were identified and
their divergence apparently predated the postglacial recolonization of the park, suggesting that ‘f’® P®*J?®®
recolonized by multiple population waves from a single yet fragrriented glacial refuge. Multivanate statisbcal analysis
highlighted the role of hydrographic systems, altitude, and stocking as the mam explanatory factors for the obsenrad
genetic structure. Altogether, these results suggest that the use of microsatellites may reonent our views about
problems of temporal and geisgraphical scales considered in conservation genetics.




Slowly-evolving proteins and higher-level snake phylogeny: a reanalysis.         L. Buckley, Biology Department,
 Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623-9932 USA; M. Kearney, Ge^e Washington University.
 Department of Biological Sciences, Washington, DC 20052 USA; K. de Queiroz, Departrnent of Vertebrate Zoology,
 National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington. DC 20056 USA.
 We reanalyzed the data of a recently published study of higher-level snake relationships, which was based on a
 UPGMA analysis of alleles at four "slowly-evolving" protein-coding loci. The distance matnx denyed from these data
 contains a large number of ties, which are not explicitly revealed in many UPGMA programs. Our analyses of these
 date reveal teat the single, well- resolved phenogram presented in the published study is only one among at least
 9,999 equivalent UPGMA phenograms supported by the data, the consensus of which is largely unresolved.
 Additive distance analysis and character-based parsimony analysis of the same data yield even less resolution.
 Thus, regardless of one's preference regarding analytical approaches, the date in question are highly ambiguous
 concerning higher-level snake phylogeny. The highly resolved tree presented in tee published study is an analyt cal
 artifact that was obtained only because the analysis failed to consider equivalent trees resulting from ties in the
 distance matrix.

   136______________          16:00 Saturday                                ■P2                               PCH
Microsatellite variation in wild populations of lake trout {Sah/elinus namaycush) from Lake Superior. EJ^
Leder and R.B. Phillips. Department of Biological Sciences. University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wl
ijSA; M Burnham-Curtis, Great Lakes Science Center, USGS, Ann Arbor, Ml USA; C.R. Bronte. Great Lakes Field
Station, USGS.Ashland, Wl USA.
Microsatellite variation was surveyed in six populations of lean lake trout and two populations of siscowet lake trout
from Lake Superior using heterologous primer pairs developed for brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis) and Atlantic
salmon (Salmo safari. The number of alleles varied from 4 to 21 at different loci. Mendelian inhentance was
confirmed for all loci. Significant differences in allele frequencies were found for leari populabons from
qeoqraphically distant regions and for leans and siscowets from the same regions. Genetic differences betoeen
southern and northern populations which were found in a previous study using allozyme loa were confirrned with the
miorosatellite loci. Comparison of our results with previous allozyme surveys and a recent study of microsatellite
frequencies in lake trout hatchery stocks and populations from inland Cariadian lakes suggests that there is more
within lake variation in large lakes compared to small lakes and wild populations compared to hatchery stocks.




   137                         16:00 Saturday                         .      P2
Stock Identification of dolphin, Coryphaena hippurus, in the western raritral Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico and
eastern Caribbean using molecular genetic techniques. R.S. Wingrovg, University of Charleston, Grice Manne
Lab, 205 R. Johnson Rd... Charleston, SC 29412.
The dolphin, Coryphaena hippurus, is a fast swimming, migratory, pelagic fish that supports irnportantcomrnercial
and recreational fisheries throughout the tropical and subtropical waters of the world. Oxenford and Hunte (1986)
suggested two distinct stocks exist in tee western central Atlantic. The southern stock migrages from Greriada
northwards to tee Virgin Islands and then returns souteeastwards in the Atlantic. The northern stock migrates frorn
Puerto Rico northwards to North Carolina and returns via Bermuda. The purpose of my study is to test Oxenford and
Hunte's (1986) two stock hypothesis and investigate the possible presence of additional stocks using rnitochondnal
DNA analysis. Dolphin samples were obtained throughout their range in the western central Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico,
and Caribbean by port sampling and attending offshore fishing tournaments. Preliminary results from restnction
fragment length polymorphisms of the ND-1 region of tee mitochondrial genome will be reviewed. Significant genetic
differences between geographic localities provides strong evidence of demographic isolation arid indicates tee need
for independent management of individual stocks (Dixon 1992, Moritz 1994). In August 1997, tee Soute Wlanbc
Rshery Management council proposed management options for tee highly migratory dolphin fishery. Date provided
by this study on the stock identification of the dolphin should be beneficial to the management of this fishery
throughout the western Atlantic. Gulf of Mexico, and Caribbean.




    138          __________ 16:00 Saturday                            .       P2
The structure of basking shark Cetorhinus maximus populations in the North-East Atlairtte- development of
genetic markers. T.J. Thom. A.R. Hoelzel, MJ. O'Connell and M.C. Lucas, Department of Biological Sciences,
 University of Durham, DH1 3LE, England, UK.
 Basking shark populations have been subject to exploitation for many years and are currently con^dered Jo be
 endangered in European waters. However, little is known of their population structure. In the recent past, population
 structure assessments have been made on tee basis of oapfure-mark-recapture studies or differentiation of menstio
 and morphological characteristics of different stocks. However, for a species such as the basking shark, which are
 not easy to tag in large numbers, and which little is known about their ecology, a new approach is required.
 Molecular genetic methods are increasingly being used with success in determining tee stock structure of
 commercially important fish species in bote marine and freshwater environments. In particular, the use ot
 microsatellite DNA sequences is finding increasing use in fisheries stock assessment. This poster presente reports
 on work to develop miorosatellite DNA markers for use in assessing the population structure and migratory behaviour
 of basking sharks in the north-east Atlantic.Ad^ve distenci           Srf dJaStortiSS paTSr^ronyliFalysis of the same data yield even less resolution
Thus reaardless of one's preference regarding analytical approaches, the data in que^on are highly ambrauous
c^cernTnffier “evePfna^e ph^ogeny.® The liighly msolve?tree presented in the published ^dy is an
artfaTthaf was obtained only^ b^use the analysis failed to consider equivalent trees resulting from ties in the
distance matrix.




Funduhja tUtiphamia la tho maternal parent of the clonal hybrid minnow FunOulua haltfocitus x Fimdutua
diaphanua. B.M. Nath. R.O. Hopkins, K.A. Goddard and R.M. Dawley, Department of Biology, Ursinus College,
Collegeville, PA. USA, 19426.
Fundulus hetemcIHus is an abundant estuarine fish found along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts of the United States.
This species has been the subject of numerous investigations of its own biology and has been used as a fool to
study zenobiotio metabolism, development, and ecology. Hybrids between Fundulus heteroclitus and F. diaphanus
from Nova Scotia reproduce clonally, and thus all individuals are genetically identical. Heterozygosity al
codominantly expressed enzyme loci is detectable for ell enzymes for which the parental species differ, with the
exception of isocitrate dehydrogenase for which the F, diaphanus is not expressed. We have amplified the
c^ochrome b gene from the mitochondrial genome and cut it with restriction enzymes for which the two parental
species have distinct restriction patterns to determine if the lack of expression of the F. diaphanus IDH allele is due
to Inactivation of a paternal allele, a phenomenon occasionally observed in hybrids. The hybrids share the
restriction patterns of F. diaphanus, indicating that F. diaphanus is the rnatemal parent of the hybrid lineage. Lack of
expression of the F. diaphanus allele must therefore be due to a mutation that inactivated this allele or another rare
event.




   140                         16:00 Saturday      ....          ...          P2                                PCH ..
Assessment of randomly amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) for use as genetic markers in studies of the
sailfin molly (PoeclUa latipinna). A.T. Quinones. K. Nakamura and J.C. Trexler, Department of Biological Science,
Rorida International University, Miami, FL 33199, USA.
RAPD markers are powerful tools in the analysis of genetic relationships and genetic diversity. Recently, however,
questions have risen concerning the inheritance patterns and the reproducibility of the RAPD markers. In this study,
fragments generated by RAPD primers were tested for Mendelian inheritance in sailfin mollies. Mollies were
collected from three locations in Rorida, and over 25 single-pair matings of parents with known RAPD genotypes
were made. Progeny from each mating were used to test patterns of inheritance. Of the sixty RAPD primers
initially screened, 18 amplified polymorphic bands and two showed no variation. Repeatable, identical bands were
amplified from both fin clips and muscle samples providing a mechanism for non-destructive genotyping of laboratory
fish. Frequencies of alleles in natural populations were determined to measure the degree of population stnicture.




   141                         '16:00 Saturday                                P2                                PCH
Evolution of germ-cell determining genes in amphibians. M.E. White and B.l. Crother. Department of Biology,
Southeastern Louisiana University, Hammond, LA 70402; A.D. Johnson, Rorida State University, Dept, of Biology,
Tallahassee, FL 32306.
Amphibians have been widely used as model systems for studying the early embryonic development of vertebrates.
Although much of the early development of all amphibians is very similar, frogs and salamanders differ strikingly in
the way they determine the germ cell lineage (the cells that will form eggs and sperm). The pattern observed in frogs
is quite different than the one seen in other vertebrates; the salamander mechanism is apparently much more similar
to that of birds and mammals. Although the pattern of germ cell formation has been elucidated in a wide variety of
species, little is known about the genes governing this process. Because most major embryological events are
controlled by genes that have been highly conserved evolutionarily, it is logical to conclude that genes involved in
germ cell determination will also be similar in a wide variety of species. Three genes- daz, oct-3/4 and vasa- have
been shown to be critical for germ cell determination in mammals. We have used phylogenetic methods to analyze
the homologous genes from frogs and salamanders to investigate whether the evolution of germ cell specific genes
reflects the mode of germ cell determination (salamanders being more similar to mammals) or the phylogenetic
relationships of the organisms (salamanders and frogs being more closely related). Our preliminary results suggest
that germ cell determining genes from two different salamanders are more closely related to the mammalian
homologues than to anuran ones, supporting the idea that the evolution of the genes tracks the mode of cell
determination rather than the anlm^ phylogeny.

“a«^^iN?.sequencesTsfin^^                                                               This poster presents reports
on work to develop microsatellite DNA markers for use in assessing the population structure and migratory behaviour
of basking sharks in the north-east Atlantic.




Genetic relationsbipe among disjunct populations of Waccamaw kiMIflah,               C.R. Young. Department of
Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA; J.M. Quattro, Department
of BiSogical Sciences, Marine Science Program, Baruch Institute, and School of the Environment, University of
South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA; J.M. Grady, Department of Biology, University of New
Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA; F.C. Rohde, North Carolina Division of Marine Rsheries, 127 Cardinal Drive
Extension, Wilmington, North Carolina 28405, USA.

Tho Waccamaw killifish (Fundulus waccamensis), a derivative of F. diaphanus, was originally thought to be endemic
to Lake Waccamaw and tributaries. Recently, however, samples thought to be F. waccamensis have been collected
in Lake Phelps. These samples differ morphologically from those found in Lake Waccamaw implying that they are
not the product of an accidental introduction of F. waccamensis into Lake Phelps. The large geographical distance
between Phelps and Waccamaw and the absence of F. waccamensis in intervening bay lakes, suggests that these
populations might be remnants of a once widespread species, or, alternatively, might have arisen independently from
F. diaphanus. Vie investigate these hypotheses using phylogenetic analyses of mtDNA control region sequences
sampled from F. waccamensis (Lakes Phelps and Waccamaw) and F. diaphanus.




   143                         16:00 Saturday                               'P2 .                             PCH
Fine-scale genetic population structure in wood frogs (Rana sylvatica). R.A. Newman and T. Squire, University
of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND USA.
The prairie pothole region of North Dakota contains numerous wetlands of varying habitat quality. As part of a study
of the consequences of environmental heterogeneity for population dynamics and life history evolution, we have
attempted to determine the spatial scale of gene flow using microsatellites, a highly polyrnorphic class of molecular
markers. We also plan to compare genetic population structure of wood frogs in the prairie pothole region with a
more ‘typical’ woodland population that breeds in wetlands around Lake Itasca, Minnesota. In addition to
documenting patterns of genetic differentiation in relation to spatial separation and habitat variation, we ultimately