d
populations were compiled from the literature and examined for latitudinal trends within the Atlantic and
Mediterranean. Differences in moqjhology and reproductive output were observed among the three populations.
Indicating that each population experiences and responds to a unique combination of factors both at and away from
the nest™ beach. Both body size and egg size were significantly correlated with latitude. However, correlations
were not significant when Mediterranean data were excluded, suggesting that turtles in the Mediterranean encounter
environmental conditions significantly different from oceanic populations. This study highlights important differences
among populations, broadens the concept of lite history variation to a turtle species not confiried to a single
geographic location, and emphasizes the need for conserving genetic and phenotypic variation in marine turtle
populations.  .541                         14:15 Tuesday                      .. . .        CR1                            CHM
Effects of human disturbance on five-line'd skink (Eumeces fasciatus) abundance and distribution at Point
Peiee National Park, Canada. S.J. Hecnar and R J. Brooks, Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
ON, N1G 2W1; R.T. M'Closkey, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Windsor, Windsor, ON, N9B 3P4.

The five-lined skink is widely distributed in eastern North America but its populations are disjunct and of conservation
concern in the northern portion of its range. Canadian populations are presently considered "vulnerable". We
studied effects of human disturbance on five-lined skinks at Point Peiee National Park, from 1990 to 1997.
Surveys Indicated low skink abundance and a lack of woody debris in areas heavily used by humans. A population
dedine, concurrent with high disturbance levels, occurred from 1990 to 1996. Skinks used woody debris as refuge
sites and showed preferential use of large moderately decayed logs and boards having greater surface area. Human
disturbance resulted in degradation and removal of debris. To test the hypothesis that skink absence in human high-
use areas was caused by a lack of suitable debris, we placed artificial microhabitats in areas which previously
lacked debris and skinks . Experimental boards were quickly colonized and heavily used despite high disturbance
rates. Results suggested that skinks are resilient to minor disturbances such as board displacements, but not to
removal or degradation of debris. Habitat restoration by moving large woody debris from open beach to the
stabilized dune began in 1996 and resulted in increased skink abundance in 1997.




   542                     ... . 14:30 Tuesday                                  CR1                     ..   . .CHM
The effects of road mortality on two threatened snake species on Peiee Island, Ontario. R.J. Willson. B.D.
Porchuk and R.J. Brooks, Department of Zoology. University of Guelph. Guelph. Ontario, NIG 2W1.

Road mortality is becoming an increasing threat to endangered and isolated reptile populations. Reptiles killed by
motorized vehicles and found on Peiee Island's roads (68 km in total) were collected and locations recorded from
1993 -1996. During the three years of intense surveys, the roads were scanned approximately every two days. In
1998, sections of road that had high numbers of roadkilled blue racers {Coluber constrictor mx'i) and eastern fox
snakes {Elaphe gloyd!) during the roadkill surveys, will be scanned intensively to determine suitable methods to
mitigate the effects of vehicular mortality. The blue racer is endangered in Canada, and threatened status for the
eastern fox snake is pending review. In three years 78 blue racers (11 adults/year) and greater than 100 eastern fox
snakes were found dead on Peiee Island's roads. Many adult females that are killed on the roads are moving to or
from shoreline oviposition sites. In the fall of each year, many hatchlings are also found dead on the roads. For
example, from 1993 - 1996, 75 hatchling eastern fox snakes were recorded as roadkills. As a result of continuing
development in the form of summer cottages, and growing tourism, vehicular traffic continues to increase on Peiee
Island's roads. Ths future impact of increased traffic flow and continued road mortality on the blue racer and eastern
fox snake remains to be seen. Our data suggest that road mortality will be a significant factor leading to the decline
of both snake species on Peiee Island.




   543                         14:45 Tuesday                                    CR1     .   .    . .           CHM
The Impact of roads on snake populations in eastern Texas. D.C. Rudolph. S.J. Burgdorf, R.R. Schaefer and
R.N. Conner, Soulhem Research Station, Box 7600, SFA Station, Nacogdoches, TX 75962 USA.

Radio-telemetry studies of timber rattlesnakes {Crotalus horridus) and Louisiana pine snakes {Pituophis mthvem}
suggested that mortality associated with roads was a significant factor in the biology of these species. An arialysis of
timber rattlesnake records in relation to road densities supported the hypothesis ffiat mortality associated with roads
has resulted in the extirpation of this species from significant portions of the landscape. The hypothesis that existing
road networks depress populations or large snake species was tested using a trapping protocol to sample snake
populations up to 850 m from road corridors. Preliminary results suggest that snake populations are reduced by 50%
or more up to a distance of 450 m from roads with moderate use. There was no indication that the population indices
had reached an asymptote at a distance of 850 m. For some species the data suggest that larger individuals are
located further from road corridors. Quantification of the road network on a landscape scale indicates that the large
snake fauna of eastern Texas Is subject to significant road related mortality that has the potential to reduce
populations by 50% ro more across a large proportion of the landscape.




                                16:30 Tbesaay                              ..   CR1                            CHM
Ami^lbians, r^ltes, and phosphate mining In Florida. H.R. Mushinsky and E.D. McCoy, Department of Biology
and Center for Urban Ecology, University of South Rorida, Tampa, Honda 33620, USA.

 Much of central Florida has been subjected to strip mining for phosphate. The mining process drastically alters the
upland habitats available for wildlife occupancy. We collected amphibians and reptiles at 30 unmined xeric upland
sites and 30 previously mined sites to determine which amphibians and reptiles may be under-represented at the
rwlaimed mined sites. Thirteen species of amphibians (4) and reptiles (9) were determined to be "focal species,"
that IS, they were under-represented at the reclaimed mine sites, relative to the unmined sites. Reasons for their
under-representation^ include the lack of suitable substrate for burrowing species, lack of temporary ponds for
amphibian reproductiOT, and lack of sufficient litter, ground cover, and plant structure for other species. Plans to
further study selected focal species, including translocating common species to reclaimed habitats will be reviewed.

   544                         15:30 Tuesday                                 CR1                               CHM
Habitat use, home ranges and hibernacula of the copperbelly water snake (Nerodia erythrogaster neglecta}
in southern Indiana and northwest Kentucky. C.J. Coppola and R.A. Kingsbury, Department of Biology, Indiana-
Purdue University, R. Wayne, IN 46805 USA.

The copperbelly is federally listed under the Endangered Species Act as Threatened in the northern part of its range,
and protected to the south by the Copperbelly Water Snake Conservation Agreement. Snakes from two populations
were radio-tracked at the Sloughs Wildlife Management Area, Kentucky, and in the Patoka National Wildlife Refuge,
Indiana. The movements of the snakes were monitored to elucidate patterns of home range size and habitat use.
including hibernacula sites. Habitat use was seasonally compared between sexes. Home ranges and activity
centers were calculated using minimum convex polygons. Individual snakes occupied widely different habitats,
demonstrated pronounced fidelity to selected habitats for much of the season. Buttonbush sloughs and areas of
shallow water with emergent vegetation were most frequently used, while closed canopy forested habitats away from
the sloughs and targe bodies or open water were not. Habitat use shifted towards palustrine forest edges as the
season progressed. The hibernacula of most snakes were crayfish burrows or stumps near or within the floodplain.




   545                         15:45 Tuesday                                 CR1                                CHM
Conservation of the endangered copperbelly water snake, Nerodia erythrogaster neglecta. B.A. Kingsbury.
Department of Biology, Indiana-Purdue University, Fort Wayne, IN 46805 USA.

The copperbelly is an inhabitant of shallow wetlands in parts of the midwestem United States. It is stats listed as
Endangered by Illinois, Indiana, and Ohio, federally listed as Threatened to ths north by ths US Rsh and Wildlife
Service, and protected in southern Indiana, southern Illinois, and Kentucky by a conservation agreement. Over the
last few years, efforts have dramatically increased to learn more about the species' ecological requirements to
prevent further losses of snakes or suitable habitat. I will review efforts to conserve the remaining populations of the
copperbelly. Discussion will include a review of fire current status of the snake, both in the legal and biological
senses, and a description of the conservation agreement. I will also examine the implications of research findings
from several studies out of my lab regarding management decisions about restoring and reclaiming habitat for the
species.




   546                         16:00 Tuesday .             .   .             CR1                                CHM
Long-term changes in movement patterns of massasauga rattlesnakes following a severe flood. R.A. Seiael
and MA. Pilgrim, Dept, of Biological Sciences, Southeastern Louisiana Univ., Hammond, LA 70402-0736 USA.

From 1979-1983 we conducted radiotelemetry and mark-recapture studies on massasauga rattlesnakes {Sistrurus
catenatus) at the Squaw Creek National Wildlife Refuge in northwestern Missouri. These data showed that snakes
hibernated in a moist prairie, moved away from the prairie to drier areas in the late spring and summer, and returned
to the prairie in the fall. In 1993, the refuge was impacted severely by the "Great fiffidwestem Rood"; massasauga
populations showed significant changes in population size strocture, sex ratio, mass-length relationships, and
reproduction as a result of this event. From 1996-1997 we re-examined the movement patterns of this population to
determine any addition^ effects of the flood. We found that although snakes still hibernate in the main prairie, very
few massasaugas leave the prairie for outlying areas, but remain in the prairie during the summer. In addition, the
number of massasaugas found crossing roads on the refuge has decreased dramatically, and the snakes that do
cross refuge roads are mainly neonates rather than adults as was seen in the earlier study. The implications for
these apparent changes in movement patterns for management and conservation will be discussed.




   550             ,   . .      13:30 Tuesday                               CF14                                AXL
Mi*SinTfn7S^ roS'                                              Museum of Zoology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,


Hubbs and Miller's research on the Great Basin emphasized changes at the level of races and subspecies- these
^^ges apparently occurred rapidly, in hundreds to thousands of years. Miocene to Pleistocene fossils of these
fishes, in coritrast, suggest unexpectedly stow changes at the species level, i.e., over hundreds of thousands to
neari^y 10 million years, with infrequent evolution of new species. Resolution of this incongruence requires
danfication of the relative frequency of short-term differentiation, species origins, and extinction. The Great Basin
evidence demonstrates that fluctuating pluvial-interpluvial cycles result in rapid proliferation of new subspecies but
everitual extinction of all but generalist survivors, often as relict endemics. The frequent extinctions and infrequent
persistence of new speaes in the Great Basin seem to bo the consequence of repeated loss of habitat during
interpluvial stages of Pleistocene cycles. The result seems to be rapid but superficial changes in morphology without
lOTg-term charge. Great Basin fish faunas exhibit low diversity and high endemism characteristic of tectrxiically
active areas The low diyereity suggests that high extinction rales were caused by high elevations, high gradients
(low habitat diversity), and dimatic variability.                                                       • a a   543                         14:45 Tuesday                          .      CR1                               CHM
Th© impact of roads on snake populations in eastern Texas. P.C. Rudolph. S.J. Burgdorf, R.R. Schaefer and
R.N. Conner, Southern Research Station, Box 7600, SFA Station, Nacogdoches, TX 75962 USA.
Radio-telemetry studies of timber rattlesnakes (Cmtalus horridus) anti Louisiana pine snakes {Pituophis ruthvenl)
suggested that mortality associated with roads was a significant factor in the biology of these species. Ari ari^ysis of
tirnber rattlesnake records in relation to road densities supported the hypothesis mat mortality associated with mads
has resulted in the extirpation of this species from significant portions of the landscape. The hypothesis that existing
road networks depress populations or large snake species was tested using a trapping protocol to sample snake
populations up to 850 m from road corridors. Preliminary results suggest that snake populations are reduced by 50%
or more up to a distance of 450 m from roads with moderate use. There was no indication that the population indices
had reached an asymptote at a distance of 850 m. For some species the data suggest that larger individuals are
located further from road corridors. Quantification of the road network on a landscape scale indicates that the large
snake fauna of eastern Texas is subject to significant road related mortality that has the potential to reduce
populations by 50% ro more across a large proportion of the landscape.




  547                         16:30 Tuesday                               CR1                      CHM
Amphbians, reptiles, and phosphate mining in Florida. H.R. Mushinskv and E.D. McCoy, Department of Biology
and Center for Lfrban Ecolo^, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33620, USA.

 Much of central Florida has been subjected to strip mining for phosphate. The mining process drastically alters the
upland habitats available for wildlife occupancy. We collected amphibians and reptiles at 30 unmined xeric upland
sites and 30 previously mined sites to determine which amphibians and reptiles may be under-represented at the
reclaimed mined sites. Thirteen species of amphibians (4) and reptiles (9) were determined to be ‘focal species,'
that is, they were under-represented at the reclaimed mine sites, relative to the unmined sites. Reasons for their
under-representation include the lack of suitable substrate for burrowing species, lack of temporary ponds for
amphibian reproduction, and lack of suflident litter, ground cover, and plant structure for other species. Plans to
further study selected focal spedes, induding translocating common species to reclaimed habitats will be reviewed.




   548                          13:00 Tuesday                                CF14                               AXL
Phylogeography of the anchovies (Genus Engraulis). W.S. Grant, Northwest Fisheries Science Center, National
Marine Fisheries Service, 2725 Montiake Blvd East, Seattle WA 98112 USA; B.W. Bowen. Department of Fisheries
and Aquatic Sdences, University of Rorida, 7922 NW 71st Street, Gainesville FL 32653 USA.

Anchovies (genus Engraulis) inhabit temperate upwelling zones and boundary currents across the globe, including
locations in Europe (E. encrasicolus), southern Africa (E. capensis), Australia (E. australis}, Japan (E. japonicus},
Mexico-California (E. mordax}, Chile-Peru (E. ringens}, and Argentina-Brazil (E. anchoita}. Comparisons of mtDNA
cytochrome b sequences reveal four major lineages corresponding to three New Worid spedes and a single lineage
including all four Old Worid species. The relationships among haplotypes in the Old World anchovies demonstrate
recent colonization events between Japan and Australia, and between Europe and southern Africa. A previous
population in southern Africa (possibly the progenitor of the European population) may have gone extinct and been
recently recolonized from Europe. A comparison of anchovies to sardines (genus Sardinopd), which have a similar
geographic distribution, reveals a dramatically different distribution of mtDNA lineages. These data prompt two
conclusions about the biogeography of temperate marine fishes. First, a vicariance model alone is inadequate to
explain the distribution of evolutional lineages in these taxa. Both vicariance and dispersal events are strongly
implicated. Second, the principle of gener^ized tracks, in which species with similar distributions have similar
evolutionary histories, is contradicted by a comparison of phylogeographic patterns in sardines and anchovies.




   549                          13:15 Tuesday                                CF14                                AXL
Phylogeography of the plains klllifish. Fundulus zebrinus: Implications for Its zoogeography and taxonomy.
B.R. Kreiser and J.B. Mitton, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0334, USA; J.D. Woodling, Colorado
Division of Wildlife, CO, USA.

The plains killifish. Fundulus zebrinus, is a smallish cyprinodontid fish found throughout ths western plains states,
and additionally it has been introduced to the Colorado River drainage. The widespread distribution of F. zebrinus
has suggested the possible influence of historical connections among these drainages. In an attempt to describe the
geographic patterns of genetic variation in F. zebrinus, vte examined variation in ^lozymes and mitochondrial DNA
(RFLP's ant) COI sequence). The genetic relationships among populations demonstrated a considerable degree of
concordance across data sets. Ths geographic assemblages revealed have implications for our interpretations of
the geologic history of ths Great Plains. Some controversy exists as to whether there is in reality two species of
Fundulus (i.e. F. kansae in the northern portion of the range). The phylogeogr^hy revealed a distinct break
between northern and southern populations, suggesting that the taxonomic status of F. zebrinus might warrant closer
study.

   546                         16:00 Tuesday                                 CR1                               CHM
Long-term changes In movement patterns of massasauga rattlesnakes following a severe flood. R.A. Seiqel
and MA Pilgrim, Dept, of Biological Sciences, Southeastern Louisiana Univ., Hammond, LA 70402-0736 USA.

From 1979-1983 we conducted radiotelemetry and mark-recapture studies on massasauga rattlesnakes {Sistrurus
catenatus) at the Squaw Creek National Wildlife Refuge in northwestern Missouri. These data showed that snakes
hibernated in a moist prairie, moved away from the prairie to drier areas in the late spring and summer, and returned
to the prairie in the fall. In 1993, the refuge was impacted severely by the ‘Great Midwestern Flood'; massasauga
populations showed significant changes in population size structure, sex ratio, mass-length relationships, and
reproduction as a result of this event. From 1996-1997 we re-examined the movement patterns of this population to
detennine any additional effects of the flood. We found that although snakes still hibernate in the main prairie, very
few massasaugas leave the prairie for outlying areas, but remain in the prairie during the summer. In addition, the
number of massasaugas found crossing roads on the refuge has decreased dramatically, and the snakes that do
cross refuge roads are mainly neonates rather than adults as was seen in the earlier study. The implications for
these apparent changes in movement patterns for management and conservation will be discussed.




   550                          13:30 Tuesday                                CF14                             ... AXL.. ]
History and diversity of Great Basin fishes. G.R. SMITH. Museum of Zoology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Ml 48109-1079, USA.

Hubbs' and Miller's research on the Great Basin emphasized changes at ths level of races and subspecies; these
changes apparently occurred rapidly, in hundreds to thousands of years. Miocene to Pleistocene fossils of these
fishes, in contrast, suggest unexpectedly slow changes at the species level, i.e., over hundreds of thousands to
nearly 10 million years, with infrequent evolution of new spedes. Resolution of this incongruence requires
clarification of the relative frequency of short-term differentiation, species origins, and extinction. The Great Basin
evidence demonstrates that fluctuating pluvial-interpluvial cydes result in rapid proliferation of new subspedes, but
eventual extinction of all but generalist survivors, often as relict endemics. The frequent extinctions and infrequent
persistence of new spedes in the Great Basin seem to be the consequence of repeated loss of habitat during
interpluvial stages of Pleistocene cycles. The result seems to be rapid but superficial changes in morphology without
long-tenn charge. Great Basin fish faunas exhibit low diversity and high endemism characteristic of tectonically
actave areas. The low diversity suggests that high extinction rates were caused by high elevations, high gradients
(low habitat diversity), and dimatic variability.




   551     . ..       .        13:45 Tuesday                                 CF14                                AXL
Biogeography and life history variation In flatfishes (PleuronectidaeiPIeuronectiformes). J.A. Cooper.
National Marine Fisheries Service, Systematics Laboratory, MRC 153, Museum of Natural History, Washington, D.C.
20560, U.S.A.

Flatfishes of the family Pleuronectidae are distributed in marine waters across the entire northern hemisphere. The
majority of spedes (49 out of 59) are found in the Pacific Ocean with only fen pleuronectid species in the Atlantic
Ocean. Some species inhabit wide ranges inhabiting Pacific, Atlantic and Arctic waters, while many others have
more limited distributions. An area cladogram using a recent cladistic hypothesis of relationships within
Pleuronectidae allows for the interpretation of this geographic distribution. A trans-arctic dispersal appears to be a
repeated pattern within taxonomic subgroups of Pleuronectidae. Associated with this extensive distribution is a wide
range of life history traits. Feeding behavior, spawning season, age and size at maturity all exhibit variation at
different taxonomic levels, induding within spedes variation for some of the widely distributed spedes. The extent to
which inheritance versus geographic distribution, and corresponding environmental factors influence these life
history variables will also be presented.




  ■552                        14:00 Tuesday                                 CF14                                AXL
Sangre de Cristo and other local color from Mexico; geographic variation in sexually selected characters?
R.L.Borowskv and K.-c. Chen, Department of Biology, New York University, Washington Square, NY 10003, USA.

The variable platyfish, Xiphophorus variatus, has the broadest range of any species of Xiphophorus. Most work on
this species has concentrated on populations in the Rio Tamesi drainage, towards the northern end of its
distribution. Here, we report on the populations toward the southern end of the range, in the Rios Nautla, Solteros,
Tecolutla and Cazones. These populations differ from the ones in the north by exhibiting pronounced local variation
in adult male coloration patterns. One variety, termed Sangre de Cristo in the aquarium literature, is characterized
by deep red coloration on the belly and throat of adult males. Another color variety is vivid yellow coloration of the
gonopr^ium. These color variants, and others, ate extremely restricted in geographic distribution. Sangre de Cristo
occurs in an area no larger than ten by fifteen kilometers, with the frequency of the variant highest towards the center
of the range. Yellow gonopodium is know from only a single locality. In contrast, adult male color variants in the
north seem more broadly distributed. Population genetic data suggests that populations in the south may be more
isolated from one another than in the north. AP-PCR (RAPD) analyses reveal less band variation in the southern
populations than in the northern populations. There is also less variation at the autosomal tailspot locus in southern
than in northern populations and greater tailspot variability among populations in the south. If is hypothesized that
the evolution of local color variants is promoted by reduced gene flow among populations. This is of great interest
because vivid adult male colors in poeciliids are generally believed to be sexual selected characters and these
results suggest a potential role of small population effects in their origin.                              .14:15 Tuesday                                CF14                                AXL
   553
A couple of case studies in African Ichthyobiogeography; Anabantidae and Malapteruridae.                  S-M. Norris,
Ichthyology Laboratory, Royal Museum of Central Afnca, B-3080 Tervuren, Belgium.

Africa has a large and diverse fish fauna which is spread across a variety of ecosystems and habitats A prelminary
synthesis of fartors structuring the distributions of these fishes (exclusive of the Great Lake faunas) is att^pted.
Rigorous phylogenetic hypotheses are available for very few Afnr^n taxa. In fact, ®^®® basic t^orirmic^d
distribution infomalion is lacking for many groups and regions complicating progress in *bis field This leaves most
biogeographic discussions more in the realm of Humphry Greenwood s bioaccountaricy than tme
Mam fishes seem distributed to the limits of their preferred habitats while others seemingly pay litt e beed to habitat
bouridaries, indicating more complex factors are in play. Example fish distnbutions bom^o farnilies, AnabanMae
(climbing perches) and Malapteruridae (electric catfishes), are used to explore types of distnbution patterns, with
possible explanations (or 'accountings') offered.




                                14:30.Tuesday                                CF14                               AXL
   554
Fifty years of faunal change in Lake Pontchartraln. R.C^CashPer, J.M. Humphries. C.S. Schieble and J.S.
Stewart, Department of Biological Sciences. University of New Orleans, New Orleans. LA, 70148 USA.

Lake Pontchartraln, a complex, warm-temperate, shallow basin, is one of the largest estuaries iri the Gulf of Merdco
region The lake is bounded by Mississippi River deltaic plain on the west and south, incised Pleistocenet terraces to
the north and barrier islands and older river deltas to the east. Salinity vanes from pure freshwater Jbe w^em
fringe of the basin to nearly marine conditions in the eastern components of the basin. Freshwater riput^ pnm^N
from rivers draining the Pleistocene terraces with occasional natural (and more recently, man-made) incursions from
the Mississippi River. During the last century significant degradation of the lake has occurred due to pollution,
shoreline erosion, commercial shell dredging and saltwater intrusion from navigational waterways.
The fauna of the lake reflects these varied hydrological connections, with well over 120 sp^es of ^b Imown from
the basin. However, the human impact on the lake's fauna has been considerable. In order to Ptwid®
inventory of the basin and design a monitoring program to assist with Lake management, •be Uiwe^_of New
Orleans has been engaged in a four year assessment of the he^th of the basin. Quarterly collec^ons are ipadei by
trawl and/or seine at 15 stations approximating sites surveyed by Suttkus in the early 1950 s and Thonyson and
Verret in the late 197O's. The first two years of the present study (1996-98) have yielded nearly80 species o'fishes
with the bay anchovy most common in trawls and inland silversides most common in seme coupons. In addition,
we have collected nine specimens of Rio Grande perch, Cichlasoma cyanoguttatum from a vanety of locals.




                                14:45 Tuesday                                CF14                                AXL
    555
 Distribution of fishes in the West Twin River drainage in relation to lat^glacial events.               P.A. Cochran,
 (PAC.NRH) Division of Natural Science. St. Norbert College, DePere, Wl 54115 USA.
 We assessed the occurrence of fishes upstream and downstream frorn a waterfall iiear the mouth of the, De^ls
 River a tributary to the West Twin River in the Lake Michigan drainage of Mst-cenfral Wisconsin. We hypothesized
 that VeX atove the waterfall colonized the upper Devils River when the West Twin River vaUey^se^ed as a
 spillway from Glacial Lake Oshkosh to Lake Michigan, because terras elevations                             J^here^
 submerged under higher flow regimes. We found eighteen native fish species above fte.
 seventeen native species occurred in the West Twin River only below the waterfall. To test theJ?’!)!
 relatively early colonists gained access to the upper Devils River, we assigned^
 each species'^according to its suspected timing of colonization elsewhere in the Upper              JJ"®™ ™®^^ n°
 significant differences between the rankings of fishes found only below and those found above the walerf^L
 Constraints on fish distribution imposed by geological history may be relevant to the assessment of strearn
 ecosystem health: a stream reach above the waterfall had a lower Index of Biotic Integrity score than a similar reach
 below, reflecting the absence of some species above the waterfall.




                                16:15 "Tuesday                           CF14                              AXL
  Distribution patterns and physical parameters affecting Blacksmith larvae, Chromls punctipinnis, off the
  north west coast of Catalina Island. A.A. Foote. California State University, Northridge, Department of Bloloav
  18111 Nordhoff St. Northridge. Ca. 91330-8303, USA.                                     •

  Populations of damselfishes (Pomacentridae) are frequently found near kelp beds and rocky areas along open
 coasts. They have demers^ eggs and planktonic larvae. From the time of hatching through the three stages of
 larval development (preflexion, flexion and post flexion) many environmental factors influence development,
 distribution and abundance. This investigation focuses on pomacenfrid early life history stages in relation to
 environmental factors that influence their distribution and abundance. Four locations were selected (two inshore and
 two offshore) off the north west coast of Catalina Island. A one meter plankton net was towed, for five minutes, in
 sets of five replicates per site over a duration of three lunar cycles (200 samples). Wafer temperature, salinity, pH,
 current direction, wind velocity and lunar cycles were recorded for all tows. Data were analyzed using 3-way
 ANOVA. Preliminaiy results show increased densities inshore, with predictable cycling over the sampling period.
 Fluctuations in physical parameters appear to affect inshore and offshore lanral distributions and abundances. This
 information will aid in predicting settlement for future recruitment into local populations.




    560                          16:30-Tuesday                             . .CF14                               AXL

  556                          15:30 Tuesday                                 CF14                                AXL
Temporal dynamics of fish assemblages on small patch reefs: comparison of high diversity (Great Barrier
Reen and low diversity (Virgin Islands) systems. P.F/Sale. (PFS&PC) Biology & Great Lakes Institute for
Environmental, Research, Univ, of Windsor, Windsor. ON N9B 3P4.
We use data from 10 visual censuses over five years of fish assemblages on small patch reefs located on the back-
reef at Tague Bay. St. Croix. U.S. Virgin Islands. These are compared with comparable data frorn a 10-year study
of southern Great Banier Reef patch reefs. Tague Bay assemblages were substantially less diverse (total of 88
soeoies recorded versus 141 species at the Australian site), but displayed a.lmost the same lewis of ternporm
variation (change in composition from census to census) as did the Australian assemblages, pus result arid
related observations argue for the composition and dynamics of fish assemblages in the taro• locations to be
determined by substantially similar processes. An analysis of the data, with fish classified into 12 feeding guilds
rather than into species, showed variation in guild structure from census to census in both kxiatioris. However, the
guild composition of Taque Bay assemblages fluctuated around a structure that was markedly dmerent trom the
average structure of the Australian assemblages. While assemblages in the two locations are structured by similar
processes, they play markedly different trophic roles.




                                15:45 Tuesday                                 CF14                                AXL
   557
me fish assemblages of San Diego Bay, California. L.G. Allen, California State University, Northridge. CA USA.

Twelve guarteify samples of the fish assemblages of San Diego Bay were taken from July 1994 to April 1997 ai four
stations using a variety of sampling methods (large seine, small seines, square enclosure, puree seme, beam trai^
and otter trawl) designed to assess all components of the ichthyofauna. These sarnples yielded a total of 405,034
fishes belonging to 75 species that weighed 1,725 kg. The northern anchovy was the most abundant fi^ species,
comprising 51 % of the total catch, followed by topsmelf at 22%, the slough ani^ovy at ISIfe Pacific sardine at 3 A
and shiner surfperch al about 2% of the total catch. Round stingrays constituted ^% of the total biomass taken
followed by northern anchovy at 14%, spotted sand bass at about 13%, topsmelt, 10/o, and slough anchovy. 6 A.
Marked changes in the number individuals and total biomass occurred over the course of the study. Both numenttal
abundance and biomass were highest in the spring and summer months due largely to heavy recruitment of juvenile
surfperches and topsmelt. Very large catches of juvenile northern anchovy. Pacific sardine, round stingrays, and
Spotted sand bass caused the pronounced peaks in July. A similar number of fish were taken in the vegetated and
non-veqetated areas, however different gears yielded varying results with respect to densities in vegetated and non-
veaetated areas According to canonical correlation analysis, distance from the mouth of the bay, temperature, and
ssuinity accounted for nearly 95% (R2 = 0.949) of the variance in species abundances.




                                16:00 Tuesday                                 CF14.                               AXL
    558
 Community structure of demersal reef fishes of the Mississippi-Alabama outer crOTtinental shelf. K.J. Sulak.
 W.F. Smith-Vaniz and D.C. Weaver. Florida Caribbean Science Center. US Geological Survey-Biological Resources
 Division. 7920 NW 71st Street. Gainesville. FL 32653 USA.
 Hard-bottom features of the Mississippi-Alabama outer continental shelf in the northeastern Gulf of Mexico (the
 Pinnacles} were surveyed to determine faunal composition and relative abundance of resident reef fishes. Study
 reefs of low. medium and high profile features spanning a depth range of 58 to 110m were investigated by remote
 operating vehicle (ROV). trapping, trawling, and hook and line sampling. Cabined sampling technique^
 documented -150 species of demersal fishes, including 74 species of reef fishes, pie purpose of this study is to
 provide a comparison of reef fish diversity to other regions of the Gulf of Mexico, and identify the trophic structure of
 the reef fish community.




    562                       .08:45 Wednesday.                                 BB                                THN
 Atlantic swordfish management in the 199O's: Wifi domestic rebuilding be possible in the face of
 Intematlonal overfishing? J.T. Stevenson and R. Lent, National Marine Fisheries Service, Highly Migratory
 Species. Management Division, F/SF1,1315 East-West Highway. Silver Spring. MD 20910 USA.

 Atlantte swordfish are a highly migratory species targeted by domestic and international fishing fleets in the North
 ^r«A??b*b Atlantic Oceans. The 22-member International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas
  (ICCAT) conducts stock assessments and issues management recommendations for swordfish fisheries In 1996
 the North Atlantic swordfish stock was estimated to be at 58% of the biomass needed to produce maximum
 sustainable yield. In 1997, the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) identified North Atlantio swordfish as
 overfished and began developing a domestic swordfish rebuilding program under the authority of the Magnuson
 Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act. This plan may include time/area closures fto limit catch of
 undersized fish) and import restrictions. In 1997, U.S. swordfish imports totaled more than 15,000 mt and were
 worth more than US$95 million. As a major importer of swordfish, the U.S. can play a role in international
 conservation by ensuring that imports are from countries participating in the ICCAT conservation program. NMFS
 will continue to pursue domestic strategies to rebuild this stock and will work within ICCAT to support international
 rebuilding strategies. It is not clear what effect restrictions on U.S. fishermen may have in light of increasing
 international fishing efforts on this highly migratory species.




    563                       09:00 Wednesday                                   BB                                THN                                          VI niu uiarrue porcn, i^icniasoma cyanogunatum tram a variety of locals.




         555                          14:45 Tuesday                                 CF14                               . AXL
      roS^SS'n-’^                                 f’**®'’ drainage in relation to late-glacial events.           PA Cochran
      (PAC.NRH) Division of Natural Science, St. Norbert College, DePero, Wl 54115 USA.                            '

                                                  .uP^ream and downstream from a waterfall near the mouth of the Devils
     tha®soede^s aS^e fte watlrf^"r5nnf                                drainage of east-central Wisconsin. We hypothesized
     uiai species above me waterfall colonized the upper Devils River when the West Twin River vallev served a*? a
     submeraed'^ndpr°Wn^^®fl°®^''°®’’                            because terrace elevations indicate that the'^waterfall was
                °                       regimes. We found eighteen native fish species above the waterfall whereas
                                 occurred in the West Twin River only below the waterfall. To test the hypothesis that only
                     'colonists gained access to the upper Devils River, we assigned an independently^erived lankina to
                                'r '*® ®u®P®c*®d timing of colonization elsewhere in the Upper Midwest There were^o
                                         ’■^® ^antangs of fishes found only below and those found above the waSrfall
     Constraints on fish distribution imposed By geological history may be relevant to the assessment of stream
                           ®?®®®' '^®T’’ ®*’°''® ”^® *'atetf3l had a lower Index of Biotio Integrity score than a simnar reach
     below, reflecting the absence of some species above the waterfall.                                           winner reacn




         559                         16:15 Tuesday                                 CF14                                AXL
     Distribution patterns and physical parameters affecting Blacksmith larvae, Chromls punctipinnis, aft the
     north west coast of Catalina Island. A.A. Foote. California State University, NorUiridge, Department of Biology,
     18111 Nordhoff St., Northridge, Ca. 91330-8303, USA.

     Populations of damselfishes (Pomacentridae) are frequently found near kelp beds and rocky areas along open
     coasts. They have demersal eggs and planktonic larvae. From the time of hatching through the three stages of
     larval development (preflexion, flexion and post flexion) many environmental factors influence development,
     distribution and abundance. This investigation focuses on pomacentrid early life history stages in relation to
     environmental factors that Influence their distribution and abundance. Four locations were selected (two inshore and
     two offshore) off the north west coast of Catalina Island. A one meter plankton net was towed, for five minutes, in
     sets of five replicates per site over a duration of three lunar cycles (200 samples). Wafer temperature, salinity, pH,
     current direction, wind velocity and lunar cycles were recorded for all tows. Data were analyzed using 3-way
     ANOVA. Preliminary results show increased densities inshore, with predictable cycling over the sampling period.
     Fluctuations in physical parameters appear to affect inshore and offshore larval distributions and abundances. This
     information will aid in predicting settlement for future recruitment into local populations.




        560                          16:30 Tuesday                                CF.14                               AXL
     Use of GIS in taxonomic collections and its relevance to assessing biodiversity, spatio-temporal
     distributions, and field work validation. J.R. Ruiz-Carus. F.D.E.P., Florida Marine Research Institute, 100 Eighth
     Ave. SE, St. Petersburg, FL 33701-5095, USA.

     A system that analyzes and displays spatially referenced data is known as a geographical information system (GIS).
     The use of GIS technology has facilitated understanding of complex relationships between organisms and their
     environment. In ichthyology, GIS could facilitate access to information associated with taxonomic collections. It
     could provide spatial analysis within and among species using distribution patterns of morphological and genetic
     characters: accurately analyze geographical distributions of morphological characters and correlate them with
     ecological parameters; and provide an objective measurement of the status of an ecosystem, which has generally
     been done based on human perception but lacked data. Taxonomic collections of voucher and type specimens and
     their associated environmental data are abundant sources of unexplored information. This information is highly
     relevant for management of natural resources because taxonomy has been built upon it. This information, when
     analyzed with GIS, could be used to address these areas and to provide the foundation for measuring fish
     biodiversity and evaluating the dynamics of spatio-temporal patterns of fish. The FDEP's FMRI is applying GIS
     technology to analyse the robust databases associated with its voucher collections. Further study of voucher
     specimens will allow us to produce maps of morphological characteristics of fish linked to ecological parameters. We
     also intend to produce synthesized information for ecosystem management in a format amenable to spatial- and time­
     analysis study.




        561                        08:15 Wednesday                                  BB                                 THN
     Borders and biodiversity: a plight for Pacific salmon.           B.E. Riddell. Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Padfio
     Biological Station,, Nanaimo, B.C.

     If Pacific salmon are a cultural icon, then their treatment in the past century is certainly inconsistent with this value.
     Recent reviews of their status in Canada and the Pacific northwest report about 1,000 populations extinct or at risk,
     and several stocks are listed or proposed for listing under the U.S. Endangered Species Act. Causes of the declines
     are numerous, usually attributed to someone or something else, and always debatable. The history of impacts can
     be broadly characterized as: an initial uninformed and rapid expansion of fisheries; then decades of rapid economic
     expansion in many sectors plus heightened competitive over-fishinQ of hatchery and wild salmonids; and finally, 20-
     30 years of extensive regulation, confrontation, and change. Dunng the latter period, the issue of "borders" in
     management and conservation has become very evident. The Pacific Salmon Treaty between the United States and
     Canada (1985) provided the first comprehensive agreement on Pacific salmon and offered a means to cooperate in
     consenration and development. Unfortunately, it now exemplifies the problem of Bordets and’their risk to biodiversity
     in Pacific salmon. This talk will address the history of salmon conflicts, the complexity of salmon issues, and describe
     the risks associated with the present Treaty impasse.




<■
i—                                                                                                              1.

    558                        .16:00 Tuesday                                CF14                               AXL




documented *150 species of demersal fishes, including 74 species of reef Ashes        The ouroose Si fW«5
ttS Ash’rorSt?                                           "’®         “®’‘'®°’         "'®"«*y^‘be trophic stmXre of




    562                    . 08:45 Wednesday                                 BB                               THN
Atlantic swordfish management In the 199O's: Will domestic rebuilding be possible In the face of
international overfishing? J.T. Stevenson and R. Lent, National Marine Fisheries Service, Highly Migratory
Species, Management Division, F/SF1,1315 East-West Highway, Silver Spring, MD 20910 USA,

Atlantic swordfish are a highly migratory species targeted by domestic and international fishing fleets in the North
and South Atlantic Oceans. The 22-member International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas
(ICCAT) conducts stock assessments and issues management recommendations for swordfish fisheries. In 1996,
the North Atlantic swordfish stock was estimated to be at 58% of the biomass needed to produce maximum
sustainable yield. In 1997, the National Marine Rsheries Service (NMFS) identified North Atlantic swordfish as
overfished and began developing a domestic swordfish rebuilding program under the authority of the Magnuson
Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act. This plan may include time/area closures (to limit catch of
undersized fish) and import restrictions. In 1997, U.S, swordfish imports totaled more than 15,000 mt and were
worth more than US$95 million. As a major importer of swordfish, the U3. can play a role in international
conservation by ensuring that imports are from countries participating in the ICCAT conservation program. NMFS
will continue to pursue domestic strategies to rebuild this stock and will work within ICCAT to support international
rebuilding strategies. It is not clear what effect restrictions on U.S. fishermen may have in light of increasing
international fishing efforts on this highly migratory species.




   563                       09:00 Wednesday                                 BB                               THN
Interstate striped bass managaement, 1977-1998. H.M. Austin. Virginia Institute of Marine Science, College of
William and Mary, Gloucester Point, VA 23062, USA; J.G. Travel stead, Virginia Marine Resources Commission,
P.O. 756, Newport News, VA 23607, USA.

Initially, under the auspices of the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) Interstate Fisheries Management
Program, and subsequently the operation of the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission (ASMFC), striped bass
(Morone saxatilis) management of the mid-Atlantic (Virginia-Maine) stocks have showed both an initial abysmal
beginning, and a final and unique result that can claim responsibility for the dramatic recovery of the heavily fished
mid-Atlantic stocks. Recommendations were made to the ASMFC as early as 1942 for the need for more stringent
unified regulations that transcended state boundaries: but it was not until 1981 that a Scientific and Statistics
Committee recommenced to the ASMFC Striped Bass Board that the spawning grounds be closed during the
spawning season, and that the minimum size limit be 14* coast-wide, while most of the states adopted such
measures in 1982 their enforcement was voluntary. It was not until the passage of the Federal Atlantic Striped Bass
Cohservation Act in 1984, requiring full compliance with the Act that each state fulfilled their obligations.
Subsequently, a combination of protective regulations and stringent enforcement, coincident with several highly
successful dominant year classes (1987,1989, 1993, and 1996) have led to an unprecedented abundance of large
(>24*, 600 mm) fish. So successful is the program that Congress has passed subsequent coast-wide legislation
(Atlantic Coast Cooperative Fisheries Consenration and Management Act of 1994) to protect other coastal migratory
species.




   564.                   . 09:30 Wednesday                                 BB                               THN
Marine turtle movements In the Caribbean: realigning boundaries in the marine environment. A.L. Bass.
Department of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences; University of Rorida; 7922 NW 71 st Street Gainesville, Florida
32652 USA.

Mitochondrial DNA has proven useful for the elucidation of population structure and questions regarding the behavior
of adult female marine turtles. What can the analysis of multiple distinct foraging sites tell us about marine turtle
developmental habitats and movements in the Caribbean? Analyses of Juvenile foraging populations have provided
information regarding recruitment scales in the Caribbean and Atlantic. Previous studies indicate that multiple
nesting locations contribute individuals to a particular foraging site. Oftentimes these foraging sites are located
outside the geopolitical boundaries of countries supporting the nesting populations.            Determination of the
composition of Juvenile and adult foraging grounds provide information on movement and behavior of marine turtles
in the Caribbean and Atlantic. Consequently, this information is necessary for the development of management
policies directed tcmards marine turtles. Migratory behavior of marine organisms forces scientists anti management
organizations to think differently about how conservation efforts should be directed. Finally, unawareness of human
delineated boundaries emphasizes the importance of international cooperation In the maintenance of biodiversity.  565                     ... .10:15 Wednesday                                BB                                    THN
A bl-national effort to protect endangered Kemps ridley sea turtles. S.S. Heppell. Duke University Marine
Laboratory, 135 Duke Marine Lab, Road, Beaufort, North Carolina 28516 USA; R. Marquez-Milan, Institute Nacional
de la Pesoa-CRIP Manzanillo, Playa Ventanas S/N, A.P. 591, Manzanillo, Colima, Mexico 28200.

Kemp's ridley sea turtles {Lepidochelys kempi) nested in ths tens of thousands in the 194O's and were the most
abundant species in the Gulf of Mexico. Intensive egg harvest and mortality at sea caused the population to
plummet; by the mid-197O's, less than 1000 nests per year were counted at Rancho Nuevo, Mexico, the only known
nesting beach. Efforts to prevent extinction were initiated in Mexico in 1960s, and from 1966-1978 approximately
30,000 hatchlings were releaserJ per year. A United States-Mexico cooperative research and conservation program
was formed in 1978 which now protects 95% of the nests laid at Rancho Nuevo. The cooperative includes the
Mexican Ministry of Fisheries, U.S. National Parks Service, Fish and Wildlife Service, and National Marine
Fisheries Senrice. Additional research support and funding comes from the Glatts Porter Zoo in Brownsville, the
Texas Shrimpers Association and other groups. The National Marine Fisheries Service sponsored a captive
rearing program and efforts to re-establish a nesting colony at South Padre Island, Texas. Both nations passed
legislation that requires Turtle Excluder Devices on shrimp trawling gear to reduce incidental mortality. Today the
Kemps ridley population is still more than an order of magnitude below historical levels, but nests are increasing,
largely due to the dedicated efforts of two nations.




   566                  . . .10:30 Wednesday                                  BB          ,   .                      THN
Blind catfish {Prietella: Ictalurldae) phylogenies and troglobitic Invertebrates as Indicators of international
(Mexico - USA) subten-anean aquifer interconnections, and as tools for environmental risk assessment. D.A.
Hendrickson. Texas Memorial Museum, Texas Natural History Collections, R4000 / PRC176, University of Texas,
Austin, TX 78712-1100 USA; J. Krejca, Department of Zoology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712 USA; J.M.
Rodriguez Martinez, SIMEP, Inc., Eagle Pass, Texas, USA.

Hydrogeology of the highly karstic and arid Texas-Mexico border region is complex, and subterranean hydrographic
relationships poorly understood, yet these aquifers are heavily exploited for municipal, industrial and agricultural
uses. Diverse contaminants problems in the Rio Grande (= Rio Bravo) are well known, and increasing development,
especially in the border corridor, and regional large-scale pumping of aquifers, are rapidly increasing threats to
environmental health in the region. Preliminary hydrogeologic data indicating that karst flows may pass under the Rio
Granda were presented during international impact assessment hearings for a proposed hazardous waste dump in
south Texas. We apply phylogenetic and biogeographic relationships of the regional troglobitic fauna, together with
genetic distance data, as potentially convenient, quick, and relatively inexpensive, indirect measures of degree of
hydrologic interconnections among aquifers, and thus as indicators of probabilities and geographic extent of impacts
from leakage from the waste dump in Texas, or any other aquifer impact, such as excessive withdrawals. Sequence
data from miDNA of populations of Prietella phieatophlla throughout a large region of Coahuila indicate considerable
historic anil/or current connections among populations, as do distributions of less-thoroughly studied troglobitic
invertebrates broadly sympatric with this obligate cave catfish. Invertebrate distributions also support the hypothesis
of trans-border subterranean aquifer connections under the Rio Grande. Future studies will seek increased resolution
of relationships among Prietella populations, and phylogenetic hypotheses of relationships of the troglobitic
invertebrates, to further corroborate these preliminary conclusions.

   567                     .. 10:45 Wednesday                                BB     . .                              THN
Fish assemblages of the Rio Conchos and Rio Grande basins, Mexico and Texas. R.J. Edwards, Department
of Biology, The University of Texas-Pan American, Edinburg, TX 78539 USA; G.P, Garrett, Heart of the Hills
Research Station, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Ingram, TX 78025 USA; E.C. Marsh-Matthews, Museum of
Natural History and Biological Survey, University of Oklahoma, Nonnan, OK 73019 USA.

Rshes of the Rio Conchos and Rio Grande and their tributaries were surveyed from 1992 to 1995 and these
collections were compared to historical surveys. Cluster analysis of fish assemblages revealed several
distinguishable but overlapping assemblage stnictures. Two spring localities, both impacted, were dominated by
Gambusla, as were headwater localities of Rio Conchos tributaries. Lower Rio Conchos tributary localities were
more diverse and had large numbers of Notropis jemezanus, Campostoma omatum, and Gambusla senilis.
Mainstem assemblages near the Rio Conchos/Rio Grande confluence were characterized by a diverse oyprinid
component in addition to ictalurids and the Mexican tetra, and few introduced species. Other mairistem sites that
were heavily impacted by channelization and agricultural runoff were dominated by Cyprinella lutrensls and had large
numbers of introduced Tilapia. Lower canyons of the Rio Grande were chararoterized by a diverse fauna that
included both swift water species such as Rhinichthys cataractae and Maerhybosis aestivalis as well as other
species characteristic of the Chihuahuan Desert rivers. Comparison of recent to historical TOllections revealed
substantial changes in assemblage compostion in many reaches, often due to population reduction or extirpation of
species.




   571                       08:30 Wednesday                                   15                      .   . .      OVC
Northern Rmlts of reptiles: temperature-related constraints and adaptations.                      R.J. Brooks. Department of
Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, NIG 2W1.

Forty years ago, Bleakney pointed out that the factors limiting the ranges of herpetofauna had not been well studied.
This is still true. Presumably, limits are set by extreme climatic conditions in some if not all cases. The northern
limits are set by the severity of cold temperatures in winter or by the impact of summer temperatures on the
(ievelopment of the embryos. The northern limits of most Canadian reptiles are remarkably similar, especially
compared to the variation observed in amphibians. Few reptiles tolerate freezing, and in those that do the ecological
importance of this ability is not obvious. There is some evidence of latitudinal trends in physiological traits and
patterns of growth that suggest adaptation to cooler, shorter summers in northern reptiles, but not much evidence of
adaptation of pivotal temperatures of environmental sex determination, or to low incubation temperatures, nor to
colrier winters. I will discuss evidence suggesting that the nrthem distribution of reptiles is determined largely by the
length and warmth of the summer.

   568                        11:00 Wednesday                                    BB                                THN
Biodiversity crossing borders: the invasive vector In fishes. E.J. Crossman and B.C. Cudmore, Centre for
Biodiversity and Conservation, Royal Ontario, Museum, 100 Queen's Park, Toronto, Ontario M5S 2C6.

Most often measures of biodiversity have been documented and expressed in regard to political boundaries, as
opposed to ecological areas. There have been extensive programs of intentional introduciions of nonindigenous
species by agencies in one political area without prior consultation with adjacent political areas. When this situation
involves international boundaries it can lead to greater concern. The present freshwater fish fauna of Canada could
be said to result totally from fishes that have "invaded or reinvaded" Canadian waters as those wafers appeared.
The process continues today. Records starting in 1949 indicate that at least eight species have entered Canadian
wafers by moving across or around the Great Lakes and interconnecting rivers. The list includes eight species
native to the United States and seven introduced there. If we include the potential of global warming there are an
aditional 41 species to the immediate south of Canada that might invade. If we extend the list to the whole of
Canada and the United States there is a total of 63 species that have achieved part of their distribution by this vector.




   569                        11:15 Wednesday                                   Ba            ...   .              THN
Northern borders and threatened species: endangered amphibians In Canada. D.M. Green. Redpath Museum,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2K6.

The northern range limit of a species is the dynamic result of local extinction versus establishment of new
populations. This, in turn, is dependent upon dispersal, habitat availability, habitat predictability, population
dynamics, and metapopulation dynamics. In Canada, all native species of amphibians reach their northen limits. For
some, this limit lies just inside the southern Canadian border and therefore these species are candidates for
Canada's endangered species list whatever their distribution or abundance in the United States. Canada has no
endemic amphibian species. To what extent are these Canadian endangered species an artifact of the position of the
Canada/US border? Or, in consideration of the genetic distinction and isolation that may occur among northern
limital populations, how much of a biolological imperative does designation of "endangered" in Canada carry? These
questions are best addressed on a case by case basis.




   570                        08:00 Wednesday                                    15                                 OVC
Ecological physiology of cold adaptation and overwintering In Eastern Painted turtles. (Chrysemys picta
picta}. G. Ultsch. Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL. 35487; C.E. Crocker,
Division of Biology and Medicine, Brown University, Providence Rl 02912; M.E. Canwile, Department of Biological
Sciences, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL. 35487.

Abstract not received




   574                        10:30. Wednesday         .               .         15                                -OVC
Evolution of freeze tolerance in turtles: what is known? R.L. Burke. Department of Biology, Hofstra University,
Hempstead, NY, USA, 11549.

Hatchling freeze tolerance has been reported in western painted turtles (NE and various Canadian), midland painted
turtles (Ontario and OH), eastern X midland painted turtles (NJ ), and ornate box turtles (NE). Lack of hatchling
freeze tolerance has been reported in red eared sliders (IL anrJ LA), spiny soft-shelled turtles (NE), yellow mud turtles
(NE), and snapping turtles (NE). To this list I add wood turtles and common map turtles (IN) as not freeze tolerant,
and very preliminary data suggests that southern painted turtles (LA) are also freeze intolerant, while Blanding's
turtles appear to be freeze tolerant.

Understanding the evolution of this trait is complicated for several reasons. These include 1 .disagreement over the
importance of freeze tolerance vs supercooling in natural situations, 2. lack of a consistent standard for defining
freeze tolerance, 3. lack of comparable interpopulational freeze tolerance data for a species with large latitudinal
range and possible variation in this trait, and, 4. lack of a phylogenetic analysis of a clade with variation in this trait.
More work is needed.   567                         10:45 Wednesday                                  Bl                                 THN
                    ■'’* **!? f*'”                 Grande basins, Mexico and Texas. R.J. Edwards, Department
of Biology, The University of Texas-Pan Amencan, Edinburg, TX 78539 USA; G.P. Garrett, Heart of the Hills
Research Station, T^s Parks and Wildlife Department, Ingram, TX 78025 USA; E.C. Marsh-Matthew.s Museum of
Natural History and Biological Survey, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019 USA,

                 C°™:^°®.3rid Rio Grande and their tributaries were surveyed from 1992 to 1995 and these
       Uehow k               *° h'storical surveys. Cluster analysis of fish assemblages revealed several
elmbuSa^s                                              ''■"u      'oca'i*'®®, Poth impacted, were dominated^
mom                       ‘ localities of Rio Conchos tnbutanes. Lower Rio Conchos tributary localities were
more diverse and had large numbers of Notropis jemezanus, Campostoma omatum, and Gambusia senilis
Mainstem assernblages near the Rio Conchos/Rio Grande confluence were characterized by a diverse cvorinici
                       ictalunds and the Mexican tetra, and few introduced species. Other'mainster^sit^ that
                                'fagricul^rd runoff were dominated by Cyprinella lutrensls and had large
                                       canyons of the Rio Grande were chararcterized by a diverse fauna that
                                  ®k'^                cataractaa and Macrhybosis aesbValis as well as othir
suhSXi^ ohonoo? ® ’         S^'hoPhuan Desert nvers. Comparison of recent to historical collections revealed
substantial changes in assemblage composfion in many reaches, often due to population reduction or extirpation of
specioS.                                                                                                ’




  57-1                      08:30 Wednesday                         B                                          OVC
Northern llmits of reptiles: temperature<elated constraints and adaptations.                R.J. Brooks. Department of
Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, NIG 2W1.

Forty years ago, Bleakney pointed out that the factors limiting the ranges of herpetofauna had not been well studied.
This Is still true. Presumably, limits are set by extreme climatic conditions in some if not all cases. The northern
limits are set by the severity of cold temperatures in winter or by the impact of summer temperatures on the
development of the embryos. The northern limits of most Canadian reptiles are remarkably similar, especially
compared to the variation observed in amphibians. Few reptiles tolerate freezing, and in those that do the ecological
importance of this ability is not obvious. There is some evidence of latitudinal trends in physiological traits and
patterns of growth that suggest adaptation to cooler, shorter summers in northern reptiles, but not much evidence of
adaptation of pivotal temperatures of environmental sex determination, or to low incubation temperatures, nor to
colder winters. I will discuss evidence suggesting that the nrthem distribution of reptiles is determined largely by the
length and warmtii of the summer.




   572                        09:00 Wednesday                                  15                                OVC
The ecophysiology of freeze tolerant frogs: surviving the big freeze. J.R. Lavne Jr, Department of Biology,
Slippery Rock University, Slippery Rock PA 16057 USA.

At least five species of frogs from North America survive extensive freezing of their body fluids. Their limits of
tolerance emanate from the combined interactions of freeze temperature and the duration of exposure. Frogs protect
their tissues from injury by accumulating massive quantities of glucose or glycerol and by relocating body water from
major organs. The roles of physiologic^ systems in the cryobiology of these frogs are varied. Some morphological
characteristics and systemic functions are key elements supporting freeze tolerance. For example, the integument
transmits ice crystals info body fluids preventing extensive supercooling of body fluids and the cardiovascular system
actively distributes cryoprotectant from central stores in the liver to other body tissues before arresting. In contrast,
the CNS and skeletal muscle function at temporarily reduced rates upon thawing that are in proportion to the
intensity of the freeze episode. This then may affect important organismal activities such as the ability of frogs to find
and interact with mates.




   573                        09:30 Wednesday                                   15                               OVC
Molecular adaptations for freeze tolerance In amphibians and reptiles. K.B. Storey. Dept. Biology, Carleton
University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario K1S 5B6.

Various species of terrestrially-hibernating amphibians and reptiles are freeze tolerant, enduring long-term freezing
exposures with as much as 50-65 % of total body water frozen as extracellular ice. Studies in my lab explore the
biochemical adaptations underlying natural freeze tolerance. Recent studies have included analysis of the hormone,
B-adrenergic receptor, and second messenger responses underlying cryoprotectant (glucose) production by liver and
identitied a novel fbnn of Insulin in wood frogs. Other studies have madie the first analysis of freeze-induced gene
expression in vertebrate organs. Using a cDNA library constructed from livor of wood frogs (Rana sy/vatica) frozen
for 24 h at -2.5 degrees C °, we identified the freeze-induced upregulation of genes coding for the a and S subunits of
fibrinogen (a plasma dotting protein), the mitochondrial membrane ADP/ATP translocase, and a novel protein (about
90 amino acids, 10 kD) with a nuclear exporting sequence. Northern hybridization analysis showed that mRNA levels
for all three proteins (fibrinogen subunits paralleled each other) had distinct organ-specific patterns and responded
differently to freezeAhaw, dehydration, and anoxia stresses. Other studies have revealed that genes that are anoxia-
induced in freshwater turtles are also upregulated by freezing in hatchling painted turtles

   570                         .08:00 Wednesday                                                                     OVC




Abstract not received




   574                     .    10:30 Wednesday                                  15                                OVC
Evolution of freeze tolerance fn turtles: what is known? R.L. Burke. Department of Biology, Hofstra University,
Hempstead, NY, USA, 11549.

Hatchling freeze tolerance has been reported In western painted turtles (NE and various Canadian), midland painted
turtles (Ontario and OH), eastern X midland painted turtles (NJ 1, and ornate box turtles (N^. Lack of hatchling
freeze tolerance has been reported in red eared sliders (IL and LA), spiny soft-shelled turtles (NE), yellow mud turtles
(NE), and snapping turtles (NE). To this list I add wood turtles and common map turtles (IN) as not freeze tolerant,
and very preliminary data suggests that southern painted turtles (LA) are also freeze intolerant, while Blanding's
turtles appear to be freeze tolerant.

Understanding the evolution of this trait is complicated for several reasons. These include 1 .disagreement over the
importance of freeze tolerance vs supercooling In natural situations, 2. lack of a consistent standard for defining
freeze tolerance, 3. lack of comparable interpopulational freeze tolerance data for a species with large latitudinal
range and possible variation in this trait, and, 4. lack of a phylogenetic analysis of a clade with variation in this trait.
More work is needed.




   575                          11:00 Wednesday                                   15                               OVC
Skirting the edge of hypoxia: overwintering In bullfrogs. A.W. Pinder. Dalhousie University, Halifax NS B3H
4J1.

It has long been a mystery how aquatically overwintering frogs, such as bullfrogs, sunzive winter hypoxia. There
have been anecdotal reports that frogs bury in mud, but anoxic frogs survived less than two weeks at 4°C in the
laboratory, and frogs did not bury in mud when it was available. In the field, while most of the pond bottom was
severely hypoxic, the frogs were found in very cold (0-1°) and relatively well oxygenated water at the extreme edge
of the pond, centimetres below ice cover. In the laboratory, frogs in a thermal gradient chose colder temperatures
when the wafer was hypoxic (Tatfersall and Boutilier; J. Exp. Biol. 200:1031-1038). Frogs have a high Q10 (around
5) below 4°C, thus metabolism is reduced In cold water at the pond edge. Anally, the metabolic rate of ovenwintering
frogs In hypoxic water gradually decreased by 60% over several weeks, reducing fuel consumption and the amount
of oxygen required in the water (Donohoe and Boutilier, J. Exp. Biol, in press). Aquatic frogs thus remain aerobic all
winter by choosing a low environmental temperature to reduce metabolic rate, choosing water with the highest
available oxygen, and reducing metabolic rate at a constant temperature.




   576                         .. 11:30 Wednesday                                 15                               OVC
Freeze-activated signal transduction cascades In amphibians and reptiles. J.A. MacDonald and K.B. Storey,
Department of Biology, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada KI S 5B6.

Several terrestrial anurans and reptiles that live at high latitudes have developed elaborate physiological and
biochemical mechanisms for surviving cold winter temperatures. These animals can endure the conversion of up to
65% of their total body water into extracellular ice and then revive after freezing solid for days or weeks. Several
studies have indicated an important role for reversible protein phosphorylation in the regulation of freeze-induced
metabolic adaptations and documented changing patterns of activity of protein kinases A and C. New studies are
examining the roles of mftogen-acUvated protein (MAP) kinases in signal transduction in freeze-tolerant and anoxia-
tolerant frogs and turtles. Stress- and organ-specific changes have been found in ths responses of the extracellular
signal-regulated kinases (ERKs), the stress-activated protein kinases (SAPKs), and p38 that indicate differential
functions in cell response to stress. Other studies have monitored stress-induced changes in transcription factors by
Western blotting and electrophoretic mobility shift assays; these bind to DNA at the promoter regions of their target
genes and induce gene expression in response to cellular stress. The patterns of MAP kinase activation in stress-
tolerant animals suggest the importance of these modules in adapting to oxygen deprivation and severe osmotic
stress and identity freezing as a novel activator of MAP kinases.                             08:00 Wednesday                                CR3                                CHM
  577
Estimates of oopulation size and density for the rainbow water snake, Enhydris enhydns mornaiopsinae) in
Ske Songkia^haiiand. H.K. Voris and J.C. Murphy, Department of Zoology, Field Museum, Chicago, IL 60605,
D.R. Kams, Department of Biology, Hanover College, Hanover, IN 47243 USA.
The 98 000-hectare Lake SongMa wetland complex is one of Thailand's most uriique and irnportant natural
resources. It is home to one of the most taxonomically diverse assemblages of aquatic snakes in the worid. One
species of true sea snake (Hydrophis brooki!), one species of file snake (Acrochordus              .3*X
species of Asian water snakes (Homalopsinae) live here. We happed ma^ed, arid related 2M ranb^ water
snakes (Enhydns enhydris') on 13 consecutive days in a marsh near the village of Ban Tha^^Hin. A tot^ of 380
snakes were traoDed in a 1.5 ha area and of these 144 were previously marked. Schumachers estimate of the
population size 15^473 snakes (95% confidence limits = 406 to 567 snakes) and the Schnabel binomial estimate
usmg the poisson approximation is 446 snakes (95% confidence lirnite = 371 to 561 snakes), ^nhy^
sperids the majority of its time in the mud-root-tangle at the edge of dittoes, pools and
indicate that most snakes are found in a one meter wide band along the aquatic edges. We estimate the linear
density of Enhydris enhydris lo be approximately 0.5 snakes per square meter of shoreline.




                             08:15:Wednesday                                 CR3                               CHM
   578
Habitat utilization, movements, and activity patterns of an aMemblage of aqu^c snakes in ^ke Songkia,
Thailand. D.R. Kams. Biology Department, Hanover College, Hanover, IN 47243, USA, H.K. Vons and J.C.
Murphy, Department of Zoology, Field Museum, Chicago,, IL 60605 USA.
We conducted a radiotelemetrio study of aquatic snakes in a wetland meadow in Lake SongWa Thalar^d We
monitored three species of homalopsine (11 Enhydris enhydris. two Enhydns plumbea, one Homatops/s bL^cata),
one pipe snake {Cylindrophis ruffus), and one common keelback (Xenochrophis riavipunclalum) tor
snakes utilized the subsurface mud-root-fangle along aquatic edges and made particular use of man-m^e fe^res.
Enhydris plumbea, H. buccata, and C. rufhjs were relatively sedentary (mean dai y                                  ® f")
compared lo the more variable and active E. enhydris (mean daily movement: 5 males = 32.6 m 6 fema es - 21.3
m) We found no significant difference between the movements of male and fernale E. enh^ns (all females in
reproductive condition). Xenocbroph/s flavipunctatum (rnean daily movement = 23.8 m) was                              JS
actively forage away from aquatic edges. We found no significant difference behveen day and "ight rnoyements
three E. enhydris (mean day movement = 6.6 m; night = 11 m) nor between too E.
2.3; night = 2.8). Important factors affecting the spatial ecology of snakes in tropical wetlands will be discussed.




                              08:30 Wednesday                                 CR3                              ■ CHM
   579
Time-energy allocation in timber rattlesnakes (Crotalua horrldus}-. affects o*’""V®'Y®''’®’’®"
success. S J. Beaupre. University of Arkansas, Department of Biological Sciences, Fayetteville, AR 72701 USA.

 Studies of the affects of natural variation in food availability may provide valuable insighUegarding mechanisrns ttiat
 govern population dynamics and the responses of individuals to environmental change.^ The use of ‘®l®^®*ry'rtJ®!Q®
 bodied snakes such as the timber rattlesnake allows simultaneous monitonng of multiple ^®P°rt®®®
 the environment I monitored feeding rates, growth, reproductive activities, time allocation and field metabolic rates
 in a sample of radiotagged timber rattlesnakes during a high and low resource V®®'-
 timber rattesnakes exhibited lower feeding rates than ten radiotagged snakes dunng 1997 ^^es e^ibrted
 significantly greater size-adjusted growth rates during 1997. Dunng the low resource year, no reproductive^Mfies
 were observed, however, under conditions of high feeding rates, fourteen independent reproductive assiraatioiTS
 were observed among 10 radiotagged snakes. Snakes in low resource oondibons spent a higher proportion of
 available daylight time engaged in foraging, whereas, under high resource conditions, ^rt®*^®®JP®?*
 resting and reproductive activities. The simultaneous measurement of multiple responses to rt®*';^!®'
 variafion suggests environmental dependencies in the rules of time-energy all^ation. An understanding of those
 dependencies will allow greater accuracy in the prediction of responses of individuals and populations to changes in
 the environment.




    583                        09:30 Wednesday                                CR3                                CHM
 Experimental analyses of interactions between native and exotic lizardspecies using dredge spoil islands in
 Florida. T.S. Campbell. Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology 569 Dabney Hall, University of
 Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996 USA.

 The Cuban brown anole (Anolis sagrei) was introduced into south Rorida about 50 years ago, and is now arguably
 the most numerous tenestrial vertebrate on the peninsula. This, along with habitat alteration, coincides with the
 decline of the native green anole (Anolis carolinensis) in Florida. To experimentally assess the brown anole's role in
 the decline, I introduced brown anoles onto three dredge spoil islands occupied by greens, and used three islands
 with native greens as controls. Islands contained forested and non-forested habitats. Populations were monitored
 for four years with capture-mark-recapture techniques, and detailed microhabitat and spatial data was collected.
 Brown anole populations became very dense within too years. Green anole control population sizes and habitat use
 parameters remained stable, whereas treatment populations crashed, and the few remaining greens utilized different
 habitat types than their ancestors. Gut content analyses gave Planka's dietary overlap values above 0.9, indicating
 food resource competition, and also showed that both species eat each other's hatchlings. Ths interaction was
 highly asymmetric, favoring brown anoles In all habitat types. However, green anoles survived in forested areas also
 containing patches of dense-shrubby vegetation, which may have helped their hatchlings successfully run the brown
 anole gauntlet.

   580                      08:45 Wednesday                                 CR3                               CH^
Is the long-nosed snake, Rhinocheilus lecontel (Colubridae), a specialist predator? J.A. Ri^riquez-Robl-^ and
H W Greene, Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 3101 Valley Life Sciences Building. University of California, Berkeley,
California 94720-3160 USA.
We explored the issue of predator specialization by examining dietary variation in the widespread North Amencan
long-nosed snake, Rhinocheilus lecontei. >Ne examined the stomach contents of rnore than 800 museum
specimens, and supplemented our findings with published dietary records. Sixty-six percent of 134 prey eaten by R.
lecontei were lizards, 26% were mammals, and 6% were squamate eggs; teiid lizards of the genus Cnemidophorus
comprised 72'7o of all lizard prey. Mexican R. Lecontei that contained food were significantly larger than specimens
from the United States and consumed a higher percentage of mammals. To assess the relative degree of trophic
niche breadth of R. lecontei, we compared the frequency of lizards and of Cnemidophorus in me diet of long-nosed
snakes with the frequency with which other terrestrial alethinophidian snakes consumed lizards as modal prey and
with which these same serpents ate the lizard genus they most commonly fed on. Although there are no statistical
reasons for labeling R. lecontei a specialist, its diet might often be restricted to lizards and even to Cnemidophorus.




                             09:00 Wednesday                                 CR3                               CHM ■
   581
Sprint performance of the endangered giant lizard of El Hierro Galtotia simonyi, (Sauria. Lacerhdae). A
compar^n with Gallotla caesaris and Gallotia stehlinl. R. Marquez, Centro de Biologia Ambient^, Faculdade
de Ciencias, Universidade de, Usboa, P 1700 Lisboa, Portugal. (RM) Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales. Jose
Gutierrez Abasoal 2. 28006 Madrid, Spain; D. Cejudo, Asociacion, Herpetoldgica Espanola, Senador Castillo
Olivares 10, 35003 Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain.
Predation bv introduced vertebrates caused the near extinction of the giant lizard of the Canarian island of El Hierro
Gallotia simonyi (Sauria,Lacertidae). Thus, antipredator behavior such as escape (spent perforrnance) may have
played a major role. We studied temperature dependent sprint performance in the captive popiriation of the giant
lizard and we compared performance with G. caesaris, a small-sized lizard abundant throughout El Hierro, and with
G steNini an abundant large sized lizard from the island of Gran Canaria. Among adults, maximum speed was
significantly higher in the G stehlini, both in absolute (nVs) and relative speed (SVL/s). G. simony and the smaller
sympatric G. caesaris did not differ significantly in maximum speeds (m/s). Juvenile G. amontn were slower than
juvenile G. stehlini but the differences were significant only in absolute speed           Juvenile G. sirnonyi were
significantly slower than similar sized adult G. caesaris. Adults from the captive population of G. simonyi should not
be used for reintroduction because their sprint performance may have been hampered by prolongued captivity.
Juveniles could be released although introduced predators should be cicely monitored due to the lower sprint
performance of juvenile G. simonyi compared to the similar sized adult G. caesans which are abundant in the
reintroduction area.




                              09:15 Wednesday                                 CR3                               CHM
    582
Trapping webs may be useful for estimating densities of selected terrestrial Uzards. (IH. Rodda, USGS
Patuxent Wildlife Research Center, 4512 McMurry Ave., Fort Collins, CO 80525 USA; S.R. Vogt. CNMI Div. Rsh and
Wildlife Lower Base, P.O. Box 10007, Saipan, MP 96950 USA; K.E. Allen. Guam National Wildlife Refuge, P.O. Box
 8134, MOU-3, Dededo, GU 96912 USA.
 In 1983 Anderson and colleagues proposed that radial arrays of traps (trapping webs) could be used to estirnate
 absolute population density of trappable species, in a manner analogous to the visual/auditory arcular plots widely
 used for estimating densifies of passerine birds. We tested the validity of this approach by settiiTg radial aiW® Oj
 glueboards for lizards in forested areas of Guam and Saipan islands prior to or shortly after conducting total removal
 sampling for the same species in the same areas. One of too skink species sampled, Carita fuses, is readily trapped
 and may be attracted to traps by previously-caught conspecifics. The abundance estimate for this species, as
 estimated by five trapping webs, exceeded the estimate provided by total removal in three cases and was less than
 file total rernoval estimate in too others. The 95% confidence limits overlapped the total removal estimate in one of
 five cases The density of the other lizard species sampled, Emoia caeruleocauda, was grossly underestimated by
 three trapping webs. On days of suitable weather (e.g., sunshine for heliophils) trapping webs may provide useful it
 imprecise^ estimates of absolute abundance for species that are abundant, readily trapped, terrestrial, and relatively
 uniform in distribution.




     586                       10:45 Wednesday                                 CR3                              CHM
 Seasonal variation in shelter use by Gila monsters in the Chihuahuan Desert of New Mexico. R.D. Jennings.
 Department of Natural Sciences, Western New Mexico University, P.O. Box 680, Silver City, NM 88062, USA; D.D.
 Beck, Department of Biological lienees. Central Washington University, Ellensburg, WA 98926, USA.

 In southwestern New Mexico's Chihuahuan Desert, Gila monsters (Heloderma suspectum) may avoid extreme
 environmental conditions In underground shelters. Because shelters that are suitable during cold winter months may
 not be so during the hot and dry summer, we investigated differences in shelter use across seasons. No differences
 were detected in entrance dimensions, but shelters used in the fall and winter were deeper than those of the spring
 and summer. Spring and winter shelters were frequently in rocky substrata, while summer shelters were more
 typically In better developed soils. Winter shelter entrances were strongly oriented toward the south, while those of
 other seasons were more variable In orientation. Slopes containing winter shelters also were strongly oriented
 toward the south, while those of spring and summer shelters were oriented toward the east and souAeast. We
 explored relationships between the physical attributes of shelters and their microclimates (temperature and humidity)
 using miniature data loggers. Winter shelters provided warmer microclimates during the winter, while summer
 shelters provided more humidity during the summer, when compared to shelters from other seasons. A large
 proportion of winter shelters are reused, suggesting that suitable winter shelters are relatively less common than
 shelters suitable for use in other seasons.       579                          08:30 Wednesday                                   CR3                                 CHM
                                                                  horrldusy. affects of annual variation in foraging
    success, g       Beaupre, University of Arkansas, Department of Biological Sciences, Fayetteville, AR 72701 USA. ’

     nnvom                                           ‘o ’ood availabiliV may provide valuable insight regarding mechanisms that
     hS^®?!                   dynamics and the responses of individuals to environmental change. The use of telemetry in large
    tho^nnvimnmo                as the timber rattlesnake allows simultaneous monitoring of rnultiple responses to ctoges in
     in                  *■ i            feeding rates, growth, reproductive activities, time allocation, and field metabolic rates
    ti7nhn?TaHilfnJv«°n^i?h^ Ti^®*^ raWesiiakes dunng a high and low resource year. In 1996, thirteen radiotagged
    ck^nifin^nih?®"^®®                    Itwor feeding rates than ten radiofagged snakes during 1997. Snakes exhibried
    woTO^nh?onm^®h®'^ size-adjusfed growrth rates during 1997. During the low resource year, no reproductive activities
    wire IblllSd amnnn®ih reH?nffnn‘^H°"®v°' ^'^5 *®v®‘^'"3                     fourteen independent reproductive associations
                                      radiofagged snakes. Snakes in low resource conditions spent a higher proportion of
                                               foraging, whereas, under high resource conditions, snakes spent more ti™ in
                    reproductive activities. The simultaneous measurement of multiple responses to natural environmental
    rimnriBnHofl^ii?!.?i"'"^"'’’T"*® dependencies in the rules of time-energy allocation. An understanding of these
    dependencies will allow greater accuracy in the prediction of responses of individuals and populations to changes in
    ifiw wi iviroiirnvrii.




      ■583                         09:30 Wednesday                                   CR3                                 CHM
    Experimental analyses of Interactions between native and exotic llzardspecles using dredge spoil islands in
    Florida. T.S. Catnpbell. Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology 569 Dabney Hall, University of
    Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996 USA.

    The Cuban brown anole (Anolis sagrei) was introduced into south Florida about 50 years ago, and is now arguably
    the most numerous terrestrial vertebrate on the peninsula. This, along with habitat alteration, coincides with the
    decline of the native green anole (Ano/is carolinensis] in Rorida. To experimentally assess the brown anole's role in
    the decline, I introduced brown anoles onto three dredge spoil islands occupied by greens, and used three islands
    with native greens as controls. Islands contained forested and non-forested habitats. Populations were monitored
    for four years with capture-mark-recapture techniques, and detailed microhabitat and spatial data was collected.
    Brown anole populations became very dense within two years. Green anole control population sizes and habitat use
    parameters remained stable, whereas treatment populations crashed, and ths few remaining greens utilized different
    habitat types than their ancestors. Gut content analyses gave Pianka's dietary overlap values above 0.9, indicating
    food resource competition, and also showed that both species eat each other's hatchlings. The interaction was
    highly asymmetric, favoring brown anoles in all habitat types. However, green anoles sunrived in forested areas also
    containing patches of dense-shnjbby vegetation, which may have helped their hatchlings successfully run the brown
    anols gauntlet




       584                        09:45 .Wednesday                                  CR3                                  CHM
    Gray rat snakes, do th^ specifically target red-cockaded woodpecker nestlings for depredation? J.H. Cole
    and L.W. Burger, Mississippi State Universi^, Dept, of Wildlife and Rsheries, USA.

    The highly arboreal gray rat snake (Elaphe obsoleta spiloides} is a significant predator upon endangered red-
    cockaded woodpeckers (RCWs) (Picoides borealis). Snake excluder traps were used to detennine sel^tivity for
    RCW nest trees, active roost trees, inactive roost trees and within cluster and outside cluster random trees by
    capturing snakes attempting to climb trees. Tree cavities were assessed to determine current use status and
    captures on nest trees simulated depredations upon RCWs. Snakes climbed RCW nest trees on 14 occations (10
    climbs during nestling periods and 4 cimbs during post-fledgling periods). Inactive roosts were climbed 16 times,
    each having documented use of cavities by non-RCW species. Only three climbs were made upon active roost trees
    and none on random trees. In addition, 22 gray rat snakes were monitored via radio telemetry to assess home range
    size, habitat composition, spatial distribution and individual habitat preferences throughout Noxubee National Wildlife
    Refuge, Noxubee and Winston counties, Mississippi, during 1997. Data indicate random selection for any cavity
    using species by gray rat snakes, but, any chance selection for RCWs is important given the limited fecundity of this
    bird. Also, depredations upon RCW nest trees appears not to be random temporally. Snakes tend to visit RCW
    cluster areas only dumg the nesting season and seem to specifically target RCW nest trees during the nestling
    period. If non-iethal detenents to gray rat snake depredation can be found for RCW nest trees, the snake could serve
    as a management tool to eliminate competitors and predators of RCWs through depredation of these species, while
    presenting RCW nestiings.



1

       585                         -10:30 Wednesday                                  CR3                         , ,    CHM
    Daily refugia of brown tree snakes on Guam: location choice and thermal implications. G. Perry, B. Coupe.
    N. Anderson and T. Hetherington, Ohio Cooperative Rsh and Wildlife Research Unit, Department of ZoologyAOSU,
    1735 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210 USA; J. Williams, Department of Zoology/OSU, 1735 Neil Avenue,
    Columbus, OH 43210 USA.

    The brown tree snake (BTS, Sofga irregularis) was accidentally introduced on Guam approximately 50 years ago,
    and has caused major ecological and economic impacts. As a result, much research has been devoted to the biology
    of this nocturnal, arboreal snake. However, few data exist on the diurnal refugia of this species, or that of other
    nocturnal, arboreal snakes. We radio-tracked 11 BTSs to their daily refugia in a limestone forest on Guam. Each
    snake was followed for 9-13 consecutive days. Each morning we tracked each snake to its refuge, visually sighting
    most of them. We characterized each refuge, and obtained data on the temperature inside many using Hobo loggers,
    insetted into the refugium after the snake left. We also conducted a survey of the vegetation at our study site, to
    compare utilization with availability. About 90% of 127 refugia were above ground, typically in trees. Snake refugium
    use was not random. BTSs strongly preferred some species (e.g. Pandanus provided 72.4% of refuges, but only
    comprised about 6.5% of canopy cover). This choice may be related to the thermal and hydric environment provided
    by this unusual tree. We discuss these preferences and some of their implications.

                                       Compared to the similar sized adult G.'caesans which are abundarininhe
 iwiniroQucuon ar6a«




    582                     . 09:15 Wednesday                                CR3                               CHM

                                                    ISIS; c5»’!SS''8S5ai STw
 fo 19M Anderaon and colleagues proposed that radial arrays of traps (trapping webs) could be used to estimate
ulld                                                1?,® rtianner analogous to the visual/auditory circular plots Sly
used for estimating densities of passerine birds. We tested the validity of this approach bv settina radial armvs of
glueboards for lizards in forested areas of Guam and Saipan islands prior to or shortly after conductinq total rernoval
                     hl’S®?®/,”®?’®® '"?® ®®'P®                       species sampfed,Carffe S,fereaXwd
llrimateri                           previously-caught conspecifics. The abundance estimate for this specieSs
estimated by five trapping webs, exceeded the estimate provided by total removal in three cases and was less than
me total rem^al estirnate in two others. The 95% confirFence limits^ overiappedfee tSreS ISl fe Ine o^
five cas®s. The density rfthe other lizard species sampled, Emoia caeruleocauda, was grossly underestimated bv
knDrerisoPeliiml?es 5ah            suitable weather (e.g., ^nshine for heliophils) trapping webs may provide useful, if
uniformin'dlstribltton^ absolute abundance for species that are abundant, readily trapped, terrestrial, and relatively




   586                       -10:45 Wednesday                               CR3                               CHM
Seasonal variation In shelter use by Gila monsters In the Chlhuahuan Desert of New Mexico. R.D. Jenninos.
Department of Natural Sciences, Western New Mexico University, P.O. Box 680, Silver City, NM 88062, USA; D.D.
Beck, Department of Biological Sciences, Central Washington University, Ellensburg, WA 98926, USA.

In southwestern New Mexico's Chihuahuan Desert, Gila monsters (Heloderma suspectum) may avoid extreme
environmental conditions in underground shelters. Because shelters that are suitable during cold winter months may
not be so during the hot and dry summer, we investigated differences in shelter use across seasons. No differences
were detected in entrance dimensions, but shelters used in the fall and winter were deeper than those of the spring
and summer. Spring and winter shelters were frequently in rocky substrata, while summer shelters were more
typically in better developed soils. Winter shelter entrances were strongly oriented toward the south, while those of
other seasons were more variable in orientation. Slopes containing winter shelters also were strongly oriented
toward the south, while those of spring and summer shelters were oriented toward the east and southeast. We
explored relationships between the physical attributes of shelters and their microclimates (temperature and humidity)
using miniature data loggers. Winter shelters provided warmer microclimates during the winter, while summer
shelters provided more humidity during the summer, when compared to shelters from other seasons. A large
proportion of winter shelters are reused, suggesting that suitable winter shelters are relatively less common than
shelters suitable for use in other seasons.




   587                       11:00 Wednesday                                CR3                               CHM
Reproductive aspects of the turtle Podocnemls expansa from the Colombian Amazonia. N.C. Valenzuela.
Department of Ecology and Evolution SUNY at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-5245 USA.

A field study of the relationship between female size and clutch depth in Podocnemls expansa was carried out at the
Middle Caqueta River, Colombian Amazonia. Measurements of width and diagonal of the trails left by the females on
the sand were used as surrogates of female size. Clutch and egg sizes were also studied as well as the relationship
to female size. Larger females laid more and larger eggs which were buried deeper. Hatchling size was positively
assodated with egg size. Temperature profiles of the sand varied with depth. Effects of nest depth on sex ratios are
discussed together with implications for lifetime sex ratios produced by females and population sex ratios in nature.
Data showed no evidence supporting the Optimal Propagule Size models in this fresh water turtle. No evidence was
found of small females producing suboptimd size eggs.




   588                       11:15 Wednesday                                CR3                               CHM
Timing, temperatures, and behavior of hibernating Gopherus agassizil in the northeastern Mojave Desert.
D.F. Haines and T.C. Esque, United States Geological Survey, Biological Resources Division, 345 E, Riverside
Drive, St. George, UT 84790 USA; C.R. Tracy, Biological Resources Research Center, Univ, of Nevada, Reno,
Reno, NV 89557-0015 USA.

Desert tortoises (Gopherus agassizii) retreat to hibernacula during winter monfhs in the northern part of their range.
We studied hibernation behavior and quantified hibernaculum characteristics of radio-telemetered tortoises at two
sites in the northeastern Mojave Desert. These sites differ in elevation, physiognomy and vegetation. Miniature
temperature-recording data loggers were attached to these tortoises previous to the onset of hibernation and
removed after, emergence in 1995-1996 (n=13) and in 1996-1997 (n=16). The average hibernation onset dates
were: 4 Nov 95 (SD=12.24 days) and 24 Oct 96 (SD=7.99 days). The average hibernation termination dales were
24 Mar 96 (SD=14S9 days) and 13 Mar 97 (SD=4.37 days). These dates were significantly different between the
two hibernation seasons (onset: P=0.0058; termination: P=0.009). The duration of hibernation was not significantly
different between sites, genders and seasons. Two tortoises experienced ambient temperatures below 0 degrees C
(#464 < 2 hours; #5131 < 4 hours) while outside their hibernacula In April 1997 and survived. All air temperatures
inside hibernacula remained above 2 degrees C. The hibernacula at one site were investigated with a fiberoptic light
scope to determine depths that tortoises occupied. Correlations are made between hibernacula temperatures and
the depth of the tortoises.  589                        11:30 Wednesday                               CB3.                          ... CHM
Inter-generic hybrids In emydid turtles, description and possible significance. J.H. Harding, MSU Museurn.
Michigan'State University, East Lansing, Ml 48824-1045 USA; S.K. Davis, Department of Animal Science, Texas A
& M University, College Station, TX 77843 USA.
Hybridization events between species and genera of emydid turtles are rarely reported. Putative hybrids reported
here include cresses between Clenmys insculpta and Emydoidea blandingii, Graptemys sp. and Trachemys scnpta,
and Pseudemys sp. and Trachemys scripta. intergeneric matings took place under captive conditions, although in
large outdoor semi-natural enclosures. Supporting data on parentage from mitochondrial and nuclear DNA analyses
will be also be presented. The Clemmys X Emydoidea hybrids display a blending of parental charactenstics;
expression of certain morphological and behavioral traits may, speculatively, represent traits that were present in a
common ancestor of the parental species. Living hybrid specimens will be studied to determine rates of fertility and
ontogeny of morphological and behavioral characters. .Should these hybrids prove to be fertile, crosses will be
initiated in order to follow the segregation of traits defining these different Emydid genera.




   590                       11:45 Wednesday                   .   .       CR3                .,             CHM^
Habitat use and home range of the Blanding's turtle {Emydoidea biandingu) and the spotted turtle {Clemmys
guttata) In northeast Indiana. C.E. Bariow and B A Kingsbury. Department of Biology. Indiana-Purdue University,
Ft. Wayne, IN 46805 USA.
Blanding's turtles and spotted turtles are listed as Endangered by the state of Indiana. We are using telernetiy to
study their habitat use and patterns of movement in a wetland complex in the Pigeon River Fish and Wildlife Area, in
northeastern Indiana. Home range analysis revealed that individuals used extensive areas, but also exhibited fidelity
to particular sites. Spotted turtles were most often obsen/ed in shallow vegetation patches dominated by sedges,
cattail, and small shrubs. Blanding's turtles, however, used a relatively broader range of miorohabitats. including
open water, scrub-shrub and areas dominated by lilypads and sedges. They also tended to use deeper areas than
spotted turtles. Movement between wetlands and terrestrial activity was observed in both species of varying
degrees. In addition to summarizing our findings on habitat use and home ranges, we will discuss the implications of
these findings for conserving the species.




   591                     . 08:00 Wednesday ...                           CF12                               MCN
Spawning and fecundity In the vermilion snapper (Lut|anidae: Rhomboplites aurorubens) frorn the
northeastern Gulf of Mexico. L.A. Collins. A.G. Johnson, J.H. Brosher and M.G. Remy, National Manne Fishenes
Senrice, 3500 Delwood Beach Road, Panama City, FL 32408, USA.
The vermilion snapper (Lutjanidae: Rhomboplites aurorubens) is an important species to commercial and
recreational fishers in the southeastern United States, especially in the northern Gulf of Mexico and off the coast of
the Carolinas in the South Atlantio Bight (SAB). A recent publication by Cuellar et al. was the first to use the most
effective techniques on reproduction of multiple-spawning fishes (from Hunter et al. 1985, and Hunter and Macewicz
1985) on vermilion snapper, from samples taken during 1992 and 1993 from the SAB. We used similar techniques
as those used by Cuellar et al. (1996) on 1,962 vermilion snapper ranging from 195 to 570 mm total lerigtti dunng
1991-1994 from the northeastern Gulf of Mexico (NEGOM). Most (70 %) of our fish were sampled from the
recreational catch and fishing-depth was 31 to 98 m. We estimated that 1993-1994 sex ratio was 1:1 batch fecundity
was 26,761-415,161 hydrated oocytes, average-annual spawning frequency was 44 in 1993 and 23 in 1994, and
annual fecundity was 0.62-21.9 million. Our estimates of batch fecundity, spawning frequency and annual fecundity
were all greater (at fish length) than for SAB vermilion snapper (Cuellar et al. 1996). Possible causes of these
differences are water temperature, preservation, diet, length of spawning season, and sampling techniques.




    595                      09 15 Wednesday .                             CF12                              MCN
Reproductive ecology of guH toadfish {Opsartus beta). S.J. Allee and W.A. Bennett. University of West Florida,
Florida USA.

Gulf toadfish, Opsanus beta, are pooriy represented in ecological studies and their reproductive strategies relatively
undefined. Our preliminary investigations into breeding seasons and mating behaviors of a Florida gulf toadlish
population have revealed several unique and previously undocumented strategies. Ten replicates, each with 5 nest
types, were placed in the field and observed from February until November for toadlish activities. Gulf toadfish
appear to participate in a bi-peaked breeding season. Males established nests and females oviposit during the month
of May, then all fish disappear until late July and breeding resumed in September. Male and female toadfish
apparently discriminate between nest types differently. Females preferred nests with one opening over those that
are accessible to the surrounding environment through multiple openings. Males, however, showed distinct
preferences between the five different nest types based on charactenstics of each nest. Males that occupy nests
adjacent to other male-occupied nests appear to have greater reproductive success than lone males, contradicting
the traditional view that toadfish are highly aggressive and territorial. Male gulf toadfish do not appear to
aggressively defend any territory beyond their immediate nest site, an observation which may explain why males in
groups experience greater reproductive success.

  592                        08:15 Wednesday                 .              CF12                              MCN
Lack of synchrony In the reproductive cycles of male and female blackbelly rosefish, Hellcolenus
dactylopterus, off the Atlantic coast of the southeastern United States. D.M. Wyanski, D.B White and G.R,
Sedbeny, Marine Resources Research, Institute, P.O. Box 12559, Charleston, SC 29422 USA,

Histological examination of gonad tissue from 1300 specimens showed that blackbelly rosefish have intraovarian
gestation. Fertilization is internal, as free spermatozoa were found primarily in resting ovaries from July through
December with peak occurrence in September through November. There was a delay of one to three months before
fertilization, as oocyte development did not begin until December. Occurrence during January through April of early-
celled embryos, the most advanced stage observed, and postovulatory follicles indicated that oocyte development
was rapid. Embryos composed of a blastodermal cap and a large yolk mass were surrounded by a clear gelatinous
matrix within the ovary. The reproductive mode in blackbelly rosefish appeared to be intermediate between oviparify
and viviparity.




   593                      .08:30 Wednesday                     .,          CF12                               MCN
Sperm modifications associated with Insemination in glandulocaudine fishes. J.R, Bums, Department of
Biologic^ Sciences. George Washington University, Washington, D.C, 20052, USA; S.H. Weitzman, Dept.
Vertebrate Zoology. MRC159. NMNH, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. 20560, USA.

Previous results have demonstrated that females within the subfamily Glandulocaudinae (family Characidae) are
inseminated. With the exception of one genus that transfers sperm with spherical nuclei (’aquasperm') to the
female, the species of all other genera transfer sperm with elongated nuclei. We have been carrying out
transmission electron microscopy on the testes of available species in order to describe the morphology of the
mature sperm and to ascertain the mechanisms of nuclear elongation. Additionally, our results have uncovered
potential characters that may prove useful in hypothesizing phylogenetic relationships among these taxa. Within the
Glandulocaudinae, the mature spermatozoa of the genera Diapoma , Hysteronotus , Corynopoma and
Pseudocorynopoma all have the anterior portion of the flagellum contained within an elongated cytoplasmic collar.
The mature spermatozoa of Mimagoniates barbed , M. microlepis and M. rheochatis , on the other hand, have
very short cytoplasmic collars with the flagellum free along most of its length. However, an analysis of
spermiogenesis in these three species showed that during spermatid development, the cytoplasmic collar (containing
the flagdlum) initially elongates substantially, but subsequently most of the collar degenerates before maturation is
complete. Therefore, for the species thus far analyzed, an elongated cytoplasmic collar at least at some point during
development may be a synapomorphy.




   594                       09:00 Wednesday'                         .     CF12                             . MCN
Poecilia formosa, an all-female fish? M. Doebler, I. Schlupp and J. Parzefall, Zool. Inst.u. Mus., -Martin-Luther-
King-Platz 3, 20146 Hamburg, Germany.
Poectlia formosa is known as an all-female species which reproduces gynogenetically. Normally sperm from closly
related species trigger the embryogenesis. After breeding Poecilia foimosa for 10 years in our laboratory now, we
found phenotypic males for the first time last year. The most important question now is whether the masculinized fish
are functional Poecilia formosa males which can even reproduce or if they occur because of an error in the
development and are therefore only deformed females. To find out the possible effects of these phenotypic males for
the whole reproduction complexes, we examined the morphology and the behavior. We could prove that the Poecilia
formosa males have a gonopodium, the muscle that moves the gonopodium, a suspensorium and male gonads. With
standardized choice experiments we could show that the Poecilia formosa males prefer Poecilia formosa females to
Poecilia latipinna females and Poecilia mexicana females. And Poecilia formosa females prefer Poecilia formosa
males to Poecilia mexicana males and other Poecilia formosa females. So from the behavior we could expect a
normal intraspecific reproduction, as well. On top of these results we got a couple of broods of Poecilia formosa
males and Poecilia formosa females since September last year.




   598                    „ .10:30 Wednesday                                 CF12                              MCN
Morphology and life history of the marine threespine stickleback {Gasterosteus aculeatus). R.W. Kino Deol
of Biology, Clark University, 950 Main St., Worcester, MA 01610, USA.                                     '

At the dose of the last gladal period, only some 15,000 years ago, numerous and varied freshwater aquatic habitats
were formed. The threespine stickleback was one of the first fish to colonize these habitats, and these populations
have undergone a spectacular adaptive radiation. The threespine stickleback inhabiting nearby coastal marine
habitats is the stock from which these freshwater populations were founded. Thus, both the diredion and degree of
change following freshwater isolation can be inferred by comparing freshwater and marine stickleback. However, the
manne form actually may comprise two types: one living and breeding only in marine waters; and a second,
anadromous type. At present we know relatively little about whether these types differ in any substantive way.
Further, we know little about variation within these types. I present preliminary morphological and life-historical data
showing that these types may not bo as similar as previously thought, and I compare the level of apparent
phenotypic variability with that eirhibifed by freshwater populations. SB^MSlg
 1991-1994 fmm*«£^northeaJieMli^of^^'STnEGoKos?
 wa?" 415                             '° ®® "’•
                                                                                                   "’"’ '°‘^ W ‘’“^9
                                                                    that W9X°1994 sex rafio wlTlTba^ fecTndSy
 annScundty’wU                                                                                and 2BT/^4“"an‘X
 we^ all greate^ (a. fish lengft)“fo?                                                             SSS’S®
 differences are water femperafure, preservation, diet, length ofTpaw'ning season a-^d s^UlShnTues




   595                       09:15 Wednesday                            .   CF.12      .    .. .              MCN
Reproductive ecology of gulf toadfish (Opsanus beta). S.J. Allee and W.A. Bennett. University of West Florida,
Florida USA.

Gulf toadfish. Opsanus beta, are poorly represented in ecological studies and their reproductive strategies relatively
undefined. Our preliminary investigations into breeding seasons and mating behaviors of a Florida gulf toadfish
population have revealed several unique and previously undocumented strategies. Ten replicates, each with 5 nest
types, were placed in the field and observed from February until November for toadfish activities. Gulf toadfish
appear to participate in a bi-peaked breeding season. Males established nests and females oviposit during the month
of May, then all fish disappear until late July and breeding resumed in September. Male and female toadfish
apparently discriminate between nest types differently. Females preferred nests with one opening over those that
are accessible to the surrounding environment through multiple openings. Males, however, showed distinct
preferences between the five different nest types based on charactenstics of each nest. Males that occupy nests
adjacent to other male-occupied nests appear to have greater reproductive success than lone males, contradicting
the traditional view that toadfish are highly aggressive and territorial. Male gulf toadfish do not appear to
aggressively defend any territory beyond their immediate nest site, an obsenration which may explain why males in
groups experience greater reproductive success.




   596                       09:30 Wednesday                                CF12                             -.MCN
Reproduction of Pseudoplatlstoma corruscans (Silurfformes: Pimelodidae) in the Paranri River, State of Sao
Paulo, Brazil. N. Buck. Institution: Departamento de Educacao UNESP Campus de Assis, SP.

Pseudoplatlstoma corruscans is a migratory species of economic interest. It is widely distributed in South America (in
the basins of ths Parana, San Francisco and Paraguay Rivers) and reproduces in floodplain lagoons where it spends
the first phases of its life. Monthly collections, from January 1985 to January 1988, were done performed in 150km of
Parang River, State of Sao Paulo, Brazil. A total of 255 fish were examined (56% young and 44% adults) measuring
between 20.0 and 170.0 cm in total length. Data on body length at first sexual maturation was estimated to be 73.0
cm. This is larger than minimum capture size for this specie determined by the Brazilian Environmental Agency
regulating fishing. The reproductive period coincided with the flood period from October to January and schools of
mature fish were followed as far as Rio Pardo, a tributary of the Paranri River. In the next months P. corruscans
larvae were always collected in marginal ponds. These periodic floods promote the contact of the Parana River with
the marginal ponds and are a requirement to the maintenance of the reproductive processes of P. corruscans.




   597                      09:45 Wednesday                                 CF12                           .. MCN
Spatial and temporal patterns of reproductive and trophic divergence in bluegill sunfish. T.J. Ehlinoer.
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee, 3209 N. Maryland Ave, Milwaukee, Wl
53111 USA.

A study of bluegill populations from 12 Wisconsin lakes revealed significant differences among lakes in the degree of
trophic specialization and sexual dimo^hism. Morphological and behavioral variation within and among populations
suggested that males compete most intensely for nesting sites in lakes with limited breeding area. Subsequent
studies discovered additional bluegill colonies located in deeper areas of lakes for 4 of the most sexually-selected
populations. Comparisons between deep-spawning and shallow-spawning colonies showed that deep-spawning
bluegill possessed a trophic morphology typical of limnetic specialists and were less sexually dimorphic than bluegill
from shallow colonies. Deep- and shallow-spawning bluegill did not differ in mean size or age, however there was
greater variation in both age and size among males from the shallow colonies. The relative abundance of cuckolder
males was significantly higher in shallow colonies. The mean number of eggs per nest did not differ between colony
types, but variation in the number of eggs spawned per nest was greater in the shallow colonies. These data are
consistent with the hypothesis that the intensity of sexual selection is greater in the shallow colonies, and that the
deep colonies reflect an evolutionary aitemative.

 ^lS^^s»rigger°^:C                            X? bre^Jino"                                            ®P®™         <='“'V
 found phenotypic males for thVfwSlTit^ar                                                        our laboratory now. we
 are fuScBon^IPoecilia foXa mX S ca?evS?%Sce                                                      the masculinized fish




 glSt«:>SSW«
 males and Poedlia formosa females since September last year              ®                              Poealia formosa




   598                        10:30 Wednesday                 .               CF12                               mcN
Morphology and life history of the marine threesplne stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus). R.W. Kino. Dept,
of Biology, Clark University, 950 Main St.. Worcester, MA 01610, USA.

At the dose of the last gladal period, only some 15,000 years ago, numerous and varied freshwater aquatic habitats
were formed. The threesplne stickleback was one of the first fish to colonize these habitats, and these populations
have undergone a spectacular adaptive radiation. The threesplne stickleback inhabiting nearby coastal marine
habitats is the stock from which these freshwater populations were founded. Thus, both the direction and degree of
change following freshwater Isolation can be inferred by comparing freshwater and marine stickleback. However, the
marine form actually may comprise two types: one living and breeding only in marine waters; and a second,
anadromous typo. At present we know relatively little about whether these types differ in any substantive way.
Further, we know little about variation within these types. I present preliminary morphological and life-historical data
showing that these types may not be as similar as previously thought, and I compare the level of apparent
phenot^ic variability with that exhibited by freshwater populations.




   599                        10:45 Wednesday.                                CF12                               MCN
Evaluating the relationship between organismal trait values and body size, with an example from life-history
data for the threesplne stickleback, Gasterosteua aculeatus. J .A. Baker. Department of Biology, Clark
University, Worcester, Massachusetts 01610, USA.

The form of the relationship between values for organismal traits (e.g. clutch size) and organism body size has been
of interest to biologists for >150 years. This interest has two, somewhat independent foci: to estimate the slope of
the relationship itself, and to estimate size-free trait values for comparison across groups. Despite this long interest,
there remains considerable controversy over the appropriate statistical model to use in each instance. Most studies
use ordinary least squares regression for both, but this is only appropriate when the correlation between the trait of
interest and size is quite high (i.e., > 0.9). Such high correlations are infrequent in life-history data sets. Presently,
two alternatives for slope estimation appear to be gaining support: major axis regression, and reduced major axis
regression. I apply all three methods to a data set for 50 threesplne stickleback populations in order to illustrate the
considerably different conclusions that cran be generated for slopes. Size-adjustment is only appropriately performed
using ordinary least squares procedures. Nevertheless, I use a subset of populations to illustrate how faulty
conclusions can be generated hero, also. No present statistical resolution to this latter problem is apparently in view.




   600                      '11:00 Wednesday                                  CF12                              MCN
Inter-and Intra- latitudinal variation in life history traits in migrating silver-phase American eels, Anguilla
rostrata. K. Oliveira and J.D. McCleave, University of Maine, School of Marine Sciences, 5741 Libby Hall, Orono,
ME 04469-5741 USA.

Migrating silver phase American eels were collected from two geographically separated pairs of rivers in Maine. Size
at migration, age at migration, mean annular growth, and sex ratios were compared to existing data from other
locations to test for the presence of latitudinal changes in life history traits. Comparisons of traits within and among
river pairs were also made to examine intra-regional variations. 'The correlation between latitude and female life
history traits resulting from the addition of data from Maine female eels does not support established relationships,
reducing the correlation coefficients from 0,64 to 0.28 for length and 0.88 to 0.26 for age. The analysis of mate data
from Maine eels, however, yields significant correlations between latitude and these traits (size: r=0.94: and age:
0.65). Comparisons of traits among Maine rivers revealed several possible sources of variation that could account
for the low relationship between latitude and female traits. Variations observed in these four Maine rivers can be
associated with drainage characteristics, methodological differences, and fishing pressure.   601                        11:15 Wednesday                         .   . . CF12                              MCN
Phenotypic plasticity In life history traits of Gambusia puncticulata puncticulata (Poecllildae) from the
Cayman Islands, BWI. M.A. Abnev and C.F. Rakocinski, Gulf Coast Research Laboratory, Fisheries Ecology
Program, 703 East Beach Drive, Ocean Springs, MS 39564 USA.

 Gambusia p. puncticulata is a common resident of saline ponds which show high spatio-temporal variability in
physico-chemical conditions. We examined variability in reproductive traits of Gambusia p. puncticulata from eight
ponds among the ttiree Cayman islands during both rainy and dry periods, In August 1996 and January 1997,
respectively. Life-history traits examined included: (1) size at maturiW; (2) number of propagules per brood; (3) mean
individual weight of propagules; and (4) reproductive allotment, ihe average standard length of mature males
increased significantly between August and January due to the influence of either post-maturation growth or late-
maturing males. The mean standard length of mature females was often significantly greater during the dry period
than during the wet period. Also, females were nonsuperfetating and provided continual nourishment during
propagule development. There was an inverse relationship (r=-.63; n=171) between body-weight adjusted number of
propagules and mean individual propagule weight, although both traits increased with somatic weight. This
relationship signifies a phenotypic life-history tradeoff. Mean individual propagule weight varied significantly between
months and among ponds, whereas reproductive allotment only varied among ponds in Two-Way ANOVAs.
Plasticity in life-history traits of these populations may be tied to the dynamic nature of their environment.




   602                       -11:30 Wednesday                                CF12                               .MCN
Phenotypic plasticity In Gambusia hispanlolae from Lake Enriquillo, Dominican Republic, Hispaniola Island.
C. Mir and C.M. Rodriguez, Museo Nacional de Historia Natural, Plaza de la Culture, Santo Domingo, Dominican
Republic; F. Nunez, Institute Dominicano de Investigaciones Biologicas.

Extreme phenotypic plasticity of the lip was discovered in a population of Gambusia hispaniolae during a survey of
fishes to Lake Enriquillo, southwestern Dominican Republic, Hispaniola Island. Las Azufradas, a pool of sulfurous
water, is tributary to the main lake (Enriquillo). It is the only known habitat for a population of G. hispaniolaa
characterized by cxinspicuously enlarged and papillose lower lip that has not been observed in any other member of
the genus (although it is superficially similar similar to the lip of Cyprinodon labiosus, a member of Cyprinodontidae
and also to Poecilia sulphuraria, a member of Poedliinae). In a sample of more than 200 spedmens from Las
Azufradas, the enlarged lip was present in 100% of individuals, but no specimen of G. hispaniolae from elsewhere
exhibits the character. The hypothesis that the population comprises a new species was tested by morphometric
analysis of individuals from Las Azufradas versus individuals from other populations in the island. Other than the
modified lip, no morphological differences were found. Common garden experiments conducted to test for plasticity
showed that the enlarged lip dissappeared after short periods of time under laboratory conditions. At the end of the
experiment, no differences in lip size or shape were detectable among samples from Las Azufradas and other
localities. Feeding habits and effects of food type were also studied. We discuss the possible driving forces that
produce the phenotype.




   603                        11:45 Wednesday                                CF12        .                      MCN
Ethnolcthyology of Piracicaba River fishermen (Southeastern Brazil). R.A.M. Silvano and A. Begossi, Nucleo
de Estudos e Pesquisas Ambientais, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.

Ethnolcthyology is the part of science that studies the relationships between people and fish, including folk
knowledge. Fishermen usually have knowledge on fish biology and behavior, which is often useful to ichthyologists.
We conducted an ethnolcthyological study with fishermen from the impounded portion of the Piracicaba River
(Southeastern Brazil), interviewing 22 fishermen (17 men and 5 women) using questionnaires based on pictures of
ten fish species. We showed the pictures at random, in the same order for all people interviewed. Fishermen showed