                                                     261
flow conditions. Initial analysis using Akaike information criterion (AIC c ) to test model strength indicated
lunar phase had a significant influence on the movement of Gulf sturgeon along with other secondary
factors such as time of day and barometric pressure. Principle component analysis is also employed to
more thoroughly explore which metrics were correlated with increased movements of Gulf sturgeon
during the fall migration period. Expanding on our current examination of sturgeon movements as they
leave the river, we plan to further explore patterns of Gulf sturgeon movement as they enter the
Pascagoula River estuary using acoustically tagged fish with a multi-receiver fixed acoustic array.



Grande, Terry (Loyola University Chicago); Borden, Calvin (Loyola University Chicago, Canada); Wilson,
Mark (University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada)

Osteology and myology of the suspensorium in basal Neoteleostei

Among the results from the NSF-funded Euteleost Tree of Life (EToL) project is a revised phylogeny of
basal acanthomorphs and their close relatives among primitive neoteleosts. The revised phylogenetic tree
allows us to ask novel questions concerning the evolution of the bones and muscles of the suspensorium
(the functional unit of the fish skull that includes the palatine, ectopterygoid, endopterygoid,
metapterygoid, quadrate, symplectic, hyomandibular, and preopercular bones) and to generate new
hypotheses and evaluate existing ones concerning jaw mechanics in these fishes. Osteological
descriptions are based on new observations of cleared and stained specimens, while myological
descriptions are based on original dissections. Building on earlier studies of basal euteleosts by authors
such as Diogo, Sanford, and Williams, we describe the osteology and myology of the suspensorium in
members of the Stomiiformes, Aulopiformes, Myctophiformes, Polymixiiformes, Paracanthopterygii,
Lampriformes, Beryciformes, and Percomorpha. Results allow tests of earlier ideas, such as those of
Rosen and Patterson about the evolution of jaws and suspensoria, in light of our revised understanding of
the membership and relationships of major groups of Neoteleostei. Based on examination of Recent
fishes, we make predictions about the morphology and possible function of early fossil neoteleosts and
test those ideas by direct observation of well-preserved fossil forms.



Grant, Evan (USGS - ARMI);

Using Monitoring Data to make Decisions about Amphibian Conservation

Concern for natural resources, especially in protected areas like National Parks in the United States, have
resulted in a general call for monitoring data on the status of animal populations at broad scales. More
rarely are these monitoring programs designed to directly inform resource management decisions. In
contrast to many natural resource monitoring programs, explicit in the goals of the ARMI program is to
provide information useful to improve US protected areas management. The development of a monitoring
program is a key step in assessing the current status of species‘ occurrences and distributions, examining
population trends over time, and identifying suitable targets for management to halt or reverse declining
trends. One monitoring program detected declining trends in occupancy of a community of wetland-
breeding amphibian populations in one US National Park. This triggered a need to identify suitable
management actions to halt or reverse the decline. I demonstrate how monitoring data may be used in a
formal decision analysis through the following steps: 1) Collect monitoring data; 2) Fit model to data,
including estimation of trend and covariate effects; 3) Identify management alternatives; 4) Identify
optimal management strategies.




                                                                                                          262
Grant, Tandora (San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research); Burton, Frederic (Blue Iguana
Recovery Program, Canada)

Studbook and Population Management Analysis Software Applied to Reintroduction Programs for
Caribbean Iguanas

Rock iguanas are the largest native land vertebrate endemic to islands in the Greater Antilles. They are
among the world‘s most endangered lizards primarily because most of their habitat has been severely
degraded by human development and invasive alien species. The populations of Jamaican, Anegada,
and Grand Cayman iguanas became critically low in the 1990s with fewer than 100 animals estimated to
remain in the wild. Headstarting began as a key recovery strategy for these species, by collecting
hatchlings upon emergence from the nest and raising them in captive facilities in situ until large enough to
deter predation by feral cats and mongoose. In Grand Cayman, captive breeding was also employed to
generate large numbers of iguanas for release. To manage this aspect, an electronic studbook was
created from disjunct records at the National Trust for the Cayman Islands and US zoos, where a limited
amount of breeding had occurred with wild-caught and F1 individuals.                Since then, breeding
recommendations have been generated every year using population management analysis software
designed for fostering sustainability within cooperatively managed zoo captive populations.

Breeding pairs of Grand Cayman iguanas are formed with two objectives: to preserve the proximity to the
founder genotype for as long as possible in captivity, and secondarily to generate large numbers of
variable and diverse offspring for release. Iguanas are paired based on their mean kinship within the total
captive and three released populations, with the aim of increasing the contribution from under-
represented founders in all release locations. Ideally, linking rare and common lineages is avoided,
however individual iguana health and behavior has affected mate choices throughout the years of the
program. Initially iguanas are released in large numbers of similar aged juveniles to instigate a rapid
growth rate that promotes wild mating closer to random, minimizes inbreeding, and loss of genetic
diversity over time.

Future work intends to compare the assumptions, models, and outcomes of using a pedigree-based
management strategy with DNA analysis, which can potentially refine the knowledge of the population‘s
composition and guide future management decisions.



Grant, Taran (Universidade de São Paulo); Rada, Marco (Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio
Grande do Sul, Canada); Rueda, Vicente (Colombia en Hechos, Canada)

A trans-Andean test of the monophyly of Anomaloglossus (Dendrobatoidea: Aromobatidae)

Grant et al. (1997) discovered the median lingual process (MLP) in a several dendrobatoid frogs from
northern South America. Insofar as an MLP also occurs in several groups of Old World ranoids, including
the potential dendrobatoid sister groups Phrynobatrachidae and Petropedetidae (e.g., Ford and
Cannatella, 1993), Grant et al. (1997) considered the structures to be homologous and the occurrence in
dendrobatoids to be symplesiomorphic. Later, Frost et al. (2006) provided decisive evidence that
dendrobatoids are not closely related to any MLP-possessing ranoids and Grant et al. (2006) found that
all MLP-possessing dendrobatoids that were analyzed formed an exclusive clade. To recognize the
monophyly of this MLP-possessing group, Grant et al. (2006) proposed the genus name Anomaloglossus
within the family Aromobatidae. Since 1997 the number of dendrobatoid species known to have the MLP
has grown to 24, all of which are currently referred to Anomaloglossus. Most species occur on the
Guayana Shield north of the Amazon, but three species occur west of the Andes, including A. confusus



                                                                                                        263
from northwestern Ecuador and A. atopoglossus and A. lacrimosus from western Colombia. The 20 cis-
Andean species exhibit remarkable diversity for such a small group, including phytotelm breeders with
oophagous tadpoles and maternal provisioning (Bourne et al., 2001; Grant et al. 2006), endotrophic
larvae with reduced mouth parts, with or without dorsal transport (Juncá et al., 1994; Lescure and Marty,
2000), and distributions at elevations as low as 50 m in the Amazon (A. stepheni) are as high as 2700 m
atop tepuis (A. roraima). Grant et al. (2006) also included representatives from across this diversity,
further strengthening the test of Anomalogossus monophyly. Nevertheless, due to lack of material Grant
et al. (2006) did not include any of the trans-Andean species in their phylogenetic analysis, and they
placed those species in Anomalogossus based solely on the shared occurrence of the MLP. As such,
several persistent questions remain to be addressed: (1) Are the trans-Andean species part of
Anomaloglossus or do they represent an independent radiation? (2) Is the MLP of the cis- and trans-
Andean taxa homologous or did the MLP evolve multiple times within dendrobatoids, as it did among
anurans generally? (3) If Anomaloglossus is indeed monophyletic, do the robust, extensively webbed
species from both sides of the Andes form a clade, or are these morphologies independently derived?
Recently collected material of an undescribed species allows these questions to be addressed.



Grant, Tyler (Iowa State University); David, Otis; Rolf, Koford (Iowa Cooperative Fish and Wildlife
Research Unit, Ames, IA, United States)

Evaluating Amphibian Response to Missouri River Flooding Using Novel Occupancy Modeling

Restoration of the Missouri River ecosystem has been ongoing since the Water Resources Development
Act of 1986. We began in 2009 an assessment of the ecological functionality of mitigation properties in
Iowa using the anuran community as ecological indicators. In 2011, the Missouri River experienced
record flooding. Annual runoff was 75 km3, substantially more than the next highest estimated runoff of
61.7 km3 in 1881. The mitigation properties were inundated with >4 meters of water for over a month in
July and August. Some breeding ponds were >1 kilometer away from the flood boundary. The 2011
flood offered a unique opportunity to assess the response and resiliency of anuran species to extensive
flooding at 125 sample sites distributed along a 19 km floodplain corridor. We used a novel occupancy
model that relaxed the closure assumption to demonstrate that anuran species rapidly colonized new
shallow wetlands as the river stage rose. The probability of occupancy at sites with 30 cm of water was
nearly 100% for Pseudacris maculata, Lithobates pipiens, and L. blairi, but decreased to 0% with
increasing depths. Phenologically, L. pipiens, Anaxyrus woodhousii, Hyla versicolor/chrysocelis, and P.
maculata began metamorphosing at dates comparable to 2010. Conversely, L. blairi, L. catesbeianus,
and Acris blanchardi metmorphosed 3-5 weeks later than in 2010. These three species breed later than
other species and flooding likely hindered reproduction. L. pipiens and A. woodhousii appeared to have
successful reproduction despite the flooding, judging from the number of observed metamorphs at 81
post-flood survey points. H. versicolor/chrysocelis complex and P. maculata produced a moderate
number of tadpoles. L. blairi and A. blanchardi produced few metamorphs. The data indicate that
species that breed later in the season metamorphosed later and in smaller numbers. We will present
data from the spring and summer of 2012 to document longer-term response of these species to the
flooding, including rates of recolonization of flooded areas. The resiliency of these species and the
habitat on which they depend may prove important under future climate change scenarios which predict
more climate extremes. We suggest that a elevational gradient of habitats is necessary to provide
useable habitat over a wide range of potential river stages.




                                                                                                      264
Grassmann, Michael (aquarium of the bay); Natanson, Lisa (NOAA Fisheries, Narragansett, RI, United
States); Slager, Christina; Herbert, Keith (Aquarium of the Bay, San Francisco, CA, United States)

Observations of Growth and Demography in Captive-Born Pacific Angel Sharks (Squatina
californica), at Aquarium of the Bay

In May of 2009, seven Pacific angel shark ( Squatina californica ) pups were born in the Aquarium of the
Bay in San Francisco, California. This is the first reported case of successful captive-breeding for the
species. The data collected on these specimens offer a unique opportunity to closely observe the early
stages of age-related growth in Pacific angel sharks. Over two and a half years data were regularly
collected on each shark‘s length, weight, average consumption, and the percentage body weight
consumed.        Based on these length data, three variations of von Bertalanffy were generated. Small
sample size and rapid early growth in the population produced highly variable data with low confidence
values in the first two trials. The third trial incorporated additional data from wild adult Pacific angel
sharks that were previously tagged or collected by Aquarium of the Bay. This growth curve was
compared to the previous trials and showed juvenile growth falling on approximately the same curve as
adults. The parameters obtained in the final trial were also consistent with those derived from previously
published data on the growth of Pacific angel sharks, despite the differences in some life history traits and
highly variable growth rates of this specific population.    Continued observation will help determine if
these parameters change with further development, and if the initial variation in life history characteristics
will influence other traits as the sharks reach maturity.



Gray, Teagen (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA and Guy Harvey Research Institute, Nova
Southeastern University, FL USA 33004); Bernard, Andrea (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA and Guy
Harvey Research Institute, Nova Southeastern University, FL USA 33004, Canada); Clarke, S. (Oceanic
Fisheries Programme, Secretariat of the Pacific Community, BPD5 CEDEX, Noumea 98848, New
Caledonia, Canada); Chapman, D. (School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, Stony Brook University,
NY, USA, Canada); McAuley, R. (Department of Fisheries, Government of Western Australia, Hillarys,
WA, Australia, Canada); Shivji, M.S. (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA and Guy Harvey Research
Institute, Nova Southeastern University, FL USA 33004, Canada)

Global phylogeography of the dusky shark (Carcharinus obscurus) based on nuclear
microsatellite DNA analysis: delineation of genetic stocks and the geographic sourcing of shark
fins from commercial markets.

The dusky shark, Carcharinus obscurus , is a globally distributed, coastal- pelagic species subject to an
apparent high level of exploitation. The International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) lists
this species as ―Vulnerable‖ globally, and ―Endangered‖ within western North Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico
waters due to an over 80% decline in this region, with no evidence of population recovery. The extensive
exploitation of dusky sharks may partly be attributed to the high market value of its fins, but the
contribution of individual dusky shark stocks to the fin markets is unknown. This knowledge would be
helpful to detect if specific stocks are experiencing disproportionate levels of exploitation. Due to its
susceptibility to overfishing, current dire conservation status and need for additional information on its
population dynamics, we analyzed the genetic population structure and genetic diversity of the dusky
shark (n = 301) across 10 globally distributed locations utilizing 10 nuclear microsatellite loci.

Surprisingly, dusky sharks showed similar allelic richness and gene diversity (A=10.5-11.4; H e = 0.64-
0.66) across all populations despite the more severe IUCN classification and a history of severe
population decline in the western North Atlantic. The microsatellite marker analyses support previously
published mtDNA work, identifying a strong divergence among Atlantic and Indo-Pacific samples ( F ST



                                                                                                          265
= 0.01-0.15; P <0.05). Overall, microsatellite marker results indicate the presence of three genetically
discrete management units for dusky sharks, due to the significant genetic differentiation found between
the western North Atlantic, South African, and Australian collections and the low frequency of migrant
exchange between these populations.

Additionally, these nuclear microsatellite-defined, discrete management units provide a method for the
assignment of market derived fins to their population of origin with the use of genetic assignment
techniques, including Bayesian multi-clustering methods (Structure) and principal coordinate analysis.
Using these sourcing techniques, 15 of 21 market fins analyzed were found to have likely originated from
the highly endangered western North Atlantic dusky shark population, supporting the need for more
urgent conservation measures within this region.



Grayson, Kristine (Victoria University of Wellington); Mitchell, Nicola (University of Western Australia,
Crawley, Australia); Hoare, Joanne (NZ Department of Conservation, Christchurch, New Zealand); Keall,
Susan; Wilson, Joanna; Nelson, Nicola (Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand)

Sex ratio bias drives an extinction vortex in an island population of tuatara (Sphenodon
punctatus)

Despite the vast number of endangered species, quantitative data on the drivers of extinction events are
lacking. In the process of population extinction, positive feedbacks among a range of stressors can
hasten the process of population collapse and create an ‗extinction vortex,‘ particularly in small, isolated
populations. Here we show the positive feedbacks from a male-biased sex ratio creating conditions for
extinction in a population of tuatara ( Sphenodon punctatus ). Over the last decade, the percentage of
adult females on North Brother Island has abruptly declined by 30%. Our monitoring reveals that the
male-biased sex ratio has compounding impacts on female fitness through reductions in female body
condition, fecundity, and survival. Additionally, we find current nest temperatures result in more male
offspring owing to the pattern of temperature-dependent sex determination in tuatara where males hatch
at warmer temperatures. Climate change could be the final nail in the coffin for this isolated population, as
temperature increases predicted for New Zealand over the next century will further skew the offspring sex
ratio towards males. While individuals may persist for many decades due to the longevity of tuatara, our
viability models predict that without an evolutionary response, the population will be functionally extinct
and entirely composed of males in 144 years (3.5 – 4.5 generations in tuatara). Sex ratio bias is an
underappreciated threat to population viability, particularly in populations that appear numerically stable.
Understanding the mechanisms underlying population declines is critical for identifying appropriate
conservation measures and assuring the persistence of endangered populations.



Green, David (McGill University and Redpath Museum); Yagi, Katharine (Redpath Museum, McGill
University, Montreal, PQ, Canada)

Movements and habitat use by Fowler's Toads (Anaxyrus fowleri) at Long Point, Ontario

Eleven adult Fowler‘s toads were radio-tagged and tracked along the Hahn Beach of the Big Creek
NWA at the western base of Long Point, Ontario, from Aug 30 th – Sept 8 th , 2008 in order to assay
habitat use by the animals. Small radio transmitters were fitted to the toads with a harness of made from
fine, surgical plastic tubing around the body behind the front limbs. The toads‘ behaviour is not
significantly affected by the presence of the transmitters, nor did the attachment harnesses significantly



                                                                                                         266
hamper or injure the toads. Toads were tracked every morning and evening and their precise locations
were recorded using GPS and mapping software. During the day, the toads resided on the upper beach
or in the dunes. They may or may not dig completely under the sand and may facultatively make use of
objects, such as driftwood, as hiding places. In the evening, the toads generally may move close to the
water line when active. Although most toads remained within a constrained area of shore, some animals
moved over 70 m along the beach in a single night. The onset of cooler weather coincided with the
movement of some animals further away from the water line, curtailment of the nightly activity and deeper
retreat in the sand. The behaviour of the toads indicate that at this time of year for this life stage, the
toads require a) beaches for evening activity, b) sparsely vegetated foredunes for day-time retreats, and
c) dunes and backdunes as retreats for long-term dormancy. These must also be in proximity to still,
shallow, open water that the toads use as breeding sites in the spring. The conditions exist, or have
existed, at approximately seven general locations at Long Point that can be identified on high definition
maps.



Green, David M. (McGill University);

Canadian endangered species legislation: How effective is it for herpetofauna?

The Canadian Species at Risk Act ( SARA ) is complex legislation that aims to offer protection to
endangered and threatened wildlife and plants in Canada. The long and difficult political process that
culminated in its proclamation into law in 2003 resulted in a bill with tangible strengths, abundant
compromises and many weaknesses. SARA has three primary components. One is the assessment and
legal listing of wildlife species at status, the second is effecting the recovery is listed species, and the third
deals with prohibitions, penalties and compliance measures. Assessment of species by COSEWIC is
highly effective and proactive. To date, virtually all species of amphibians and reptiles in Canada that
might be at some risk have been assessed at least once. Formulation of remediation measures, however,
has been slow and implementation of recovery strategies for amphibians and reptiles has been even
slower. Prohibitions and compliance measures are ineffective. In large measure, this is because SARA
applies mainly to federal lands and waters and is unable to override numerous other statutes, including
aboriginal land claims agreements.              SARA      is a classic Canadian compromise, relying on
federal/provincial/territorial co-operation and good will. That is its great strength, and great vulnerability.



Green, David M. (Redpath Museum, McGill University);

Ecological implications of temporal variation in body size.

Animal body size has intrinsically significant ecological and evolutionary importance and is well known to
a reasonably consistent predictor of overall abundance. Exactly why this should be true has long been
disputed since the relationship between body size and abundance is almost always clouded by
considerable variance. At the scale of individuals, variation in body size may be related to such factors as
lifespan, age at maturity, access to resources and fecundity and therefore may have implications for
fitness, mate-choice and survival. Many animal populations, including populations of pond-breeding
amphibians, may fluctuate in abundance considerably from year to year but there is little documentation
of body size variation at the same time.

Over more than two decades, the average body size in a population of Fowler‘s toad, a common
amphibian throughout much of eastern North America, has fluctuated considerably from year to year in



                                                                                                              267
inverse proportion to abundance. Such temporal variation means that determining a species‘ average
body size depends on when a population is sampled, as well as where. Furthermore, since average body
size cannot be treated as a population constant, there are implications for ecology ranging from the
incidence of size-assortative mating to the applicability of Bergmann‘s rule.



Green, Sarah (Southeastern Louisiana University); Crother, Brian (Southeastern Louisiana University,
Canada)

Which method is best? Comparing geometric morphometric techniques on snake head shapes

Geometric morphometric techniques have come a long way in the past twenty years. Despite the
advances in methodology, this type of analysis has rarely been used on snakes. It has proven quite
successful in other taxa. But despite this success it remains underutilized. The purpose of this project is
to test three geometric morphometric methods on several species of snakes. The species that will be
used will be the four species of the genus Regina , as well as Lampropeltis getula and Lampropeltis
nigra. The analyses will include testing the viability of scales as homologous landmarks, testing an
outlining method, and a novel grid method. The results will be compared against true homologous
landmark analysis as well as traditional morphometric techniques. This information will be gathered using
skulls and performing a literature review. It is expected that scales will make poor landmarks because
scales do not represent underlying structures in snakes. It is also expected that outlining will have the
greatest congruence with homologous landmarks as well as traditional morphometric techniques. There is
concern as to whether the outlining method will be able to pick up on small scale shape differences. The
grid method is expected to produce results similar to the outlining method.



Green, Stephen (Operation Wallacea); Kundu, Samit (Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology,
Canterbury, United Kingdom); Montgomery, Chad (Truman State University, Kirksville, United States);
Boback, Scott (Dickinson College, Carlisle, United States); Frazier, Julius (California Polytechnic State
University, San Luis Obispo, United States); Reed, Robert (USGS, Fort Collins, United States); Griffiths,
Richard; Groombridge, Jim (Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology, Canterbury, United Kingdom)

Population structure and gene flow of the Hog Island Boa (Boa constrictor imperator) in the Cayos
Cochinos and Bay Islands, Honduras

Recent phylogenetic analysis has identified insular populations of Boa constrictor imperator in the Cayos
Cochinos and Bay Island archipelagos, Honduras as a probable Evolutionary Significant Unit (ESU).
These populations have likely been on a separate evolutionary trajectory to mainland populations for
approximately 2 million years. However, dwarfed phenotypes displayed in the Cayos Cochinos
populations are suspected to have evolved rapidly since the islands were last isolated from the mainland
by rising sea levels at the end of the last ice age, approximately 10,000 years ago. This study investigates
the level of population structure and gene flow between the islands and mainland and specifically
between the dwarfed phenotypes of the Cayos Cochinos and the larger phenotypes of the Bay Islands
and continental mainland. It is concluded that the dwarfed boas of the Cayos Cochinos were isolated
approximately 5,000 years ago and that dwarfism has evolved in the absence of substantial gene flow
from the surrounding populations since this time. Thus, dwarfism is likely to be an adaptive response to
local environmental conditions in the Cayos Cochinos, rather than as a result of phenotypic plasticity for
body size within the island system. In contrast to previous studies of gene flow in mainland populations of




                                                                                                        268
B. constrictor, gene flow appears to be low over relatively short distances, highlighting the substantial
barrier to gene flow presented by the relatively small expanses of water between the islands.



Green, Stephen (Operation Wallacea);

Using short-term student projects to build long-term herpetological monitoring datasets

University and high school students with an interest in the biological sciences and conservation represent
a valuable resource to researchers wishing to carry out ambitious, large-scale research projects. By
utilising students to carry out biodiversity monitoring as part of annual research expeditions, it is possible
to collect large spatial and temporal data sets whilst simultaneously broadening the opportunities
available to students to gain valuable practical experience in biodiversity monitoring techniques.

Operation Wallacea is a UK founded conservation organisation and network of academics from European
and North American universities, who design and implement biodiversity and conservation management
research programmes utilising student volunteers. Operation Wallacea biodiversity monitoring
programmes are now being implemented across 25 study sites in 11 countries, spanning both the
terrestrial and marine environments. By funding these research projects directly through fees paid by
student volunteers, rather than through traditional funding routes, researchers are not constrained in their
study design to produce short-term results, but can instead look to build the types of long-term datasets
desperately needed for appropriate conservation management planning.

Of paramount importance to any volunteer based survey work is having clearly defined objectives and
standardised, unambiguous methodologies. However, the inclusion of modern, more complex, techniques
in survey design should not necessarily be overlooked as a way of augmenting more traditional field data
sets, as has been successfully demonstrated by the integration of a pop-up genetic laboratory at our
Cloud Forest research site in Honduras. Advances in DNA extraction and PCR technologies are allowing,
for example, in situ Chytrid infection tests to be conducted in the field, as well as population genetic
studies using ISSR markers, giving instant access to information previously unobtainable in a remote field
site.

This talk will examine key examples of the long-term herpetological data sets that have been compiled
using Operation Wallacea volunteers. The vast benefits, but also the difficulties encountered in using this
‗paying volunteer‘ conservation model will be discussed, including how to reconcile rigorous
methodological design and implementation with providing an exciting, attractive experience that
represents good value for money to the customer.



Greenbaum, Eli (University of Texas at El Paso); Conkey, Nancy (University of Texas at El Paso, El
Paso, TX, United States); Pramuk, Jennifer (Bronx Zoo/Wildlife Conservation Society, Bronx, NY, United
States); Carr, John (University of Louisiana at Monroe, Monroe, LA, United States); Rödel, Mark-Oliver;
Penner, Johannes (Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and Biodiversity at the Humboldt
University Berlin, Berlin, Germany)

Systematics of Congo Basin True Toads (Anura: Bufonidae: Amietophrynus) Reveals Widespread
Cryptic Speciation

Two competing hypotheses have been proposed to explain speciation patterns in the Congo Basin of
Central Africa: (1) the Refuge Hypothesis states that contemporary areas of rainforest endemism in the



                                                                                                          269
Congo Basin were not affected by past climatic fluctuations, and these stable areas (i.e., forest refugia)
led to allopatric speciation in forest-adapted taxa; whereas (2) the Montane Speciation Hypothesis
focuses on montane regions of Central Africa (i.e., Cameroonian Highlands and Albertine Rift) as stable
forest refugia where allopatric speciation occurred, with the inference that the Congo Basin served as a
―museum‖ where some species persisted since the Miocene with little subsequent diversification. A
testable prediction of the latter hypothesis is that there is limited or no geographic structure in the genetic
diversity of widespread Congo Basin species. We tested these hypotheses by examining phylogenetic
patterns and divergence timing of two widespread, lowland species ( Amietophrynus camerunensis and
A . gracilipes ) in the Congo Basin, with sampling of multiple populations from all ecoregions.            We
sequenced approximately 4 kb of combined mitochondrial (12S–16S) and nuclear (CXCR4, POMC, and
RAG1) genes from over 30 samples of Amietophrynus, and several outgroups. These data were
analyzed with maximum parsimony, maximum-likelihood and Bayesian inference with the programs
PAUP, RAxML and MrBayes v.3.1, respectively, after appropriate models of nucleotide substitution were
identified in the program jModelTest. Our phylogeny identified widespread cryptic speciation among our
toad samples from the Congo Basin, which supports the Refuge Hypothesis.                     Our findings are
consistent with recent phylogenetic analyses of birds and rodents.            One of the new toad species is
restricted to the forests that transition into the Itombwe Plateau, a region of paramount conservation
importance that is renowned for its amphibian endemism and diversity.



Greenberg, Dan (Redpath Museum & McGill University); Green, David M. (Redpath Museum, Montreal,
PQ, Canada)

Population regulation structures the natural dynamics of amphibians: Evidence from a long-term
study of a declining population

The apparent global decline of amphibian populations has generated a need for effective methods for
identifying true declines in abundance from natural fluctuations. Since amphibian populations experience
high levels of annual variation in recruitment, understanding long-term population dynamics is essential to
separate true declines from normal decreases. Evidence from a 23 year study of a population of Fowler‘s
Toad ( Anaxyrus fowleri ) in Long Point, Ontario, Canada, indicates substantial fluctuations in abundance
and evidence of decline over the last 9 years. This decline in abundance is coincident with the spread of
an invasive marsh plant, the Common Reed ( Phragmites australis ), throughout the toads‘ breeding sites.
Using an information theoretic approach, we compared models of population growth that included both
intrinsic (density dependence) and stochastic extrinsic factors (weather), as well as the deterministic
factor of P. australis expansion in breeding marshes. From 1989 through 2001, prior to the major
expansion of P. australis in the study area, population growth of the toads conformed best to a model of
Gompertz population regulation and winter severity affecting overwintering mortality. These factors
declined in importance over the latter 10 years of the study, 2002 - 2011, and the variable for growth of
P. australis explained an increasingly significant degree of the variation in population growth of the toads.
We interpret this as evidence of habitat loss due to an invasive plant species causing the decline of an
amphibian population. Furthermore, we advocate the use of multi-model inference for long-term time-
series to identify changes in population dynamics coincident with population decline.



Greenwald, Katherine (Eastern Michigan University); Gibbs, H. Lisle (Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH, United States)




                                                                                                           270
Abundance, Distribution, and Habitat Associations of Unisexual Mole Salamanders (Ambystoma)
in Ohio

Unisexual salamanders in the genus Ambystoma are an abundant yet difficult to identify component of
amphibian biodiversity in the Great Lakes region. These all-female salamanders reproduce in a unique
way that involves "stealing" genomes from the sexual species that they coexist with. To date, unisexuals
have been documented incorporating genomes from five different sexual species. This phenomenon,
along with the fact that the unisexuals are frequently polyploid (having more than two copies of the
genome), means that there are a large number of possible genome combinations (biotypes) in these
salamanders. In many cases the unisexuals closely resemble the sexual species whose genomes they
have incorporated, making morphological identification problematic. We have developed and used a
genetic method to identify unisexual biotypes for over 2000 salamanders from over 60 sites across Ohio.
Analysis of locality data reveals a strong latitudinal gradient in the frequency of unisexuals, with frequency
decreasing from north to south. Furthermore, habitat data collected at each site suggest that there is
niche partitioning among the various species and biotypes found in Ohio. Comparisons of Jefferson
salamanders ( A. jeffersonianum ) and their associated unisexuals (LJJ) revealed that the sexual species
is found in higher quality habitat than the unisexual biotype; however, the reverse is true for smallmouth
salamanders ( A. texanum ) and their associated unisexuals (LTT). Overall, these data will be used to
explore the ecological and evolutionary factors that determine the range, abundance and habitat usage of
sexual species and unisexual biotypes throughout Ohio.



Gregory, Patrick (University of Victoria);

Once Bitten, Twice Shy: Does Previous Experience Influence Behavioural Decisions in
Encounters with Predators?

Injuries are common in animals of diverse taxa and are usually attributed to encounters with predators.
Although often non-lethal, injuries nevertheless represent indirect effects of predators that can have
negative consequences for demography and fitness (e.g. reproductive costs). However, encounters with
predators also represent experience through which animals can learn and positively adapt their future
behaviour, potentially mitigating, at least partly, the negative effects of prior exposure to predators. I
predicted that injured grass snakes (Natrix natrix) would be more likely to move before capture than
uninjured snakes, especially if they had scars or other injuries on the body or tail, indicating significant
previous handling by a predator. This prediction was borne out, but another kind of injury (stumped tails)
had no effect on predator-evasion behaviour. A similar test of whether previous capture affected such
behaviour showed a much weaker effect than that of injury, Humans typically are used as proxies for
real predators in studies of anti-predator behaviour in snakes, but these results provide somewhat
equivocal support for this approach.




                                                                                                          271
Grieneisen, Michael (University of California, Davis); Zhang, Minghua (University of California, Davis,
Canada); Hassapakis, Craig (Amphibian and Reptile Conservation (journal), Canada); Browne, Robert
(Royal Zoological Society of Antwerp, Belgium, Canada)

Global Herpetology Thesis Portal - A wellspring of unpublished data relevant to herpetological
science & conservation

Dissertations and theses document a substantial investment of resources in training the next-generation
of researchers, and are important literature resources for herpetological research. For example, of 1471
articles published in Herpetologica or J Herpetol from 2001-2010, 38% cited at least one thesis. Despite
offering considerable research results of scientific significance, many theses never yield peer-reviewed
publications, often due simply to time demands placed on recent grads. The "electronic thesis and
dissertation" movement has prompted 1000s of universities worldwide to establish open-access thesis
repositories, that greatly improve the accessibility of theses. However, a global thesis catalogue is
lacking, given the large gaps in the geographic coverage of resources such as WorldCat and Dissertation
Abstracts.

From numerous university library catalogues & national thesis repositories (e.g., China, Egypt, India,
Kenya) a database of thousands of theses referencing reptiles or amphibians in some manner has been
compiled. The GHT Portal is hosted on the Amphibian and Reptile Conservation journal website:
http://redlist-arc.org/GHTPortal.htm. Each record includes basic bibliographic data, links to online
abstracts/full-text (when available), and controlled-vocabulary term lists which allow users to quickly find
all theses for geographic, taxonomic or general topics, e.g., "USA, Pennsylvania," "Cryptobranchidae,"
"conservation," or their combinations. About 40% of the theses concern herpetology, with most of the
remainder using herpetofauna as model organisms/systems for physiological or molecular studies.

Due to the limitations of our linguistic skills and the geographic coverage of electronic databases, we are
very interested in collaborating with herpetologists from regions with poor coverage in the current GHT
Portal. The presentation will demonstrate the breadth of information that herpetological theses have to
offer using "conservation" as a basic search term.



Griffith, Oliver (The University of Sydney); Belov, Katherine (The University of Sydney, Sydney, N,
Australia); Ujvari, Beata; Thompson, Michael (The University of Sydney, Sydney, N, Australia)

Lipoprotein lipase expression increases in the uterus of a pregnant skink

In placentotrophic animals, mothers transport nutrients across a placenta to nourish their developing
embryos. The Australian skink, Pseudemoia entrecasteauxii , provides approximately 60% of the lipid
for embryonic growth and metabolism to embryos across the placenta. Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) is an
important enzyme in lipid transport in vertebrates. We examined patterns of LPL gene expression in the
uterus of pregnant P. entrecasteauxii to identify its role in placentotrophy in this species. We used
reverse transcription quantitative real time PCR to measure the expression of the lipoprotein lipase gene
in the uterine tissue of four periods in the reproductive cycle and compared uterine LPL expression in
chorioallantoic and yolk sac placenta. Expression of the LPL gene is five fold higher in the uterus of late
pregnant compared to non-pregnant and early pregnant P. entrecasteauxii, indicating a greater capacity
for lipid transport towards the end of pregnancy. This result correlates with the time that developing
embryos are undergoing the greatest growth and have the highest metabolic rate. LPL gene expression is
10 fold higher in the uterine tissue of the yolk sac placenta than the chorioallantoic placenta, suggesting
the yolk sac placenta is the primary site of lipid transport in pregnant P. entrecasteauxii.




                                                                                                        272
Griffiths, Richard (Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology);

How many newts in how many populations? Modelling the viability of amphibian metapopulations
in fragmented landscapes

Population Viability Analysis (PVA) has become a widely-used tool within species conservation. The basis
of a PVA model is usually a matrix of survival-fecundity schedules. These are used to make population
projections under different environmental or management scenarios, such that the risk of extinction can
be estimated within a defined timescale. Although PVA has strong potential for informing the
management of threatened species, the reality is that such species often have poorly understood life
histories that yield weakly parameterized and unreliable models. The species best suited for PVA are
therefore well-studied species, but these are often widespread, of little conservation concern, and not in
need of viability analyses. The great crested newt ( Triturus cristatus ) is unusual in that it is widespread
and has a well-documented life history, but is of considerable conservation interest because of the
frequency with which it comes into conflict with development in the UK. This leads to questions
concerning the minimum levels of population size and population connectivity required to maintain viable
populations in the face of fragmentation. We used RAMAS metapop to examine compromises between
‗more ponds with fewer newts‘ or ‗fewer ponds with more newts‘ in a fragmented landscape. Isolated
populations comprising 50 newts are predicted to go extinct within a few decades. Connectivity and
dispersal reduces the extinction risk. As subpopulation size and number of subpopulations increases,
extinction risk declines. Long-term, viable metapopulations require at least 16 subpopulations of 50
newts, or 4-8 populations of at least 100 newts. On the basis of these predictions, current actions to
mitigate development impacts in the UK may be insufficient to ensure sustainable populations. Although
the predictions of PVA need interpreting with caution, model outputs can serve to identify gaps in
information and inform evidence-based management decisions.



Griffiths, Richard (Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology); Clemons, Jan (Amphibian and Reptile
Groups UK, Bournemouth, United Kingdom)

Introduction: A historical perspective, and evolution of a national recording scheme in the UK

Early herpetologists were citizen scientists, who pursued their scientific interests alongside such
professions as physicians, lawyers or members of the clergy. The professional herpetologist is therefore a
comparatively recent development, and has been driven by rapid advances in science and technology.
Rather than making the citizen scientist redundant, the demands of conservation decision-making tools
mean that data are now required on spatial and temporal scales that are beyond the capacity and
resources of even the largest team of professional researchers. The past two decades have therefore
seen renewed initiatives to harness the considerable manpower available within the citizen scientist
community. This drive has been assisted by the rapid and widespread adoption of hand-held devices that
now carry communication, photographic, GPS, database and environmental-measuring capabilities. The
UK has a long tradition of citizen scientist involvement with natural history recording. The first national
distribution maps for amphibians and reptiles were published 64 years ago, and precipitated a series of
subsequent recording initiatives, all of which were of relatively short duration and involved incomplete
coverage of the country. These schemes have evolved into the present-day National Amphibian and
Reptile Recording Scheme (NARRS), which uses volunteers to collect data in targeted survey areas. A
very active network of local amphibian and reptile groups also now exists, while specific projects, such as
‗Make the Adder Count‘ and the ‗Million Ponds Project‘ target specific taxa or conservation issues.
Paradoxically, economic exigencies frequently increase the demands for training and relevant




                                                                                                         273
experience, so increased citizen scientist capacity may well be a by-product of the global financial
downturn. Nevertheless, there remain significant issues to be addressed if citizen scientists are to be
deployed effectively. Checks and balances need to be in place to ensure that data are collected reliably
and in accordance with rigorous research designs. At the international scale, issues arise over whether
conservation is better served in developing countries by building local capacity, or by using fee-paying
volunteers from developed countries that provide incomes for local communities. This symposium
explores these issues, and examines the current and future role of the citizen scientist in herpetological
surveys and conservation.



Grismer, Lee (La Sierra University); Wood, Perry (Brigham Young University, Provo, United States);
Quah, Evan (Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang, Malaysia); Anuar, Shahrul; Muin, Mohd. (Universiti Sains
Malaysia, Pulau Pinang, Malaysia); Sumontha, Montri (Ranong Marine Fisheries Station, Ranong,
Thailand); Ahmad, Norhayati (Universiti Kebansaan Malaysia, Bangi, Canada); Bauer, Aaron (Villanova
University, Villanova, Canada)

Phylogenetic relationships within the Cyrtodactylus pulchellus complex: an example of the hidden
diversity of lizards on the Malay Peninsula

Morphological data from 116 individuals and genetic data from 1497 base pairs of the mitochondrial ND2
gene from 68 individuals of both species of the Cyrtodactylus pulchellus complex (C. pulchellus and C.
macrotberculatus) were gathered from lizards throughout nearly their entire range along the Thai-Malay
Peninsula. These data indicate that this complex is composed of nine species as opposed to two.
Percent sequence divergence estimates between species show deep divergences ranging from 5.9–
18.8% and are supported in all cases by discrete morphological differences. In most cases, each newly
recovered species is restricted to a particular geographic feature (i.e. mountain top, island, etc.) and the
estimated divergence dates of cladogenic events separating lineages coincide with geological dates of
the emergence of such features. The genetic data indicate that speciation within this complex has taken
place over the last 6–8 million years and that once isolated, little to no genetic admixture occurred
between populations during episodes of putative secondary contact following glacial-interglacial habitat
fluctuations. This is in contrast to the closely related and completely sympatric C. quadrivirgatus that
shows less than 4% sequence divergence in the same gene throughout its entire range with speciation
only occurring in peripherally isolated, swampy habitats. These data indicate that some of the more
widely ranging species of Cyrtodactylus may be species complexes and that phylogenetic analyses may
be an additional source of increasing the diversity within this rapidly growing genus.



Groenhout, Elze (University of Amsterdam, IBED, RAVON);

Population structure and landscape genetics of the grass snake (Natrix natrix) in the Netherlands
analysed using microsatellite data.

Most reptiles in the suburban landscape are restricted to nature reserves. In the densely populated
western part of the Netherlands, only the Grass snake, Natrix natrix , is able to maintain populations
outside these nature reserves making use of anthropogenic landscape elements for migration and
habitation. On the other hand, other anthropological landscapes can represent obstacles like highways,
railroads, canals and buildings and may have profound effects on their metapopulation structure,
demography and reproduction. Population genetic analysis can provide information about the genetic
connectivity between, and genetic diversity within populations that inhabit natural reserves and




                                                                                                        274
anthropogenic areas and allowed us to identify important barriers and migration routes. We therefore
sampled more than 400 individuals from key-area‘s in the Netherlands and genotyped each individual for
5 microsatellite loci. Our data show gene flow between most of the populations, but relatively low genetic
diversity in some of the larger populations indicating genetic isolation due to habitat fragmentation or
illegal introduction of a small number of snakes by humans. We will use these data to optimize
conservation measures such as the rearrangement of the landscape with the creation of artificial breeding
and hibernation sites, transplantation and reintroduction of snakes. Finally population genetic data will
provide basic biological information about the migratory and reproductive behaviour of the grass snake. It
will allow us to test where recruits at hibernation sites come from: are they related -- site fidelity
hypothesis – or unrelated – random dispersal hypothesis -- to residing individuals?



Gross, Iwo (Eastern Illinois University); Durso, Andrew (Department of Biology, Logan, UT, United
States); Lennon, Corissa; Mullin, Stephen (Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, IL, United States)

Why did the Brownsnake cross the road? Understanding how snake populations are impacted by
vehicle access within a state park

Roads are among several anthropogenic structures that can have negative impacts within a habitat.
Even though the presence of roads might expand ecotone habitats, negative impacts might include
increased fragmentation and risk of predation. Where roads occur between habitats used for hibernation
and those occupied during the activity season, animals moving between habitats incur greater mortality
from cars travelling along the road surface. Midland Brownsnakes ( Storeria dekayi wrightorum ) in an
Illinois state park biannually cross a 2.7-km stretch of road that separates over-wintering sites from
activity season habitat. The road surface and shoulders provide the snakes with opportunities to
thermoregulate, but crossing or basking on the road increases the chances of mortality. Since October
2010, we have collected live and recently-killed snakes at this site using a combination of visual
encounter surveys and a 900-m drift fence-pitfall trap array. We collected morphometric, behavioral, and
life-history data for all snakes, and uniquely marked all live individuals before releasing them at site of
capture. The road was closed to all traffic for a 9-week period during the 2011 activity season, producing
a 20 % improvement in snake survivorship over the previous year. Within and between years, female
snakes appear to experience greater survivorship than males. Limiting vehicular access to park road
during the second half of October, or adding culvert structures, would further improve survivorship for this
brownsnake population.



Grözinger, Franziska (Museum für Naturkunde, Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and
Biodiversity at the Humboldt University Berlin); Thein, Jürgen (Büro für Faunistik und Umweltbildung,
Haßfurt, Germany); Feldhaar, Heike (University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany); Rödel, Mark-Oliver
(Museum für Naturkunde Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and Biodiversity at the Humboldt
University Berlin, Berlin, Germany)

Specialist on local scale? Differences in developmental traits within a population of a generalist
amphibian species in southern Germany (Ranidae: Rana temporaria)

The common frog ( Rana temporaria ) can be regarded as a generalist amphibian species in Europe. Due
to its wide distribution and broad range of used breeding habitats, it should be able to cope with different
environments. Our studies of one population in a forested area in southern Germany (Steigerwald,
Bavaria, monitored since 2005) revealed a strong preferences for particular reproduction sites (repeatable




                                                                                                        275
throughout seven years), which were not related to pond parameters or the presence of predators
(newts). Furthermore, we found extreme phenotypic plasticity in developmental traits among breeding
ponds: e.g. metamorphic weight differed up to factor 10 among studied ponds (0.07 and 0.70g, 2007).
Neither pond parameters, nor predation or larval density could account for the developmental differences
(development time, metamorphic weight). Since the observed philopatry and differences in developmental
traits could not be explained by extrinsic factors (biotic and abiotic parameters), we conducted transplant-
experiments in order to test, if intrinsic factor such as local specialisation might shed light on our findings.
Therefore, clutches of different ponds were taken and hatched tadpoles raised in mesh cages in natal and
non-natal ponds in the study area. Preliminary results show that a) tadpoles of the same clutch are highly
plastic in developmental traits when confronted with different environments, and b) tadpoles originating
from different ponds do not show uniform response to a common environment. These results indicate that
this generalist species might be a specialist on local scale.



Grubbs, Dean (Florida State University); Gelsleichter, James (University of North Florida, Jacksonville,
FL, United States); Heithaus, Michael; Kirk, Gastrich (Florida International University, Miami, FL, United
States); Charles, Cotton (Virginia Institute of Marine Science, Gloucester Point, United States)

Demersal Elasmobranch Assemblages associated with Desoto Canyon and the Continental Slope
of the Eastern Gulf of Mexico relative to the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill

Edge habitats typically have high biodiversity and biomass regardless of ecosystem, but such deep-sea
habitats (e.g. continental slopes, submarine canyons, seamounts) remain relatively unexplored and little
information on community structure exist. DeSoto Canyon and adjacent continental slope habitats of the
eastern Gulf of Mexico were the first affected by the Deepwater Horizon oil spill (DwH). Deep-water
fishes, especially the elasmobranchs, have slow life histories and are among the most sensitive taxa to
environmental perturbations yet in the Gulf of Mexico these taxa are poorly documented, many species
are taxonomically unresolved and new species undoubtedly exist. We developed a fishery-independent
survey employing longlines and traps in concert to describe the deep-water assemblages of large
demersal fishes in this region. During 2011-2012, three research cruises were completed and stations
from 199m to 2,014 m deep were sampled offshore of the Mississippi Delta, through the DeSoto Canyon
(including the DwH site), and offshore of St. Petersburg, Florida. More than 1,000 fishes were captured
including at least two species of hagfishes, more than 15 species of elasmobranchs and more than 20
species of teleosts. Sharks ranging in size from 20 cm TL ( Galeus area ) to 500 cm TL ( Hexanchus
griseus ) were captured using these methods. We will present a cluster analyses describing distinct fish
assemblages mediated by depth (85% were captured <600 m deep), temperature and bottom type.
Regional comparisons of community structure, species richness, and relative abundances will be
presented and related to the DwH oil spill.



Grummer, Jared (University of Washington); Bryson, Jr., Rob (University of Nevada, Las Vegas,
Canada); Reeder, Tod (San Diego State University, Canada)

Species delimitation using Bayes factors applied to the Sceloporus scalaris species group
(Squamata: Phrynosomatidae)

The development of new coalescent-based techniques for phylogenetic reconstruction using multi-locus
sequence data has enabled researchers to statistically investigate species limits and evaluate alternative
speciation models within a group. Whereas the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and likelihood ratio



                                                                                                            276
tests (LRTs) have been utilized as model selection tools in species delimitation, these tools are not
without issues when applied to phylogenetic problems. Here, we examined the efficacy of Bayes factors
in delimiting species in the Sceloporus scalaris species group with a dataset consisting of six nuclear
loci and 34 individuals. We compared species delimitation results from Bayes factor testing with two other
available methods, BPP (utilizing reversible jump MCMC) and SpeDeSTEM (which uses the AIC
criterion). Bayes factor testing and BPP methods both support the recognition of two new species in the
group, whereas SpeDeSTEM appears to be more of a ―lumper‖ and does not recognize these new
species. We also emphasize the importance of correctly estimating the marginal likelihood of competing
species delimitation models when computing Bayes factors. As many currently available programs to
species tree reconstruction use Bayesian phylogenetic inference, it is intuitive that Bayes factors receive
more attention as a preferred model selection tool in statistical species delimitation.



Gubler, Jenny (Central Michigan University); Karrick, Megan; Nicholson, Kirsten (Central Michigan
University, Mount Pleasant, United States)

Investigation of the Evolutionary Relationships Among Species of the Anolis cupreus Complex

The phylogenetic relationships among mainland Anolis lizards are still not completely resolved and new
species continue to be described every year. Widespread species in Central America have recently been
split up and subpopulations elevated to species level. All of these recent descriptions have been on the
basis of morphological data, but no phylogenetic analyses have been conducted to explore how these
species are related. Here we report on the molecular genetic variation and relationships among
populations of Anolis cupreus throughout its range, including one purportedly closely related species ( A.
villai ), and two new species that have been recently split from A. cupreus . We also analyzed these data
to infer the phylogenetic relationships of these species in the context of all mainland Norops clade
species. We found no molecular support for A. villai . As of this writing the placement of A. macrophallus,
A. yoroensis, and A. dollfusianus have not been completed but will be added by presentation time.



Guidugli, Michelle (Eastern Kentucky University); MacGregor, John (Kentucky Department of Fish and
Wildlife Resources, Frankfort, KY, United States); Richter, Stephen; Brown, David (Eastern Kentucky
University, Richmond, KY, United States)

Developing a Rapid Assessment Method and Amphibian Index of Biotic Integrity for Kentucky's
Wetlands

In Kentucky, at least 80% of wetlands have been lost or degraded; however, the amount of impact is
likely underestimated. Unfortunately, no statewide program has been adopted to assess the quality of
wetlands to aid in establishing mitigation levels or long-term monitoring. To address these needs, the
Kentucky Division of Water, Eastern Kentucky University (EKU), and various state and United States
federal agencies are in the process of developing the Kentucky Wetland Rapid Assessment Method (i.e.,
KY-WRAM). In an effort to validate the KY-WRAM‘s ability to reflect wetland condition, more intensive
assessments of wetland condition such as amphibian, vegetation, macroinvertebrate, chlorophyll a, and
water quality surveys are being conducted. These rapid assessment data and intensive bio-assessment
data will be compared for each wetland where both assessments occurred. To make these comparisons
possible with the amphibian survey data, EKU and John MacGregor (Kentucky Department of Fish and
Wildlife Resources) have begun developing an Amphibian Index of Biotic Integrity (Amphibian IBI), which
will be just one of several tools used for KY-WRAM validation and assessment and as a tool to monitor



                                                                                                        277
amphibian communities throughout Kentucky. In this presentation, we discuss the process we are using
to develop the KY-WRAM and Amphibian IBI, which are based upon the methods established by Ohio
EPA‘s Wetland Ecology Group, and some preliminary results. These topics include a description of
Coefficients of Conservatism, an Amphibian Quality Assessment Index, other amphibian community
metrics, and our approach to developing these for Kentucky.



Gunn, Theresa (Florida Atlantic University); Cave, Eloise; Bedore, Christine (Florida Atlantic University,
Canada); Kerstetter, David (Nova Southeastern University, Canada); Kajiura, Stephen (Florida Atlantic
University, Canada)

Sexual Dimorphism in the Dentition of Basal Vertebrates

Elasmobranch fishes are among a small group of vertebrates that use their mouth to bite their mate
during courtship and copulation. Because the teeth of males are under selective pressure to facilitate
both feeding and grasping of the females, there exists the potential for conflicting selective demands on
the tooth morphology, where the tooth shape optimal for one behavior may be suboptimal for the other.
Various elasmobranch species have been documented to exhibit sexual dimorphisms in tooth
morphology with males typically possessing more cuspidate teeth, presumably to facilitate grasping the
female during mating. Male Atlantic stingrays ( Dasyatis sabina ) demonstrate seasonally dynamic
changes in dentition, from molariform teeth during the non-mating season to cuspidate teeth during the
mating season. Thisseasonal change in tooth shape is documented for only a single species so it
remains unknown whether this is a widespread phenomenon. Pelagic stingrays ( Pteroplatytrygon
violacea ) are in the same family (Dasyatidae) as Atlantic stingrays but feed on teleost and squid prey
which present similar demands on the male tooth morphology as the slippery body of their female mates.
If the tooth morphology of pelagic stingrays is sexually dynamic and males undergo a seasonal change in
tooth shape, it suggests that dynamic teeth are likely widespread throughout the batoids. Pelagic stingray
jaws were collected monthly from commercial fisherman for a full year. the number of tooth files and rows
did not differ between the sexes and ranged from 20-35 tooth rows and 5-10 tooth files in both upper and
lower jaws. Upper jaw symphyseal teeth were extracted for shape analysis, Qualitative differences in
tooth shape were observed between males and females throughout the year, and males demonstrated
different tooth shapes between mating and non-mating seasons. male Pelagic stingray teeth were more
strongly cuspidate than female teeth especially late in the mating season (April) when the teeth have
rotated to the outermost functional position. Male Teeth fromthe non-mating season (November) showed
a more rounded triangular shape. a Procrustes superimposition with relative warp analysis was
employed to quantify the differences between the sexes and between mating and non-mating seasons.
The observation that male tooth morphology changes seasonally, even in a piscivorous species, indicates
that this is a widespread phenomenon.



Guo, Ce (Institute of bio-inspired structure and surface engineering,Nanjing University of Aeronautics and
Astonautics);

Biomechanism of adhesion in gecko setae

The study of the adhesion of millions of setae on the toes of geckos has been advanced in recent years
with the emergence of new technology and measurement methods. The theory of the mechanism of
adhesion by van der Waals forces is now accepted and broadly understood. However, this paper
presents limitations of this theory and gives a new hypothesis of the biomechanism of gecko adhesion.



                                                                                                       278
The findings are obtained through measurements of the magnitude of the adhesion of setae under three
different conditions, to show the close relationship between adhesion and status of the setae. They are
reinforced by demonstrating two setal structures, follicle cells and hair, the former making the setae
capable of producing bioelectrical charges, which play an important role in attachment and detachment
processes. It is shown that the abundant muscular tissues at the base of the setae cells, which are
controlled by peripheral nerves, are instrumental in producing the foot movement involved in attachment
and detachment. Our study will further uncover the adhesion mechanism of geckos, and provide new
ideas for designing and fabricating synthetic setae.



Guttridge, Tristan (Bimini Biological Field Station Foundation); Brown, Culum (Macquarie University,
Sydney, Australia)

Learning and memory of port jackson sharks, heterodontus portusjacksoni

Basic understanding of the fundamental principles and mechanisms involved in learning are extremely
lacking for cartilaginous fishes. Our aim in this study was to experimentally investigate the learning and
memory capacity of juvenile Port Jackson sharks, Heterondontus portusjacksoni . Sharks (N = 30) were
conditioned over a 19-day period to associate an underwater LED light or stream of air bubbles
(conditioned stimulus, CS) with a food reward (unconditioned stimulus, US), in three procedures (delay,
trace and control) . During experiments the CS signaled at a random time between 180 and 300s for
30s. For delay (US overlapped in time with CS), for trace (US delivered 10s after CS) and for control
(US delivered random time between 180 and 300s after CS). H.portusjacksoni trained in all procedures
improved consistently in their time to obtain food, indicative of learning. Importantly the number of sharks
in the feeding area 5s prior to the CS signaling did not change over time for any procedures. However,
significantly more sharks were present 5s during CS signaling for delay (air bubble) and trace (light).
Sharks trained in the delay and trace procedures (air bubble CS) also displayed significantly more
anticipatory behaviors, such as turning towards the CS and biting. Sharks trained with the light CS did not
exhibit any biting behaviors however trace procedural sharks did show a significant improvement in
turning towards the CS at its onset. At 40 and 20 days after the end of the conditioning experiments some
sharks were presented the CS without reward. Two sharks trained in the delay procedure (air bubble CS)
exhibited movement and biting behaviors. This study demonstrates that H.portusjacksoni have the
capacity to learn a classical conditioning procedure relatively quickly (some in <5 days), associate two
time-separated events and retention of learnt associations for up to 40 days.



Guzy, Jackie (Davidson College);

An assessment of the spatial configuration of greenspace and aquatic habitats on semi-aquatic
turtle occupancy and species richness in a suburban landscape

Within urban areas, the importance of greenspaces for supporting wildlife has been widely investigated
for some species, but studies of reptiles have generally been neglected. To assess the importance of the
amount, spatial distribution, and composition of greenspaces, we examined semi-aquatic turtle species
richness in urbanized areas. In this study, we sampled turtles from 2010-2011 at 20 suburban ponds
classified as rural, urban, or golf. We used a hierarchical Bayesian species-richness model to estimate
species richness and species-specific responses to four landscape measurements of greenspace,
generated in FRAGSTATS (Euclidean nearest neighbor, interspersion juxtaposition index, percent of
landscape, and connectance). We found no effects of pond type (rural, urban, or golf) on turtle



                                                                                                        279
occupancy or estimated species richness. We found that occupancy of four species, Kinosternon
subrubrum , Trachemys scripta , Chelydra serpentina , and Pseudemys concinna increased
substantially with an increase in connectance of greenspace within 500 m of each pond. Our results
indicate that in suburban areas, semi-aquatic turtles benefit from increased connectivity of greenspace.
As land-cover becomes increasingly urbanized, it is important to understand mechanisms which promote
biodiversity and conservation in these systems.



Hagerty, Bridgette (York College of Pennsylvania); Tracy, C. Richard (University of Nevada, Reno,
Canada); Tracy, Christopher R. (University of Melbourne, Canada); Snyder, Sarah J.; Wakeling,
Stephanie R.; Sandmeier, Franziska C.; Maloney, Nichole (University of Nevada, Reno, Canada)

Dissecting the genetic structure of the chuckwalla (Sauromalus ater) at two spatial scales

Anecdotally, chuckwallas ( Sauromalus ater ) are rarely found more than a few meters away from the
rocky outcrops that these lizards require for predator avoidance, thermoregulation, and hibernacula.
Rocky desert habitat is naturally heterogeneous, so the close association between chuckwallas and their
rock piles has the potential to limit dispersal ability and isolate populations. Additionally, male chuckwallas
are highly territorial, appear to defend resources or females, and generally do not have overlapping home
ranges. These characteristics lead to the hypotheses that 1) chuckwalla dispersal might be limited at a
local scale and 2) males are more likely to be the dispersing sex. We used six microsatellite markers to
investigate the spatial genetic structure of chuckwallas in the Mojave Desert of the southwestern United
States (Nevada and California), and to test hypotheses related to dispersal. At the spatial scale of the
Mojave Desert, sampled chuckwalla populations showed high levels of genetic differentiation and clear
spatial structure that aligned closely with geography. Genetic differentiation among individuals did not
correlate strongly to geographic distance, which is consistent with our first hypothesis. Within the
Newberry Mountain range, we sampled at a finer scale and found the highest level of spatial
autocorrelation at intermediate distance classes, greater than 1km but less than 5km. Surprisingly, we did
not find genetic evidence for sex-biased dispersal at either spatial scale using assignment tests. We
discuss our results as a springboard for additional research on the external and internal factors that
influence chuckwalla dispersal.



Hagey, Travis (University of Idaho); Puthoff, Jonathan; Autumn, Kellar (Lewis and Clark College,
Canada); Harmon, Luke (University of Idaho, Canada)

Using the Weibull Distribution to Quantify Adhesion across Geckos

Adaptation is a major process in the diversification of life on earth. Studies of adaptation often rely on
patterns of correlated morphology, performance, and habitat preferences. Gecko lizards are an excellent
system to study these patterns of adaptation, as they are a species rich group with highly variable
morphology. Well known for their climbing ability, geckos have unique adhesive toe pads. The shape and
size of these adhesive pads vary across genera. Unfortunately, statistical measurements of geckos‘
adhesive capabilities can be difficult. To estimate and compare adhesion between species, we suggest
using a failure analysis technique relying on the Weibull distribution. The generation of adhesion relies on
the amount of friction a gecko‘s toe pad generates, and measuring the angle of toe detachment is a proxy
for the efficiency with which a gecko can translate frictional forces into adhesion. We can estimate the
most likely angle of toe detachment with the Weibull analysis. Using this method, we have evaluated the
adhesive capabilities of nearly 40 species, sampling across the gecko phylogeny. Establishing standard




                                                                                                           280
methods to quantify performance and significant variation between and within species is a valuable first
step in examining how geckos have adapted to a wide array of habitat types across the globe.



Hagman, Mattias (Stockholm University); Elmberg, Johan (Kristianstad University, Kristianstad, Sweden)

'Museum mining' - a method for investigating population trends

The general lack of long-term population data for amphibians and reptiles is a major problem in ecology
and conservation. This is particularly evident in the light of recent negative changes such as habitat loss,
climate change, invasive species and emerging infectious diseases. In the cases where data are
available they rarely embrace more than a decade or two, and are often restricted to a single population
monitored for some time by a researcher. Consequently, there is an alarming lack of essential long-term
population data required to make informed decisions. In this presentation we argue that ‗museum mining‘
– the use of museum data – can overcome this deficiency and provide a useful tool in ecology and
conservation. We will outline the concept and illustrate it with data on widespread species in the
European herpetofauna, of which some are presently of conservation concern. The method should be
useful in many countries and we will list the conditions under which it is applicable.



Hagman, Mattias (James Cook University); Alford, Ross (James Cook University, Townsville, Q,
Australia)

Patterns of Bd (Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis) transmission between tadpoles in a rainforest
stream

The fungal pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) has been implicated in worldwide amphibian
population declines and is widely seen as a major threat to amphibian biodiversity. Streams and other
water bodies are central habitats in the ecology of the disease, particularly in rainforests where they may
transport and transmit the pathogen and harbor infected tadpoles that serve as reservoir hosts. To
examine how the fungus is transmitted between tadpoles in stream habitats and whether infection affects
their growth, we conducted an experiment using semi-natural streamside channels in a rainforest in
tropical Australia. The results showed that transmission could occur downstream in flowing water with no
contact between individuals, and that infected tadpoles grew at reduced rates. Recently infected tadpoles
showed substantial loss of mouthparts, but individuals with longstanding infections did not, suggesting
that mouthparts may re-grow following initial loss. These findings may have implications for the
management of Bd in stream habitats.



Haines, Maggie (University of Melbourne/Museum Victoria); Moussalli, Adnan (Museum Victoria,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia); Clemann, Nick (Arthur Rylah Institute, Department of Sustainability and
Environment, Heidelberg, VIC, Australia); Stuart-Fox, Devi (University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC,
Australia); Melville, Jane (Museum Victoria, Melbourne, VIC, Australia)

Unravelling the complex evolutionary history of southeastern Australian alpine skinks using a
phylogeographic approach

Species endemic to the sub-alpine regions of Australia are among the most threatened by climate
change. To predict how these species will respond to changes in climate, it is important to understand




                                                                                                        281
their evolutionary history. The genus Pseudemoia contains six species, including generalists and sub-
alpine specialists such as the endangered alpine bog skink Pseudemoia cryodroma. It has been
hypothesised that this species arose from hybridisation between P. entrecasteauxii and P. pagenstecheri.
All three of these species have overlapping distributions in the sub-alpine areas of Victoria and they are
syntopic in at least one location. We reconstructed the phylogeny of Pseudomoia, in part to address this
hypothesis and determine whether there is any current hybridisation. We sequenced one mitochondrial
gene (ND4) and one nuclear gene (Rhodopsin) from all six Pseudemoia species across their geographic
range. Preliminary results indicate that admixture may have occurred between P. cryodroma, P.
entrecasteauxii, and P. pagenstecheri. The mtDNA data indicates that P. cryodroma is part of the P.
pagenstecheri complex. However, the nuclear data, which has limited resolution, suggest that P.
pagenstecheri is monophyletic. The molecular data also suggests the existence of cryptic species within
this genus. Data from additional nuclear genes are required to confirm these patterns and provide
additional phylogenetic resolution. We also present analyses of microsatellite data to shed further light
on possible hybridisation and determine genetic diversity and connectivity for sub-alpine populations of P.
cryodroma, P. entrecasteauxii, and P. pagenstecheri.



Hall, Alex (The University of Texas at Arlington); Pierce, Benjamin A. (Southwestern University,
Georgetown, TX, United States)

Call Latency in Anuran Breeding Call Surveys in Central Texas

Concern over global amphibian declines has increased the use of amphibian monitoring programs such
as the North American Amphibian Monitoring Program (NAAMP). The NAAMP protocol has been widely
used to determine anuran (i.e., frog and toad) species distribution and relative abundance using
volunteer-based auditory surveys of male breeding calls. The goals of this study were to monitor anuran
breeding habitats in central Texas using the NAAMP protocol and to investigate the utility of a new
measure of anuran calling behavior, call latency, the latency of a species to call after the beginning of a
call survey. Four routes with ten listening sites per route were surveyed once a month between February
and July from 2007 to 2010. Nine species of anurans were heard across all surveys and for six species,
annual percent site occupancy changed significantly between years. Call latency and call index (a
measure of calling intensity) varied significantly across species. For seven of the nine species, higher call
index was associated with shorter call latency. Neither call latency nor call index differed significantly
between surveys with low road noise and surveys with high road noise. Call index was not associated
with wind velocity, but for two species, call latency was longer in surveys conducted under high-wind
conditions than surveys conducted under low-wind conditions. Call latency is more reliably quantified than
call index and is a simple measure that can be incorporated into the NAAMP call survey protocol.



Halpern, Bálint (MME BirdLife Hungary); Péchy, Tamás (MME BridLife Hungary, Canada)

Hungarian meadow viper conservation program

Remaining Hungarian meadow viper ( Vipera ursinii rakosiensis ) population was estimated below 500
individuals, with three major occurrences in Hungary and one in Romania. The reasons behind the
decline are habitat loss and unvafourable management due to intensive agriculture. A complex
conservation program was started in 2004, supported by the EU LIFE-Nature fund. Viper Conservation
and Breeding Centre was started with 10 adult individuals, collected from 4 different subpopulations, and
after eight successful breeding periods by 2011 number of captive bred vipers exceeded 1000. First



                                                                                                         282
reintroduction took place in March 2010, releasing 30 snakes into a reconstructed habitat in Kiskunság
National Park. Later 70 snakes were released to the same site in 2011, and 50 more to a new site in
2012. Snakes were released at the end of the hibernation period, by removing them together with their
artificial burrows, a tool developed by the program. During regular monitoring we checked these burrows
by using pipe-camera and their surroundings visually. Other amphibian and reptile species started to use
these burrows as well. We recorded Triturus dobrogicus, Bombina bombina, Pelobates fuscus, Podarcis
tauricus, Lacerta viridis, Natrix natrix and Coronella austriaca . In 2010 we recorded vipers 54 times
during these visits, 44 times in or around these burrows. Altogether 9 individuals were identified by
photos. In 2010 4 of them , while in 2011 7 females were gravid at the time of observation. For the future
plan to continue release of snakes in new sites from 2012, some equipped with VHF-transmitters that are
tested recently.



Halstead, Brian (U.S. Geological Survey); Valcarcel, Patricia (Oregon State University, Canada); Wylie,
Glenn; Coates, Peter; Casazza, Michael (U.S. Geological Survey, Canada)

Hierarchical case-control logistic regression reveals multiple patterns in giant gartersnake habitat
selection

The giant gartersnake ( Thamnophis gigas ) is listed as threatened by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
and the State of California because of extensive habitat loss within its restricted range. Little is known,
however, about how the giant gartersnake selects habitat at small spatial scales. We examined
microhabitat selection of the giant gartersnake to help guide habitat restoration and management efforts
for this rare species. We used a case-control design, whereby we recorded the percent cover of several
habitat types (open water, emergent vegetation, submerged vegetation, bare ground, litter (dead
vegetation), and terrestrial vegetation) and vegetation categories (aquatic = hardstem bulrush (tule;
Schoenoplectus acutus ), cattail ( Typha spp.), duckweed ( Lemna spp.), water primrose ( Ludwigia
peploides ), mosquitofern ( Azolla spp.), algae, and rice ( Oryza sativa ); terrestrial = grasses (Poaceae),
weedy dicots, rushes (Juncaceae), and woody shrubs and vines) within a 0.5 m radius of an individual
snake‘s location and at a paired random point within 50 m of the individual‘s location during the active
season (April – September, 2009 and 2010). We used Bayesian hierarchical paired logistic regression to
estimate the odds of use based upon microhabitat conditions. Emergent vegetation, terrestrial vegetation,
litter, and submerged vegetation were positively selected. Bare ground and open water were neither
positively nor negatively selected. Rice was negatively selected by the population, but individuals were
highly variable in their selection of rice habitat. Only one aquatic plant, hardstem bulrush, was positively
selected. Water primrose, duckweed, and cattails were neither positively nor negatively selected.
Mosquitofern, algae, and rice were all negatively selected. Rushes were the only positively selected
terrestrial vegetation; all other terrestrial vegetation was used in proportion to its availability. Hierarchical
case-control logistic regression provided inference to the population, quantified variability among
individuals in the selection of microhabitats, and allowed an examination of selection by individual snakes
in a single analysis. Our results suggest that restoration and management activities that promote
abundant cover of aquatic and terrestrial vegetation and litter, while maintaining microhabitat
heterogeneity, will likely improve habitat conditions for the giant gartersnake. Restoration of native tule
marsh habitat, in particular, will likely benefit giant gartersnake populations.




                                                                                                             283
Halstead, Brian (U.S. Geological Survey); Wylie, Glenn; Coates, Peter; Casazza, Michael (U.S.
Geological Survey, Canada)

Robust Estimation of Giant Gartersnake Density in Linear Habitats using Spatial Capture-mark-
recapture Models

The estimation of animal densities is essential for comparing abundances among habitat types or
locations. Estimating the effective sampled area, however, can be a difficult task. Spatial capture-mark-
recapture (CMR) models (Royle and Young, 2008) offer a highly effective solution to this problem by
estimating the latent activity center location of both captured and unobserved individuals. Estimation of
density then proceeds by calculating the number of individual activity centers that occur within the
sampled area. For organisms that occur in linear habitats, expression of density as a function of distance,
rather than area, is often appropriate. We used a simplification of the Royle and Young (2008) model to
calculate robust linear densities of the giant gartersnake ( Thamnophis gigas ) from spatially-referenced
captures on trap transects in a canal system. Closed CMR models indicated a positive effect of water
temperature on capture probability of the giant gartersnake at our site, so in addition to spatial effects, we
included effects of water temperature in our spatial CMR model. We captured 23 individuals 37 times in
traps from 2 June – 8 July 2011. Our estimate of abundance from model-averaged closed CMR models
was 44 (95% CI = 28 – 75) individuals. The corresponding density of the giant gartersnake in the sampled
canal was 43 (28 – 68) individuals/km. Spatial CMR models are an effective solution to calculating
herpetofaunal densities in a number of sampling situations, and can be easily modified to calculate
densities in linear habitats.



Hamady, Li Ling (MIT/Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution); Natanson, Lisa (National Marine
Fisheries Service, NOAA, Canada); Skomal, Gregory (Massachusetts Division of Marine Fisheries,
Canada); Thorrold, Simon (Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Canada)

Testing white shark, basking shark, and dusky shark age estimation techniques using bomb
radiocarbon validation

Accurate age estimation is critical to population assessment and conservation strategies for sharks and
rays as it allows for the calculation of important demographic information including longevity, growth rate,
and age at sexual maturity; m anagement decisions based on under aging can inadvertently lead to
overexploitation . The primary method for estimating age of sharks relies on counting pair-bands that are
assumed to be annual in vertebrae. While it is widely acknowledged that the assumption of annual
deposition should be tested by an independent method, most shark species lack this validation. White
sharks (Carcharodon carcharias) , basking sharks ( Cetorhinus maximus ), and dusky sharks (
Carcharhinus obscurus ) are listed as vulnerable on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species due to a
history of overfishing, and all three currently lack age validation. We present new radiocarbon data taken
from analyses of shark vertebrae and compare and contrast the different results from the three species.
We hope that this work will inform and assist with conservation efforts for all three species.



Hanken, James (Harvard Museum of Comparative Zoology);

The Encyclopedia of Life and the Biodiversity Heritage Library

The Encyclopedia of Life (EOL) is a global biodiversity informatics initiative that launched officially in May
2007. Its fundamental goal is deceptively simple: provide a homepage for every species of living



                                                                                                          284
organism. In reality, EOL is an ambitious, even audacious project that seeks to readily make available
online and at no cost to the user as much biological information regarding a given species as can be
obtained legally and in digital form.         In addition to its two core activities, bioinformatics/IT and
construction of species pages, key components include biodiversity synthesis, learning and education,
and scanning and digitization of the primary literature of comparative biology and taxonomy since
Linnaeus. The latter activity is performed by the Biodiversity Heritage Library (BHL), an affiliated
consortium of many of the world‘s largest natural history libraries. The Encyclopedia of Life is not a
taxonomic activity per se, but it has the potential to tremendously enhance the work of practicing
taxonomists and systematists, especially those in developing countries, and thereby facilitate the
discovery, naming and classification of Earth‘s biological diversity. As of March 2012, EOL was delivering
online pages with content for nearly 900,000 of the estimated 1.9 million living, named species. At the
same time BHL had scanned and was making available nearly 38 million pages of scientific literature,
representing more than 38,000 titles and 100,000 separate volumes.          EOL requires—and seeks—the
active participation and involvement by the professional scientific community in order to succeed and
achieve its full potential as a reliable and up-to-date source of information for scientists, educators,
conservationists, environmental planners, government policymakers, students, laypeople, and other
―consumers‖ of biological data worldwide. Several of its most important and active participants to date
come from ichthyology and herpetology; among the most prominent content partners, for example, are
FishBase, AmphibiaWeb and The Reptile Database. Encyclopedia of Life and Biodiversity Heritage
Library are two of several current projects that together may soon realize the grand vision of a seamless
global biodiversity informatics infrastructure for use by science and society. Launch of EOL and BHL was
enabled by financial support from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation and the Alfred P.
Sloan Foundation.



Hargarten, Heidi (University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point);

Testing the Lepisosteus oculatus and L. platyrhincus species boundary in the Florida Panhandle
using molecular techniques.

The Spotted Gar (Lepisosteus oculatus) and the Florida Gar (Lepisosteus platyrhincus) have potentially
overlapping distributions in the panhandle of Florida. Previous studies (Swift et al. 1977) defined that the
respective ranges met at the watershed boundary between the Apalachicola and Ochlockonee Rivers.
Florida and Spotted gar are sister species (Grande 2010, Sipiorski 2011) and display remarkably similar
morphologies. Until recently, it has been assumed that there has been no genetic mixing between these
two species at the contact zone and that there is no overlap to the species‘ ranges. However, each
species has similar habitat and feeding preferences and there is no fundamental observable break in the
type of habitat found there. Recently, studies based on mitochondrial DNA haplotypes show that there
may be evidence of ongoing migration across the contact zone and/or that the two species may hybridize
in the vicinity (Sipiorski 2011). By including DNA from more individual gars of both species we expand
upon previous results to preliminarily test both the proposed migration and hybridization hypotheses.




                                                                                                        285
Harrington, Sean (John Carroll University); Harrison, Luke (Redpath Museum, McGill University,
Canada); Sheil, Christopher (John Carroll University, Canada)

A Comprehensive Study of Heterochrony Among Amphibians Using Parsimov-based Genetic
Inference (PGi)

Studies of the relative timing of formation and ossification of skeletal elements have shed light on the
developmental and evolutionary origins of various aspects of the tetrapod skeleton. Recently, software
has been developed that automates the process of inferring ancestral sequences of developmental
events, thereby facilitating the study of sequence heterochrony. Parsimov-based genetic inference (PGi)
is one such program, and it differs from similar algorithms (e.g., Parsimov, event-pair cracking) in that it
analyzes entire sequences of events simultaneously, rather than relying on paired comparisons of
ossification events. Additionally, an updated version of PGi allows for results of multiple computational
runs to be combined into a single consensus solution and improves visualization. Ossification sequence
data were collected from representatives of families within Anura, Gymnophiona, and Caudata to
reconstruct ancestral sequences for internal nodes within a user-defined constraint tree for relationships
among extant and fossil amphibians.         Instances of acceleration and deceleration (i.e., early and late
shifts) in the relative timing of appearance of bones within various structural units, as well as across all
structural units of the skeleton, were identified.

Bones of the jaws and palate were inferred to ossify early in the common ancestor of Amphibia, with the
vomer (a dentigerous palatal bone) shifting early in this clade relative to the common ancestor of
[Amphibia + Actinopterygii]. These bones were then identified as shifting late in the ancestor of Anura;
elements of the hind limb and pelvic girdle also shifted early in this clade.      These shifts may be
explained by the relatively radical metamorphosis that anurans undergo, and the developmental and
functional constraints that this process confers.



Harris, Lindsay (Florida Atlantic University); Bedore, Christine; Kajiura, Stephen (Florida Atlantic
University, Canada)

Bioelectric fields of elasmobranch prey

All aquatic organisms produce minute yet complex electric fields around their body as a result of internal
ion concentrations that differ from those in the environment. Ion leakage across mucous membranes
results in greater electric field strengths around the mouth and gills where they are modulated by
opercular movements during respiration. The divergent electrical properties of freshwater and saltwater
present different challenges for electroreceptive predators like elasmobranch fishes (sharks, skates, and
rays) that detect the bioelectric fields of their prey. This study employed an electrophysiological technique
to measure the voltage and frequency of electric fields produced by various elasmobranch prey items in
both fresh and saltwater. Three marine invertebrates, eight marine fishes, and three freshwater fishes
representing a broad taxonomic range and lifestyle were c hosen for this study. Overall, the fishes
produced a greater average voltage than the invertebrates (marine fishes 134.15 μV; freshwater fishes
849.59 μV; invertebrates 16.8 μV). All fishes generated the greatest voltage near the mouth and gills (
marine average 113.0 μV, freshwater average 765.18 μV) and the smallest voltage along the trunk and
caudal peduncle ( marine average 13.76 μV, freshwater average 41.18 μV) . The amplitude of the
bioelectric potential did not correlate with size or mass of the prey items. The frequency component
ranged from 0.61 Hz at the mouth of the freshwater tiger oscar Astronotus ocellatus to 11.1 Hz at the
swimmerets of the marine shrimp Penaeus spp. These frequencies fall within the range of detection for
elasmobranchs (<20 Hz). Decay of the electric field with distance was also measured, and bioelectric



                                                                                                         286
potentials could be measured up to 5 cm away from the mouth of the freshwater fishes, and 15 cm from
the mouth of the marine fishes. From these voltage data, the electric field gradient (μV/cm) was modeled
to estimate from how far an elasmobranch could detect the electric potential of a prey item. Marine
elasmobranchs should be able to detect a teleost prey item from 32-75 cm away based on an average
electrosensitivity of 35 nV/cm. Sensitivity data are lacking for freshwater elasmobranchs so detection
distances of freshwater prey remain unknown, but are the subject of ongoing research.



Harrison, Alexis (Harvard University); Revell, Liam (University of Massachusetts, Boston, Canada);
Losos, Jonathan (Harvard University, Canada)

Correlated evolution of microhabitat, morphology, and behavior in West Indian Anolis lizards: A
test of the ecomorph hypothesis

Ecology, morphology, and behavior are known evolve together in many taxa, producing species with
convergent sets of traits known as "ecomorphs". Though many studies have examined the correlated
evolution of morphological and ecological traits, behavioral traits have often been neglected. This is
unfortunate because behavior has been alternately proposed as a driver of evolution, and as a force that
could inhibit adaptation; in either case behavior is thought to be central to the evolutionary process. We
examined the role of behavior in the correlated evolution of Anolis ecomorphs, a classic system for the
study of convergent evolution, using data on the locomotor behavior, morphology, and microhabitat use of
30 species from the Greater Antilles using phylogenetic canonical correlation analysis. We found that the
morphology of anoles was correlated with both locomotor behavior and microhabitat utilization, but
different aspects of morphology are correlated in each case. By contrast, locomotor behavior was not
correlated with microhabitat use. This suggests that ecomorph evolution is more complex in Anolis than
was previously thought.



Harrison, Lucy (IUCN Shark Specialist Group); Dulvy, Nick (IUCN Shark Specialist Group, Burnaby, BC,
Canada)

Towards a Species Conservation Strategy for Sawfish

 All seven species of sawfish are globally listed as Critically Endangered by the IUCN Red List and are
listed on CITES; both the smalltooth and largetooth sawfishes are listed on the US Endangered Species
Act. Sawfishes were formerly widespread in tropical and subtropical coastal waters, with some species
extending into freshwater. However, their distribution is now severely fragmented, and some sawfish are
thought to be locally extinct from large parts of their former range, for example in the Gulf of Mexico, West
Africa and the Indo-Pacific. Because of this, and their k-selected life history, there is a very real risk that
this ecologically unique and evolutionarily distinct lineage will vanish in our lifetime due to an intrinsic
vulnerability to extinction. The IUCN Shark Specialist Group develops Species Conservation Strategies
(SCS) for species that would benefit from immediate conservation action, i.e. sawfishes. Here, we
describe the Species Conservation Strategy process and review the current status of sawfishes,
summarize current conservation activities and provide priority recommendations for further action.




                                                                                                           287
Hart, Kristen (United States Geological Survey); Cherkiss, Michael (USGS Southeast Ecological Science
Center, Canada); Mazzotti, Frank; Fujisaki, Ikuko (University of Florida, Canada); Snow, Raymond (U.S.
National Park Service, Canada); Dorcas, Michael (Davidson College, Canada)

Home range, habitat use, and movement patterns of non-native Burmese pythons in Everglades
National Park, Florida

Knowledge of the spatial ecology of invasive species is important because it allows for identification of
key habitats occupied and provides insight into which native species may be at risk. To understand the
spatial ecology non-native Burmese pythons ( Python molurus bivittatus ), now established in Everglades
National Park (ENP) in south Florida, we radiotracked16 wild-caught adult pythons from 2006-2009. Our
goal was to identify individual core-use areas and quantify home ranges, as well as to explore
correlations of individual movement parameters with environmental factors such as presence of surface
water. Tracking periods for individual pythons ranged from 87 to 697 days, with a total of 5,119 tracking
days (mean + 1 SD = 319.9 + 184.3 d). We observed mean individual home ranges of 22.5 km 2 .
Although all home ranges were within ENP boundary, not all pythons exhibited high site-fidelity. . Python
core-use areas included slough and coastal habitat types, and we delineated 18 common-use areas (i.e.,
areas where individual core-use areas spatially overlapped). Tree islands appeared to be a principal
feature of common-use areas, even if they were not the predominant habitat type. Average movement
rates of pythons were greater with the presence of surface water, however, the longest movements
occurred during both wet and dry seasons. Our results potentially provide a starting point for planning
targeted control efforts as well as information that can help in further studies of python impacts on native
fauna.



Hartson, Carissa A. (Edinboro University of Pennsylvania); Ilgen, Emily L.; Zaleski, Olivia S.; Lindeman,
Peter V. (Edinboro University of Pennsylvania, Edinboro, PA, United States)

Channelization Impacts on Sabine Map Turtle Habitat in the Mermentau River, Louisiana: Use of
Original vs. New Channels

Graptemys sabinensis (the Sabine map turtle) occurs in the Sabine, Calcasieu, and Mermentau rivers. In
the 1970‘s, the Mermentau was altered by construction of seven cut-offs between the town of Mermentau
and Lake Arthur, Louisiana. There are also several cut-offs on the river‘s largest tributary, Bayou
Plaquemine Brule. We surveyed basking turtles on lower Plaquemine Brule and the Mermentau to
determine if the new channels are used to the same extent as original channels. Original channels had
nonsignificantly higher numbers of Sabine map turtles and total turtles basking than new channels, but
there were significantly more Sabine map turtles and total turtles per kilometer (higher densities) on new
channels than original channels. Dredging created a bypass for excess water on the river, allowing higher
flow on the new channel, which is thought to be preferred by map turtles. There was no significant
difference in Sabine map turtle density between inner and outer banks of Mermentau original channels,
presumably because dredging made the depths along the inner and outer banks similar. New channels
divert the flow of water, which may maintain the homogenized condition of the original channels.




                                                                                                        288
Harvey, Emily (Sonoma State University); Minarik, Kellianne; Crocker, Dan; Girman, Derek (Sonoma
State University, Canada)

Female Mate Choice and Species Recognition via Repellent Chemical Cues in Rough Skin Newts
(Taricha granulosa)

Species recognition during mate choice plays a key role in maintaining reproductive isolation between
closely related sympatric species. Here, we examine female mate choice and species recognition via
chemical cues in the rough skin newt, Taricha granulosa, in both pond and creek habitats. To simulate
mate choice decisions in nature as closely as possible, we chose to conduct our behavioral experiments
in the field using a Y-maze apparatus. Mate choice was analyzed using a generalized linear model to
control for environmental variables. We found that females were not attracted to conspecific males over a
water control or conspecific females, with mate choice decisions being nearly random. However, females
significantly preferred the conspecific male over both heterospecific male species. Our results suggest
that female rough skin newts are repelled by heterospecific male chemical cues, and that a repellent
chemical cue may function to prevent heterospecific pairings between these species.



Hasan, Mahmudul (Inst. for Amphibian Biology, Graduate School of Science); Sumida, Masayuki (Inst.
for Amphibian Biology, Graduate School of Science, Higashihiroshima, 40, Japan)

A new species of genus Hoplobatrachus (Anura, Dicroglossidae) from the coastal belt of
Bangladesh

A new cryptic species of the genus Hoplobatrachus from Cox‘s Bazar district of Bangladesh is described
and compared with its relevant congeners both in morphology and mitochondrial gene sequences. The
new species differs from its close relative H . tigerinus in having a distinct broad black band from the
eye, through the nostrils, to the anterior edge of the upper jaw, another black band along the lateral
margin of the upper jaw, and a narrow inter-orbital distance relative to eyelid width and inter-nostril
distance. Advertisement calls of the new species are similar to those of H. tigerinus but differ in
dominant frequency and number of pulses. Based on mitochondrial DNA sequence data, this species was
proved to genetically divergent from H . tigerinus at 3.2% for the 16S rRNA gene and 14.2% for the
Cytb gene. The known distribution range of the new species is restricted to the southeastern corner of
Bangladesh and it seems to be endemic in this coastal belt.



Hathaway, Anna (University of South Florida); McCoy, Earl (University of South Florida, Tampa, FL,
United States); Mushinsky, Henry (University of South Florida, Canada)

Relocating Gopher Tortoises to a Cattle Ranch. How Does Reproductive Output Vary Between
Years and Resident and Relocated Females?

 As part of a state-funded Gopher Tortoise ( Gopherus polyphemus Daudin) translocation project, we are
monitoring actively grazed improved pastures to determine if they can serve as suitable recipient sites for
the threatened Gopher Tortoise as it is displaced by human development. For cattle ranches to be
considered suitable recipient sites, numerous requirements must be met: two critical requirements are
that females are able to acquire sufficient energy to produce a clutch of viable eggs and that sufficient
high quality vegetation is available to support juvenile recruitment into the population. Vegetation surveys
were conducted at a working cattle ranch in Pasco County, Florida, to determine the composition and
frequency of plant species, especially those containing high amounts of nutrients, specifically nitrogen.



                                                                                                        289
We radiographed resident and relocated females during the 2010 and 2011 nesting seasons (May –
June) for the presence of shelled eggs. We were able to determine clutch size and egg diameter for both
relocated and resident gravid females. The average clutch size for all gravid females across both years
was 9.2 +/- 3.0 SD (n = 77). Average clutch sizes were not significantly different between years.

Resident females had larger average clutch sizes than relocated females in both years, significantly so in
2011, suggesting a period of stress and adjustment for relocated females. Egg diameters were
significantly larger by an average of 3 mm in 2010 for both resident and relocated females compared to
2011. Three females were recaptured in both years and exhibited the same trend of similar clutch sizes
between years but significantly smaller eggs in 2011. Burrow surveys indicate that at least some
hatchlings are able to successfully leave the nest by the presence of hatchling size burrows scattered
throughout the fields, but the ratio of juveniles to eggs laid is especially low. Survivorship of eggs,
hatchlings and juveniles may be too low to support a sustainable Gopher Tortoise population in improved
pasture possibly due to burrow compaction by cows, lack of available natural shelter material for
protection from desiccation, and the reduced ability of movement in thick pasture grasses, especially by
hatchling and yearling tortoises.



Hauswaldt, J.Susanne (TU Braunschweig);

Comparative Phylogeography of two species of brown frogs in Europe, Rana temporaria and Rana
dalmatina

We compared genetic diversity and structure of two species of European brown frog, the common frog (
Rana temporaria ) and the agile frog ( R. dalmatina ) across their ranges. While R. temporaria is one of
the most widespread Eurasian amphibians, ranging from the Pyrenees to the Ural Mountains and West
Siberia, the range of R. dalmatina is much smaller. It is patchily distributed or even absent from many
northern and eastern European countries, but it extends further south into southern Italy, southern
Greece and Turkey. We analyzed animals from 115 populations of R. temporaria and from 63
populations of R. dalmatina and used one or more of the following set of markers: cytochrome b, RAG-1,
and 8 microsatellite loci. While in R. temporaria we found substantial level of variation in the
mitochondrial and nuclear markers, in particular in the western part of its range, in R. dalmatina a single
mitochondrial and nuclear haplotype were found to dominate across its range, only in southern Italy a
divergent mitochondrial lineage was found. We are discussing how the contrasting patterns of the two
species reflect the differences in glacial refugia and postglacial expansion routes as well as demographic
histories.



Havrylkoff, Jeanne-Marie (University of Southern Mississippi); Grammer, Paul O.; Mickle, Paul F.;
Peterson, Mark S. (University of Southern Mississippi, Canada); Slack, W. Todd (US Army ERDC,
Canada)

Inter-drainage Gulf sturgeon (Acipenser oxyrinchus desotoi) occupancy of Ship Island habitats
during marine migrations.

The ecological integrity and productivity of the Mississippi coastal marshes and Mississippi Sound are
protected from damaging storm surges and saltwater intrusion by barrier islands. The Mississippi Coastal
Improvement Program is tasked with restoring, improving and stabilizing both the coastal marshes and
barrier islands. As part of this project, the breach and subsequent erosion of Ship Island, formed by




                                                                                                       290
Hurricane Camille and greatly extended by Katrina, will be restored to pre-Camille conditions.
Historically, threatened Gulf sturgeon have been acoustically tagged and manually relocated during
periods of marine residency, with the greatest number of relocations occurring in the barrier island passes
where they are presumed to be foraging (Ross et al. 2009). Recently, a gulfwide sturgeon monitoring
program and the use of a fine-scale automated telemetry array have allowed for a more critical
examination of Ship Island occupancy. Twenty-one VR2Ws were deployed around Ship Island, with 4 on
each lateral tip of East and West Ship, and 13 positioned to monitor usage of Camille Cut. Currently,
acoustically tagged Gulf sturgeon (n = 14) have been detected in the array, originating from five distinct
populations: Pearl (n = 4), Pascagoula (n = 4), Escambia (n = 1), Yellow (n = 1), and Blackwater (n = 4)
Rivers. Of the two nearest populations, Pearl River fish have been detected more heavily using those
areas monitored by the array, contributing to 40% of total detections compared to Pascagoula‘s 8.5%.
The three eastern populations, Escambia, Yellow, and Blackwater, account for 12.8%, 18.7%, and 19.8%
of total detections, respectively. The use of the array varied greatly between fish from the same drainage
as well as between different drainages. This project will provide fine-scale pre- and post-restoration data
on barrier island habitat use by a wide range of distinct Gulf sturgeon populations, compare size-
dependent behaviors among Gulf sturgeon, and expand Ship Island habitat use patterns relative to earlier
data in Ross et al. (2009).



Hawk, Holly (California State University);

The genetic variability and evolutionary history of the overfished Giant Sea Bass, Stereolepis
gigas

This study addresses the evolutionary history and genetic diversity of the critically endangered giant sea
bass, Stereolepis gigas. Accurately defining how lineages evolve aids in understanding how it has
historically responded to natural as well as anthropogenic pressures. The giant sea bass is the largest,
reef-associated, bony fish found off the coast of California, with populations concentrated south of Point
Conception. Commercial landings peaked in 1932 in the United States and then steadily declined.
Mexican landings remained high until 1964, when commercial landings fell below 200,000 pounds. Giant
sea bass stocks have been depleted to the point that a moratorium from fishing was declared in 1982.
Although they are restricted from being targeted, commercial vessels may legally retain giant sea bass as
incidental catch. Following the severe decline in the abundance of S. gigas, we predict the current gene
frequencies will reflect a loss in genetic variability in the remaining population.

S. gigas currently resides in the family Polyprionidae, due to shared morphological characteristics with
wreckfishes. Nuclear and mitochondrial DNA are being sequenced to provide a molecular foundation to
its most recent taxonomic placement. Samples were collected from the Natural History Museum of Los
Angeles, Scripps Oceanographic Institute and through collaborative efforts with local fish landings.
Determining an accurate phylogeny of S. gigas and its allied taxa will not only clarify the evolution of a top
carnivore but will also inform us as to the genetic impact of overexploitation and allow for the predicted
response of potential pressures.




                                                                                                          291
Hawkes, Virgil (LGL Limited); Gregory, Patrick (University of Victoria, Canada)

Temporal changes in the relative abundance of amphibians relative to riparian buffer width in
western Washington, USA

In certain regions of Canada and the United States, amphibians have been shown to be sensitive to
forest management and the short-term adverse effects of timber harvesting on terrestrial amphibians
have been well documented in the literature. However, the effects of silvicultural treatments on
amphibians may not be realized until many years after treatment. Manipulative forest management
experiments with pre- and post-treatment data, random assignment of replicates to treatments, and
analyses over a large spatial scale are rare in the literature. Furthermore, even studies with pre- and post-
treatment data can be affected by ecological time lags; the longevity of some species may mean that it
could take several years to observe a treatment effect.

Riparian areas in forested landscapes of the Pacific Northwest have been recognized for high species
richness of amphibians yet little is known about the persistence of amphibians in mature forest fragments
such as unharvested riparian buffers surrounded by clearcuts. Our study investigated the efficacy, 2 and
10 years post-logging, of two different riparian management zone prescriptions established around third-
and fourth-order streams in western Washington to mitigate the effects of upland timber harvest on
amphibians.       Our findings suggest that there is no global response by terrestrial amphibians to logging
or to the retention of riparian management zones. Rather, species showed individual responses that
varied over time and between treatments and transects. Specifically Coastal Tailed Frogs ( Ascaphus
truei ) declined in clearcut upland habitats 2- and 10-years following logging while Western Red-backed
Salamander ( Plethodon vehiculum ) and Ensatina ( Ensatina eschscholtzii ) appear to benefit from the
recommended riparian management zone width. The influence of site effects was evident for some
species, whereas for others there is some suggestion of treatment effects, but the analyses were
confounded by patterns of natural population change at both local and regional scales, which were
evident two years following logging. Our results exemplify the need for longer-term studies to ensure that
potentially confounding factors, such as natural population fluctuation, are considered when interpreting
the results of time series data.



Hawlitschek, Oliver (Zoologische Staatssammlung); Rösner, René; Guggenbichler, Daniel; Glaw, Frank
(Zoologische Staatssammlung, Canada)

SmartHerper Comoros, a free field guide to the herpetofauna of the Comoro archipelago as a
mobile application.

We present SmartHerper Comoros, a free field guide to the reptiles and amphibians of the Comoros as a
mobile application for smartphones. SmartHerper Comoros fulfills every function of a traditional printed
field guide. It includes an introduction to the Comoran environment and herpetofauna, an interactive key,
and species accounts. The species accounts include text information, a photograph gallery, sounds of
frog calls, and a map with localities that can be viewed in a GoogleMaps window and are available for
navigation via the GPS function of the smartphone. An interactive glossary provides explanations of
specific terminology in popup windows. Weblinks connect to the related Reptile Database, AmphibiaWeb
and IUCN Red List entries via the browser of the smartphone. The app enables users to contribute
photographs and locality data of the species included. This data is directly uploaded to the database for
inspection by the administrator and will be made available to the user community in regular updates. The
app is freely available for download at the website of the Zoologische Staatssammlung München
(http://www.zsm.mwn.de/). It was programmed using Java and is currently available for the Android



                                                                                                         292
operating system. We chose Android because all software necessary for the development is open-
source, and because many smartphones use this operating system. The development of versions runnig
on iOS and Microsoft Windows Mobile is planned. The application targets scientists working in
biodiversity research, taxonomy, ecology, and conservation planning, as well as non-professional
naturalists visiting or resident of the focus region. In addition to the current English version, editions in
other languages are planned. Since SmartHerper Comoros and planned future SmartHerpers are free,
easily available and easy to use, we hope that they will contribute to the dissemination and generation of
knowledge on biodiversity of their focus regions and thus stimulate interest in the observation and
conservation of regional biodiversity in visitors, e.g., ecotourists, and residents alike. The structure of
SmartHerper allows for easy modification to create field guides of other organism groups and regions.



Hayes, Marc P (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife); McIntrye, Aimee P (Washington
Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada); Jones, Jay E (Weyerhaeuser NR, Canada); Lund, Eric M
(Washington Department of FIsh and Wildlife, Canada); Waterstrat, Frithioff T (The Evergreen State
College, Canada); Giovanini, Jack N; Duke, Steven D (Weyerhaeuser NR, Canada); Quinn, Timothy
(Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada); Kroll, Andrew J (Weyerhaeuser NR, Canada)

Evaluating N-mixture abundance estimators for unmarked individuals of cryptic taxa

Sentinel taxa are used as indicator species due to their perceived sensitivity to environmental change.
Estimates of population size based on count data uncorrected for spatial and temporal variation in
detection probability can lead to erroneous conclusions about impacts from environmental or
anthropogenic disturbances.        Traditional tools for estimating population size, such as mark-recapture
estimators, may be impractical for sentinel taxa, many of which are cryptic and occur at low population
densities. We used simulated and empirical data and a binomial mixture model for unmarked individuals
to estimate detection probabilities and abundance for two amphibian genera, giant Dicamptodon and
torrent Rhyacotriton salamanders.          In our simulation, we assessed model sensitivity to changes in
animal density (5 and 15), number of plots (50 – 150), detection probabilities (0.05 – 0.5), and number of
sampling visits (2 – 4). We evaluated the effects of stream temperature and stream order on detection
probability using field data collected from forested streams in Washington, USA.

Simulation results indicated that precision of detection probability estimates improved as the number of
sites and sampling occasions increased. Variability of estimated population sizes decreased with higher
detection probability, although species abundance had little effect on the precision of detection probability
estimates.Results from empirical field data indicated that detection probability estimates ranged from
0.07-0.65 for giant salamanders and 0.06-0.67 for torrent salamanders. Giant salamander detection
probability was positively associated with stream temperature regardless of stream order, and was higher
in second- and third- order streams than first-order streams. Detection probability for torrent salamanders
varied with stream temperature, order, and the interaction of those covariates, with detection increasing
with temperature for second- and third-order streams but showing a flat or decreasing trend for first-order
streams. Taken together, our results indicate that the use of binomial mixture models for unmarked
individuals is a feasible alternative to traditional mark-recapture techniques for estimating detection
probability and abundance for taxa that are cryptic or occur at low densities. These models, paired with
careful consideration of study design alternatives, can provide researchers with robust estimates of
important quantities and obviate the traditional reliance on ad hoc indices of relative abundance for many
rare and sensitive taxa.




                                                                                                         293
Hayes, Marc P (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife); Abrahamse, Allison E (Northwest Trek
Wildlife Park, Canada); Anderson, Marko J (Cedar Creek Corrections Center, Canada); Aubrey, Dennis
A; Bush, Kelli M B (Sustainability in Prisons Project, Canada); Cole, Douglas O (Cedar Creek Corrections
Center, Canada); Clouse, David C (Joint Base Lewis McChord, Canada); Ellis, David E (Northwest Trek
Wildlife Park, Canada); Goodrowe Beck, Karen (Point Defiance Zoo and Aquarium, Canada); Hallock,
Lisa A (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada); Hash, Steven W (Oregon Zoo, Canada);
Hicks, Tiffany L (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada); Konecny, Lelani J (Woodland
Park Zoo, Canada); LeRoy, Carri J (Sustainability in Prisons Project, Canada); Lynch, James J (Joint
Base Lewis McChord, Canada); Tidwell, Kyle S (Oregon Zoo, Canada); Martin, Andrea S (Sustainability
in Prisons Project, Canada); McAllister, Kelly A (Washington Department of Transportation, Canada);
Meadows, David S; Milner, Jacklyn A (Northwest Trek Wildlife Park, Canada); Mukobi, Asaba C (Oregon
Zoo, Canada); Mullett, Tina M (Woodland Park Zoo, Canada); Nadkarni, Nalini M (University of Utah,
Canada); Neitman, Keith E (Woodland Park Zoo, Canada); Pacholke, Dan J (Washington State
Department of Corrections, Canada); Pramuk, Jennifer B. (Woodland Park Zoo, Canada); Richardson,
John F (Joint Base Lewis McChord, Canada); Ridgway, Ryan A; Rojas, Christina M (Northwest Trek
Wildlife Park, Canada); Sartor, Richard L (Phoenix Zoo, Canada); Schmidt, Tamara A (Washington
Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada); Shepherdson, David J (Oregon Zoo, Canada); Stewart, Karen
L (Woodland Park Zoo, Canada); Tirhi, Michelle J (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada);
Weber, Sarah R (Sustainability in Prisons Project, Canada)

The Successful Translocation Trajectory of Oregon Spotted Frogs (Rana pretiosa) on Joint Base
Lewis McChord: A Remarkable Partnership of Prisons, Zoos, Students and Scientists

The Oregon Spotted Frog (OSF - Rana pretiosa ), an at-risk endemic to the Pacific Northwest, is the
focus of recovery efforts over its geographic range. One such effort is a pilot translocation the Washington
(State) OSF Working Group initiated in 2008. The Group includes a coterie of stakeholders dedicated to
conservation assembled to address OSF recovery in Washington State in 2007. In this effort, the
Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW) leads; four partners (Northwest Trek, Oregon Zoo
[OZ], Sustainable Prisons Project [SPP – an Evergreen State College-based collaboration with the
Department of Corrections that involves the Cedar Creek Corrections Center], and Woodland Park Zoo
[WPZ]) rear frogs; the Fish and Wildlife Program at Joint Base Lewis McChord (JBLM) manages the
recipient site; Port Blakely Tree Farms, WDFW, and the US Fish and Wildlife Service manage donor sites
and provide logistic support; and with all partners, the Point Defiance Zoo and Aquarium, the Nature
Conservancy, and the Washington Department of Transportation help advise.

In 2007, the Working Group viewed engaging in a pilot translocation as prudent because such efforts,
often problematic, had never been tried with OSF. We first evaluated potential recipient sites for habitat
suitability, exotic predators and disease. After initial site screening and applying this evaluation more
thoroughly to the three top choices, we chose Dailman Lake on JBLM. We weighed the tradeoff between
releasing mortality-prone early life stages and predator experience-limited later life stages, opting to
release post-metamorphic frogs grown to the largest possible size prior to a release date safely in
advance of overwintering. We chose two donor sites based on advice that founders should be both locally
adapted and diverse, and that genetic mixing was not the problem historically believed. Our locally
adapted choice was the Black River population complex in Thurston County; the diverse choice was the
Conboy Lake population in Klickitat County.

Northwest Trek and OZ began rearing frogs in 2008, and SPP and WPZ added to that effort in 2009.
Each year, eggs obtained in Feb-Mar from donor sites were reared through metamorphosis up to the
release size in Sept-Oct. Survival among institutions and years has been variable, averaging about 50%
(0-84%). Frogs released annually have increased from ca. 500 the first year to >1,200 in 2010 -11. Size
of released frogs also varies, in part because SPP can consistently rear frogs to adult size each year, a
situation not possible at other institutions due to less time available for husbandry. In 2011, we recorded



                                                                                                        294
the first in situ reproduction. The 2012 season is the five-year mark, the point at which the Working
Group will decide whether translocation to this site should continue. Our presentation will include lessons
learned on site evaluation, rearing, anti-predator behavior and discuss the future.



Hayes, Tyrone (Univ. California);

“The” Cause of Amphibian Decline