 levels in high elevation populations of Taricha granulosa in Oregon and predation by
otters

Tetrodotoxin (TTX) is a low molecular weight neurotoxin that is found in a wide variety of taxa. TTX
blocks voltage-gated sodium channels, preventing the propagation of action potentials, inducing
paralysis. Death is typically due to asphyxiation. Taricha granulosa have been known to possess TTX
in high quantities and only have one positively identified predator, Thamnophis sirtalis . However, recent
observations of predation events on T. granulosa by otters were documented in a high elevation
population just outside of Crater Lake National Park in Oregon. Given this observation, we quantified
TTX levels in this population of T. granulosa as well as three other populations within Crater Lake
National Park and compared them to one another. Additionally, we compared these three populations of
newts to one from a very toxic population in Benton County, Oregon.



Stoler, Aaron (University of Pittsburgh); Relyea, Rick (University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United
States)

Tadpoles as litterbugs: assessing the influence of leaf litter chemistry and diversity on larval
anurans in artificial wetlands

Forest wetlands are important for a wide variety of amphibians that spend their larval stage in these
environments. The chemistry of leaf litter entering these wetlands is a major determinant of bottom-up
resource supply and can modify environmental conditions.                Although litter chemistry varies widely
among plant species, the effects of this variation on amphibian growth and development remain largely
unknown. We investigated the effects of litter species, chemistry, and diversity on larval anurans in two
studies using artificial wetlands. In a 4-month study using large, outdoor mesocosms, we hypothesized
that responses to 10 common tree litter species would be correlated with four broad aspects of litter
chemistry: lignin, phenolic, soluble carbon, and nitrogen content.          To understand how mixtures of leaf
litter species with similar or contrasting chemistry influence larval anurans, we conducted a second
mesocosm study where we hypothesized that greater diversity would result in faster development and
larger growth. We found dramatic effects of individual litter species on anuran survival and metamorph
mass.      For both spring- and summer-breeding anurans, phenolics and soluble carbon were strong
determinants of survival and metamorph biomass. Indeed, survival of American toad ( Bufo americanus
) was as low as 20% with litter species that produced highly soluble carbon.              For summer-breeding
anurans, we found additional correlations with lignin content. Results were due to a combination of litter
chemistry, litter-induced changes in abiotic conditions, and community interactions. Although we found
strong effects of individual litter species, we found few effects of litter chemical diversity. However, post-
hoc analyses suggest that diversity of some chemical attributes more strongly correlates with responses
than others. Together, these studies provide a wealth of new insight regarding the effects of riparian
diversity on larval anurans, at a time when forest diversity and species composition is highly threatened.




                                                                                                           694
Stoot, Lauren (Carleton University/University of Ottawa); Cairns, Nicholas (Carleton University/University
of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada); Cooke, Steven (Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada); Blouin-
Demers, Gabriel (University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada)

Consequences of incidental capture of freshwater turtles in commercial fisheries

Commercial fisheries are an important industry in marine and freshwater ecosystems. Although the
majority of catches consist of targeted species, a percentage of annual global catches are non-targeted
organisms. Bycatch is the capture of non-targeted species and frequently occurs in commercial fisheries.
Captured individuals are exposed to a wide range of stressors. Interactions with fishing gear can cause
both acute and chronic issues influencing the health, condition, and behaviour of the individual. In
extreme cases, animals may die. Many vertebrate groups are at risk of being captured as bycatch
including fish, mammals, reptiles and birds. Recently, greater efforts have been made to quantify and
prevent bycatch. Most efforts have been directed towards marine ecosystems with relatively little research
and attention devoted to freshwater. Freshwater turtles are frequently encountered as bycatch in fyke-net
fisheries in eastern Ontario. Typical setting techniques can result in trapped individuals being exposed to
anoxic conditions for up to seven days. Although freshwater turtles tolerate anoxic conditions during
hibernation, their ability to withstand prolonged submergence decreases as water temperatures increase.
This is concerning as most commercial fishing activity occurs during the spring and fall. Turtle mortality
associated with bycatch is a conservation concern due to their at-risk status and life-history
characteristics including delayed maturation and high adult survivorship. The purpose of the current
study is to test three turtle species for the presence of acute and chronic physiological and behavioural
consequences of capture in commercial fishing nets. We simulated stressors that captured turtles would
experience and measured physiological parameters on three typically encountered turtle species. Our
work showed that entrapped individuals displayed considerably higher blood lactate and lower blood pH
values compared to free-living control individuals. Moreover, entrapped turtles had reflex impairments
that were not apparent in control turtles. We will use biologging techniques to monitor turtles post-release,
assessing the behaviour and survival of captured individuals. Collectively, this research along with
associated fishing gear modification projects will clarify the role of fisheries interactions in the
conservation biology of turtles.



Straube, Nicolas (College of Charleston); Naylor, Gavin (College of Charleston, Charleston, SC, United
States); Ebert, David (Pacific Shark Research Center Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, Moss Landing,
CA 95039, CA, United States); Corrigan, Shannon (College of Charleston, charleston, United States); Li,
Chenhong (College of Charleston, Charleston, Canada); Rochel, Elisabeth (College of Charleston,
Charleston, SC, United States); Leslie, Robin (Branch Fisheries Management, Department of Agriculture,
Forestry and Fisheries, Roggebaai 8012, South Africa)

A molecular approach to estimate the etmopterid species-diversity off South Africa.

The cold waters of the Benguela current on the South African west coast and the subtropical warm
temperate waters of the Agulhas current on the east and south coasts in conjunction with the suitable
habitat afforded by the Agulhas and Mozambique plateaus, are believed to be the primary factors driving
high shark species diversity off South Africa. One of the most speciose families of squaliform deep-sea
sharks is the Etmopteridae (Lantern Sharks). An estimated 13 species of etmopterids have been reported
from South African waters. The phylogeography and taxonomy of these species is debated in current
literature, as some etmopterids show a wide distribution range contrasting more locally distributed
species. Here, we present mtDNA analyses using the NADH2 gene (ca. 1000bp), applied to an extensive
South African etmopterid sampling. Preliminary results indicate the presence of at least one cryptic cold-




                                                                                                         695
water species formerly referred to as Etmopterus cf. granulosus, as well as an unknown warm water
species from the Etmopterus lucifer clade. We further discuss results in a phylogeographic context, i.e.
presence of widespread species questioning the validity of some South African etmopterids considered
endemic.



Straube, Nicolas (College of Charleston); Corrigan, Shannon (College of Charleston, Charleston, SC,
United States); Li, Chenhong (College of Charleston, Charleston, United States); Rochel, Elisabeth;
Rosana, Kerri; Naylor, Gavin (College of Charleston, Charleston, SC, United States)

Putting some jaws on the Tree of Life: Taxon-rich estimates of elasmobranch phylogeny based on
mitochondrial and nuclear DNA markers

Exploring patterns and processes of evolutionary change in the elasmobranch fishes may be critical to
understanding vertebrate diversification and success. The elasmobranchs hold an important position in
the gnathostome tree because they are basal, sister to the Osteichthyes while also showing similarities
with the mammals in terms of genome organization. In spite of this importance, and widespread
fascination with sharks among the scientific and general communities, we know relatively little about the
interrelationships among constituent members of the group. To date, most molecular based estimates of
elasmobranch phylogeny have been based on mitochondrial DNA sequence data. While such estimates
are useful, they constitute a single gene tree, which may or may not accurately depict true species level
relationships. To be reliable, estimates of phylogeny must be based on multiple independent markers. In
the few cases where independent nuclear gene markers have been used to estimate the relationships
among elasmobranchs, taxon-sampling has been sparse and the resulting trees have been highly
discordant. We present, for the first time, a phylogeny based on 8 protein coding loci (7 nuclear, 1
mitochondrial) among 150 of the 190 described genera of elasmobranchs, representing 56 of 57 extant
families. We identify the phylogenetic signal that is common to all 8 markers and discuss the differences
in signal among genes.



Strickland, Jason (University of Central Florida); Territo, Gregory; Carter, Sharon (University of Central
Florida, Canada); Kraus, Fred (Bishop Museum, Canada); Parkinson, Christopher (University of Central
Florida, Canada)

New Guinea and the surrounding islands have a geological history that has generated a diverse
assemblage of species, many of which are endemic. Much of this diversity, however, has not yet been
described or assessed evolutionarily. One group of poorly understood New Guinean reptiles is the elapid
snake genus Toxicocalamus . There are 11 documented species described based on morphological
characters, three of which are only represented by a single specimen. These snakes are small, secretive
burrowers that apparently feed only on earthworms and are not commonly collected. Although previous
research has placed them in the subfamily Hydrophiinae within the Elapidae, the exact placement of the
genus has not been well supported. It is also unknown if the currently described species represent a
monophyletic lineage: species currently placed therein had formerly been assigned to three different
genera. The most recent phylogeny of Hydrophiinae included two Toxicocalamus species and indicated
that the genus is polyphyletic. Our objective was to determine the phylogenetic position of
Toxicocalamus within Elapidae and to evaluate species relationships within the genus using genetic
data. We generated full mitochondrial cytochrome –b sequences (~1100 base pairs) for 26 samples
representing 10 species within this genus. To determine the evolutionary relationships of Toxicocalamus
within Elapidae, we included sequences from GenBank for numerous members of the Hydrophiinae. We



                                                                                                       696
estimated relationships using Bayesian and maximum likelihood methodologies. Aspidomorphus is a
closely related and similarly distributed taxon to Toxicocalamus that exhibits high levels of genetic
divergence among species. We found that Toxicocalamus also shows high levels of genetic divergence
among species. The prevailing hypothesis for the level of diversity in the Papuan region is that it‘s
complicated biogeographic history has created many barriers that limit gene flow and facilitate speciation.
The phylogenetic tree inferred in this study supports this hypothesis and will help shape further
investigation into the mechanisms of speciation on New Guinea and the surrounding islands.



Stuart, Yoel (Harvard University); Campbell, Todd (University of Tampa, Tampa, FL, United States);
Losos, Jonathan (Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States)

A real-time test of a classic hypothesis: rapid, replicated character displacement in Anolis
carolinensis following invasion by a congeneric competitor

The theory of ecological character displacement (ECD) posits that natural selection will favor divergence
in resource use and phenotype when sympatric species compete for limited resources. Today ECD is
broadly considered an important agent of diversification in evolution, yet despite the enthusiasm for the
idea and nearly 50 years of study, the number of solid empirical cases is surprisingly few and limited to
observational data. To our knowledge, there are no experimental tests of the ECD hypothesis in nature
even though it is becoming increasingly recognized that natural selection and evolution can be observed
in the wild. We test the ECD hypothesis using a natural experiment initiated by the recent invasion of the
lizard Anolis sagrei to manmade spoil islands in Mosquito Lagoon, FL. These islands already housed the
native lizard, A. carolinensis, so the colonization by A. sagrei to some but not all of these islands created
a replicated, controlled natural experiment that allowed us to test whether the presence of a congeneric
competitor alters habitat use and promotes evolution in populations of A. carolinensis. We visited the
islands in 2010 and 2011 to measure lizard habitat use and morphology, survey island plant communities,
and collect lizards for a common garden experiment. We found that A. carolinensis has shifted its habitat
use to become more arboreal in the presence of A. sagrei compared to islands where A. carolinensis is
allopatric. Moreover, populations of A. carolinensis in the presence of A. sagrei had larger toepads with
more setae-bearing scales, likely enhancing clinging ability, consistent with predictions for an arboreal
lifestyle. Data from the common garden experiment indicate that the morphological change is evolved
rather than plastic. Last, there are no confounding differences in island physical characteristics or plant
diversity and abundance between treatments. Thus, our data provide strong experimental support for the
rapid evolution of ecological character displacement in nature.



Stubbs, Alexander (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology); Karin, Benjamin (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology,
UC Berkeley, Canada); Umilaela, Umilaela; Iskandar, Djoko (Institut Teknologi Bandung, Canada);
McGuire, Jimmy (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, Canada)

Phylogeography and diversity of the Indonesian skinks Carlia and Lygisaurus

The skink genera Carlia and Lygisaurus are known from Australia, New Guinea, and Eastern Indonesia.
They are well studied as a model species in Australia; however, almost no genetic work has been done
on their representatives in Indonesia.

We conducted fieldwork in remote areas of the Lesser Sunda Islands (Eastern Indonesia: Nusa Tenggara
and Maluku) and made a large collection of both Carlia and Lygisaurus from the islands of Alor, Banda




                                                                                                         697
Besar, Banda Api, Ai, Seram, Gorom, Kei Kecil, Tam and multiple islands within the Aru island complex.
We sequenced over 100 individuals representing six described species of Carlia and, based on these
data, describe the phylogenetic relationships of the following named species: C. diguliensis (Aru), C. storri
(Aru), C. beccarii (Kei), C. leucotaenia (Seram), C. peronii (Alor) and C. tutela(Halmahera). We also are
able to place previously unassigned and newly collected populations from the Banda Archipelago,
Gorom, and Tam, as well as a unicolor population on Kei Kecil. Lygisaurus collected in Indonesia are
typically referred to as L. novaeguineae, but the type locality of this species is on Irian Jaya (West Papua,
Indonesia). While it has been recognized that specimens from other Indonesian islands likely represent a
number of species, we provide the first phylogenetic analysis of this taxon. We collected one specimen
from Aru, a group of low-lying islands separated from Irian Jaya by a shallow channel. Our sample from
Aru matches the morphological description of L. novaeguineae. However, other samples from Kei, Tam,
Seram, Gorom, Banda, and Sulawesi are morphologically distinct from C. novaguineae and are highly
divergent genetically. We present morphological characters used to differentiate these populations and
attempt to describe some of this cryptic diversity within Lygisaurus.



Stuckert, Adam (East Carolina University); Summers, Kyle (East Carolina University, Canada)

Mimicry complexes in Peruvian Ranitomeya

Poison frogs are characterized by their bright coloration and striking patterns. Coupled with toxic skin
alkaloids, this coloration is a warning to potential predators—an example of aposematism. Ranitomeya
imitator (formerly Dendrobates imitator ) is a poison frog endemic to the lowland and montane forests of
Peru where it mimics the color patterns of sympatric congeners throughout its range ( R. fantastica,
summersi, and variabilis ). This complex is a putative example of Müllerian mimicry though empirical
data demonstrating this is lacking. Therefore we tested this hypothesis in a series of predator learning
experiments using naïve chicks ( Gallus domesticus ) as model predators. Preliminary analyses of a
spotted population of R. imitator and its model R. variabilis indicate that both species are noxious and
contribute to learned avoidance of a shared morph. These data therefore support the hypothesis of
Müllerian mimicry in this system.



Stump, Kristine (University of Miami - RSMAS); Crooks, Christopher (University of Manchester,
Manchester, United Kingdom); Gruber, Samuel (Bimini Biological Field Station, Miami, FL, United States)

Hunted hunters: an experimental test of the effects of predation risk on juvenile shark habitat use

The effects of predation on a species occur either directly, through consumption, or indirectly as risk
effects. Risk effects arise when prey alter their behavior in an attempt to decrease encounters, detection
and/or capture. Often, a perceived predation threat leads to risk effects which manifest as changes in
habitat use by the prey species, and these effects can be significant and even greater in consequence
than direct effects. In Bimini, Bahamas, neonate and juvenile lemon sharks (Negaprion brevirostris) use
mangrove-fringed shorelines as nursery areas in part due to the protection afforded from predators,
namely larger conspecifics. We investigated the small-scale use of mangrove structure by neonate and
juvenile lemon sharks as an anti-predatory response to predation risks. Controlled experimental trials
were conducted on captive sharks to assess the degree of the sharks‘ use of artificial mangroves when
solitary, with a size-matched conspecific and with a potential predator (subadult conspecific). Results
showed a significant increase in use of artificial mangroves when in the presence of a potential predator
as compared to when with a size-matched conspecific. In addition, a significant negative correlation was



                                                                                                         698
found between body size and the use of artificial mangrove structure when in the presence of a potential
predator, indicating that size is an important factor in anti-predatory behavior.



Stümpel, Nikolaus (Naturhistorisches Museum Braunschweig); Joger, Ulrich (Naturhistorisches Museum
Braunschweig, Canada)

Phylogeny and Biogeography of west Palaearctic vipers

We reconstructed the phylogeny of the true Vipers (Viperinae) of western Palaearctic based on molecular
data. We sequenced two mitochondrial and four nuclear genes of 75 representative evolutionary Viper
lineages and reconstructed their ancestry with Bayesian Inference and Maximum Likelihood approaches
and found oriental Vipers of the genus Montivipera , Macrovipera and Daboia to be monophyletic.
Hence, Daboia is the sistergroup of Montivipera and Macrovipera . We then used complete
mitogenomes from a subset of Vipers and calculated divergence times, calibrated with deep amniote
fossils and correlated them with tectonically events in the circum Mediterranean region. With the data at
hand we reconstructed the biogeography of west Palearctic vipers. We found strong incidence that the
repeated isolation of the Anatolian landmass from the beginning of Oligocene was one of the driving
forces of allopatric speciation of oriental vipers.



Stynoski, Jennifer (University of Miami); Saporito, Ralph (John Carroll University, University Heights,
OH, United States)

Investigating natural predators of poison frog tadpoles (Oophaga pumilio) with video cameras and
choice tests

Many organisms including some poison frogs use chemical defenses to avoid predation. Several poison
frogs transport and/or rear their tadpoles in small water pools called phytotelmata. Predator avoidance in
poison frogs is well-studied in adults, but not in early life stages. Recent work revealed that later stages of
phytotelm-dwelling tadpoles of the strawberry poison frog, Oophaga pumilio, contain the same alkaloids
that defend adult frogs (see symposium talk by Saporito et al.). Still, 67% of tadpoles are predated before
metamorphosis. In the first of a series of studies to investigate the effectiveness of alkaloids as a
chemical defense in O. pumilio tadpoles, we aimed to identify the natural predators of O. pumilio
tadpoles. We placed IR motion-activated video cameras above natural and artificial tadpole sites at La
Selva, Costa Rica. Videos revealed at least 10 predation events, primarily nocturnal, by 7 snakes (6
Leptodeira septentrionalis and 1 Rhadinaea decorata), 2 spiders (Cupiennius sp.), and a large Coleoptera
larva (collected from the bromeliad for species identification). Field videos provide the first evidence of
predation of a vertebrate by a vertebrate in an otherwise invertebrate bromeliad microcosmic ecosystem.
This poster will also include upcoming results of predator choice tests by the predators identified in
videos. For example, in preliminary tests, L. septentrionalis snakes did not show a food preference
between either (1) tadpoles of O. pumilio and the red-eyed tree frog, Agalychnis callidryas, or (2) early
and late stage O. pumilio tadpoles.




                                                                                                           699
Sulikowski, James (University of New England); Carlson, Amy; Knotek, Ryan; Peterson, Cassidy
(University of New England, Canada); Bubley, Walter (Texas Parks and Wildlife Division, Canada);
Driggers, William; Hoffmayer, Eric (National Marine Fisheries Service, Canada); Tsang, Paul (University
of New Hampshire, Canada)

Spiny Dogfish: How new hypotheses', new data, and a little luck, may lead to a better
understanding of this species in the U.S. western north Atlantic Ocean

The spiny dogfish, Squalus acanthias , was once considered to be the most abundant shark off the east
coast of the United States. As a result of reported declines in abundance, a management plan was
implemented in 2000 which imposed annual quotas and possession limits in both federal and state
waters. Due to characteristics such as slow growth, long gestation, small brood size, and an estimated
spawning stock biomass (SSB) below threshold levels, the spiny dogfish population was not anticipated
to rebound until 2020. However, increases in the SSB have recently occurred that cannot be explained
when considering what is known about the biology of this species. Based on the previously reported
population decline and the life history characteristics of this shark, conservation groups are suggesting
the species should be protected. In contrast, the commercial fishing industry believes spiny dogfish are
actually abundant and are adversely      impacting commercially important groundfish stocks. Thus, state
and federal agencies charged with managing this species are in the middle of a volatile issue.       We
present data to support hypotheses‘ that are divergent to common paradigms: 1) this shark has a more
active vertical movement pattern that prevents representative sampling during trawl surveys used for
stock assessment purposes; 2) this species horizontal movement patterns are more regional than
previously thought; 3) this shark reaches sexual maturity faster and has a shorter gestation period than
the literature suggests (resulting in an increased reproductive output); and 4) that a larger dogfish
population will impact the ecosystem.



Sumida, Masayuki (Institute for Amphibian Biology, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University);
Satou, Naoki; Islam, Mohammed Mafizul; Igawa, Takeshi; Kurabayashi, Atsushi (Institute for Amphibian
Biology, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University, Canada); Ukena, Kazuyoshi (Section of Life
Science, Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, Canada); Oumi, Shohei
(Section of Agriculture and Forest, Amami City Government, Amami, Kagoshima, Canada); Katsuren,
Seiki (Biology and Ecology group, Okinawa Prefectural Institute of Health and Environment, Nanjo,
Okinawa, Canada); Fujii, Tamotsu (Faculty of Human Culture & Science, Hiroshima Prefectural
University, Hiroshima, Canada)

Artificial and natural breeding of the endangered frog species Odorrana ishikawae and Odorrana
splendida, analysis of genetic diversity, and usage as resource materials: Case study of fauna
conservation in Japan

Odorrana ishikawae, an anuran endemic to the Okinawa and Amami Islands, has been described as the
most beautiful frog in Japan. Regrettably, over-hunting and environmental destruction over the last
several decades have devastated local populations. Odorrana ishikawae is therefore listed as a class IB
endangered species on the IUCN Red List and is protected by law in both Okinawa and Kagoshima
prefectures. Recently, the Amami population was regarded as a new and distinct species, O. splendida.
In addition, it was recently found that large-type specimens inhabit a limited area of the Amami Island and
can be morphologically distinguished from the common-type. In the present study, we performed the
following: (1) artificial breeding of frogs and testing of farming techniques in the laboratory to preserve
these endangered species and promote natural breeding; (2) mitochondrial DNA and allozyme analyses
to evaluate genetic diversity and population composition; (3) antimicrobial peptide extraction from the skin
to find biologically active agents with strong antimicrobial effect. Field-caught male/female pairs of each



                                                                                                        700
species were bred using an artificial insemination method in the 2004, 2006, and 2008 breeding seasons.
Although fewer than 50% of the inseminated eggs achieved metamorphosis, approximately 500, 300,
and 250 offspring from the three respective trials are currently being raised in the laboratory. During the
2009 and 2010 breeding seasons, second-generation offspring were produced through natural breeding
of the first offspring. These findings appear to be applicable to the temporary protection of local
populations. Mitochondrial ND2 data showed that genetic diversity is relatively low (1.0%) between the
two Amami types but comparatively high (7.5%) between the two species. Allozyme data confirmed very
low (0.016) genetic distance between the Amami types and comparatively high (0.204–0.234) genetic
distance between the species. These results revealed clear genetic diversity between the species but
slight genetic divergence between the types. We can therefore consider the following possibilities with
regard to the Amami two types: speciation and genetic divergence are currently in progress; or speciation
occurred in the past but genetic interaction has resumed. We succeeded in identifying 11 antimicrobial
peptides from the skin of this species. Some peptides showed strong antimicrobial activity and wide
antimicrobial spectrum against bacteria.



Summers, Kyle (East Carolina University); Tumulty, James (East Carolina University, Greenville, NC,
United States)

Parental Care and Mating Strategies in the mimic poison frog, Ranitomeya imitator

We present an overview of recent research on the mating and parental strategies of the mimic poison
frog, Ranitomeya imitator. First, we review evidence that R. imitator exhibits social and genetic
monogamy, and that the evolution of this mating system is associated with the use of very small breeding
pools and the evolution of biparental care. We then present the results of recent experiments
investigating the role of male parental care on offspring growth and survival. Male removal experiments
demonstrate that male care is crucial for offspring growth and survival in this species. Genetic analyses
confirm that the males removed were in fact the parents of the tadpoles putatively under their care. This
evidence, combined with previous research, indicates that biparental care provides a crucial foundation
for the evolution of monogamy.



Sutton, Tracey (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Bergstad, Odd Aksel (Institute of Marine Research,
Canada); Bucklin, Ann (University of Connecticut, Canada); Burghart, Scott (University of South Florida,
Canada); Cook, April (Virginia Institute of Marine Science, Canada); Falkenhaug, Tone (Institute of
Marine Research, Canada); Hopkins, Thomas (University of South Florida, Canada); Porteiro, Filipe
(Universidade dos Açores, Canada); Schiel, Sigrid (Alfred-Wegener-Institut Für Polar- und
Meeresforschung, Canada); Torres, Joseph (University of South Florida, Canada); Vecchione, Michael
(Smithsonian Institution, Canada); Wiebe, Peter (Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Canada)

The Bathypelagic Biome of the Atlantic Ocean: Character and Ecological Discreteness of the Fish
Fauna

Recent global synthetic analyses have revealed that marine taxonomic inventories are far from complete,
nowhere more so than in the deep-pelagic ocean. At over a billion km3, it is the largest biome on Earth,
yet only a tiny fraction of the biogeographic records include the bathypelagic fauna. This data gap served
as the impetus for recent deepwater surveys, many of which have altered our perceptions of pelagic
ecosystems. Here we examine data from four deep-pelagic (0-5000+ m) sampling programs in the
Atlantic (60°N-25°S) in order to assess the character of bathypelagic fish communities with respect to
faunal distinctiveness and ecological connectivity. Regions studied include the Gulf of Mexico, Sargasso



                                                                                                       701
Sea, eastern North/South Atlantic, and mid-North Atlantic. Quantitative analyses give contrasting pictures
with respect to faunal composition and ecosystem operation. The discreteness of the bathypelagic zone
is exhibited faunistically by the suite of ―holobathypelagic‖ species found only below 1000 m, most of
which are highly modified morphologically. Geometric abundance class analyses reveal that the character
of relative species abundance distributions between the meso- and bathypelagic zones is fundamentally
dissimilar; the former exhibit a much higher proportion of common species, while the latter exhibit a much
higher percentage of rarer species. From a community energetics perspective, however, the bathy- and
mesopelagic zones are highly interconnected. Approximately 70% of fish species collected below 1000 m
are also found in the mesopelagic zone, and in the far North Atlantic, are also found in the epipelagial.
These species comprised 66 to &gt;90% of individuals collected below 1000 m in the regions sampled. In
the mid-North Atlantic, these species contribute to the unexpected water-column biomass maximum
observed between 1500-2300 m. Thus, the ―transient‖ taxa (primarily mesopelagic migrators and spanner
taxa) add considerably to the ichthyofaunal diversity of the world ocean below 1000 m, and appear to be
the vectors that support the diverse array of holobathypelagic fishes whose taxonomic composition is
dominated by piscivores. Data from the four regions studied suggests that classic pelagic biogeographic
boundaries do not apply to bathypelagic realm, as shared species are the rule rather than the exception.
Last, cumulative species curves suggest we are far from understanding the true complexity of the
bathypelagic zone.



Swanson, Penny (NOAA Fisheries); Beckman, Brian; Larsen, Donald (Northwest Fisheries Science
Center, Canada)

Physiological insights into mechanisms of plasticity in age of male maturity in salmonid fishes

Age of maturity (puberty) is a key component of the species-specific life history strategy in fish, which has
evolved to achieve maximal reproductive fitness. In salmonid fishes, age of puberty is highly plastic,
particularly for males, but the underlying mechanisms involved are not understood. A wide variety of
internal and external cues must be integrated for the initiation of sexual maturation. These signals provide
critical information on when an animal should reproduce: whether it is of sufficient size or energy status to
reproduce (metabolic cues), whether conditions are optimal for reproductive success (environmental
cues), and whether an appropriate mate is present (social cues). Although the mechanisms involved in
integrating this information are not known, ultimately the onset and completion of puberty involves
increases in brain gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and subsequent effects on pituitary
gonadotropins and gonadal physiology. We have used a variety of endocrine and molecular tools to
monitor the earliest stages of initiation of spermatogenesis in male spring Chinook salmon and summer
run steelhead to determine the seasonal timing of puberty onset in males relative to the timing of
smoltification and downstream or upstream migration in these species. In hatchery-reared spring Chinook
salmon that spawn in late September and October, for example, initiation of spermatogenesis occurred
over several months, from late September through March. Similarly, we monitored steelhead smolts prior
to release from the hatchery and found evidence that initiation of maturation in male steelhead had
occurred in a portion of the males a year before expected spawning, even though there were no a
significant changes in gonadosomatic index.             Changes in expression of genes that regulate
spermatogenesis provided sensitive tools to monitor the earliest phases of puberty, and to estimate
proportions of steelhead males that may residualize because maturation had already been initiated for the
next year.     Our data suggest that ―maturation decisions‖ in both species were being made a year in
advance of spawning and imply that the influence of metabolic or environmental factors on the onset of
maturation occurs well in advance of this.




                                                                                                         702
Sztatecsny, Marc (University of Vienna);

Don't feel blue: The nuptial colouration in male Balkan moor frogs facilitates visual sex
discrimination and reduces intrasexual harassment during explosive breeding.

Among anurans, male-male competition is most intense in explosive breeders with scramble competition.
Short breeding periods and highly male biased operational sex ratios cause males to actively search and
struggle for the access to mates instead of calling to attract individual females. .. Male explosive breeders
coerce females and clasp onto almost any live or inert object including conspecific males. The moor frog
differs from the majority of explosive breeders in the fact that during spawning males change colour from
brown (similar to females) to a conspicuous blue which has so far been assumed to act as a cue in
female choice. Given the limited opportunity for choice in females, however, we tested if the colouration is
advantageous for males as a visual signal, facilitating sex discrimination in dense male aggregations. To
do so, we first measured the colouration of mated (in amplexus) and unmated males by the means of a
spectrophotometer and then analysed interactions of male moor frogs in natural spawning aggregations
with a brown and a blue male model frog. Mated and unmated males did not differ in colouration.
Interestingly, male moor frogs spent 75% less time in contact and 85% less time in amplexus with the
blue compared to the brown model frog. Our results show that the blue nuptial colouration is unlikely to
influence mating success per se but makes mate search more efficient by making sexes clearly
distinguishable and reducing unwanted male-male interaction similar in function to release calls.



Takahashi, Mizuki (Bucknell University);

On the role of sexual selection in ecological divergence: a test of body-size assortative mating in
the eastern newt Notophthalmus viridescens

Speciation processes initiated by divergent selection often fail to complete. Although reproductive
isolation is essential to the completion of ecological speciation, how sexual selection affects the progress
and completion of ecological speciation is rarely understood. Intraspecific body-size variation affects
mate preference and male-male competition, which can consequently lead to assortative mating based
on body size. We tested the importance of body size difference in the potential of assortative mating
between the two eastern newt subspecies, larger Notophthalmus v. viridescens and smaller N. v.
dorsalis . Through differential expression of life-cycle polyphenism, these two subspecies are adapted to
contrasting environments between mountains and coastal plain. This differential adaptation has likely led
to the subspecific body-size difference. We found that males of both subspecies preferred larger females
of N. v. viridescens as mates presumably because of the fecundity advantage of larger females. On the
other hand, no evidence of female choice was found. Larger males of N. v. viridescens exhibited greater
competitive ability and gained primary access to larger females of their own kind. However, smaller males
were able to overcome their inferior competitive ability by interfering with larger males‘ spermatophore
transfer and sneakily mating with larger females. Thus, the subspecific body-size difference importantly
affected sexual selection processes, resulting in non-random but not completely assortative mating
patterns between the larger and smaller subspecies. While life-cycle polyphenism facilitates ecological
divergence, sexual selection processes, namely smaller males‘ mate preference for larger females and
sexual interference during spermatophore transfer, may be halting the completion of ecological speciation
of the eastern newt subspecies.




                                                                                                         703
Takahashi, Mizuki (Bucknell University); Wunder, Julie; Lampazzi, Noel; Acre, Kelsey; Bent, Nick;
Canter, Sadie; Chapman, Alexandra; Davies, Margaret; Kashan, David; Keiley, Jon; MacIntyre, Rachel;
Milton, Tamara; Weichler, Kara; Wilson, Matt (Bucknell University, Canada)

Promoting amphibian conservation through the college classroom: detection of Batrachochytrium
dendrobatidis among local amphibians

Amphibian populations are in decline worldwide. Many of these declines have been linked to the fungal
pathogen Batrachochytriumdendrobatidis ( Bd ). Yet, we lack sufficient knowledge in Bd‘s spatial
distribution in many areas of the world, including the United States. Detection of Bd requires specific
skills and knowledge, appropriate facility, and funding; thus, it is difficult for laypersons (e.g., volunteers)
to conduct such surveys. On the other hand,such projects often lack scientific novelty and may not be
rewarding or appealing to many university researchers. The college classroom provides an excellent
opportunity to not only expand our knowledge of Bd distribution but also promote amphibian
conservation education among students. Here, we describe an example of such research projects
integrated into a laboratory section of a college biology course to detect Bd prevalence among previously
unsurveyed amphibian populations in central Pennsylvania, U.S.A. Thirteen students in an upper level
Amphibian Biology course were divided into four groups, each of which conducted an individual project
focusing on amphibians in one of three habitat types: ponds, streams, and forests. Toe clips of six local
amphibian species, Plethodon cinereus, Desmonagthus fuscus, Notophthalmus viridescens, Lithobates
catesbeiana, Lithobates clamitans, and Lithobates sylvaticus (total of 59 individuals) were collected to
conducted PCR assays for detection of Bd . We only found Bd infection in 5.6% of all N. viridescens
individuals, but no infection in the other species. As relatively high prevalence of Bd has been reported
in surrounding areas, our results suggest spatial or temporal heterogeneity in Bd occurrence at a
regional scale. The college classroom can be an important resource for testing the prevalence of Bd at
a regional scale. At the end of the semester, each group presented their work to the class, wrote up a
manuscript by following a specific journal format, and submitted it to the instructor. While providing data to
the scientific community, through such semester-long research projects students learned scientific
processes by doing science and also developed deep understanding of conservation issues surrounding
world amphibians.



Talley, Brooke (Southern Illinois University); Lips, Karen (University of Maryland, College Park, Canada);
Vredenburg, Vance (San Francisco State University, San Francisco, United States)

Untangling the effects of environmental and biological factors on the intensity and prevalence of
chytridiomycosis in Illinois amphibians

Disease dynamics are a result of complex interactions among hosts, pathogens, and their shared
environment. Many environmental (e.g., temperature, season) and biological (e.g., species richness,
aquatic associations) factors are known to affect disease dynamics in the Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis
(Bd)-amphibian system, so we designed a systematic stratified sampling design to identify primary causes
and interactions among factors. We visited 22 sites, composed of 77 wetlands, and swabbed 2,804
individuals from 12 species during a state-wide survey for Bd in Illinois in 2008-2009. At each wetland we
measured water temperature, amphibian density, species richness, species evenness, and anuran
familial proportions. In 2008, we intensely sampled five sites comprised of 22 wetlands, and determined
that statewide prevalence varied, but was relatively high at 7 – 61% among sites. In 2009, we sampled 17
sites comprised of 55 wetlands and found that prevalence varied among sites 23 – 91%. Bd prevalence
differed between years (χ2 = 8.8908, df = 1, p = 0.0029). Bd was ubiquitous in both years, present in all
sites, wetlands, and species. Infection intensities were high in both years; average intensity in 2008 was



                                                                                                            704
1,773 zoospores (range 0.04 – 57,020), and 2,159 zoospores (range 0.01 – 130,307) in 2009. To identify
the most important contributing factors to Bd- dynamics, we created multivariate models in R based on
site- and wetland-level assessments. We used AIC to identify the environmental and biological
parameters that explained the intensity and prevalence of disease in 2009. Water temperature and
familial composition best explained site-level Bd prevalence (AIC = 2241.85, ΔAIC = 17.51), while water
temperature, alone, best explained wetland-level Bd prevalence (AIC = 2442.54, ΔAIC = 92.34). All ten
biological factors significantly contributed to the best models predicting Bd intensity, but density was the
strongest (AIC = 3408.51, ΔAIC = 144.97). Our results support previous studies in which prevalence was
associated with temperature while intensity – which is related to survival – was affected by density (e.g.,
Briggs et al 2010). No die-offs or extinctions have been reported from Illinois, but Acris crepitans has
experienced widespread declines, and our reported infection levels have caused mortality and population
declines in other systems. We recommend mark-recapture studies to assess population trends of Illinois
amphibians.



Tanaka, Sho (Tikai University, School of Marine Science & Technology); Nohara, Kenji (Tokai University,
School of Marine Science & Technology, Shizuoka, Japan); Burns, Finlay; Neat, Francis (Marine
Laboratory, Aberdeen AB11 9DB, United Kingdom)

Morphological and genetic comparison of the genus Deania between European and Japanese
waters

The genus Deania is a group of deep-sea squaloid dogfish. Deania spp. inhabit worldwide along upper
continental slopes at the depth of 400 to 1500 m and are caught incidentally with deep-sea longline
fishery and/ or bottom trawl fishery. The genus is distinguishable easily into squaloid dogfish by having a
long snout, and currently contains 4 valid species from the world; D. calcea, D. hystricosa, D.
profundorum, and D. quadrispinosum. Among them, D. calcea is known to have considerable variation in
the morphometric characters, especially with the growth. Up to the present, 4 species were reported from
Japanese waters: D. eglantine Jordan & Snyder, 1902; Acanthidium aciculatum Garman, 1906; A.
rostratum Garman, 1906; A. hystricosum. Among them, the former three species have been synonymized
with D. calcea and there are two species, D. calcea and D. hystricosa, in Japanese water at the present
time. In this study, general morphology of external futures and genetics were examined in Deania spp.
from European and Japanese waters. As a result, Japanese D. calcea was different from European D.
calcea in the length of the 1st dorsal fin base and the distance between the 1st and 2nd dorsal fins. The
species name will be discussed with a result of genetic study.



Tang, Kevin (University of Michigan-Flint); Fielitz, Christopher (Emory & Henry College, Canada)

Phylogenetic relationships within the family Muraenidae (Teleostei: Anguilliformes)

The anguilliform family Muraenidae consists of 16 recognized genera and approximately 200 species.
Moray eels are predominantly marine fishes found in tropical and temperate waters worldwide, where
they are important predators on reefs. They are characterized by a high posterior nostril, long fang-like
teeth, and the absence of a pectoral fin. Loss and reduction of bones in the skull and caudal fin limit the
morphological characters that can be used to resolve their phylogeny, relative to the number of species.
Sequence data from 12S and 16S ribosomal DNA were analyzed for 42 muraenid species representing
ten genera (Anarchias,       Echidna,      Enchelycore,    Gymnothorax,      Gymnomuraena, Muraena,
Rhinomuraena, Scuticaria, Strophidon, and Uropterygius) from both subfamilies, Muraeninae and



                                                                                                        705
Uropterygiinae. Additional anguilliform and elopomorph taxa were examined to determine theplacement
of the Muraenidae within the order Anguilliformes. Two osteoglossomorph species were included for
outgroup comparison. A tree of relationships will be presented and the monophyly of the family, its
subfamilies, and its genera will be discussed.



Targino, Mariane (Universidade de São Paulo); Taboada, Carlos; Faivovich, Julián (Museo Argentino de
Ciencias Naturales Bernardino Rivadavia- Conicet, Canada)

The vocal sac structure in Microhylidae (Amphibia, Anura)

The anuran vocal sacs are described as diverticulae of the lining of the mouth that communicate with the
later by slit-like apertures. They lie directly above the superficial, ventral mandibular muscles with which
they comprise the vocal sac structure. While the superficial mandibular muscles of Microhylids have
already been studied in some subfamilies, the vocal sac structure has never been describedin detail. In
this presentation we describe the vocal sac structure of some gastrophrynines, using both gross
dissections and histological techniques. In the Australo-Papuan genera, the sac has been reported to be
covered by the M. interhyoideus forming a single sheet lying ventrally to the M. intermandibularis, which
is consistent with a regular anuran vocal sac structure. In the Neotropical genera studied, the vocal sac
seems to be independent of the ventral muscles and posteriorly surpasses them; probably this is what
has been described in the literature as ―involuted pouch, dorsal to the M. intermandibularis ‖. This sac
may have a more predominantly elastic or muscular structure. The histological sections of the mandibular
region of Dermatonotus muelleri indicate avocal sac dorsal to the M. intermandibularis and M.
interhyoideus , and just posterior to M. submentalis. Histologically, the vocal sac is a structure composed
of an external and internal epithelial sheet, and between them three distinct connective tissue layers,
depending on the distribution andorientation of elastic and collagen fibres. The posterior region of the sac
is thick and has many muscular fibers immersed in the matrix of connective tissue. Beneath the sac, the
M. interhyoideus emits from its posterodorsal apex a thin flap of connective tissue with interspersed
muscular fibres that contour the subjacent muscle and attach to the sac anteriorly. Elastic fibers are also
present in the subgular lymphatic septum, dermis, hypodermis, and interspersed in the muscle fibers of
the M. intermandibularis and M. interhyoideus .



Tarrant, Jeanne (North-West University); Armstrong, Adrian (Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife, Cascades, South
Africa)

Using Ecological Niche Modelling to predict and survey the distribution the Critically Endangered
KwaZulu-Natal endemic Pickersgill's Reed Frog (Hyperolius pickersgilli)

Hyperolius pickersgilli has recently (2010) been listed as Critically Endangered and has an estimated
AOO less than 9 km2. It is endemic to the KwaZulu-Natal coastal area and is known only from a few
localities, most of which are unprotected and face increasing pressure from anthropogenic development.
Given its status, cryptic behaviour and limited distribution, this species is an ideal candidate for predictive
modelling. Here we use a maximum entropy model (MaxEnt) to create a predicted distribution for this
species based on limited occurrence data. Predicted sites with an occurrence-probability greater than
sixty percent were surveyed during the species‘ breeding season of 2010-2011 and 2011-2012. Despite
extensive surveys, few new localities were revealed: in total 5 new populations were discovered during
the study period. In addition, known historical locations (pre-2007) were re-visited to verify the species‘
presence there. Of 15 historically known sites, H. pickersgilli was deemed absent at seven. Taking this



                                                                                                           706
into account and including additional populations discovered between 2007 and 2010, the total number of
localities currently known is fourteen. We also use our results to recalculate AOO and EOO. The Critically
Endangered status of this species is warranted given its limited and very fragmented distribution. The
degree of isolation, development pressure and human-posed threats facing the majority of locations make
the long-term survival of these populations dubious and thus emphasises the need for urgent
conservation action, including ex-situ measures, for this species.



Taylor, Dylan (Villanova University); Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University, Villanova, United States);
Blackburn, David (California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, CA, United States)

Diet of two species of Libyan Acanthodactylus (Lacertidae) based on historical museum material

Although modern herpetological collections from Libya are limited, extensive historical material from the
Italian colonial period in the early 20th century is represented in a number of European collections, most
notably the Museo Civico di Storia Naturale di Milano, Italy. We used this historical material to study diet
in the common desert-dwelling lacertid lizards Acanthodactylus boskianus and A. scutellatus. Although
the two species are broadly sympatric A. scutellatus is a loose sand specialist, whereas A. boskianus
prefers more hard-packed substrates. Stomach contents were investigated in 100 specimens of A.
boskianus and 104 specimens of A. scutellatus initially collected between 1922 and 1937 in southern
Libya. 60% and 61% of specimens of these two species, respectively, contained prey items. The most
important prey categories are the same for both species, albeit ranked differently. Formicids were the
most important for A. scutellatus (70% by number, 33% by volume), followed by insect larvae of multiple
orders (11% by number, 15% by volume), followed by coleopterans (5% by number, 16% by volume). For
A. boskianus, larvae were the most important (33% by number, 54% by volume), formicids were second
(39% by number, 9% by volume), and coleopterans were third (8% by number, 19% by volume). Diets
also included spiders, scorpions, and cockroaches. Intersexual dietary overlap was considerable (92%) in
both species. These species of Acanthodactylus appear to show substantial variation in diet across their
broad ranges. Although ants make up a large part of the diet in other locations, as in Libya, elsewhere
spiders, orthopterans, and other groups predominate. Unfortunately, seasonal patterns in diet could not
be assessed as many of the specimens lacked complete collection data. These results reveal both the
usefulness of museum collections as data sources, particularly for areas with limited accessibility, as well
as the limitations imposed by the use of data-incomplete historical material.



Taylor, Eric (University of British Columbia);

Minding the gap: plasticity's role in the ability of salmonids to cope with environmental change

Pacific salmonids have evolved within the context of variable and changing environments. The result has
been a spectacular example of an adaptive radiation of species as well as the evolution of variability
within species. Despite this evidence of the general ―evolvability‖ of salmonids, their capacity to adapt to
environmental change accelerated by various anthropogenic activities is unknown and raises serious
concerns about their capacity to persist over the current range of habitats in which they exist.
Consequently, a major question in salmonid biodiversity conservation is: can adaptive change in
salmonids ―track‖ environmental shifts and minimize the loss of local populations in environments
undergoing such change? If not, then many local populations may be extirpated or disperse to more
suitable environments, the latter of which may pose its own problems for biodiversity. One process that
may influence the probability of these alternative outcomes is phenotypic plasticity; the ability of a given



                                                                                                        707
genotype to express different phenotypes in different environments. Being poikilotherms, the greatest
large-scale environmental stress facing salmonids is directional change in water temperature that impacts
their physiology, behaviour, and the timing of life-history events critical to their persistence in local
environments. This presentation examines evidence for plasticity‘s role in the persistence of organisms in
environments as a direct response to anthropogenic changes to those environments. I addition, I suggest
critical information that is required to make informed judgments on the extent to which plasticity may
minimize extirpations of salmonids in local environments undergoing rapid environmental change



Taylor, Julia (San Francisco State University); Crow, Karen; Saxton, Mike (San Francisco State
University, Canada); Graves, Kerry (Tishomingo National Fish Hatchery, Canada)

Pinning the tail on paddlefish

Hox genes specify body plan features such as fins and limbs. They are well known for setting up anterior-
posterior and proximodistal axes during animal development. The posterior HoxA and HoxD genes exhibit
nested and overlapping expression domains during pectoral fin development that are associated with
specific fin morphologies. However, the pectoral fin develops early relative to medial fins and various
paired structures that develop at later stages, which have not previously been characterized. Ray-finned
fishes exhibit a variety of caudal fin morphologies yet little is known about the molecular basis for this
variation. The North American paddlefish Polyodon spathula occupies an interesting phylogenetic
position as a basal ray-finned fish and exhibits an ancestral heterocercal caudal tail morphology. Using
in-situ hybridization, we found expression of HoxD12, HoxD13, and HoxA11 genes in the development
of several prominent external body features. These structures are involved in locomotion, sensory
systems, and excretion. Many of these features lie along the fish‘s midline, including an essential cavity
known the pelvic vent. Other medial structures expressing HoxA and HoxD genes include dorsal, caudal,
and anal fins; as well as paired structures such as pelvic fins and rostral barbels. Looking at later time
points during development, we found that the posterior HoxA and HoxD genes are expressed in waves
and the patterning of distal outgrowth during heterocercal tail morphogenesis is associated with HoxA11
expression. Several phases of Hox genes have been characterized during pectoral fin development and
the posterior genes have been coined ―late phase‖ expression. However, our data suggest that Hox
genes are redeployed at various time scales beyond pectoral fin development and recur on a morphing
body plan.



Taylor, Mollie (Florida State University); Craig, Kevin (NOAA NMFS, Canada)

Spatial and temporal variation in nursery habitat for juvenile fishes in a river-dominated estuary:
a diet and stable isotope analysis

The value of estuaries as nursery habitat for juvenile fishes depends on their connection with coastal
watersheds that provide nutrients, freshwater, and other materials essential to the productivity of these
ecosystems. This connectivity is of particular importance for river-dominated estuaries that experience
considerable spatial and temporal variation in hydrography and flow of alluvial materials. Apalachicola
Bay is one of the most productive estuaries in the northern hemisphere, largely due to the intensity and
duration of freshwater output. Variation in nutrient and fresh water input to the Bay may alter habitat
quality with regard to foraging success for juvenile estuarine-dependent fishes. Using juvenile spot (
Leiostomus xanthurus ), I am testing the hypothesis that spatial and temporal variation in diet
composition, foraging success, and organic matter source are related to seasonal variation in river flow



                                                                                                       708
and associated environmental conditions. The diets of 868 juvenile spot (9 – 171 mm standard length)
were sampled monthly in 2009 and 2010 from 12 locations throughout Apalachicola Bay. Stomach
fullness was quantified and prey was identified to the lowest possible taxonomic level, counted, and
volume of each prey category was estimated. Juvenile spot prey included harpacticoid and calanoid
copepods, ostracods, small bivalves, nematodes, amphipods, chironomid larvae, and polychaetes. A
comparison of feeding intensity and the relative importance of different prey groups between regions of
Apalachicola Bay will test the hypothesis that foraging dynamics of juvenile spot vary in relation to river
flow. A stable isotope analysis of δ 13 C, δ 15 N, and δ 34 S was conducted on 230 of the samples.
Isotope values will provide insight on the organic contributions over a longer time scale than the diet
analysis and will provide better understanding of how alluvial materials contribute to juvenile fish growth
during their residency in estuarine nursery habitats. It is important to understand how alluvial materials
contribute to juvenile fish foraging in order to better inform policy makers on decisions regarding water
diversions and upstream river modifications.



Taylor, Murdoch (University of Alberta); Paszkowski, Cynthia (University of Alberta, Canada)

Movement Patterns of Urban Wood Frogs (Lithobates sylvaticus) in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada

Amphibian populations in North America worldwide are facing increased habitat loss due to the
destruction of wetlands and riparian areas. Habitat loss is often a direct result of urbanization and
anthropogenic expansion into wetlands. Although an increasing number of studies are focusing on the
effects of urbanization on amphibian species richness and abundance as well as breeding success, very
few studies have examined the movement patterns of amphibians in urban environments. We
characterized habitat use and movement patterns of the wood frog ( Lithobates sylvaticus ) within the city
of Edmonton, Alberta, Canada through the use ofradio-telemetry. We radio tracked a total of 31 adult
wood frogs at 9 urban wetlands (4 natural and 5 constructed) during April-September 2011. Frogs were
captured during wetland perimeter searches and individuals ≥ 8 g were affixed with a radio transmitter
(Holohil Systems Ltd. BD-2N) and released. Frogs were relocated every 2-3 days during the tacking
period and upon each relocation, GPS coordinates were recorded as well as microhabitat characteristics.
We predicted that frogs at natural wetlands would show greater daily movement distances and move
farther from wetlands during the summer months due to the presence of more complex and natural
vegetation surrounding these wetlands compared to constructed ponds. Body size was also predicted to
be an important factor determining movement distances with larger frogs moving greater distances from
breeding ponds than smaller individuals. The31 adults wood frogs (22 females and 9 males) with a mean
mass of 13.05 ± 0.65g were tracked onaverage for 29 ± 4 days . The average daily-movement distance
was 7.53 ± 0.812m with frogs moving farther at natural sites (8.74 ±4.91m) than at constructed sites
(5.86 ±3.43m) .      Maximum single-day travel distance was recorded at 67.8m and maximum distance
from water was 34.4m. The frogs tracked in our study tended to show similar movement patterns in terms
of total distance travelled and distance travelled per day to those recorded in other studies quantifying
wood frog movement in natural, non-urban environments. In contrast, the frogs tracked at our urban
wetlands tended to stay much closer to the fringes of their breeding ponds than frogs tracked at natural,
non-urban wetlands. We believe that these restricted migrations could be due to narrow riparian zones
(constructed ponds) and potential topographic constraints (natural ponds).




                                                                                                       709
Tedeschi, Jamie (University of Western Australia);

How about some fried eggs? Assessing marine turtle embryo resilience to temperature extremes

My project attempts to answer three questions concerning the thermal biology of a marine reptile species
and their potential to adapt to climate change: 1) Is there geographic variation in the tolerance of marine
turtle embryos to extreme temperatures? 2) Is there intra- and inter-specific variation in expression of the
heat-sensitive genes affecting thermal tolerance? 3) Can I estimate how rapidly thermal thresholds could
evolve in marine turtles? It is proposed that incubation experiments, gene expression scoring and
paternity analysis will provide details on the adaptability and heritability of the thermal properties of
marine turtle embryos, with implications for marine park management.



Teixeira, Livia (Departamento de Biologia Estrutural e Funcional, Instituto de Biologia, Universidade
Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas/SP); Tacioli, André (Departamento de Zoologia, Instituto
de Biociências, Universidade Estadual Paulista Júlio de Mesquita Filho (UNESP), Rio Claro/SP, Canada);
Bolsoni Lourenço, Luciana (Departamento de Biologia Estrutural e Funcional, Instituto de Biologia,
Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas/SP, Canada)

Cytogenetic analysis of two species of Dendropsophus (Anura, Hylidae): a contribution to the
study of the D. marmoratus species group

The monophyletic genus Dendropsophus (Anura, Hylidae) includes 92 neotropical hylid species that are
distributed in nine groups. This genus has recently been revalidated to include species with 2n=30, which
is a synapomorphic trait for this group. Currently, 27 species have been karyotyped, but only information
about the diploid number of chromosomes and their morphology is available in most cases. An interesting
characteristic observed in this genus is the variety in the number of telocentric chromosomes among the
species. Dendropsophus seniculus and Dendropsophus soaresi are currently assigned to the
Dendropsophus marmoratus group along with seven other species, only three of which - D. marmoratus,
D. nahdereri, and D. melanargyreus - have been studied cytogenetically. In the present study, we
karyotyped the former two Brazilian species, sampled from Ribeirão Grande, São Paulo State, and
Barreiras, Bahia State, respectively, and compared them with other Dendropsophus species. The
chromosome preparations were obtained from intestinal epithelial cell suspensions and subjected to
conventional staining, C-banding, DAPI staining (for C-banded metaphase spreads), and silver
impregnation using the Ag-NOR method. Both species had similar 30-chromosome karyotypes with five
submetacentric, five metacentric and five telocentric chromosome pairs. The C-banding technique
revealed only centromeric heterochromatin in all of the chromosomes, which were also stained with DAPI.
A secondary constriction was observed on the long arm of the metacentric Chromosome 8 in both
species, which was identified as a nucleolar organizer region (NOR) using silver impregnation. This NOR-
bearing chromosome is similar to a medium-sized submetacentric chromosome of D. marmoratus in
which a secondary constriction was observed interstitially onthe long arm. Interestingly, the NOR
occupies a distinct site in D. nahdereri , on the short arm of the submetacentric pair 1. The number of
telocentric chromosomes (five pairs) found for the species studied herein was the same observed in D.
marmoratus and D. nahdereri . Curiously, several species from other groups also show fivetelocentric
pairs, including D. sanborni (gr. D. microcephalus) and D. labialis (gr. D. labialis). Further studies will
be necessary to clarify the cytogenetic differences and possible homeologies among the telocentric pairs
ofdifferent Dendropsophus species.




                                                                                                        710
Telemeco, Rory (Iowa State University);

Effects of temperature during development on the offspring phenotype of a facultative
thermoregulator, the southern alligator lizard (Elgaria multicarinata: Anguidae)

Developmental environment greatly affects offspring survivorship and phenotype. Temperature in
particular has profound fitness-relevant effects in diverse organisms. Because most reptiles deposit their
eggs in nests without further parental care, ambient thermal conditions within the nest greatly impact
many reptiles. Understanding these effects illuminates important aspects of the ecology and evolution of
these species, and is important for determining the likely effects of impending climate change. To date, no
study has examined the effects of thermal variation during embryogenesis on any member of the
Anguidae, a diverse and conspicuous family of lizards found throughout the northern hemisphere. To
begin bridging this knowledge gap, I incubated southern alligator lizard (Elgaria multicarinata) eggs at five
temperatures (24°C, 26°C, 28°C, 30°C, and 32°C). Hatchling size and performance were measured at
hatching, 7 days, and 30 days of age. Eggs incubated at 26°C and 28°C resulted in the highest quality
offspring (increased survivorship, performance, and size), with eggs incubated at both 24°C and 30°C
resulting in lower quality offspring, and eggs incubated at 32°C failing to hatch. These data allow
estimation of the thermal reaction norm for development in this species, with the optimum and critical
maximum temperatures being ~ 27°C and 31°C, respectively. Similar to adult southern alligator lizards,
these thermal parameters are relatively cool compared to those of many sympatric species, suggesting
that E. multicarinata is adapted to relatively cool environments throughout their ontogeny. Southern
alligator lizards might therefore be particularly susceptible to decline resulting from regional warming
associated with climate change.



Territo, Gregory P. (University of Central Florida); Sims, Kenneth R. (Canada); Hickson, Jason B.;
Schrum, Michael I.; Parkinson, Christopher L. (University of Central Florida, Canada)

Systematics of the Salt Marsh Snake (Nerodia clarkii)

Scientific understanding of evolution has changed dramatically in the last 50 years, particularly with the
widespread use of molecular genetic data in research. Conservation biologists and systematists have
incorporated these changes into their disciplines to reflect the current scientific climate. Systematists
seek to identify, classify, and name ―natural‖ groups, or lineages, which have a shared ancestry and a
unique set of heritable, genetic characters. Conservationists strive to protect the heritable units of
biodiversity and often rely on systematists to identify and name these units. In the past, systematists
have depended on overall phenotypic and geographic similarity to infer natural lineages.
Conservationists frequently default to historically delimited taxa as units for protection, sometimes without
testing the evolutionary context of these units. These historically delimited taxa provide hypotheses of
evolutionary lineages for modern systematists to test. An example of a taxon in need of rigorous
systematic assessment is the Salt Marsh Snake, Nerodia clarkii . There are three morphologically-
described subspecies within this species: the Gulf Coast Salt Marsh Snake ( N. clarkii clarkii ), the
Mangrove Salt Marsh Snake ( N. clarkii compressicauda ), and the federally-threatened Atlantic Salt
Marsh Snake ( N. clarkii taeniata ). In this study, we investigate the subspecies designations of Nerodia
clarkii using molecular data. We infer the relationships of the three subspecies using Bayesian inference
and haplotype networks with statistical parsimony of the full cytochrome-b gene (cyt-b). Prior research
has suggested that the Salt Marsh Snake subspecies hybridize with their sympatric sister species, the
Southern Watersnake ( Nerodia fasciata ), which we also investigate. Preliminary phylogenies cannot
resolve the relationships within and between the N. clarkii and N. fasciata species. Our results have




                                                                                                         711
implications for conservation management of the federally-threatened N. clarkii taeniata and Florida
saltmarshes.



Testerman, Christine (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute); Fitzpatrick,
Sean; Prodöhl, Paulo (Queen's University, Canada); Simpfendorfer, Colin (James Cook University,
Canada); Shivji, Mahmood (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute,
Canada)

Global Phylogeography and Mating System Analysis of the Great Hammerhead Shark (Sphyrna
mokarran)

The population status of the great hammerhead shark ( Sphyrna mokarran ) worldwide is of management
and conservation interest due to its high bycatch mortality and high market value fins. We evaluated the
population genetic structure of S. mokarran based on samples from the central western Atlantic (US
Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean), Indian Ocean (Red Sea, Persian Gulf and western Australia)
and south western Pacific (eastern Australia) using complete mitochondrial control region sequences
(n=277) and twelve nuclear microsatellite loci (n=286). The population structure results based on
mitochondrial and microsatellite markers were concordant, revealing strong geographic partitioning
between samples from the central western Atlantic and Australia. We found shallow but statistically
significant genetic structuring within oceanic basins, albeit with some differences between the two marker
types in fine scale patterns involving Red Sea and Persian Gulf samples. Standard molecular diversity
indices and coalescent analyses suggest that the species originated in the western Pacific with
subsequent radiation into the Indian and Atlantic oceans. We also conducted parentage analysis of four
complete litters (litter sizes n=55; n=23, n=20, n=19) and one partial litter (n=6) using the nuclear
microsatellite markers. The parentage analysis showed multiple paternity in all 5 litters with a range of 2-
6 sires per litter, suggesting a genetically polyandrous mating strategy in S. mokarran . Evidence of
geographic patterns of genetic structure in this species suggests that genetic data may prove useful to
source the broad geographic origin of S. mokarran fins in trade and assist with delineation of stocks for
individual population assessment and general conservation efforts.



Testerman, Christine (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute); Wintner,
Sabine (University of KwaZulu-Natal, Canada); McAuley, Rory (Western Australia Fisheries and Marine
Research Laboratories, Canada); Cartamil, Dan (Scripps Institute of Oceanography, Canada); Shivji,
Mahmood (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute, Canada)

Global Population Genetic Analysis of the Smooth Hammerhead Shark (Sphyrna zygaena)

The smooth hammerhead ( Sphyrna zygaena ) is a globally distributed shark frequently caught as
bycatch and in fisheries, and its fins are valued in the international fin trade. Despite its wide distribution
and importance in fisheries, published information on its population dynamics is scarce. We evaluated
the global population genetic structure and demographics of S. zygaena using complete mitochondrial
control region sequences (1,090 nucleotides) and 19 nuclear microsatellite loci. Our genetic assessment
is based on a widely distributed set of 397 samples from the North and South Atlantic, northern, central
and southern regions of the eastern Pacific, and the southwest Indian and western Pacific Oceans. The
mitochondrial sequence and microsatellite-based findings were generally concordant, revealing strong
genetic partitioning between samples from the Atlantic and Indo-Pacific, and shallower but statistically
significant genetic structuring within oceanic basins. As coastal nursery areas have been reported for this
species, we also investigated the extent of female natal site philopatry and male mediated gene flow



                                                                                                           712
using mixed-marker analyses. Statistical analyses of genetic diversity in S. zygaena are also providing
insight into current and historical population trends that may be informative for conservation and fishery
management efforts.



Testerman, Christine (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute);
Brunnschweiler, Juerg (ETH Zurich, Canada); Gulak, Simon (Southeast Fisheries Science Center,
National Marine Fisheries Service/NOAA, Canada); Werry, Jonathan (Griffith University, Canada);
Jabado, Rima (United Arab Emirates University, Canada); Jones, Catherine (University of Aberdeen,
Canada); Shivji, Mahmood (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute,
Canada)

Global Population Genetic Structure and Parentage Analysis of the Bull Shark (Carcharhinus
leucas)

Population structure, demographic trends and mating system biology are important information
components of national and international management and conservation efforts. The bull shark (
Carcharhinus leucas ) is a globally distributed, large coastal shark that occurs in marine, estuarine and
freshwater habitats. It has been assessed as near threatened by the IUCN, is caught in recreational and
commercial fisheries throughout its range, and shows evidence of recent declines in the Gulf of Mexico.
Recent reports have provided evidence of strong geographic structuring between northern and southern
populations of C. leucas in the western Atlantic at the maternally inherited mitochondrial control region
locus, but no structure within the western Atlantic at 5 nuclear microsatellite loci. We expanded on this
study by evaluating the global population genetic structure of C. leucas based on 490 samples from the
central western Atlantic (northern Gulf of Mexico and US Atlantic coast) and the Indo-west Pacific (South
Africa, Persian Gulf, Arabian Sea, Indonesia, eastern and western Australia, and Fiji) using twelve
nuclear microsatellite loci. We also genotyped 4 individuals from the eastern Pacific. The microsatellite
data revealed strong geographic partitioning between samples from the Atlantic and Indo-Pacific and
shallow but statistically significant genetic structuring within oceanic basins. We present statistical
analyses of genetic diversity that provide insight into current and historical population trends. Finally,
parentage analysis of 2 litters (12 pups each) suggests that the species may be genetically polyandrous.



Thomas, W. Kelley (UNH/Hubbard Center for Genome Studies); King, Benjamin (Mount Desert Island
Biological Laboratories, Canada); Genome, Skate (Northeast Bioinformatics Collaborative, Canada)

The Skate Genome Project

The little skate ( Leucoraja erinacea ) is a member of the most primitive surviving clade of jawed
vertebrates, thecartilaginous fishes, that first appeared approximately 450 million years ago.
Cartilaginous fishes exhibit manyfundamental vertebrate characteristics, including a neural crest, jaws
and teeth, an adaptive immune system, and a pressurized circulatory system. The skate is a powerful
comparative model to study biological processes shared among jawed and limbed vertebrates such as
renal physiology, immunology, toxicology and regeneration.             The North East Bioinformatics
Collaborative of the North East Cyberinfrastructure Consoritum (NECC) is a team ofbioinformatics experts
from five member states and is currently sequencing the genome of the skate to enable comparative
genomic studies.      We are characterizing the genome using the whole genome shotgun sequencing
approach and Illumina high-throughput sequencing.      To date, we have 59x coverage of the estimated
3.4 Gbp genome by generating over 200 Gbp of sequence in 1.8 billion sequencing reads that are
primarily from a paired-end fragment library with a 500bp insert size.     An initial de novo genome



                                                                                                       713
assembly yielded three million contiguous (contig) sequences. Together the contigs represent 40% of
the estimated genome. One of these contigsrepresents the entire 16.7kb mitochondrial genome. We
are currently constructing mate-pair sequencing libraries that will be used to build scaffolds. So far, a
3.5 kbp mate-pair library was generated and sequenced at low depth.          Theskate genome sequence
project has served as an important model for highly collaborativebiomedical research, especially with
regards to improved biomedical workforce development through cyber-enabled research. Three week-
long workshops provided bioinformatics training in genome andprotein sequence analysis and annotation
to faculty, students and other researchers among NECC institutions.



Thompson, Jacob (University of Oklahoma);

Influence of Habitat Complexity on Survival of Juvenile Red River Pupfish in the Presence of Red
Shiner

The red river pupfish (Cyprinodon rubrofluviatilis) is highly tolerant of extremes of both salinity and
temperature, but is a very poor competitor, and previous research has shown that the presence of a
generalist minnow, red shiner (Cyprinella lutrensis), would suppress survival of juveniles through
predation. Increased habitat complexity can allow for higher species diversity by creating additional
niches, as well as providing cover for species to aid in avoiding predation. It has been suggested that
increased habitat complexity may allow for greater juvenile survival of the red river pupfish in the
presence of red shiner. To test this, I conducted an experiment to examine the effects of habitat
complexity on the reproductive success of red river pupfish in the presence of red shiners, a generalist
minnow which will actually prey upon juvenile fishes of small enough size. To test this, I established
pupfish populations in 12 artificial outdoor stream units. In a two factorial design, presence of red shiners
and habitat complexity were varied such that six units had red shiners and six had increased complexity,
divided in such a fashion as there were three each of the four combinations. To increase habitat
complexity I added artificial vegetation, woody debris, large rocks, and a cinderblock. I let the experiment
run for the summer and early fall of 2011, and captured and preserved all remaining fishes, including
juveniles. Results show that while increased habitat complexity did not increase juvenile survival in the
presence of red shiners, pupfish tended to have higher reproductive success in high complexity
treatments that lacked red shiners. I also found support for what previous research had indicated—that
red shiners depressed juvenile survival of pupfish.



Thompson, Michael (University of Sydney); Bridget, Murphy; Matthew, Brandley (University of Sydney,
Sydney, N, Australia); Christopher, Murphy (University of Sydney, University of Sydney, N, Australia)

Morphological variation of the placentae of Eulamprus quoyii group skinks

Frequent evolutionary changes in reproductive mode have produced a wide range of placental structures
in viviparous squamate reptiles. Closely-related species with different placental structures are particularly
useful for reconstructing how placentae might have evolved. We used light microscopy to study placental
morphology in late stage embryos of four species of Eulamprus , a genus of viviparous scincid lizards
that we had reason to suspect may display significant interspecific variation in placental morphology.
The genus is of particular interest because it formed the basis of the historical definition of a Type I
chorioallantoic placenta. Embryos from all four species display a chorioallantoic placenta, an
omphaloplacenta and an interomphalopleuric membrane, characteristics present in other viviparous
skinks. Unlike other viviparous skinks, but characteristic of oviparous skinks, the allantois expands to



                                                                                                         714
surround the yolk sac in each species, supplanting the omphalopleure with a larger area of
chorioallantois, until a chorioallantoic placenta surrounds the entire egg a few days from birth. All four
Eulamprus species share the same extraembryonic membrane morphology, but the cellular morphology
of the uterine epithelium in the chorioallantoic placenta and omphaloplacenta vary between species. The
entire area of the chorioallantoic placenta comprise squamous uterine epithelium in E. heatwolei , E.
kosciuskoi and most E. tympanum specimens, while E. quoyii and one specimen of E. tympanum
showed regional specialisation of the chorioallantoic placenta in the form of tall irregular uterine epithelial
cells at the mesometrial pole. In the omphaloplacenta, E. heatwolei , E. kosciuskoi , and E. tympanum
display a mixture of squamous and cuboidal uterine epithelial cells, while E. quoyii shows no cuboidal
uterine epithelium and only squamous cells. We used new phylogenetic information to predict that the
placental variation we observed is the result of two character state changes in the chorioallantoic placenta
and a single character state change in the omphaloplacenta.



Thoney, Dennis (Vancouver Aquarium);

Anuran breeding programs at the Vancouver Aquarium

Nearly half of the 6,000 species of amphibians are threatened with extinction. Over 160 species are
thought to have gone extinct in our lifetime. Habitat changes resulting from human development and
climate change are the main contributing causes, but pollution and invasive species such as the bull frog
and chytrid fungus also take their toll. Through the display of 23 amphibian species in ―Frogs Forever‖
the Vancouver Aquarium introduces the issues facing amphibians to the public. As part of this exhibit
and other conservation efforts, well over twenty species have been bred at the aquarium. The Aquarium
also is involved in direct conservation by maintaining assurance populations of the two most endangered
amphibians in Canada and a Neotropical frog that is extinct in the wild. The Oregon Spotted Frog (OSF),
Rana pretiosa, is the most endangered amphibian in Canada with only three breeding populations and
less than 300 breeding females in total. The Vancouver Aquarium assists the OSF Recovery Team by
maintaining a captive assurance population. In 2010, the Aquarium was the first institution to breed the
OSF in captivity. Of the approximately 3,000 tadpoles hatched in 2011, three hundred were used for
enclosure survival studies, three hundred were retained for radio tagging studies, fifty were retained by
the Aquarium to produce F2 generation, and over 2,000 tadpoles were released into a new adjacent wild
site. With many more frogs maturing over this winter, we expect to produce a magnitude more young in
2012. The Northern leopard frog, Rana pipiens, is also endangered in British Columbia, with frogs only
occurring in one natural and one introduced site in southeastern BC. The Aquarium assists the British
Columbia Northern Leopard Frog Recovery Team by maintaining captive assurance population and
expects to first breed and release young in 2012.



Tidwell, Kyle (Portland State University); Shepherdson, David (Oregon Zoo, Portland, United States);
Hayes, Marc (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Olympia, United States)

Inter-population Variability in Evasive Behavior in the Oregon Spotted Frog (Rana pretiosa)

The Pacific Northwest endemic Oregon Spotted Frog (OSF; Rana pretiosa) is postulated to be strongly
affected by the American Bullfrog (Lithobates catesbeianus; hereafter bullfrog) based on high overlap in
their habitat requirements. The Endangered status of OSFs populations in Washington State led to a
multi-institutional pilot translocation program at Joint Base Lewis McChord (JBLM). As part of this 5-year
effort, OSF eggs from two donor populations (Conboy Lake National Wildlife Refuge (CLNWR), east of



                                                                                                           715
the Cascade Mountains, and the upper Black River, in the Puget Lowlands) were collected and reared for
release on the JBLM recipient site as post-metamorphic animals (juveniles or adults). Based on
observations that captive Oregon Spotted Frogs from CLNWR appeared to display a more vigorous
response to predator approach than Black River animals, we developed a method to quantify their
evasion behavior. This method used a tethered 150-mm ball as a pseudo-predator that could be released
from an overhead location over an aquatic stage in which each tested frog was placed. Quantifying
latency-to-response as the time between release of the ball and a frog reaction, we video-archived the
responses of individual Oregon Spotted Frogs tested with this stimulus. We found that captive-reared
Oregon Spotted Frogs from CLNWR did indeed respond significantly faster than their Black River
counterparts. Further, regression of response time on size showed that the speed of response increases
with body size. The basis of the differential response time is unclear, but it may result either from
adaptations to the different predator sets affecting each population, or from some impairment to the
behavior of Black River frogs that may be water-quality related or both. The differential in response times
between the two source populations led us to compare captive-reared frogs to wild ones from one source
population, and we made the prediction a priori that captive-reared frogs would respond more rapidly that
wild frogs. Non-intuitively, using frogs from Conboy Lake, we found that wild frogs respond less rapidly
and less frequently to the same pseudo-predator stimulus than their captive reared counterparts. This
finding led us to consider the possibility that captive-rearing may be effecting the frogs response to
predator stimuli. This work is part of a broader study that seeks to determine whether intrinsic aspects of
the anti-predatory behavior of native ranid frogs may make them vulnerable to the American Bullfrog
(Lithobates catesbeianus) predation.



TinHan, Thomas (California State University, Long Beach); Erisman, Brad; Aburto, Octavio (CMBC -
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, CA, United States); Weaver, Amy (Niparaja A.C., La Paz,
Mexico); Vazquez, Daniel (Niparaja AC, La Paz, Mexico); Hernandez, Dalia (CMBC - Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, La Paz, Mexico); Lowe, Chris (California State University, Long Beach, Long Beach, CA,
United States)

Long-term horizontal and vertical movements of yellow snapper and leopard grouper at the Los
Islotes reserve, Gulf of California.

Gulf of California coastal fisheries heavily target species that form seasonal spawning aggregations. The
exploitation of spawning aggregations is thought to have lasting effects on populations, and marine
reserves have been proposed as a tool to mitigate losses resulting from this practice. However, it is
unclear to what extent fish may use these protected areas with regards to spawning. While some species
spawn year round and remain near or within their home ranges when spawning (resident), others may
travel over great distances at specific times to spawn (transient). From August 2010 to June 2011, we
implanted 32 yellow snapper (Lutjanus argentiventris) and 25 leopard grouper (Mycteroperca rosacea)
with coded acoustic transmitters, a portion of which were depth-sensing. Fish movements were
continuously monitored by an array of underwater acoustic receivers at the Los Islotes no-take reserve, a
small rocky reef and reported spawning site for both species in the southwest Gulf of California. For each
species, site fidelity was calculated as the proportion of days present since release. As of November
2011, grouper showed a high degree of site fidelity to Los Islotes (87 ± 27 % of days). Although snapper
showed only moderate fidelity to the reserve (58 ± 32 % of days), periods of absence typically only lasted
days or weeks. No changes in site fidelity were found to correspond with spawning periods of each
species (snapper: July-Sept; grouper: April-June). For both species, levels of horizontal and vertical
activity increased during crepuscular periods, while spectral analyses revealed diel and tidal rhythms in
presence to the reserve. Overall, snapper used less of the available reserve area, exhibited a greater




                                                                                                       716
degree of site attachment to specific portions of the reserve, and occupied a shallower, narrower range of
depths than grouper (snapper, 11.6 ± 6.3 m; grouper, 15.2 ± 8.8 m). Frequent use of the reserve by both
species, coupled with the lack of evidence that these species emigrate seasonally, implies that snapper
and grouper at Los Islotes are resident spawners, and are likely to benefit from the year-round protection
afforded by a permanent no-take reserve.



Tinius, Alexander (University of Calgary); Anthony P. Russell, Anthony P. (University of Calgary,
Canada)

The in situ Relationships of the Clavicle in Lizards: Employing C-T Scanning to Explore the
Anatomy of the Breast-Shoulder Apparatus

The pectoral limb and girdle play important roles in the locomotion of lizards, and their form is likely
related to patterns of ecological diversity, although little is known of this at present. The forelimbs connect
indirectly to the axial skeleton through a multi-joint complex that constitutes the breast-shoulder apparatus
(BSA - consisting of the scapula, coracoid, clavicle, interclavicle, sternum and rib cage). This arrangement
permits a greater range of motion of the limb girdle on the boy wall than is evident in the more direct
linkage between the pelvicgirdle and vertebral column. The BSA is involved in various
overlappingfunctions, such as locomotion, respiration, defence, mating and cleaning behavior. An
exploration of the structural and functional-morphological variability of the BSA in situ willenable
enhanced interpretation of its anatomical form. Computed tomography permits imaging of internal
structure and allows for visualization of in situ relationships. Imaging the BSA in this way allows
assessment of the morphological diversity shown by its constituent parts. In this contribution we present a
comparison of the morphology and anatomical disposition of the clavicles, a morphologically variable
component of the BSA. We investigate this for a phylogenetically diverse array of exemplar lizard taxa,
representing the Iguania, Gekkota, Varanidae and Lacertidae. As generally understood the clavicle
articulates with the interclavicle midventrally and the acromion process of the scapulocoracoid dorsally.
This seemingly simple kinematic linkage, however, is expressed differentially through the form and three-
dimensional disposition of the clavicle and its anatomical interconnections. In Sceloporus, for example,
the clavicles abut each other directly in the midline, and the dorsal half of the clavicular shaft approaches
the scapula in an almost vertical orientation. This configuration alters the angle of attack of the associated
shoulder musculature with respect to the humerus, and influences the biomechanical implications of the
scapula and the interclavicle in comparison to patterns of articulation that are seen in other lizards. The
exemplars investigated demonstrate the anatomical and morphometric variables that can be explored
using a CT-scanning approach for examination of this structurally complex region.



Tinôco, Moacir (DICE - University of Kent at Canterbury / ECOA - Universidade Católica do Salvador);
Griffiths, Richard (DICE - University of Kent at Canterbury, Canada)

Atlantic Forest Habitat Loss and Herpetofauna Hotspot Conservation

There a few herpetofauna mega diverse hotspots on Earth. The Australian desert, the Colombian forest,
the Kalahari desert, the North American desert and the rainforests of southeast Asia, are some relevant
regions for reptiles and amphibian. The Atlantic forest in Brazil, a highly disturbed ecoregion, is one of the
most important global herpetofauna hotspots. On the north coast of Bahia, a small fraction of the biome
with its 220 km coast line, it is estimated to house over 150 species. The region is one of the last Atlantic
forest refuges, and its diversity is shared with the Brazilian Savannah and the Brazilian Dryland, together,



                                                                                                           717
they create an unique ecosystem: The Bahia Restinga Sand Dune. A study has been carried out within
the region since 2008. The project aims to describe the region's herpetofauna diversity and indicates how
habitat loss and disturbance influence the reptile and amphibian species distribution. The project was
able, to detect so far, 121 species. Over 10,000 individual records were made, after 1,760 visual search
hours on nine different sites. Forty four frogs species, 37 snakes, 34 lizards, four freshwater and land
turtles and two caimans. The region shows high diversity indices (11.4), and richness indices estimate
over 130 species. Although higher diversity is found on forest habitats, the river plain and the sand dune
fringes also houses high levels. The Bahia whiptail, the broad nose caiman, the moustache tree frog and
the Bahia lava lizard are some of the endangered or endemic species. Some species have not been
described for the region before: the spiny tail lava lizard (found on the Brazilian Savannah), the snouted
nose snake (found on the south and centre of the country), the glass tree frog (found on the southern
Atlantic forest) and the giant gecko (found on the Brazilian Dryland). However, although highly diverse,
the region undertakes the effects of urban development. That affects herpetofauna, which is the most
abundant vertebrate group within the ecosystem. Most impacts come from urban development,
agriculture, and recently, the development of massive hotel resorts. Despite the contribution describing
the local reptile and amphibian diversity, the project has been able to aid biodiversity management
policies, advising the creation of four protected areas, as well as promoting the enrichment of public
and private awareness towards the conservation of a global importance hotspot for biodiversity
conservation.



Tipton, Michelle (Wesleyan University); Chernoff, Barry (Wesleyan University, Canada)

Post-Glacial Recolonization of Rhinichthys atratulus, the Eastern Blacknose Dace

Post-glacial colonization is well researched in the field of phylogeography. However, a large gapexists for
the study of post-glacial colonization of flora and fauna in the Northeast region of the United States and
adjacent Canada. We have been conducting phylogeographic studies of Rhinichthys atratulus, the
Eastern Blacknose Dace (Tipton et al. 2011). At the end ofthe last glacial maximum, deglaciation in New
England began only ~20,000 yearsago (Hewitt 2000), representing a very recent (geologically and
evolutionarily speaking) starting point for recolonization of flora and fauna into communities that we
consider native today. But where was their refugium or refugia located? This study will determine the
glacial refugium or refugia responsible for harboring the populations of R. atratulus that recolonized the
northern parts of its current distribution. Phylogenetic analyses of two mitochondrial genes and nine
microsatellites reveal that R. atratulus recolonized northern regions from multiple refugia. There are
two dominate haplotypes that are geographically separate.           Each of these geographic regions have
populations with low nucleotide diversity. These genetically distinct populations rarely mix, illustrating an
east-west divide. This identifies that at least two refugia harbored fish that dominated the recolonization
process. The data indicate refugia were likely in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, supporting the
Pleistocene refugia theory that southeastern regions harbored populations close to the glacial maximum
during the last ice age (Schmidt 1986; Whitworth 1996). We also conclude that the rivers in the state of
Connecticut served as a gateway to the eastern post glacial recolonization. We theorize that R. atratulus
dispersed through the temporary glacial river in Long Island Sound before it was inundated by seawater
(Stone et al. 2005; Tipton et al. 2011). Our study begins to reveal the complex recolonization history of
fishes in New England. This helps to fill a knowledge gap of their origins and recolonization routes so that
we may derive a more complete understanding of their recent biogeographic and evolutionary histories




                                                                                                         718
Tipton, Michelle (Wesleyan University); Kraczkowski, Krystal (University of Colorado Boulder, Canada);
Chernoff, Barry (Wesleyan University, Canada)

The Blacknose Dace Complex Revaluated: Large Genetic differences within and between
Rhinichthys obtusus and Rhinichthys atratulus

The debate over the distinction and geographic locations of the Eastern vs. Western Blacknose Dace has
lingered for decades. Morphological analyses have been ambiguous and field identification is complicated
by the lack of consistently diagnostic characteristics. Added to this confusion is the unclear history of their
taxonomic classification/reclassifications and syntopic zones. In this study, we clear up some of these
issues from analyses of mitochondrial and nuclear DNA from Blacknose Dace across the eastern half of
North America. Our results show large genetic differences between the Eastern Blacknose Dace,
Rhinichthys atratulus and the Western Blacknose Dace, R. obtusus . The most surprising result was that
genetic variation within the R. obtusus clade was about five times higher than in the R. atratulus clade.
For R. obtusus, there are genetic differences between its sub-clades of approximately 5% and are
roughly clustered by geographic region. We suggest that the R. obtusus clade may need a taxonomic
revision based on these phylogenetic relationships. By providing a map of dace identified genetically to
species we provide a new geographic view of the Blacknose Dace complex that will serve as the
foundation for more detailed morphological and genetic studies.



Tirhi, Michelle (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife);

Western Pond Turtle (Clemmys marmorata) Recovery Project: Celebrating 20 years of
conservation in Washington State.

Western pond turtles (Clemmys marmorata) were once common from Baja California to Puget Sound
Washington, USA. Historical declines of this species resulted from commercial exploitation for food,
alteration and loss of habitat, and introduced predators such as bullfrogs (Rana catesbeiana) and bass
(Micropterus sp.). Western pond turtles were essentially extirpated in the Puget Sound lowlands by the
1980s, and in the mid 1990s, they were found in only two small populations in Skamania and Klickitat
counties totaling some 150 turtles. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife listed the western pond
turtle as endangered in 1993 although they remain locally common in parts of California and Oregon.
The Washington State Recovery Plan for the Western Pond Turtle was published in 1999. Now in its 20th
year, the Western Pond Turtle Recovery Project seeks to re-establish self-sustaining turtle populations in
Puget Sound and the Columbia Gorge regions of Washington State. Western pond turtles have a slow
growth rate, taking 10 to 12 years to reach reproductive age. Hatchling to adulthood survival rates in the
wild seldom exceeds 15% decreasing the likelihood that these populations will ever recover without
intervention. Continuing habitat degradation and predation compound the situation. To give these
animals a head start, Washington Department Fish and Wildlife in partnership with Woodland Park Zoo in
Seattle, Washington launched a captive rearing project in 1991. Oregon Zoo in Portland, Oregon joined
the effort in 2000. The first nest laid by a captive-reared (headstart) turtle took place in 2001 and by 2005
Western pond turtles in the wild reached the 1,000 mark. By 2011, the 20th anniversary of the project,
western pond turtles in the wild reached 1,500 in Washington. These turtles are contained at three
managed recovery sites in Pierce, Mason, and Klickitat counties. The recovery objectives are to establish
at least 5 populations of >200 pond turtles, composed of no more than 70% adults, which occupy habitat
that is secure from development or major disturbance. It is also necessary that the populations show
evidence of being sustained by natural recruitment of juveniles. Preferred recovery sites are wetland
complexes that may be less susceptible to catastrophic events than sites of a single water body. The




                                                                                                           719
greatest constraint to full recovery of this species is locating and securing recovery sites that provide
short term management control yet long term population viability.



Titon Jr., Braz (Universityof São Paulo);

Water balance and locomotor performance in species from the genus Rhinella

Amphibian locomotor performance is affected by temperature and dehydration and interaction between
these factors can potentially reduce the ability to perform important behavioral patterns, such as prey
capture and escape from predators. We compared the sensitivity of locomotor performance to
dehydration (SLPD) of three Brazilian species of toads from the genus Rhinella . We measured distance
moved during 10 minutes of locomotion in a circular track, at different temperatures (15, 20, and 25C) and
levels of hydration (100, 90, 80, 75, and 70% of body mass). Results show patterns associated to
differences in both geographical distribution and season of reproduction. SLPD was lower at low
temperatures for R. icterica , a species reproductively active during winter, and lower at intermediate
temperatures for R. schneideri , a species that reproduces mostly during spring, suggesting a pattern of
thermal adaptation of locomotor performance for these species. Otherwise, R. ornata , a species with
broader reproductive season and geographical distribution more tightly associated to forested
environments, shows high SLPD at all temperatures tested. We are now expanding this comparative
study by increasing the number of species and biomes sampled. We also expanded the range of
temperatures tested (15, 20, 25, 30, 35, and 40C) and testing SLPD only at 25C. In addition to the
sustained locomotion test, we are using a high-speed camera to test for the effects of temperature and
dehydration on biomechanical parameters of a single jump. By now, we have analyzed data for R.
granulosa from the Brazilian semi-arid area (Caatinga). Our results show that dehydration and
temperature affect both sustained locomotion and biomechanical parameters, but in different ways. The
effects of temperature and dehydration on sustained locomotion are linear, with higher performances at
higher temperatures and levels of hydration. Otherwise, the effects of these parameters on the
biomechanics of a single jump show more complex patterns: most biomechanical parameters (force,
acceleration, velocity) exhibit a rise at the first three levels of dehydration followed by an abrupt fall.
Otherwise, variation in most of the biomechanical parameters with temperature show an abrupt rise from
20 to 25C, and a maintenance of values from 25 to 35C, and falling at 40C. Implications of these results
in studies attempting to relate locomotor performance with ecological aspects will be discussed.



Titus, Valorie (Wildlife Conservation Society);

Preserving Salamander Diversity: How PARC partnerships can work to conserve our endemic
caudates

North America has the most diversity of salamander species in the world. Very little is known about the
majority of the taxa and new species are continually being described. With such high species diversity
and the lack of basic natural history data, it is difficult to make educated conservation plans. There is a
need for partnerships across the US, Canada and Mexico to preserve the amazing salamander diversity
seen in North America. Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation (PARC) is a venue through
which these partnerships can be established. Using several case studies, I will address challenges and
current successes between partners and how PARC can be integral in herpetological conservation
efforts.




                                                                                                       720
Titus-McQuillan, James (Villanova University); Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University, Villanova, PA, United
States); Jackman, Todd (Villanova University, Villanova, CA, United States); Blackburn, David (California
Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, CA, United States)

Molecular Phylogenetics of the Palearctic Naked-toed Geckos (Squamata: Gekkonidae)

Palearctic ―naked-toed‖ or ―angular-toed‖ geckos are a group of gekkonid geckos that range from North
Africa to northern India and western China, with their greatest diversity in Iran and Pakistan. The lack of
adhesive toe pads has suggested a close relationship of Palearctic geckos, and indeed recent molecular
phylogenetic studies have verified that these geckos, exclusive of Microgecko and Alsophylax, form a
monophyletic group that is sister to Cyrtodactylus + Hemidactylus. However, relationships among the
Palearctic naked-toed gecko genera remain incompletely resolved and the monophyly of many
constituent genera remains unverified. Further, competing classifications are in current use and many
species have been allocated to different genera by different authors. We used both mitochondrial (ND2)
and nuclear genes (RAG1, PDC) to explore relationships among representatives of all but one genus in
the group (Rhinogecko), including four genera not previously included in phylogenetic analyses
(Asiocolotes, Altigekko, Indogekko, and Siwaligekko). We found that Siwaligekko and an unnamed
Tibetan clade (together often referred to the ―Tibeto-Himalayan group of Cyrtopodion) are, in fact, more
closely related to Cyrtodactylus than to naked-toed geckos and that both should be considered valid at a
generic level. Asiocolotes and Altigekko are valid genera and are sister to one another. Cyrtopodion
sensu lato is paraphyletic. Mediodactylus and Tenuidactylus, which have variably been considered as
valid genera or as subgenera or synonyms of Cyrtopodion should be treated as valid. Indogekko is
closely related to Cyrtopodion sensu stricto and is best regarded as a junior synonym. Bunopus and
Crossobamon are closely related to one-another, and with Agamura are interdigitated among taxa
previously assigned to Cyrtopodion. Our data confirm earlier studies demonstrating that Tropiocolotes
sensu stricto is sister to Stenodactylus, with Pseudoceramodactylus as sister to this pair. Based on
morphology and biogeography we believe that Indo-Pakistani species assigned to Altiphylax are referable
to Altigekko and that the type species of Altiphylax is probably allied to Alsophylax spp., as originally
suggested by its authors. Although intergeneric relationships among Palearctic naked-toed geckos are
now mostly resolved, taxonomic stability in the group will require the sampling of more Indo-Pakistani and
Iranian species in order to establish generic composition.



Tobe, Edith (Squamish River Watershed Society);

A Community Approach towards Amphibian Restoration in Squamish, British Columbia

Squamish, British Columbia is a coastal community situated at the upper end of Howe Sound, a fjord
within the Salish Sea. The city is located half way between a major city, Vancouver, BC, and a resort
municipality, Whistler, the host of the 2010 Winter Olympics. As a result of being an Olympic site there
were numerous upgrades to the only highway that connects the resort municipality of Whistler to the city
of Vancouver, that being the Sea to Sky Highway, also known as Highway 99. From 2005 - 2009 highway
upgrades along Highway 99 resulted in significant impacts to amphibian habitat, in particular, that of the
red-legged frog. The Squamish River Watershed Society, working in partnership with Ministry of
Transportation, Ministry of Environment, the Sea to Sky Highway Improvement Project, the District of
Squamish, and Squamish Nation, was able to secure enhancement funds and later compensation funding
to restore amphibian habitat in lands adjacent to those that had been impacted from highway upgrades.
The Squamish River Watershed Society received permission from the District of Squamish to construct
wetland habitat on lands owned by the municipality and through staff support, secure permanent
protection of the wetlands, the first stage of which were constructed in August 2011. The Squamish River



                                                                                                       721
Watershed Society, working with the local community, has also developed a long-term monitoring
program that is both scientific and community based, providing long-term stewardship initiatives that will
extend well beyond the three year term of post construction monitoring funding.



Todd, Brian (UC Davis); Bolster, Betsy (California Department of Fish and Game, Canada); Lotz, Aaron
(UC Davis, Canada)

A guiding vision for the conservation and management of California's amphibians and reptiles

California has a rich assemblage of native amphibians and reptiles. More than half of the state‘s
amphibian species have special status (53%) and a similar proportion of reptiles fall into this category
(39%). Many species that do not have formal status receive little or no management attention and the
laws and policies regarding special status species are often complex or could be more easily discerned.
Both common and special status amphibians and reptiles face conservation threats similar to those of
other taxa, including climate change, habitat loss, diseases, introduced species, environmental
contamination, and unsustainable take. Given these concerns, there is an urgent need to evaluate the
current management framework for these taxa in California and to develop a more comprehensive
management strategy to guide future conservation decisions. Here, we outline a process recently begun
to develop a guiding vision for the management of these taxa in California. We describe the ways in
which protected amphibians and reptiles and their ecological communities are currently managed in the
state and we describe opportunities to extend these models to common and unprotected special status
species. Additionally, many native amphibians and reptiles are allowed to be legally taken in California
with a sportfishing license. However, these taxa present unique management challenges for the
application of the traditional North American model of wildlife management. We describe the
NorthAmerican model of wildlife management and discuss the challenges and opportunities this model
presents for the management of amphibians and reptiles.



Todd, Melissa (BC Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations); McEwan, Alexis;
Johnson, Chris (University of Northern British Columbia, Canada); Govindarajulu, Purnima; Paige, Kathy
(BC Ministry of Environment, Canada); Steventon, Doug; Hetherington, Anne; Vanderstar, Len (BC
Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations, Canada); Turney, Laurence; Rach, Lis
(Ardea Biological Consulting, Canada)

Habitat Factors Influencing the Distribution of Coastal Tailed Frogs (Ascaphus truei) in North-
western British Columbia

 In coastal British Columbia, Canada, post-metamorphic Coastal Tailed Frogs ( Ascaphus truei ) inhabit
cool, moist micro-sites and habitats closely associated with old growth and mature second growth forest,
away from larval streams. These terrestrial habitats are afforded little to no protection and are at high
risk of degradation or permanent loss from development activities such as logging, Run-of-River
independent power projects (IPP), and urban development.              Where applied, BC conservation
management focuses on streamside retention (30 to 50m) to protect aquatic and stream bank integrity.
The extent to which this meets the life requisites of terrestrial post-metamorphic frogs in the face of
human- and climate-induced change is largely unknown. To address this knowledge gap, we have
established 15 research sites - 3 riparian forest treatments (undisturbed, 50m buffer, harvested) in 5
watershed blocks - in the upper reaches of small (&lt;3m wide) occupied streams in the forests of north-
western BC. We are evaluating the influence of terrestrial habitat factors on the distribution and




                                                                                                       722
persistence of tailed frog populations at a range of scales by integrating a study of post-metamorphic frog
habitat use and movement, as characterized by radio-telemetry, mark- recapture studies, and visual
encounter surveys (McEwan et al. 2012), with an assessment of terrestrial habitat conditions
(microclimate, structure, composition) within and between buffer treatments and watersheds. Aquatic
larval populations and habitat conditions in adjacent stream reaches are monitored to confirm continued
reproductive occupancy, with high variability in larval abundance between sites (0 to 64 larvae per 60
minutes of survey) due to watershed and stream effects.         Preliminary stand-level results indicate frog
use of moist micro-sites tied to within-stand topography (e.g., seepages, gullies, and ephemeral draws),
and fine-scale selection of downed wood elements within those moist micro-sites. Autumn breeding
aggregations were associated with such micro-sites 12 to 31m away from streams. Frogs distribute
themselves closer to stream edges (mean distance to stream = 29.8m, SD 12.60m; range 3 to 71m), but
occur farthest from streams in undisturbed treatments. Microclimate monitoring indicates warmer and
drier mid-summer conditions further from streams in harvested and buffer sites. A preliminary study of
genetic connectivity is underway to better assess distribution and dispersal at larger scales.



Todd, Melissa (BC Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations); McEwan, Alexis;
Johnson, Chris (University of Northern British Columbia, Canada); Govindarajulu, Purnima (BC Ministry of
Environment, Canada)

Use of Radio-telemetry to Investigate the Habitat Ecology of Post-metamorphic Coastal Tailed
Frogs (Ascaphus truei) in North-western British Columbia.

We are investigating the habitat ecology of post-metamorphic Coastal Tailed Frogs within 3 riparian buffer
treatments (undisturbed, 50m buffer, harvested) distributed across 3 watersheds in north-western British
Columbia. This research is part of a larger study designed to determine the influence of habitat factors on
the distribution of Tailed Frogs in landscapes affected by human development. Post-metamorphic frogs
are rarely encountered during larval surveys in this area due to their association with moist habitats and
micro-sites away from streams. Studies to date have used mark-recapture techniques to examine post-
metamorphic habitat use and movement, but are limited by narrow spatial scope and low recapture rates.
We are using radio-telemetry, a first for this species, to track the movements of individual post-
metamorphic frogs. These data will allow us to quantify p atterns of terrestrial habitat use and movement.
In 2011, we used visual encounter surveys to locate 60 post-metamorphic frogs within 100m of occupied
larval streams from mid-July to early November. We fit 12 adult males and 6 adult females with radio-
transmitters (BD-2N Holohil) as part of a use-availability study. Of those, 5 males and 4 females were
monitored for the full nominal life-span of the transmitters (10-14 days). We measured microclimate
conditions (light intensity, temperature and relative humidity) at all used and random locations, and
habitat attributes at three nested scales (micro-(1m 2 ), meso-(25m 2 ) and macro-(100m 2 )). Results
demonstrated a strong association between radio-tagged frogs and downed wood, debris piles and root
hollow elements as well as moist micro-sites (e.g., Devil‘s Club and Skunk Cabbage sites). Adult females
were larger than males in all sites, averaging 11.1g (SD=1.92; n=13) as compared to a male average of
6.4g (SD=0.74; n=38); males outnumbered females in captures in all seasons. In summer, frogs were
located up to 70m from larval streams, with daily movements in localized areas of &lt;15m 2 . In contrast
to summer distribution, we observed late fall (mid-October – early November) aggregations of frogs (8 to
39 breeding and non-breeding adults and juveniles), another first in the study of this species, at 2
research sites located 32km apart. Work continues in 2012, with frogs permanently marked (visual
implant elastomer) for long term population assessment, and the installation of pitfall arrays for a mark-
recapture study to supplement telemetry data.




                                                                                                         723
Toledo, Gabriela (University of Kansas Biodiversity Institute);

X-frogs: "wolverine frogs" found in Borneo

 Phylogenetic studies of Limnonectes kuhlii , a fanged frog from Southeast Asia, have shown substantial
genetic variation among lineages, which is surprising given the phenotypic uniformity among the species.
As a consequence, L. kuhlii is considered a cryptic species complex in which different species remain
subsumed under the same name. The species complex condition has potentially detrimental implications
with regards to conservation efforts. A recent phylogenetic evaluation of the group recognized 22
divergent clades within the L. kuhlii complex. Morphological data are necessary to corroborate the
phylogenetic findings and to properly diagnose the individual species currently within the complex. In this
study, we examined the presence of digital claws in the L.kuhlii complex. The terminal phalanges of the
hind limbs act as claws by protruding through the skin in the toe pad. It is likely that the claws serve as
defense structures to escape predators. These claws were present in 6 clades, representing all of the
known diversity of the complex in Borneo. Histological analysis of the claws was used to describe the
internal anatomy and to note differences among clades. These results divide the clades into two groups
with respect to the presence of one morphological character. These preliminary data represent the first
step in the attempt to use discretemorphological characters to distinguish among the species of this
complex.



Toledo-Hernandez, Carlos (UPR-Rio Piedras); Vélez-Zuazo, Ximena; Ruiz-Diaz, Claudia; Patricio, Rita;
Mege, Pascal; Navarro, Melissa; Sabat, Alberto (UPR-Rio Piedras, Canada); Betancur, Ricardo (George
Washington University, Canada); Papa, Riccardo (UPR-Rio Piedras, Canada)

Population ecology and genetics of the invasive lionfish in Puerto Rico

Lionfishes ( Pterois spp. ), endemic tropical and subtropical Indo-Pacific Ocean reef-fish, are now
establishing sustainable breeding populations along the Northwest Atlantic and Caribbean coasts. As
many Caribbean reefs have exceeded their resilience capacity due environmental stresses, this invasion
presents an immense threat to their communities. Since 2008 lionfishes have been consistently reported
throughout inshore waters of Puerto Rico, however no scientific study has addressed that incident (there
might be a better expression than incident) yet. In this study, we sampled 24 sites around Puerto Rico for
lionfishes to investigate their sex- and life-stage-specific ratios, length-weight relationship, and relative
condition factor . Furthermore we documented the number of lionfish species inhabiting local waters, their
genetic diversity and population of origin . A total of 227 lionfishled to an overall sex-ratio of 1:1 and a
similar ratio of juveniles to adults. When individuals were classified by sex and life-stage, juveniles were
biased towards females and adults towards males. Juveniles had positive allometric growth, suggesting
allocation of resources into somatic growth, whereas adults showed isometric growth, with most
resources allocated into reproduction. According to their relative condition factor, juvenile males are under
sub-optimal conditions, not observed for other classes. Genetic analyses demonstrated that P. volitans
L. is the only lionfish species present in Puerto Rico, originating from the Florida invasive population. Only
4 haplotypes out of the 9 haplotypes identified in the Atlantic, were detected suggesting a secondary
founder effect after the initial invasion.




                                                                                                          724
Tolley, Krystal (SANBI); Herrel, Anthony (CNRS/MNHN, Paris, France); Measey, G. John (Nelson
Mandela Metropolitan University, Port Elizabeth, South Africa); Townsend, Ted M. (San Diego State
University, San Diego, United States); Vences, Miguel (Technische Universitat Braunschweig,
Braunschweig, Germany)

Chameleons through time and space: Extinction or Adaptation?

Biogeographic patterns are often explained by spatial shifts that match changing environmental
conditions to which species are adapted. We hypothesize that biogeographic patterns however, can also
be explained through the adaptation of organisms in situ to changing environments over time, rather than
purely through shifting distributions as a response to those changes. We combined multiple existing and
newly dated phylogenies, using between three and thirteen genetic markers, for 174 taxa representing ca.
90% of described species in the family Chamaeleonidae (BEAST, MrBayes). We show that most genera
radiated in the Oligocene, and that recent radiations are scarce, resulting in a phylogeny dominated by
paleo-endemic lineages. We suggest that the reduction of the Pan African forest coupled to the increase
in open habitats (savannah, grassland, fynbos) since the Oligocene has generated a preponderance of
paleo-endemic lineages (e.g. Brookesia, Kinyongia, Nadzikambia, Rieppeleon, Rhampholeon).
Geographic regions (Eastern Arc, northern Madagascar, and eastern Madagascar) which contain
fragments of ancient forests show comparatively higher phylogenetic diversity (PD) due to the retention of
paleo-endemic lineages. Randomisations were performed to obtain a null model for comparison against
observed PD, and the result shows that PD is lower than expected by chance across all areas. This
suggests that on the whole, the phylogeny is over-dispersed, possibly as a result of extinction filtering
(and/or undiscovered taxa). Recent radiation (e.g. Pliocene and later) is uncommon, and occurs primarily
within the genera Bradypodion and Trioceros. We suggest that these lineages were able to take
advantage of fine-structure microhabitats (e.g. grasses, fynbos) within the open vegetation that has been
dominant since the Pliocene. We investigated a combination of morphological and performance data (bite
force, gripping, sprinting) among Bradypodion species, and conclude that some Bradypodion lineages
adapted to fine-structure habitats through the evolution of small body size, limb lengthening, hand/feet
reduction, and ornamentation reduction. In contrast, paleo-endemic lineages have not radiated
substantially since the Oligocene-Miocene, and these lineages retain morphological features that are
adaptive in habitats that lack fine-structure vegetation (i.e. bushes/trees, or leaf litter). Our work suggests
that biogeographic patterns of chameleons can be explained primarily by lineage loss that corresponds
with forest habitat reduction since the Oligocene, but that certain lineages in this family have adaptively
radiated to new habitats since the Pliocene.



Tomita, Taketeru (Hokkaido University Museum); Sato, Keiichi (Okinawa Churaumi Aquarium, Motobu,
1, Japan); Suda, Kenta; Kawauchi, Junro (Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Japan); Nakaya, Kazuhiro
(Hokkaido University, Hakodate, 4, Japan)

Feeding of the megamouth shark (Pisces: Lamniformes: Megachasmidae) predicted by its hyoid
arch: A biomechanical approach

Studies of the megamouth shark, one of three planktivorous sharks, can provide information about their
evolutionary history. Megamouth shark feeding has never been observed in life animals, but two
alternative hypotheses on biomechanics suggest either feeding, i.e., ram feeding or suction feeding. In
this study, the second moment of area of the ceratohyal cartilages, which is an indicator of the flexural
stiffness of the cartilages, is calculated for 21 species of ram- and suction-feeding sharks using computed