uza, Guillem (University of Valencia); Font, Enrique; Monterde, Juan Luis (University of
Valencia, Canada); Carazo, Pau (University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain)

Sexual selection drives the evolution of sexual dichromatism in lacertid lizards

Sexual selection has often been invoked as a major force in the evolution of secondary sexual traits,
including sexually dimorphic colouration. Previous studies have shown that display complexity and
elaborate ornamentation in lizards are associated with variables that reflect the intensity of intrasexual
selection. However, these studies have relied on techniques of colour analysis based on human – rather
than lizard – visual perception, and have focused on iguanians, a clade of lizards that communicate
primarily using visual signals. Here, we use visual modelling to quantify sexual dichromatism considering
the overall colour patterns of lacertids, a group of scleroglossan lizards. We then use a comparative
phylogenetic approach to investigate the relationship between sexual dichromatism and body size
dimorphism (as an index of intrasexual selection). Sexual dichromatism is positively associated with size
dimorphism, suggesting that conspicuous colouration in male lacertids may have evolved in order to
improve opponent assessment under conditions of intense male-male competition. Our findings provide
the first evidence for the coevolution of sexual dichromatism and size dimorphism in lacertids and suggest
that the prevalent role of intrasexual selection in the evolution of visual signals is not restricted to the
iguanian lineage, but rather seems to be a general trend in diurnal lizards.



Perkins, Susan (American Museum of Natural History); Amato, George; Feinstein, Julie (American
Museum of Natural History, Canada)

Collections in the 21st Century: an overview of issues in storing samples for genomic analysis
with an emphasis on the AMNH collection.

Repositories of frozen tissues and genetic isolates from the world's organisms represent an invaluable
resource for the study of biodiversity and evolution. However, best practices for the establishment,
organization, and maintenance are necessary if these collections are to have utility. The Ambrose Monell
Cryo Collection for Molecular and Microbial Research was established at the American Museum of
Natural History in New York in 2001 and quickly rose to prominence as one of the world's major frozen
tissue collections. With a current holding of 70,000 tissues and a capacity for up to one million tissues,
we are poised to continue to grow and expand this important resource. Critical to the value of this
collection are the following attributes. The facility is a ―state of the art‖, passive, liquid nitrogen system
ensuring best preservation of samples and protection against power failure. All of the samples are
accessioned with complete collecting, metadata and permit information. Curation of the collection allows
for retrieval of any sample within minutes and, facilitates the loaning of thousands of samples each year.
In terms of herpetological diversity, this collection holds over 9,500 samples representing 1,231 species.
Samples range from recent, comprehensive, population level, field collections numbering in hundreds of
individuals to DNA samples extracted from the Museum‘s traditional, historical collections including 100
year-old type specimens. Examples from recent herpetological research on cryptic diversity in




                                                                                                          550
crocodilians, using recently collected and historical samples will be used to illustrate the value and
importance of frozen tissue repositories for biodiversity and evolutionary studies.

Perkins, Susan (American Museum of Natural History);

Value-added collections: Detection of parasites in herpetological museum specimens.

It has been casually estimated that each vertebrate species is host to between one and ten "macro"
parasite species and innumerable microbial symbionts and pathogens. Thus, each specimen in a
collection may, in fact, be several specimens in one. Depending on the method of preservation, these
parasites or symbionts may be preserved intact or may just have their genetic material preserved along
with that of the host and can be detected and studied. Blood parasites may be particularly well captured
in tissue collections given that their presence is not confined to a particular organ. The malaria parasites
of lizards are extremely diverse, with over 100 described species from all over the planet. However, it is
certain that this number is a gross underestimate of the true diversity of these parasites. The sampling of
these taxa has also been largely opportunistic and so may result in skewed perceptions of biodiversity
and evolution of the group. Here, I will present results from PCR-screening of lizard specimens from
Vietnam and other areas as well as similar molecular detection work on other herpetological samples
such as turtles and snakes, many of which indicate that several undiscovered taxa are present in these
hosts. However, I will also offer a strong cautionary note about the reliance on PCR alone as a detection
method and encourage all collectors to endeavor to take appropriate samples in the future to allow for
proper parasite detection and description.



Perry, Gad (Texas Tech University); Farmer, Michael (Texas Tech University, Canada)

Reducing risk of invasives via policy in the pet trade

Invasive species, whether herpetofaunal or ones that affect herpetofauna – are increasingly common, and
many are unlikely to be eradicated. Moreover, the social and economic factors that result in the majority
of these introductions are here to stay. Thus, there is urgency in devising ways to identify causes and
effectively manage invasive species as a chronic and broad problem, rather than an acute and species-
or location-specific one. Data from the US and the Caribbean help identify factors contributing to the
problem, which include – but are far from limited to – the pet trade. Standard responses, such as
belatedly banning pythons in        Florida    after they have become broadly established, are rarely
operationally effective and often result in poor public relations and unintended consequences. We
propose a decentralized approach that includes identifying particularly risky behaviors and locales,
employing the precautionary principle in making decisions, and empowering local communities to act as
both sentinels and first responders. Funding would come through a tax on the pet trade, with taxation
level to vary based on actual performance. Thus, instilling effective practices and responsible conduct
would result in reduction of the tax, whereas incidents of costly problems would result in penalties - a tax
increase. Funds would primarily be used to train and support local prevention, monitoring, and response.
Prevention could take the form of encouraging pet stores to take back unwanted animals, for example.
Monitoring would include volunteers, such as regional herpetological societies, as first responders who
may be called to deal with a found animal, and utilizing wildlife rehabilitation centers as well as, when
appropriate for a community, fire departments, police, and animal control professionals. Response would
mobilize some of the same people to identify the cause of an incursion and eliminate incipient populations
before they become problematic. This process also addresses problems originating beyond the pet trade.




                                                                                                        551
Peskov, Andrey (Institute of Ecology of Volga river Basin of Russian Academy of Science); Pavlov,
Alexey (Volzhsko-Kamsky National Nature Biosphere Reserve, Canada); Garanin, Valerian (Kazan
Federal University, Canada); Bakiev, Andrey; Malenyov, Andrey (Institute of Ecology of Volga river Basin
of Russian Academy of Science, Canada)

On hybridization of genus Vipera in the Volga River basin

In the first decade of the XXI century, it was widely accepted by most herpetologists that three Vipera
species inhabit the Volga River basin, the longest river in Europe. These include the adder V. berus ,
Nikolsky‘s viper V. nikolskii , and east steppe viper V. renardi . Both V. berus and V. renardi are
represented by nominal subspecies, whereas V. nikolskii is monotypic. The V. berus and V. nikolskii
belong to the berus complex, and the V. renardi to the ursinii complex. Here we present that the
Volga River basin is inhabited only by two species: V. berus , with subspecies V. b. berus and V. b.
nikolskii , and the species V. renardi , with subspecies V. r. renardi and V. r. bashkirovi . In the last
few years, our research together with our collaborators, U. Joger, N. Stümpel (Germany) and O.I. Zinenko
(Ukraine), showed that based on vipers‘ external morphology, ecological data, properties of venoms and
DNA analysis, natural hybridization of the above mentioned taxa occur, and result in fertile hybrids.
Hybridization range of V. b. berus and V. b. nikolskii covers several areas in the Middle Volga River
Region, and the specific distribution needs to be elucidated. Meanwhile, the most similar populations to
V. b. nikolskii are found at the borders between the Volga River and the Don River basins. Viper venom
from those populations has peptide composition typical to V. b. nikolskii , while the venom composition in
other parts of the Volga River basin is typical of V. b. berus . Most obvious populations of V. b. berus
are located in the north and the east of the Volga River basin. Natural hybridization between V. berus
and V. renardi is a unique and local phenomenon. The early described subspecies, Bashkirov‘s viper
V. r. bashkirovi , is likely a result of the hybridization between V. berus and V. renardi. Populations
concerning the subspecies are found in a sympatric area of these two species (Tatarstan Republic,
Samara and Ulyanovsk region; Russia). Most populations from the sympatric area, in Russia, and all the
populations out of the sympatric



Pessier, Allan (San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research);

Disease Considerations and Risk Assessment for Amphibian Reintroductions and Translocations

Global amphibian declines and the rapidity in which they have occurred has resulted in expansion of
survival assurance populations as a conservation strategy for threatened species. The goal of assurance
populations is to reintroduce species to the wild when the original cause of population declines has been
mitigated and increasingly these captive populations are the last representatives of a species. Therefore,
the need to consider disease as a limiting factor to amphibian reintroductions has reached a heightened
level of importance.        Many of the most devastating examples of amphibian population decline are
linked to anthropogenic introduction of the amphibian chytrid fungus and this highlights the need to
reduce the risk of infectious diseases in the management of reintroduction and translocation programs. It
is nearly impossible to design programs that are completely free of disease risk, but risk can be reduced
by careful planning and adherence to recommendations for risk mitigation. One of the biggest risks for
introducing detrimental infectious agents into wild amphibian populations via a reintroduction or
translocation program is exposure of reintroduction candidates to other amphibians from outside their
native range.To avoid this risk the ideal reintroduction candidates are housed in long-term isolation from
cosmopolitan amphibian collections.The need for pre-release disease testing in a reintroduction or
translocation program and the extent of the screening procedures needed is dependent on a risk
assessment. Risk assessments and disease testing are usually simple and minimal for animals kept in



                                                                                                      552
long-term isolation and become much more complicated and extensive for animals exposed to a
cosmopolitan collection. Besides consideration of how animals have been housed a critical element of a
risk assessment is assembly of disease information from the source captive populations and the wild
populations at reintroduction sites. This information is gathered by necropsy examination of animals that
die and targeted testing such as PCR for specific pathogens of interest (e.g. the chytrid fungus or
ranaviruses). In general, if an identical pathogen is present in both the captive and wild populations, the
presence of that pathogen should not impact the decision on whether to reintroduce captive animals to
the wild. However, this decision becomes more complicated when acknowledging that currently used
tests for the chytrid fungus or ranaviruses cannot always discern between different strains of these
pathogens. Development of better guidelines to assist program managers and veterinary consultants in
making risk assessments and disease testing protocols are in progress.



Peterson, Bill (NOAA, National Marine Fisheries Service); Mantua, Nate (University of Washington,
Canada); Kosro, Mike (Oregon State University, Canada)

An evaluation of freshwater and marine habitat cues for migrating salmon - to what degree are
they coherent?

Waples and Douglas pose several questions to ponder relative to this symposium and this talk addresses
one of their questions: ―For species like salmon (and birds) that migrate between different environments,
adaptive plasticity requires high cue reliability (e.g., freshwater cues that trigger smolt migration must
reliably predict optimal times to enter the ocean). What effects will climate change have on cue reliability
and adaptive plasticity?‖ The general idea behind our talk is (1) are the cues which trigger migration from
freshwater (FW) towards the ocean (OCN) in spring correlated with cues that indicate that the ocean is
ready to receive the fish? That is, is the initiation of spring in FW correlated with initiation of spring in the
OCN? In our talk we will be looking at a collection of different measures relevant to the timing of ―spring‖
in both freshwater and the northern part of the California Current system:

snowmelt timing in western US rivers

coastal upwelling and coastal sea level

seasonal shifts in coastal current from coastal radar

the timing of the appearance of cold salty water at depth as a result of the initiation of upwelling

zooplankton community changes from hydrographic surveys

We will also attempt to generate other temperature-based measure of terrestrial spring, something like
"initiation of growing season/date of the last frost" for western OR/WA. Finally, we will consider how these
measures might change under different climate change scenarios and speculate as to how salmon might
respond to various scenarios.




                                                                                                             553
Peterson, Cheston (Florida State University); Grubbs, Dean (Florida State Univeristy Coastal and
Marine Laboratory, Canada)

Investigating the trophic ecology of sharks and teleost fishes in the Florida Big Bend using stable
isotope analysis

The Florida Big Bend supports a high diversity of sharks and teleost fishes, but the region is poorly
studied to date. This study aims to describe the trophic ecology of the sharks and large teleost fishes in
one of the world‘s largest and most pristine seagrass beds. This area, nearly 300km in length, is
bordered by important hard bottom habitat that acts as an intermediary between nearshore nursery areas
and offshore adult habitats. White muscle biopsies were collected from most fishes caught during an
annual gillnet and longline survey of the system from 2009 to 2011. Nitrogen stable isotope analysis was
used to describe the general trophic ecology of the sharks and large teleost fishes over four continuous
regions of the Big Bend. Biopsies were collected in ontogenetic series from the most abundant shark
species and many teleost fishes, and will be used to investigate potential shifts in diet and trophic level
related to ontogeny. Carbon and sulfur stable isotope analysis will be used, when possible, to describe
sources of primary productivity in the Big Bend region, with special regard to two separate regions split by
the input of the Suwannee River. Data presented are preliminary.



Peterson, Christopher (SSAR); Dawson, Graham (SSAR, Canada)

The Effects of Predator Presence and Prey Size on Norops humilis Foraging Decisions

Predation-aware foraging has been observed across a variety of taxa. In this study, we examined if the
anole, Norops humilis, altered its foraging patterns in the presence of a predator and whether that
response is mediated by food profitability. The study was conducted during September 2011 at the La
Selva Biological Station, a 1500 ha forested reserve located in Heredia Province, Costa Rica. We used
Lycosid spiders of varying sizes (1.3 – 4.9 mm cephalothorax width) as prey and an 11 mm Cupiennius
sp.spider (Araneae: Ctenidae) as the predator; members of this family are known to prey upon N. humilis.
We presented individual N. humilis with prey spiders of varying sizes and recorded if they attempted to
feed. In half of the trials, the predatory spider was present near the Norops. There were significantly
more anole strikes in the absence of a predator (14 strikes without predators vs. 3 with predators present;
chi^2 =10.9032, d.f. = 1, p = 0.0010). Prey size (cephalothorax) width had no significant effect on N.
humilis decision to strike (chi^2 = 0.05876, d.f. = 1, p = 0.8494) in the absence of predators. However,
when a predator was present, the spiders struck were significantly larger than those that were not struck
(chi^2 = 4.0857, d.f. = 1, p= 0.0432). This suggests that N. humilis respond to predator presence by
reducing foraging activity, but are willing to risk predation to acquire higher value food (larger prey items).



Peterson, Mark (University of Southern Mississippi); Slack, William T. (US Army ERDC, Canada);
Grammer, Paul O.; Havrylkoff, Jeanne-Marie; Mickle, Paul F. (USM, Canada)

The threatened Gulf sturgeon, Acipenser oxyrinchus desotoi, is an anadromous species inhabiting
coastal drainages along the northern Gulf of Mexico from the Pearl River, LA through the Suwannee
River, FL, where it reaches its maximum abundance. Western populations use multiple components of
the habitat landscape ontogenetically during their life history. We have examined Gulf sturgeon
movements since 1997, first by manual tracking, but since 2008 by acoustic array technology. Gulf
sturgeon have differential use of coastal watersheds and adjacent marine environments. For example,




                                                                                                           554
adults (&gt;1250 mm FL) are detected in rivers (detected a mean of 5.3d) and then move through
estuaries (detected 7.1d) to barrier islands (detected 14.1-20.9d) to feed in associated benthic habitats in
winter periods (Sept-Dec) and return mainly to natal rivers in spring (Jan-April) for either spawning
(March-April) or holding (Feb-Sept) for the summer period. In contrast, some sub-adults (891-1250 mm
FL) use the same adult temporal movement pattern to feed on barrier islands (detected 3.0-9.5d) but
smaller sub-adults appear to use estuaries (detected 19.9d) and nearshore habitats (detected 7.3d) for
feeding before all sub-adults move back upriver to the summer holding areas. Compared to up river sites
(detected 6.3d), juveniles (304-890 mm FL) spend considerable time in estuaries (detected 18.7d) and
nearshore habitats (detected 4.3d) year-round, theoretically feeding. Little is known about juvenile Gulf
sturgeon in western populations. Results of our efforts provide new data on sub-adult and juvenile
movement in Mississippi Sound, and complete our understanding of this river-estuary-barrier island
pathway for most life stages. We view this anadromy pattern in a metacommunity context defined as "a
set of local communities that are linked by dispersal of multiple potentially interacting species" (Holyoak et
al. 2005). We discuss the importance of maintaining the integrity of this linkage for Gulf sturgeon recovery
in light of impact to other anadromous species in the region, like Alabama shad, Alosa alabamae and
skipjack herring, A. chrysochloris which exhibit a similar life history pattern, but replace barrier island
habitats for open marine environments since they are filter feeders.



Pettingill, Kaitlyn (University of Texas at Tyler); Dunithan, Ashley; Ford, Neil; Williams, Lance (University
of Texas at Tyler, Tyler, TX, United States)

Ecology of Aquatic Communities in the Neches and Sabine Rivers, Texas

We compared fish and mussel community structure in the Neches and Sabine Rivers of East Texas, two
rivers with similar geology and biogeographic history. Biota were collected on the Sabine River, between
Lake Tawakoni and Toledo Bend Reservoir, and on the Neches River, between Lake Palestine and B.A.
Steinhagen Reservoir. Fish data were collected using a Smith Root electroshocker throughout a 200m
reach. Mussel data were collected in 50m transects using one-hour tactile searches. Fish species
richness was higher in the Sabine River and evenness and diversity were both higher in the Neches
River. Mussel richness, evenness, and diversity were all higher in the Neches River. Nonmetric
multidimensional scaling showed sites for the fish data were separated by river and longitudinal position.
In contrast, mussels from the lower Sabine River and the Neches River are more closely related than
sites from the upper Sabine River. These results may be explained by differences in habitat, stream size
and impacts of reservoirs.



Phillips, Nicole (Murdoch University); Chaplin, Jennifer; Morgan, David (Murdoch University, Murdoch,
WA, Australia); Peverell, Stirling (Queensland Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries, Cairns,
WA, Australia)

Stock structure in the Indo-West Pacific Pristis sawfishes: the importance of habitat use in the
evolution of sex-biased dispersal

A number of elasmobranchs across different families exhibit sex-biased dispersal. However, the selective
pressures that favor the evolution of sex-biased dispersal in elasmobranchs are not well understood and
sex-biased dispersal has been assessed in too few species for a clear pattern(s) to emerge. This study
provides the first evidence of sex-biased dispersal in sawfishes and demonstrates how such dispersal
may vary with habitat usage in Indo-West Pacific species. The Freshwater Sawfish, Pristis microdon,



                                                                                                          555
which utilizes freshwater rivers as juveniles and marine/estuarine waters as adults, was found to have
male-biased dispersal in Australian waters. In contrast, P. clavata and P. zijsron, which spend their entire
lives in marine and/or estuarine waters, are genetically structured in northern Australian waters. The use
of freshwater rivers as juveniles by P. microdon suggests that the evolutionary history of this species in
Australian waters was potentially very different to those for P. clavata and P. zijsron and may have
influenced the evolution of sex-biased dispersal in the former, but not the latter, species.



Phillis, Corey (Earth to Ocean Research Group, Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University); Pearse,
Devon (Fisheries Ecology Division, Southwest Fisheries Science Center, NOAA National Marine
Fisheries Service, Canada); Moore, Jonathan (Earth to Ocean Research Group, Biological Sciences,
Simon Fraser University, Canada); Garza, Carlos (Fisheries Ecology Division, Southwest Fisheries
Science Center, NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service, Canada)

Dam evolution: Rapid evolution of fish migration in response to novel river barriers

Animal migrations are amazing phenomena that connect disparate habitats, exerting large influence over
recipient ecosystem dynamics. However, migrations may also make populations more vulnerable to
anthropogenic impacts such as blockage of migration corridors. A population‘s fate in the face of a novel
threat depends on the adaptive potential of the underlying traits that control migration. Salmonid
populations express a range of migration tendencies, including partial migration. Dams are threats to
migratory salmonids across their range; where dams bisect partially migratory populations their
persistence upstream requires adoption of the completely resident form. Whether fish in these
populations undergo migrations is dependent on the genetic and or environmental conditions. Here we
examine the evolutionary response and demographic consequences of selection against migration in
partially migratory populations. To test the potential for adaptive evolution in response to migration
barriers we performed a common garden experiment with a pair of partially migratory rainbow trout
populations recently isolated by a barrier waterfall. We found that above barrier offspring expressed the
migration phenotype at a significantly lower rate. Furthermore, expression of the migratory phenotype
was conditional on exceeding a threshold body size, and this threshold was larger in the above barrier
population. We propose that this is an evolutionary response to directional selection in favor of threshold
sizes larger than can be attained in a normal growing year. As a result, the above barrier population
persists due to selection for thresholds that favor the resident form, yet likely maintains some cryptic
genetic variation for migration should conditions change. Thus, rapid evolution can provide population
resilience to barrier creation. We use these results to parameterize a model to simulate demographic and
evolutionary consequences of dam creation and removal. These simulations predicted that population
size decreases following dam construction due to the loss of individuals that migrate out of the system
and due to the removal of the more fecund migrant adults. We find that, assuming heritability of the
threshold size trait, populations can persist--albeit at a lower size--via rapid evolution to the resident state.
Following dam removal, re-evolution of the more productive, migratory populations can occur. However,
depending on the parameters, this re-evolution of anadromy occurs over longer timescales--if at all.
These results not only have important management implications for salmonid recolonization efforts, but
also inform understanding of how migratory species in general may respond to changes in landscape
connectivity.




                                                                                                             556
Phochayavanich, Ratchata (Biological Science Program, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University);
Khonsue, Wichase (Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
Thailand); Kitana, Noppadon (Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Canada)

Distribution Pattern of Amphibian Affected by Check Dam Installation in an Ephemeral Stream at a
Tropical Deciduous Forest

Check dams have been constructed in a large number as tools for water and soil management in many
countries throughout the world, including Thailand. Many physical factors have been reported to be
changed after the check dam construction. However, only a few reports are available on effects of check
dam on biotic component, especially on animals living in the area. Since amphibian is sensitive to water
and moisture change, the distribution pattern of amphibian was selected as monitoring parameter in this
study. Distribution patterns of amphibian in an ephemeral stream at a deciduous forest were studied
before and after check dam construction at Chulalongkorn University Forest and Research Station at Nan
province, northern Thailand. Ten replications of 5 transects including 1 stream transect and 4 terrestrial
transects (5, 10, 25, and 50 meters from the stream) were used to monitor the amphibian. The survey
were conducted every month for 2 years and data of April 2009 to March 2010 and May 2010 to February
2011 were represented as pre- and post-check dam periods, respectively. There were 15 amphibian
species found in pre-check dam period and 14 species found in post-check dam period. Among these
species, 12 species were commonly found in both periods. The distribution pattern of each common
species were compared among 5 transects in each periods (pre- and post-check dam) by Kruskal-Wallis
test with nonparametic Tukey-type multiple comparisons at p≤0.05. The physical factors including
hydroperiod, water depth, and number of water body were also collected and compared during these
study periods. Although, physical factors related to water were significantly different between pre- and
post-check dam periods, the distribution patterns of 8 common species were similar between pre- and
post-check dam periods. However, the distribution patterns of 4 amphibian species significantly changed
from ―equal‖ distribution among 5 transects in pre-check dam period to ―dense‖ at the stream habitat in
the post-check dam period. These results strongly indicate that the distribution patterns of some
amphibian species were affected by the check dam. The distribution patterns of these 4 amphibian
species could be applied as a sensitive indicator to detect effect of the check dam on biotic component at
the population level in the future.



Pickard, Alexandria (Guy Harvey Research Institute, Nova Southeastern University, FL 33004 USA);
Wetherbee, Brad (Guy Harvey Research Institute, Nova Southeastern University, FL, and the University
of Rhode Island, RI, USA, Canada); Nemeth, Richard; Kadison, Elizabeth; Blondeau, Jean (University of
the Virgin Islands, St. Thomas, Virgin Islands, USA, Canada); Shivji, Mahmood (Guy Harvey Research
Institute, Nova Southeastern University, FL 33004 USA, Canada)

Characterization of shark movements on a mesophotic Caribbean coral reef and temporal
association with fish spawning aggregations

Fish spawning aggregations (FSA) are often composed of hundreds to thousands of individuals and
represent the primary source of annual reproductive effort for many species. Migration of sexually mature
adults from home sites to spawning grounds for reproduction is predictable in location and timing. Fish
spawning aggregations may also play an important role in ecosystem function. For example, grouper
spawning aggregations can represent a huge concentration of fish biomass, which fluctuates on a
seasonal basis. As such, they may represent a potentially important prey source for large predators,
including sharks. Moreover, their large-scale reproductive migrations connect various habitats and local




                                                                                                      557
food webs within the larger ecosystem.      This study   aims to determine how populations migrating to
FSA sites function within the ecosystem, by examining the relationship between movement patterns of
apex predators (sharks) and multi-grouper species at two FSA sites along the southern shelf edge of St.
Thomas, US Virgin Islands. We test the hypothesis that increased shark presence will be detected at FSA
sites during grouper spawning seasons. To determine shark presence at spawning aggregations, three
species of sharks (tiger, lemon and Caribbean Reef) were tagged with acoustic transmitters (VR13, 16).
Their movements were monitored over five years using an array of Vemco receivers (VR2) deployed at
spawning sites and at locations spanning a stretch of deep reef approximately 100 km in length.
Receiver data will indicate if shark frequency at spawning areas is correlated temporally with grouper
spawning seasonality, diurnality or species. Results will increase knowledge of shark reliance on FSA
sites and how they utilize the mesophotic reef system as a whole, for habitat and prey.



Pickett, Evan (University of Newcastle); Stockwell, Michelle; Bower, Deborah; Garnham, James; Pollard,
Carla; Clulow, John; Mahony, Michael (University of Newcastle, Callaghan, N, Australia)

Growth, survival, uncertainty and the impact on viability of a remnant population of a threatened
frog

Since the detection of the global amphibian decline, there has been call for long-term demographic
studies, as they are crucial to understand temporal fluctuations in amphibian population and to quickly
detect declines. Population viability analysis (PVA) has been increasingly used for these purposes
throughout many taxa, however the use of long-term data to produce PVA models for amphibians is rare.
We conducted long-term mark recapture on one population of an endangered frog and short-term mark
recapture on a further two populations to determine the temporal and spatial variability of vital
demographic rates. Using these vital rates, we constructed a matrix population viability model
incorporating parametric uncertainty and temporal variability in R. PVA was used to predict the most
powerful vital rates for affecting population persistence as well as modelling management actions and
determining the effort required to reduce uncertainty within the model. Female survival had the greatest
impact on predictions of population persistence, but growth rate of individuals to maturity, which is
naturally variable on a spatial scale, also increased population persistence. Increasing fecundity
(juveniles per female) increased population persistence, but had less power. This was also seen in the
projected use of captive breeding to enhance the populations as an increase in population persistence
required large effort. The PVA model showed a large level of uncertainty in predicted outcomes due to
the incorporation of sampling variance. A 4-fold decrease in sampling variability was required to decrease
model uncertainty, indicating amphibian PVA are unlikely to be useful for direct predictions of persistence,
and therefore restricted to comparison of management actions.          This PVA modelling has enabled
comparison of scenarios to rioritise research and management efforts for these populations. Using
program R allows flexibility in model construction and easy sharing of code, and we recommend the use
of this PVA code as a starting point for future PVA models on amphibians.




                                                                                                        558
Pierce, Benjamin A. (Southwestern University); McEntire, Kira D.; Wall, Ashley E.; Harren, Jenifer W.
(Southwestern University, Georgetown, TX, United States)

Population Size, Movement, and Reproduction of the Georgetown Salamander, Eurycea naufragia,
a Species of Conservation Concern in Central Texas

The Georgetown salamander, Eurycea naufragia , is an endemic, neotenic salamander that occurs at
only 15 sites in central Texas. Rapid urbanization throughout its range places all known populations at
risk and the species is currently being considered for listing under the Endangered Species Act. Little is
known about its natural history or ecology. We conducted mark-recapture studies at two sites in the
summer of 2010. Estimates from the mark-recapture studies indicate that each population consisted of
only about 100-200 adult salamanders. Recaptures of marked salamanders over an 18-month period
demonstrated that marked salamanders exhibited high site fidelity, most being recaptured within 5 m of
the point of initial capture. Examination of salamanders for the presence of eggs suggests that
reproduction occurs primarily during winter and spring months. These studies provide basic ecological
information that can be used to develop a long-term conservation plan for the species.



Pike, David (James Cook University); Huang, Wen-San (Department of Zoology, National Museum of
Natural Science, Taiwan, Canada)

Sea turtles (indirectly) induce behavioral evolution in a terrestrial lizard

Animals display an astonishingly wide diversity of parental care tactics that ultimately enhance offspring
survival, but we do not understand how and why such behaviors evolve. We show that sea turtles
(indirectly) induce the evolution of maternal care in a terrestrial lizard, a cascading trophic effect mediated
by egg-eating snakes . By nesting on land, sea turtles provide a highly seasonal food source for egg-
eating snakes. When turtle eggs are scarce, snakes migrate inland and consume lizard eggs. Female
lizards have responded to snake predation by remaining at the nest during incubation and actively
deterring snakes from eating their eggs. When erosion prevented sea turtles from laying eggs at one of
our study sites, snakes stopped foraging on the beach and increased their foraging efforts at an inland
lizard nesting site. This was followed by a decrease in snake body mass, and a &gt;50% reduction in
survival, suggesting that the snake population is too large to persist on lizard eggs alone. These patterns
imply that sea turtles indirectly induce maternal care in a lizard by increasing mesopredator abundances,
empirical evidence that predation can trigger the evolution of parental care from a non-caring state.



Pilgrim, Melissa (University of South Carolina Upstate); Farrell, Terence (Stetson University, Canada)

The effects of spatial scale and habitat heterogeneity on the isotopic composition of
herpetofauna.

We tested the validity of the stable isotope approach for determining differences in pigmy rattlesnake (
Sistrurus miliarius ) diet composition among three Florida populations. We collected scale clips from 186
rattlesnakes captured in the study populations (65 Hog Island individuals, 62 Jones Island individuals,
and 59 Uplands individuals). We determined the stable carbon and nitrogen isotope ratios for each scale
clip (δ 13 C values ranged from -18.1 to -23.9 and δ 15 N values ranged from 4.3 to 8.4). Hog Island
average δ 13 C values (-20.8 ± 0.13) were significantly enriched relative to Jones Island and Uplands
average δ 13 C values (-22.3 ± 0.13 and -22.1 ± 0.12, respectively). Average δ 15 N values of each
population were significantly different from one another (Hog Island = 6.2 + 0.08; Jones Island = 6.9 +



                                                                                                           559
0.07; Uplands = 5.8 ± 0.10). To evaluate what portion of the observed variation in scale tissue isotope
values was related to differences in food sources, we built an isotopic profile of potential prey items for
each population. We collected 992 prey items, representing 10 amphibian, 8 reptile and 7 mammal
species. Prey δ 13 C values ranged from -31.1 to -14.5‰ and prey δ 15 N values ranged from 0.3 to
7.0‰. When trying to link observed variation in snake isotope values to differences in diet composition,
our interpretations were complicated by spatial variation in prey abundance and within-species spatial
variation in prey isotopic composition. Our work emphasizes that use of stable isotopes as trophic
indicators in natural systems is most accurate when sources of variation in the isotopic baseline (i.e., food
sources) of the system are quantified.



Pilliod, David (US Geological Survey);

Automated Pattern Recognition Program for Leopard Frogs

Identification of individual animals is needed for studying population demography and movement patterns
and is the basis for mark-recapture analyses. Animals with unique body markings (e.g., coloration or
stripes) are easily identified by the human eye from photographs. Photo-matching provides a non-
invasive alternative identification method but has been limited to small datasets because of time and
effort requirements of manual searches. To improve photo-matching for research purposes, Identifrog
software was developed. Identifrog uses a spot-pattern recognition algorithm to identify individual
northern leopard frogs (Lithobates pipiens) using images of their dorsal spot pattern. The algorithm
consists of multiple reduction steps that reduce false matching images at each step. The system returns
the top ten ranked individuals as closest matches along with a classification of these into ‗probable‘
versus ‗not so probable‘ categories. The classification serves as an indication whether the query
individual was previously captured or not. Identifrog was tested on a dataset of 200 individuals, with a
total of 854 images. Identifrog identified 95% of the true matches in the top ten and classified 87% of the
true matches as ‗probable‘ in the top ten. Depending on the discriminators, the system classified 77-84%
of individuals new to the database as ‗not so probable‘ matches. Future versions of this software will
adapt the spot-pattern recognition algorithms for other spotted animals by either adding or removing
reduction steps suitable for animal identification.



Pinto, Nelsy (Universidad de los Andes); Calderon, Martha (Universidad Nacional, Canada); Crawford,
Andrew (Universidad de los Andes. Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute.Círculo Herpetológico de
Panamá, Canada); Miralles, Aurelien (Centre D¿Ecologie fonctionnelle and Evolutive., Canada);
Ramírez-Pinilla, Martha (Universidad Industrial de Santander, Canada)

Revealing complex biogeographical relationships in the Northern Andes: A perspective using
molecular phylogeny of Mabuya lizards

Ecological and historical hypotheses have been proposed to explain high Neotropical species diversity.
Comprehensive understandings of the factors that generate Neotropical diversification require
phylogenetic and phylogeographic hypotheses of organisms coupled with a knowledge of their ecological
restrictions and dispersal abilities. We evaluated phylogenetic relationships among all 27 known species
of skinks in the genus Mabuya (sensu stricto) and related diversification patterns with geographic and
climatic barriers. Mabuya is distributed from Mexico to Bolivia and the Caribbean islands. Our geographic
sampling was especially dense in Colombia, located in the center of this distribution, and the principal
results are focused in the north of the Andes. Molecular phylogenetic inference was based two



                                                                                                         560
mitochondrial markers (12S and cytochrome b) and three nuclear genes (Rag2, NGFB and R35) combing
new and previously published data and utilizing parsimony, Bayesian and maximum likelihood criteria.
We also reconstructed ancestral areas based on parsimony and a likelihood model of evolution of
geographic range, dispersal, local extinction and cladogenesis (DEC). Our results suggest that
diversification in the Neotropical genus Mabuya began approximately in the Middle Miocene.
Diversification of Mabuya seems to have been caused by vicariant events and climatic change. For
instance, splitting time between the eastern and western Amazonian basin is congruent with divergence
time between M. bistriata y M. altamazonica. Our data support the hypothesis that the late Miocene and
early Pliocene was a period that played an important role in the generation of biological diversity in the
north of the Andean region. The northern Andean mountains are divided in at least two distinct lineages
(1) the Oriental, Caribbean and Occidental clade and (2) the Central, Occidental and Oriental clade. This
distributional pattern, the time of diversification clades and the time of uplifting of the Andean mountains
in the north suggest that diversification within the populations in the Andean region may be was triggered
by climatic changes that occurred during the Pleistocene. Therefore, we conclude that the actual
distributional pattern of Mabuya provide new evidence for the relative importance of these historical
processes (climatic cycles and vicariant events) in shaping the assembly of Neotropical biota.



Pirani, Renata (Universidade Federal de Viçosa); Nascimento, Luciana (Pontifícia Universidade Católica
de Minas, Belo Horizonte, Brazil); Feio, Renato (Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa, Brazil)

Similarity of amphibians in mountainous areas in southeastern Brazil

The Brazil is a country that has many mountains range. Among which highlight Espinhaço and Matiqueira
located at southeastern Brazil. The first is covered by Cerrado and Atlantic Forest formation, and one of
the largest Camp Rock formations of Brazil. The Mantiqueira mountain range is influenced by the Atlantic
Forest domain. Used the Sorensen index to verify the similarity in species composition of anurans from
different localities at both mountain ranges complexes. They are: Uaimií State Forest (FLOE Uaimií)
(20º29‘S, 43º57‘W), Serra do Ouro Branco Park (20º31‘S, 43º41‘W), Itacolomi State Park/Tripuí
Ecological Station (20º29‘S, 43º30‘W), Serra do Cipó National Park (PNSC) (19º17‘S, 43º35‘W), Reserva
Particular do Patrimônio Nacional da Serra do Caraça (RPPN Serra do Caraça) (20º05‘S, 43º29‘W)
located in Espinhaço, and Serra do Brigadeiro State Park (PESB) (20º43‘S, 42º28‘W), Ibitipoca State
Park (PE Ibitipoca) (21º40‘S, 43º52‘W) and Serra do Caparaó National Park (PARNA Caparaó) (20º26‘S,
41º47‘W) in Mantiqueira. A cluster analysis by the unweighted average method (UPGMA) was performed
to determine the existence of locations with similar species composition and the clusters were defined by
at least 40% similarity. The localities that are part of the southern portion Espinhaço, known as
Quadrilátero Ferrífero (FLOE Uaimií, Itacolomi State Park/Tripuí Ecological Station, Serra do Ouro
Branco Park and RPPN Serra do Caraça) form a cluster, corroborating the hypotheses that this region
form a unit of relief the Espinhaço mountain range that harbor endemic and unique species. Some
species with distribution in different mountain ranges (Espinhaço and Mantiqueira) (e.g. Hylodes babax),
explain a greater similarity of the fauna of PESB and PARNA Caparaó with the Quadrilátero Ferrífero
clade. The northern portions (Caparaó/Brigadeiro) and meridional (Ibitipoca) of the Mantiqueira mountain
range communicates with the high plains of the Espinhaço mountain range through a continuous altimetry
around 800m, joining the region of the PE Ibitipoca (Mantiqueira) to the Quadrilátero Ferrífero
(Espinhaço). The PNSC was least like the location of the study area. Even though it is located in the
Espinhaço mountain range, the Serra do Cipó is part of a different zoogeographical unit than FLOE
Uaimií.




                                                                                                        561
Pittman, Shannon (University of Missouri-Columbia); Connette, Grant; Semlitsch, Raymond (University
of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, United States)

Effects of habitat composition on movement and optimal dispersal strategies in juvenile spotted
salamanders (Ambystoma maculatum)

Natal dispersal is a critical movement phase for many species, particularly those that undergo
ontogenetic habitat shifts. Behavioral strategies of natal dispersers in response to human-altered habitat
have far-reaching implications for functional connectivity and local population dynamics. Juvenile pond-
breeding spotted salamanders ( Ambystoma maculatum ) are forest-dependent and exhibit considerable
variation in natal dispersal behaviors such as speed of movement, path linearity, and settlement
propensity. We released 200 recently-metamorphosed salamanders in 3 different habitat types (mature
forest, grassland, and 5-year old clearcut) and followed their movements for 1-3 nights. We used these
empirical data to parameterize spatially-explicit, individual-based movement models to investigate the
effects of landscape composition on dispersal success. Specifically, we investigated how distance of natal
wetland from forest and the size of terrestrial buffer zones affected optimal movement and settlement
strategies of dispersing salamanders. Habitat type affected path linearity (P=0.05), with salamanders
moving straighter in low-quality (grassland) habitat. Movement of salamanders in forest habitat was
adequately described by a correlated random walk model (CRWDiff=0.595, P=0.1617, n=84). Results
from our movement model indicated that the size of buffer zone affected the optimal responsiveness of
juveniles to microhabitat. Continuous forest and large buffer zones favored straighter movement paths
and less attention to microhabitat, while smaller buffer zones favored more tortuous paths and high
settlement propensity. All edge simulations favored high settlement propensity and more tortuous paths.
These results indicate that juvenile movement is affected by habitat type and that modified landscapes
may favor alternative dispersal strategies.



Plank, Susanne (ElasmoTech Labs); Winston, Steven (ElasmoTech Labs, Canada)

Photo identification using modern feature recognition and classifiication

Photo identification has been used as a tool for biological research for several decades as a non-invasive
method for recognizing study animals, and has been utilized across a wide range of taxa from marine
mammals to invertebrates. Though the matching process began as a manual search through a catalog of
collected photographs, it has now mostly been supplanted by computer-assisted criteria matching or
pattern recognition programs.            Despite these advances, programs still require manual
identification/confirmation of the programs' highest ranked candidate matches. We have created a new
image analysis program using updated computer science algorithms to not only strongly match photos
containing the same individual, but identify groups that share similar physical characteristic. Here we
present data on initial tests with an inanimate object (coins). We haphazardly selected 100 United States
pennies used as a ―knowledge base‖ in 4 experiments. In Experiment 1 illumination and angle of the
photo remained controlled, in Experiment 2 illumination was varied, in Experiment 3 angle was varied,
and in Experiment 4 illumination and angle were varied in randomly selected combinations. Each of these
knowledge bases was subsequently tested with 4 conditions: control, varied illumination, varied angle,
and varied illumination/angle. Each of these subsets consisted of 10 randomly selected US pennies from
the knowledge base (rephotographed under experimental conditions), 10 haphazardly selected novel US
pennies, one novel Canadian penny, and one novel US dime. Each of the 4 experiments (4 knowledge
bases with 4 subsequent tests) was computed for 64 million iterations (16 million iterations per sub-test).
US dimes and Canadian pennies resulted in outgroup placement from the US pennies without error. A




                                                                                                       562
total of 4 images had false positives during the analysis iterations, but for no more than 2 of the 16 million
iterations per test, giving very strong support for the end result. All test pennies were correctly matched
with their knowledge base counterparts without error despite most test photographs having a different
illumination and/or angle from the original knowledge base photograph. The preliminary results of this
analysis are highly encouraging not only for the individual identification of highly patterned species but for
those species lacking easily distinguished patterns. We soon hope to test this program on coastal
California elasmobranchs.



Platenberg, Renata (Virgin Islands Division of Fish and Wildlife);

The coqui, the treefrog, and the toad: a tale of three invaders in the U.S. Virgin Islands

Amphibian populations are highly vulnerable to species invasions, and insular populations more so.
Introduced species can have varying levels of impact, depending on predation, overlap of habitat,
breeding sites, and diet, and the capability of introducing diseases. The U.S. Virgin Islands are situated
on the Puerto Rican Bank in the Caribbean Sea and have a long history of species introductions and
other human impacts. Three species of amphibians have become established and are now widespread
and abundant: the Cane Toad Rhinella marina , native to South America, The Cuban Treefrog
Osteopilus septentrionalis , native to Cuba, and most recently the Puerto Rican Coqui Eleutherodactylus
coqui , native to Puerto Rico but not the Virgin Islands. These three species have different ecological
impacts on native amphibians. The larger, more distant, and more aggressive invaders consume larger
prey and utilize deeper sources of standing water for breeding than do native species, while not seeming
to include the natives as important prey items. The diminutive E. coqui , however, utilizes the same
microhabitats, reproductive sites, and prey as native frogs and is believed to be the vector for the
introduction of the chytrid fungus into the U.S. Virgin Islands. Thus, the smallest and most local invader
turns out to have the biggest impact on the native frogs.



Pluta, Jennifer (Metropolitan College of Denver); Quinn, Jessica; Gagliardi-Seeley, Jennifer
(Metropolitan College of Denver, Canada); Bakker, Aaron (Metropolitan State College of Denver, Denver,
CO, United States)

Is male mate choice equally important as female mate choice in the monogamous, biparental
Convict Cichlid (Amatitlania nigrofasciata)?

In many species, choosing a high-quality mate or a high-quality breeding site can increase one‘s
reproductive success.        Previously, we set out to determine whether female mate choice in convict
cichlids (Amatitlania nigrofasciata) was based on mate quality or breeding site quality. We created 3
compartments in a tank and placed a male in each outer compartment, leaving the center compartment
as a neutral. Our experimental design isolated the males in their compartments with dividers that had
holes large enough for the smaller female to swim to each compartment. In the experimental group, only
the small male received a breeding site. In the controls, the males were of equal size and one male was
randomly given a breeding site. We were unable to conclude anything from this experiment, because
most of the females stayed in the neutral compartment; thus, no choice was made.             This led us to
investigate whether male choice is equally important as female choice.            Since convict cichlids (
Amatitlania nigrofasciata) are serially monogamous and biparental, it is quite possible that both male and
female choice is important. We are repeating the above experiment with an addition of another female;
thus, there will be two isolated males and two free-swimming females in each tank. We hypothesize that



                                                                                                          563
pair-bond formation will occur more often than the previous experiment since both males and females will
be involved in the mate choice process.



Pollock, David (U Colorado School of Medicine); Castoe, Todd (U of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO, United States); de Koning, AP Jason (U Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United
States); Secor, Stephen (University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, United States); Feschotte, Cedric
(University of Texas at Arlington, Canada)

Snake Evolutionary Systems Genomics

Snakes represent an outstanding vertebrate model for studying the evolution of unique and extreme
phenotypes and adaptation, presenting an exciting system for linking changes at the molecular level with
phenotypic novelty and diversity. They also provide an excellent system for studying the synergistic
interactions that various levels of biological organization (i.e., proteins, gene expression, genome
structure) may have on generating adaptive phenotypes. Here we show evidence for extreme adaptation
from the level of genes through the level of genome structure that may have collectively contributed to the
evolution of extreme phenotypes in snakes. This will include evidence for adaptation and molecular
convergence in metabolic proteins, and evidence for major changes in repeat element composition that
may have altered snake genome evolution.



Pompert, Joost (Falkland Islands Fisheries Department); Pierce, Graham (Aberdeen University,
Canada); Brickle, Paul (Falkland Islands Fisheries Department, Canada); Arkhipkin, Alexander (Falkland
Islands Fisheries department, Canada)

A comparison of the life history strategies of the Falkland skate (Bathyraja macloviana) and the
joined-fin skate (Bathyraja cousseauae) using age estimations from caudal thorns.

Life history parameters for the Falkland skate, Bathyraja macloviana and the joined-fin skate Bathyraja
cousseauae from specimens caught in waters around the Falkland Islands are presented, with age and
growth estimates derived from 496 and 357 caudal thorn samples respectively. Bathyraja macloviana
were aged to 14 years, whereas B. cousseauae were aged to 20 years. Growth between the two species
was very different, with the von Bertalanffy growth model (K= 0.21, L∞=60.6cm Lt) best describing B.
macloviana, and the Gompertz growth function best describing B. cousseauae (G=1.937, k=0.178,
L∞=124.5 cm Lt-). In both species the females are heavier at size than the males, and females reach a
slightly larger size. Age increments were validated using two techniques: an oxytetracycline tag-
recaptured B. cousseauae that had been at liberty for 2½ years, and edge analyses of a subsample of
young specimens.

Sizes and ages at 50% maturity derived from maturity stages are also presented. For female B.
macloviana this is 50.2cm Lt and 7.0yrs, for males 46.0cm Lt and 6.8yrs. For female B. cousseauae these
values are 96.7cm Lt and 10.3yrs, for males 91.4cm Lt and 9.0yrs.

Of the 16 skate species that occur in the Falkland fishery, 8 have to date been age-assessed, with the
new life history information on these 2 species providing further insight into the inter-assemblage
dynamics. With an increasing amount of ageing studies completed stock management models can be
refined.




                                                                                                       564
Pompert, Joost (Falkland Islands Fisheries Department); Pierce, Graham (Aberdeen University,
Canada); Brickle, Paul (Falkland Islands Fisheries Department, Canada); Arkhipkin, Alexander (Falkland
Island Fisheries Department, Canada)

Reproductive strategies of two species of skate (Bathyraja macloviana and Bathyraja cousseauae)
inhabiting the Falkland Islands shelf; a comparison

The reproductive strategies for the Falkland skate, Bathyraja macloviana and the joined-fin skate
Bathyraja cousseauae from specimens caught in waters around the Falkland Islands are presented.
LM50 as derived from reproductive organ development are compared with those derived from maturity
stages. For female B. macloviana these are 48.7-52.2cm Lt, for males 46.9-47.6 cm Lt, for male B.
cousseauae the values are 90.9-92.7cm Lt. These LM50 values compare well with those derived from
maturity stages and are attained at a relatively large size of 75% and 77% of Lt-max respectively. The
fecundity of both species is low, at around 7 for B. macloviana and around 21 for B. cousseauae. Of all
samples examined, one hermaphrodite B. cousseauae was noted.

Both species display ontogenetic changes with depth, with juvenile B. macloviana present at and over the
shelf break, and all other size and maturity classes present mainly on the shelf. Juvenile B. cousseauae
are also mainly present at the shelf break, but as specimens grow and mature they migrate to deeper
water, returning to shallower water to spawn on the shelf break. Both species also display spawning
seasonality, with B. macloviana spawning primarily in spring and summer months, and B. cousseauae
primarily spawning in winter and spring months.

Energy investment into reproduction for females of both species is shown by a clear increase in HSI with
size, and a decreasing HSI as the animal enters the reproductive phases at LM50, with concomitant
increases in GSI.

Dimensions of egg capsules are presented, with the mean capsule length (excluding horns) for B.
macloviana 75.4mm, and for B. cousseauae 125.9mm.

The new life history information on these two species discovered by this study improves the
understanding of the reproductive biology of these two species, and will help with refining the stock
management models. It will also assist with the study of other species in the skate assemblage in the
region.



Pömpner, Nadine (Institut für Spezielle Zoologie und Evolutionsbiologie, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität
Jena); Beckmann, Felix (Helmholtz Zentrum Geesthacht, Institute of Materials Research, Max-Planck-
Straße 1, 21502 Geesthacht, Germany, Canada); Müller, Hendrik (Jena University, Department of
Comparative Zoology and Evolutionary Biology, Jena, Germany)

Development of the skull and cranial musculature in Hemidactylium scutatum (Caudata:
Plethodontidae)

The four-toed plethodontid salamander Hemidactylium scutatum has a wide distribution throughout
Eastern North America. Phylogenetically, emerging consensus resolves H. scutatum as the sister taxon
to the direct developing bolitoglossine plethodontids. Hemidactylium differs from most other plethodontid
salamanders by having terrestrial egg deposition and an aquatic larval with a very short larval period.
Reflecting its phylogenetic position, the life history of H. scutatum is somewhat intermediate between
spelerpine plethodontids with aquatic eggs and comparatively long to very long larval periods and
bolitoglossine plethodontids with complete terrestrial direct development. To determine potential life



                                                                                                      565
history effects on morphological development, we studied the development of the skull and cranial
musculature in H. scutatum from the late embryonic period through metamorphosis. Compared to other
biphasic developing salamanders, H. scutatum develops most similar to spelerpine salamanders and we
found few differences in their larval development. The basal plate, forming part of the ventral, posterior
chondrocranium, is less extensively developed in H. scutatum than in spelerpines, which might be
attributable to the short larval lifespan. Another difference is the presence of a somewhat reduced
ceratobranchial IV in H. scutatum , which is absent in spelerpine plethodontids. In all other aspects, larval
development in H. scutatum resembles that of spelerpine plethodontids.



Popescu, Viorel (Simon Fraser University); Kissel, Amanda (Simon Fraser University, Canada);
Pearson, Monica (Balance Ecological, Canada); Palen, Wendy (Simon Fraser University, Canada);
Govindarajulu, Purnima (BC Ministry of Environment, Canada); Bishop, Christine (Environment Canada,
Pacific Wildlife Research Centre, Canada)

Habitat selection by Oregon spotted frogs (Rana pretiosa) in British Columbia, Canada

The Oregon spotted frog ( Rana pretiosa ) has been extirpated from 90% of its original range in North
America, and is restricted to three remnant breeding populations in Canada. The current Oregon spotted
frog recovery strategy in British Columbia focuses on habitat protection activities at breeding sites, and
establishing new populations at restored or recently created wetlands using captive-bred frogs. An
important assumption is that current habitat protection activities are suitable for protecting mobile and
highly aquatic adults, about which little is known. Here, we evaluated seasonal and annual variation in
adult Oregon spotted frog habitat use and selection using radio-telemetry of 41 captive-bred individuals
introduced to two extant breeding sites in 2009 and 2010. In addition to tracking individual frogs, on
average 1-2 times per week, we collected data on habitat attributes at telemetry and paired random
locations. A key challenge required that we identify comparable habitat attributes that transcended site-
specific differences in wetland vegetation that often make direct comparison of habitat suitability difficult.
As such, we developed ecologically-based ‗functional groups‘ of submerged and emergent vegetation
types and habitat characteristics (e.g., culm, floating debris, floating mats, etc.), and used a model
selection approach to evaluate the level of support for a range of models. In particular, we used two
different quantitative methods. First, we performed a 2nd order habitat selection analysis (i.e., at the
population level) using a Euclidian distance-based approach. Second, we used ‗functional group‘ percent
cover data from 1-m2 plots at paired telemetry and random locations in a generalized mixed effects
modeling framework to identify microhabitats preferred at a finer spatial scale. We found that movements
of Oregon spotted frogs were limited and that at the population level frogs selected for complex habitats
with emergent vegetation that formed continuous submerged root mats. By contrast, the use of less
complex habitats, including open water, shrubs, and bushy grasses were not well supported. Given that
the two study sites are highly modified by human activities, yet support persistent Oregon spotted frog
populations, our results provide support that current recovery actions aimed at establishing additional
populations at restored or created wetlands may be successful if sites include complex habitats identified
in this analysis.




                                                                                                          566
Portik, Daniel (University of California, Berkeley);

Counter-current faunal exchanges across the Arabian Peninsula: Patterns from varanids and
toads

Faunal exchanges between Africa and Asia, driven by climatic oscillations and the availability of land
bridge connections, have resulted in patterns of admixture across Northern Africa, the Arabian Peninsula,
and throughout much of the Middle East. The Arabian Peninsula and the Red Sea have a complex
geological history, and varying levels of connectivity with Africa have allowed for scattered vicariance
events and uneven periods of potential dispersal opportunities. The dynamic geology of the formation of
the Red Sea and associated dates of major events leads to several hypotheses that can explain current
distributional patterns of fauna around the Middle East. These hypotheses are testable in a phylogenetic
framework using divergence time estimates. I investigate these patterns in African monitor lizards (
Varanus ), focusing on one species group ( V. albigularis ) that displays a disjunct Afro-Arabian
distribution. I also investigate these patterns in a toad complex ( Duttaphrynus [= Bufo ]) distributed
across the Horn of Africa (Somalia), the Arabian Peninsula (Yemen, Oman), and the Middle East (Iran,
Afghanistan, Pakistan). By comparing these newly generated data sets to previously conducted studies, I
attempt to summarize major biogeographic patterns and shed light on the complex history of the Red Sea
region.



Portillo, Frank (University of Texas at El Paso); Greenbaum, Eli (University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso,
United States)

Systematics of Leptopelis (Anura: Arthroleptidae) from the Itombwe Plateau, eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo

Leptopelis, a genus of Central African treefrogs, includes 52 species that live in tropical forests and
savannas. Currently, only two species of Leptopelis are known from the poorly explored Itombwe Plateau
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). Itombwe is renowned for its rich and endemic
amphibian fauna, including: Xenopus itombwenesis, Chrysobatrachus cupreonitens, Laurentophryne
parkeri and at least three species of Arthroleptis. Within the framework of a larger Leptopelis phylogeny,
we examined the evolutionary relationships of 27 samples of Itombwe Leptopelis by sequencing two
mitochondrial (16S and cyt b; 1100 base pairs [bp]) and two nuclear (RAG1 and c¬-mos; 1400 bp) genes.
These DNA sequence data were analyzed with maximum parsimony in PAUP* 4.0b, maximum likelihood
in RAxML v7.2.6 and Bayesian inference in MrBayes v3.1. For Bayesian inference, the appropriate
model was inferred using jModelTest.           We used multiple morphological characters and male
advertisement call data to examine species boundaries in distinct lineages identified from our molecular
phylogeny. Results indicated that several distinct lineages deserve recognition as new species and
demonstrate the importance of the Itombwe Plateau as a center of endemism.



Portnoy, David (TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY); John, Gold (Texas A&M University, Canada); Cummings,
Nancie (National Marine Fisheries Service, Canada)

Is connectivity related to adult reproductive behavior? A comparison of population structure in
two protogynous groupers in the U.S. waters of the Caribbean Sea

Relationships between larval duration (dispersal potential) and connectivity (realized dispersal) in marine
fishes have been examined in a number of studies; few studies, however, have examined possible effects



                                                                                                       567
that adult reproductive behavior may have on realized dispersal. To that end, we examined gene flow
among four localities in U.S. waters of the Caribbean Sea, using nuclear and mitochondrially encoded
markers, in two protogynous groupers: the aggregate spawning red hind, Epinephelus guttatus , and the
single-male, harem-spawning coney,          Cephalopholis fulva .    These two species are important
components of the shallow water grouper complex in U.S. Caribbean fisheries. Sample localities were
offshore of Puerto Rico (west and east coasts), St. Thomas, and St. Croix. For both species, spatial
partitioning of genetic variation differed between marker types, with a stronger signal of population
structure detected in coney. Analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA) and pairwise exact tests of
homogeneity (microsatellites) for both species indicated differences between samples from St. Croix and
St. Thomas, as well as St Croix and the west coast of Puerto Rico. In coney, the analysis also indicated
differences between the sample from the west coast of Puerto Rico and samples from the east coast of
Puerto Rico and St. Thomas. Comparable analyses with mtDNA indicated homogeneity among all four
samples of red hind and indicated that for coney the sample from St. Croix differed from the others.
Bayesian estimates of migration (long-term and contemporary), based on microsatellites, indicated that
the direction of ‗overall‘ gene flow in coney parallels the predominant direction (east to west) of current
flow in the region. These results are consistent with a relationship between larval drift and realized
dispersal. The mtDNA based heterogeneity in coney suggests a barrier to gene flow associated with the
species preference for shallow water habitats and the deep Puerto Rican trench that separates St. Croix
from the other sites. Territorial behavior by males and associated female-skewed sex ratios observed in
protogynous groupers support the hypothesis that females may be the dispersive sex, and that the lack of
congruence between nuclear-encoded and mitochondrial markers stems at least in part from female-
mediated gene flow. Our results indicate that adult reproductive behavior can effect realized dispersal in
marine fishes.



Portnoy, David (TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY); Conway, Kevin; White, Macaulay; Gold, John (TEXAS
A&M UNIVERSITY, College Station, TX, United States)

Searobin hybridization revisited: molecular insights on the reported hybrid zone between
Prionotus alatus and P. paralatus in the northern Gulf of Mexico, inferred from external
morphology

Searobins of the tribe Prionotini are common inhabitants of shallow coastal areas throughout the western
central Atlantic, including the Gulf of Mexico (Gulf). Searobins are notoriously difficult to identify and as
such frequently misidentified. Difficulties encountered during the identification of two species (Prionotus
alatus and P. paralatus) collected from the northern Gulf in the area of Mobile Bay are suggested to be
the result of hybridization between the two species in this area. This hypothesis, based on existence of
―intermediate‖ individuals possessing external morphology of both P. alatus and P. paralatus, has yet to
be tested with appropriate genetic data. We utilized sequence data from two mitochondrial and one
nuclear gene obtained from a large number of individuals of both P. alatus and P. paralatus, identified
using morphological characters, from throughout their range, including the area of interest in the northern
Gulf, to assess whether there is genetic evidence to support the hypothesis of hybridization between the
two. Preliminary results reveal low levels of genetic variation between P. alatus and P. paralatus at the
loci examined. Phylogenetic analyses of 11 members of the Prionotini and appropriate outgroups
recovered P. alatus and P. paralatus as a monophyletic group but failed to group individuals of each
taxon together within this clade. These data are consistent with the hypothesis that P. alatus and P.
paralatus are only recently diverged or are morphotypes of the same species associated with coral rubble
or terrigenous mud bottom habitats of the eastern and western Gulf, respectively.




                                                                                                         568
Poulter, Russell (University of Otago);

Fungicidal suppression of Batrachochytrium

Almost a third of all amphibian species are threatened with extinction. Although a major threat is habitat
loss and degradation, chytridiomycosis, a disease caused by a pathogenic fungus Batrachochytrium
dendrobatidis , has been shown to cause sudden and severe population declines in numerous species.
The proposed global action plan to mitigate the global decline in amphibians includes investigation into
drugs against Batrachochytrium . There are several methods for treating captive frogs infected with
Batrachochytrium but no methods for treating wild amphibian populations that are infected. Although
captive breeding programmes can sustain small populations of threatened species, over a number of
generations there is likely to be loss of genetic variation. In addition, many species cannot be bred in
captivity and their continued existence therefore relies on remediation of their environment by
suppressing the Batrachochytrium . We have been experimenting with various fungicides in laboratory
and semi-natural contexts in the search for protocols that may suppress Batrachochytrium in the wild.
We have used as our experimental amphibian, the Australian Southern Brown Tree Frog, which is
introduced into New Zealand and is now widespread. We have concentrated our attention on protocols
that will be readily implemented; for example, the protocol must be effective, cheap and ecologically
benign. We have developed a protocol that will, we believe, suppress Batrachochytrium in the wild and
which can be used to remediate large areas sufficient to support refuge populations of endangered
amphibian in sufficient numbers to be sustainable in the long term.



Powell, Brian (Duke University); Leal, Manuel (Duke University, Canada)

Brain Evolution Across the Puerto Rican Anole Radiation

Patterns of brain evolution have been widely studied across vertebrates, with the bulk of studies using
mammals and/or birds. Within these groups, species occupying different habitats have been shown to
have divergent neuroanatomy, particularly differences in the relative size of different brain structures,
correlated with differences in habitat size or structure. We examine the pattern of allometric scaling
across the telencephalon, dorsal cortex, dorsomedial cortex, medial cortex, dorsal ventricular ridge,
medulla, and cerebellum in six species of Puerto Rican Anolis lizards, which are grouped in three
distinct ecomorphs according to interspecific differences in structural habitat preferences. The differences
in habitat preferences are accompanied by morphological and behavioral adaptations for effective used of
each habitat type. However, our results challenge this trend and demonstrate a lack of convergence in
the relative size of different brain structures between species using similar structural habitats. We found
differences in the relative volume of the medulla across species, suggesting mosaic evolution in this
structure. Overall brain volume explained between 92.5% and 99.7% of the variance in volume of each of
the brain regions measured, and 93.7% and 98.5% of the variance in volume of each component
measured within the telencephalon. This pattern of brain allometry is generally consistent with concerted
brain evolution, with the exception of the medulla. Concerted brain evolution has also been observed in
mammals and cartilaginous fishes, and its presence in Anolis lizards provides additional evidence
supporting the hypothesis that concerted brain evolution might result from a conserved pattern of brain
development common to all vertebrates.




                                                                                                        569
Powell, Larry (Dept. of Biological Sciences); Russell, Anthony; Jamniczky, Heather; Hallgrimsson,
Benedikt (University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada)

Ontogenetic and sexual shape variation in the skull and horns of the Greater Short-horned lizard,
Phrynosoma hernandesi.

Morphological disparity in the phrynosomatid genus Phrynosoma is strongly associated with variations in
cranial structure. We use geometric morphometric analysis to explore size-associated shape change in
the skull of the Greater Short-horned Lizard, Phrynosoma hernandesi , as a basis for a more
comprehensive study of cranial morphological evolution in this genus. Females of P. hernandesi exceed
males in adult body size, this difference resulting from an early truncation by males of a common body-
size growth trajectory, suggesting that males will display morphological progenesis relative to females.
Three-dimensional reconstructions of the skulls of a sample covering the ontogenetic size ranges for both
sexes of this species, from over the range in Canada, were recovered from μ-CT scans. A suite of
landmarks (Bookstein‘s Type 1 and Type 2) covering the dorsal and occipital aspects of the cranium and
the bases and tips of the squamosal, parietal and supraocular horns, were applied to the reconstruction
sample. After Procrustes fit, landmark data were subjected to multivariate regression against log centroid
size and the regression residuals subjected to principal components analysis and discriminant analysis in
order to test for sexual shape dimorphism in cranial features. Positive allometry relative to log centroid
size is displayed for most cranial and horn features. Ontogenetic changes in landmark coordinates
indicate that the squamosal and parietal horns typical of Phrynosoma are iterative homologues,
displaying some developmental independence from the bones bearing them. Sexual shape dimorphism in
horn development and skull shape are not supported. This suggests that cranial heterochrony among
Phrynosoma species is important in producing morphological disparity in this evolutionary radiation, for
which phylogenetically-based geometric morphometric methods will be a fruitful means of investigation.
We present evidence concerning the roles of cranial modularity and integration in the evolutionary
radiation of Phrynosoma .



Prado, Cynthia (Universidade Estadual Paulista); Nali, Renato (Universidade Estadual Paulista -
UNESP, Rio Claro, SP, Brazil); Zamudio, Kelly (Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States); Haddad,
Célio (Universidade Estadual Paulista - UNESP, Rio Claro, SP, Brazil)

Asymmetries in natural selection on males and females and the evolution of sexual size
dimorphism in frogs

Sexual size dimorphism (SSD), the difference in body size between adult males and females of a
species, varies in animals from extreme male-biased to female-biased. A general macroevolutionary
pattern in the distribution of SSD was summarized by Rensch‘s rule, which states that, within lineages,
SSD decreases with size when females are the larger sex, and it increases with size when males are the
larger sex. Exceptions to this rule have been found primarily in female-biased lineages. In anurans,
females are larger than males in 90% of the species, but the size differences between the sexes are quite
variable. Male territoriality, female fecundity, and breeding pattern (explosive or prolonged) are possible
selective forces influencing body sizes of males and females. In this study we gathered data from 158
anuran species from 12 families and investigated whether anurans follow Rensch‘s rule. Furthermore,
using Phylogenetic Independent Contrasts we tested the hypotheses: (1) that the variation in SSD among
species is dictated primarily by evolutionary changes in female size; (2) changes in female body size
correlate with changes in fecundity; (3) explosively-breeding species show stronger selective advantage
for increased female fecundity– and therefore for female body size increase – than species with
prolonged breeding, and (4) that species with male territoriality have stronger pressure for male body size



                                                                                                       570
increase and therefore SSD decrease. We found that anurans did not follow Rensch‘s rule. Our results
corroborated hypotheses 1 to 3, although the difference in fecundity pressure for prolonged and explosive
breeders was only marginally significant. Male territoriality did not explain differences in SSD. Although
female size correlated with SSD, it was true only for small species, suggesting that fecundity increase –
therefore body size increase – is probably a stronger selective pressure for small species, likely because
large females are already capable of producing huge numbers of eggs. Even though many unquantified
ecological and behavioral traits certainly impact SSD, our study presents a broad evolutionary view of
patterns of sexual size dimorphism and targets of selection in frogs. Studies on natural history of frog
species are crucial to elucidate specific ecological and behavioral mechanisms influencing SSD at the
level of individual selection.



Pramuk, Jennifer (Woodland Park Zoo);

Curating a different kind of collection: the use of zoo animals in research.

Curating living specimens shares much in common with curating museum collections. Zoos and
museums alike face the challenges of managing ever-larger databases while seeking funding and
expertise necessary for managing these data. Of particular concern to those curating living collections
and captive populations are data related to lineages (e.g., studbooks) and their management. Given the
high visibility of individual animals housed in living institutions, zoos and aquariums also must adeptly
manage issues related to animal welfare and potential fallout from visitor perceptions related to their use
in research. For that reason it is especially critical for zoos and aquariums to form proficient committees
for evaluating research proposals. Increasingly, institutions that manage living collections are partnering
with universities and natural history museums for museum deposition, behavioral, and other studies.
These partnerships can provide a unique synergy and new research opportunities related to
conservation, improving animal husbandry and welfare, and understanding natural history. The
challenges and benefits of developing partnerships between museums and living institutions will be
discussed.



Pratt, Harold (Mote Marine Laboratory); Heist, Edward (Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, IL,
United States); Pratt, Theo (Mote Marine Laboratory, Summerland Key, FL, United States); Carrier,
Jeffrey (Albion College, Albion, MI, United States)

Sexual conflict in the nurse shark, Ginglymostoma cirratum: five compensatory behaviors

Different animal sexes often have differing reproductive goals and unequal investments which result in a
continuing conflict of interests. In the annual nurse shark mating season at the Dry Tortugas, Florida,
sexual conflict is both striking and conspicuous. Males attempt to force copulation by orally grasping or
attempting to grasp the chosen female‘s pectoral fin. Females vigorously thwart 94.1% of male mating
attempts (n=1280) by Refuging, by Avoiding and by cooperative Pectoral Shielding. In group mating
events (6.2 % of total events observed), males counter these female maneuvers with two cooperative
behaviors of their own; the Simultaneous Caudal Grab and Blocking. As many as seven males have been
observed to pursue a selected female, circle into position and compete to grasp the female‘s pectoral fins
to coerce her to mate. In most large group matings observed, one attendant, non-competitive male
facilitates male mating from the very first encounter by positioning himself in front of the mating sharks
limiting their forward motion. Videography reveals that this male‘s helping role (Blocking) is determined
even before the pectoral grasp is attained, or before the identity of the copulating male in the event is



                                                                                                       571
decided by contest. Thus males may choose a helping role on the mating grounds. The ‗Simultaneous
Caudal Grab‘ permits two males to work together to move an Avoiding female into deeper water. Group
courtship results in a copulation at least 40 % of the time (n = 86). Male and female cooperation may
have evolved as a reciprocal altruism and not kin selection as microsatellite genotype analysis reveals
low levels of relatedness. Refuging and Pectoral Shielding are mutualisms probably derived from
schooling.



Pratt, Shane (University of Manitoba); Rutherford, Pamela (Brandon Univeristy, Brandon, MB, Canada);
Koper, Nicola (University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada); Wiseman, Dion (Brandon University,
Brandon, MB, Canada)

The effect of anthropogenic cover on habitat choice of the Endangered Northern Prairie Skink

The Northern Prairie Skink (Plestiodon septentrionalis) is Manitoba‘s only lizard species and is federally
listed as Endangered. Previous research indicates that Prairie Skinks are very secretive, rarely surface
active, and commonly are located under artificial cover. Artificial cover can alter many biotic and abiotic
factors in the natural environment and could provide false habitat data of the study species. The
objective of this study is to determine the effect of anthropogenic cover on the habitat choice and
behaviour of the Northern Prairie Skink. In this project 10 adult Prairie Skinks were fitted with radio
transmitters in summer 2012 at CFB Shilo, Manitoba, Canada. Individuals were tracked every 4 hours.
Habitat data was taken within one meter of each location and at three random points within 5 meters of
each location. The habitat data was collected within a 1m by 1m square plot and included: air
temperature, surface temperature, cover temperature, cover type, cover thickness, percent vegetation
and bare ground, and distance to nearest forest edge. Habitat data also were collected using an
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) with a high definition (8-10 cm resolution) and near infrared (NIR) digital
camera. We calculated the normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) in order to increase the
probability of discriminating between differing land cover/vegetation types. A formal classification
accuracy assessment was conducted by comparing the actual land cover/vegetation type with that
determined through NDVI classification. Finally, Prairie Skink captures were overlaid onto the land
cover/vegetation classification to determine habitat selection for this species. This research provides
valuable information on how the coverboard sampling technique affects habitat selection and behaviour of
Northern Prairie Skinks.



Preest, Marion (The Claremont Colleges); Ward, Matthew (Pitzer College, Claremont, United States);
Thomas, Poon (The Claremont Colleges, Claremont, United States)

Chemical Prey Luring in Jackson's Chameleons: Time's Fun When You're Having Flies

Many animals go to extraordinary lengths to obtain prey. For example, some turtles and snakes use their
tongues or tails as lures, angler fish use a long, bioluminiscent filament extending from their head as a
lure, and the assassin bug lures spiders into their own web by plucking at the silk and mimicking the
vibrations produced by trapped insect prey. Chemical attraction of prey is also known. Bolas spiders
appear to attract prey with a pheromone and then swing bolas-like webs to capture them. The lizard,
Podarcis lilfordi, feeds on insects attracted to the pungent smell of a plant (dead horse arum). Here we
report on an investigation of the use of a chemical lure in Jackson‘s chameleons (Chamaeleo jacksonii).
In an unpublished Ph.D. thesis in 1966, P.W. Ogilvie describes a ―white, foul smelling viscous substance
at the angle of the jaw‖ of animals in the genus Chamaeleo. He reports having observed animals in the



                                                                                                       572
field wiping their jaws from side to side on branches and capturing flies that landed near the area where
the wiping occurred. Our work has repeated and confirmed some aspects of Ogilvie‘s work, as well as
building on it. We performed a detailed dissection of the temporal pouch of Jackson‘s chameleons. We
also extracted material from the pouch and ran the sample through a gas chromatograph-mass
spectrometer. These tests revealed the presence of compounds that are both volatile and odiferous and
possibly similar to insect pheromones. T-maze tests with house flies revealed that flies are attracted to
the temporal pouch material. We also confirmed the presence of the temporal pouch in preserved
specimens of 13 other species of chameleons in the genus Chamaeleo. Some authors have speculated
that the material contained in the pouch serves a function in territory marking and/or predator deterrence.
While it may play these roles, our results and those of Ogilvie, suggest that it may serve a role in chemical
luring of prey.



Preininger, Doris (University Vienna); Sztatecsny, Marc (University Vienna, Vienna, Austria); Hödl,
Walter (UniversityVienna, Vienna, Austria)

Pirates in Borneo and India: Hoisting a flag before or instead of the attack? Acoustic and visual
signaling in stream dwelling frogs

While anurans are well known for acoustic signaling, intraspecific communication may involve multiple
cues or signals in many more species than previously thought. For instance, when noise interferes with
calls, visual signals may act as an additional or a complementary mode of communication. Foot-flagging
as a striking form of visual signaling behavior has evolved in at least in 15 species from 5 different
families mainly living along fast-flowing streams generating continuous broadband background noise. To
better understand the role of foot-flagging as a visual signal component, we studied 3 Asian species from
2 different families and performed cue-isolation experiments in the field.

The Bornean species Staurois parvus and S. guttatus avoid acoustic interference of ambient stream
noise by using call frequencies less masked by the background and utilize accompanying visual displays
to signal the readiness to defend calling sites. Micrixalus saxicola from the Western Ghats of India occurs
along less noisy streams and acoustic signals are rather masked by chorus noise from conspecifics than
by abiotic noise. Micrixalus saxicola use a variety of visual signals including foot-flagging and tapping
during male-male agonistic behavior. Receiver responses from acoustic- vs. bimodal playback
presentations provide evidence that the vocal sac acts as an additional visual cue. The comparison of
stream living anurans from different habitats should help us to better understand possible selection
regimes favoring the evolution of multimodal communication in anurans.



Price, Stephen (Institute of Zoology);

Versatile pathogens in a world on the move: defining amphibian risk from ranavirus

The Frog Mortality Project (FMP) has collated reports of unusual amphibian mortality in the UK since
1992. The result is an extensive database spanning two decades and containing information on
approximately 5000 mortality events from many parts of England as well as Wales. Ranaviruses were
confirmed as the aetiological agent in a number of FMP recorded mortality events. Introduction to the UK
seems likely to have been via North America with ornamental fish, exotic amphibians, humans, birds and
insects all mooted as possible agents implicated in the introduction, spread, or both.




                                                                                                         573
Preliminary visualisation of disease spread in the UK points to a patchy distribution, with reporting shifting
from geographically isolated to widespread. The FMP database can be filtered conservatively for reports
consistent with ranavirus disease. Here, I will present the three basic outputs of a spatial epidemiology
study: (i) a description of the spatial patterns of ranavirus incidence in the UK, (ii) analysis of these
patterns, and (iii) evaluation of contrasting models of ranavirus emergence, e.g. climate change as a
modifying effect on an endemic pathogen versus spread via human-mediated translocations.



Prohaska, Bianca K. (University of New England); Tsang, Paul C.W. (University of New Hampshire,
Canada); Driggers III, William B.; Hoffmayer, Eric R. (National Marine Fisheries Service, Mississippi
Laboratories, Canada); Sulikowski, James A. (University of New England, Canada)

Potential Utilization of Steroid Hormones Extracted from the Skeletal Muscle Tissue of the Spiny
Dogfish (Squalus acanthias), the Little Skate (Leucoraja erinacea), the Atlantic Sharpnose Shark
(Rhizoprionodon terraenovae), and the Atlantic Stingray (Dasy

Currently, circulating levels of plasma steroid hormones have been used as a non-lethal method to
determine reproductive maturity and reproductive cycles in elasmobranchs. However, this method can
prove problematic to perform on large and/or endangered species, because of difficulties involved with
specimen handling.        These constraints make it imperative for new techniques to be developed for
studying the reproductive biology of elasmobranchs. Previous work conducted on other vertebrates has
shown that steroid hormones can be successfully extracted from muscle tissue. The process of collecting
muscle tissue samples is quick, minimally invasive, and may be conducted without removing the animal
from the water, facilitating its use on larger, and/or endangered species of elasmobranchs. The focus of
this presentation will be the development of a valid method for extracting steroid hormones from the
skeletal muscle tissue of the lecithotrophic aplacental viviparous spiny dogfish, the oviparous little skate,
the placental viviparous Atlantic Sharpnose shark, and the matrotrophic aplacental Atlantic stingray. For
each species 40 females are currently being collected from the Gulf of Maine, and the Gulf of Mexico and
will consist of 10 immature individuals, to act as control replicates, 10 early-gestation individuals, 10 mid-
gestation individuals, and 10 near parturition individuals. Sample collections of spiny dogfish, little skate,
Atlantic sharpnose sharks, and Atlantic stingray began in October 2010, and the remaining samples will
be collected throughout the following year. To verify the use of this tissue for reproductive analysis,
steroid hormone levels extracted from skeletal muscle tissue will be compared to the concentrations and
patterns of those same steroid hormones extracted from plasma, via radioimmunoassay. Preliminarily, the
results suggest that a trend exists between the concentrations of steroid hormone levels in the plasma to
those in the skeletal muscle tissue.



Pröhl, Heike (Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine);

Behavioral ecology and sexual selection in strawberry poison frogs, or how a frog became a star?

The evolution of mating strategies and mating systems is an integral part of sexual selection theory.
Mating strategies normally vary between the sexes and depend on ecological factors as well as the
operational sex ratio (OSR). Strawberry poison frogs are an ideal study model for answering questions on
how ecological factors affect the reproductive behavior and the strength of sexual selection because they
inhabit a variety of different habitats and show geographic variation in ecology and behavior. Moreover
the species is toxic, aposematically colored, and displays diurnal activity. Here I will summarize the
results of multiple studies conducted during the last years aiming at a better understanding of how



                                                                                                          574
ecology affects the behavior of these frogs. I will show that males and females are territorial and
aggressive. Since females provide most parental care the OSR is usually male biased. Therefore males
compete for females and defend territories in areas with high female density, which also provide ideal
calling places and food resources. Females defend the core areas of their home ranges against other
females, probably also for defending food sources. The defense of food resources, which are rich of
insects containing toxic alkaloids may be important for aposematism as an anti-predator strategy. Female
home ranges overlap with territories of several males among which they choose for mating. Female
mating strategy, male mating success and the levels of sexual selection in males vary between
populations and years depending on the OSR. The OSR in turn is influenced by resource distribution,
climate and predation. When the OSR is more male biased females are choosier, variance in male mating
success is higher and sexual selection is more intense than in less male biased situations. I will discuss
the influence of ecological variables on territoriality, mating system and sexual selection in strawberry
poison frogs and highlight the importance for further research investigating variation in behavior in time
and space.



Puente-Rolón, Alberto R. (Universidad Interamericana en Arecibo); Vega-Castillo, Sondra I.
(Universidad de Puerto Rico, Canada)

Comparison of Body Size and Body Condition of Free-Ranging and Cave-Associated Epicrates
inornatus in the Northern Karst Region of Puerto Rico

Species gather energy from the chemical potential energy in food and have to allocate the garnered
resources among maintenance, growth, reproduction, and storage. Recently, snakes have been
identified as a good group for research on this topic. The objective of this study is to compare the body
condition of free-ranging boas, Epicrates inornatus, with those associated with caves. For each snake, I
determined sex, snout-vent length (SVL), tail length, and weight. Relative tail length, stoutness and
regressions were used to analyze the data. A body-condition index was calculated as the residual scores
from the regression of the natural logarithm of body mass against that of body length. Distribution of
sizes showed that snakes associated with caves are smaller than those that are not associated with
caves. Snakes associated with caves have longer tails relative to SVL than do free-ranging snakes.
Free-ranging males were in better condition than were free-ranging females, whereas in caves females
were in were in better body condition than were males. Possibly E. inornatus may experience an
ontogenetic shift in niche, with caves sustaining a particular cohort. Caves may serve as a source for
snakes in the surrounding forested areas. The fact that snakes of this species rely on multiple habitat
types throughout their lifetimes has major implications for conservation. In order to ensure the
persistence of the populations of this endangered snake, a landscape analysis focusing on caves with a
resident population of snakes and which is connected with forested habitat, needs to be performed. This
kind of study will allow managers to identify natural corridors and new important areas for conservation
that will benefit the species.



Puky, Miklos (Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Centre for Ecological Research, Danube Research
Institute);

Amphibian road mortality: a key factor in conservation on crowded continents

The effect of linear infrastructure, primarily road networks, has recently been realised as a multi-factor
threat for amphibians. Populations of several species got extinct due to increased traffic, e.g. Pelobates



                                                                                                      575
fuscus in Hungary. It is an increasing trend all over in Europe, in the UK, for example, three times more
Bufo bufo populations have gone extinct because of this factor since 2000 compared to before 2000. A
diversity of measures is applied to counter-balance this phenomenon. Besides road signage,
compensation ponds and temporary mitigation measures, permanent structures, green bridges, fauna
passages and toad tunnels and fences have been built at least at 2,000 sites in in Canada, the US, New
Zealand and at least in 20 European countries from Portugal to Lithuania. However, due to unproper
planning, construction or the lack of maintenance many of them do not function well. Besides their
improvement, the low cost modification of already existing culverts may also have an important role in
lowering the effect of roads on amphibian populations. A new area of interest and research in this field
are gulley pots, which cause an annual death of 1-3 million anurans a year in the Netherlands only.
Different materials are being investigated to provide escape routes from those traps, while in Switzerland
a standard has been accepted on what measures to apply to help amphibians out from those traps.
Public participation is an increasing element in conservation, as such, toad rescues are becoming more
popular both in North America and in Europe. They are, however, far from only being an education
activity. In the UK alone, 1,002,746 common toads were rescued from road traffic by volunteers in the
past 30 years. The priorities of such activities should be enlargened though, besides focussing on
common species dying on roads in large numbers, rare species should also be given priority when
decisions are made in what areas to solve this problem first.



Puky, Miklos (Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Centre for Ecological Research, Danube Research
Institute); Tóth, Mihály (University of Debrecen, Department of Hydrobiology - Varangy Akciócsoport
Egyesület, Canada); Kéri, András (University Eötvös, Department of Physical Geography - Varangy
Akciócsoport Egyesület, Canada)

Herpetological projects with volunteers and the general public in Hungary: citizen science and
environmental education improves the status of herpetology

The study and conservation of amphibians is a research area in which volunteers participate for decades.
In Hungary it started in the 1980s with toad rescues over roads and ad hoc translocation projects
including highly conflicting areas between humans and herps such as swimming pools in villages and
snake nesting areas under motorways. By today, the number of volunteers participating in toad rescue
campaigns increased and many people are also active in less demanding herp-related citizen science
activities such as mapping species distribution by sending photos with the indication where they were
shot to Varangy Akciócsoport Egyesület, a 27 year old NGO working in amphibian and reptile
conservation, research and education. It is important to know, though, that data sent in clearly reflects the
target groups reached. A herpetological mapping photo survey, for example, has a characteristic bias
towards popular anurans occurring also in gardens, such as Hyla arborea, if it involves the general public
versus it contains more mountain species along tourists paths if the primary data collectors are tourist
organizations with most of their activities carried out away from settlements and holiday resorts. In any
case when scientists work with volunteers, however, easily understandable protocol and data validation is
needed, and if the organizers fail to make these steps, more difficult changes had to make later, as
another organization experienced it facing a high number of obviously incorrect herpetofauna species
determination by its volunteers. In some cases, where there is a strong educational elements, it may be
advisable for scientists to give the lead in that sub-project for educators, as it turned out to be often the
best way while making local frog concerts in Hungary and Ukraine. As a consequence of citizen science
becoming more common and the increasing number of volunteers in monitoring and research programs,
the most active participants even launch their own herpetological projects. Successful programs with
volunteers, however, need to follow some rules: participants have to be informed and trained about what



                                                                                                         576
to do, they need to be informed about the results and, for example in road-related projects, their safety
should also be a high priority. With no doubt volunteers can successfully be involved in data collection,
however, species determination and data analysis are still predominantly the field for professionals even if
modern programs may change the situation fast in the future.



Puky, Miklos (Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Centre for Ecological Research, Danube Research
Institute); Toth, Viktoria (2University of West-Hungary, Institute of Silviculture and Forest Protection,
Canada); Lakatos, Ferenc (University of West-Hungary, Institute of Silviculture and Forest Protection,
Canada); Tóth, Mihály (University of Debrecen, Department of Hydrobiology, Canada); Mester, Béla
(University of Debrecen, Department of Ecology, Canada); Bíró, Péter (Hungarian Academy of Sciences,
Centre For Ecological Research, Balaton Limnological Institute, Canada); Ács, Éva (Hungarian Academy
of Sciences, Centre For Ecological Research, Danube Research Institute, Canada); Velekei, Balázs
(University of West-Hungary, Institute of Silviculture and Forest Protection, Canada)

Phylogeographic pattern, parasite load and fluctuating asymmetry of Zootoca vivipara in Hungary

The Eurasian common lizard, Zootoca vivipara (Lichtenstein, 1823), ranging from Ireland to Japan is
the lizard with the largest distribution area on Earth. It has several subspecies/clades, some with
extremely large, others with more limited distribution areas. The phylogenetic relationships of the
viviparous and oviparous haplogroups of the species describing clades living only in Central Europe were
described earlier. The present poster discusses their distribution in Hungary together with their
ectoparasite load and front leg asymmetry. Samples were collected from eight locations. Total DNA was
extracted from small tissue samples of the tail with Sigma GenElute Genomic DNA Kit, using
manufacturer‘s protocol. Two target genes were selected for the phylogenetic analysis: a partial
sequence (appr. 300 bp) of the protein encoding cytochrome b ( cyt b ) and a partial sequence (appr. 500
bp) of the non-protein coding 16s. In the first step we analysed the cyt b sequence of 33 individuals.
The alignment of the cyt b sequences was performed with ClustalX and corrected by eye. The
recognized clades including several haplotypes were estimated in MEGA software package (version 5.0).
Sequences of four Lacertid species were downloaded from the GenBank and were used as outgroups.
Maximum likelihood analysis of the data revealed a congruent overall topology that is characterized by six
main groups: the PA haplogroup is present in the northwestern, the VH haplogroup in the central part of
the country. The other samples collected from the northeastern part of Hungary are in the contact zone of
VB and VU haplogroups and were divided into four groups. Our study supports the model of four
haplogroups being present in the Carpathian Basin, however, also shows questions to be answered
related to the contact zone of VB and VU haplogroups. The parasite load of Z. vivipara varied between
populations with the actual habitat as a main determining factor. Males have a nearly three times higher
parasite load than females while juveniles were slightly less infected than adults. No population level
fluctuating asymmetry trend was revealed among the populations studied.



Pupo, Fabio (Museu Nacional/ UFRJ); Britto, Marcelo (Museu Nacional/UFRJ, Canada)

Neuroanatomy of the family Callichthyidae (TELEOSTEI: OSTARIOPHYSI: SILURIFORMES): the
brain as a new source of morphological characters.

Callychthyidae is composed by Callichthyinae and Corydoradinae, both morphologically distinct and
monophyletic. Although the consensus regarding family monophyly is about 80% of their species
currently included in the genus Corydoras , remains poorly known concerning their relationships.
Despite of the vast amount of osteological information about Teleostei, the knowledge about the



                                                                                                        577
phylogenetic implications of the anatomy of the central nervous system are sparse since it is an untapped
source of characters. The aim of the present study is the morphological description of the central
nervous system of Callichthyidae providing new characters that may elucidate phylogenetic questions for
this group. Ten characters were raised as follows: shape of nasal organ (elliptical, circular); number of
lamellae in the nasal organ (more or less than 20); positioning of the olfactory bulb in relation to the
telencephalon (sessile, stalked); anterior margin corpus cerebelli in relation to the posterior margin of
the telencephalon (in contact, posterior); lateral margin of the telencephalon (curved, straight); the
presence of the lobus facialis (absent, present); shape of the lobus facialis (with lateral projection, with
dorsal projection); exposure degree of the lobus facialis (exposed, covered by the corpus cerebelli );
position of the swim bladder in relation to the lobus vagi (in contact, distant); shape of the posterior
margin of lobus inferior hypothalami (curve, with invagination). These character states were polarized
and optimized on the current phylogenetic hypotheses of the family based on morphological characters
suggest that representatives of Callichthyinae are oriented by mechanoreceptors and Corydoradinae are
oriented by visual receptors. The parsimony analysis indicates that the central nervous system has
important features to enhance the studies, bringing more resolution to current hypotheses of phylogenetic
reconstruction, especially for the family, genus and groups of fish.



Purrenhage, Jennifer (University of New Hampshire); Veysey, Jessica; Babbitt, Kimberly (University of
New Hampshire, Canada)

Relative Impacts of Hydroperiod and Terrestrial Habitat Buffers on Juvenile Amphibian
Recruitment in Vernal Pools

Vernal pool-breeding amphibians may be particularly vulnerable to local extinctions due to the generally
limited protection of vernal pools and adjacent upland habitat. These species‘ complex life histories
increase their vulnerability to habitat alteration and should inform management strategies that emphasize
a strong terrestrial component, in addition to the traditional focus on aquatic habitat conservation.
Forested terrestrial buffers surrounding pools may provide some protection for vernal pool-dependent
species. However, few existing studies have tested the efficacy of forest buffers, let alone the relative
efficacies of different buffer sizes. From 2004 through 2009, we monitored populations of two vernal pool-
associated species – wood frogs ( Lithobates sylvatica ) and spotted salamanders ( Ambystoma
maculatum ) – at 11 vernal pools in central Maine, following a standard drift fence and pitfall trap protocol.
Pools were assigned to one of three forested buffer treatments: 30-m buffer, 100-m buffer, and &gt;1000-
m buffer (reference). We examined population-level (sex ratio, population size, and juvenile recruitment)
effects of forested buffer treatments, in addition to the effects of variation in key environmental factors
(e.g., hydroperiod) known to influence amphibian population dynamics. Here we present our findings of
the relative influences of these anthropogenic and natural factors on juvenile recruitment of wood frogs
and spotted salamanders, and discuss the conservation implications for vernal pool-breeding amphibians.




                                                                                                          578
Putman, Breanna (San Diego State University); Lind, Craig (University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR,
United States); Taylor, Emily (Cal Poly State University San Luis Obispo, San Luis Obispo, CA, United
States)

Does size matter? Factors influencing the spatial ecology of the Northern Pacific Rattlesnake
(Crotalus oreganus oreganus) at different temporal scales

The spatial ecology of animals is influenced by a combination of factors, and it is often difficult to separate
their effects. Home ranges and movement distances are commonly calculated for rattlesnakes in the
genus Crotalus, but these parameters are highly variable within and among populations and species. I set
out to determine the factors influencing Northern Pacific rattlesnake (Crotalus oreganus oreganus) spatial
parameters at several different temporal scales: within a 14-month tracking period, among seasons, and
within seasons. I found that males had larger home range sizes, made longer mean daily movements,
and moved longer total distances than females during the 14-month period. Also, during this time, body
size was not related to home range size or movements within each sex, but this effect was sensitive to
sample size. Among seasons, males moved longer distances than females during the spring reproductive
season but this effect disappeared during the summer post-mating/foraging season. There was also a
negative effect of body size on movement distances for males and a positive effect for females during
summer, but not during spring. Within the spring reproductive season, males with larger body sizes made
their first long distance mate-searching movement sooner than smaller males. Finally, within the summer
foraging season the sex, body size, and body temperature may influence both fine-scale movement
patterns and surface activity time. This work shows that in C. o. oreganus sex may be the most important
factor influencing movement patterns as males search for sedentary females during the mating
season(s), but other factors may have an effect at finer scales.



Pyron, Robert (GWU);

Divergence-Time Estimation Using Fossils as Terminal Taxa and the Origins of Lissamphibia

Were molecular data available for extinct taxa, questions regarding the origins of many groups could be
settled in short order. As this is not the case, various strategies have been proposed to combine
paleontological and neontological datasets. The use of fossil dates as node-age calibrations for
divergence-time estimation from molecular phylogenies is commonplace. In addition, simulations suggest
that the addition of morphological data from extinct taxa may improve phylogenetic estimation when
combined with molecular data for extant species, and some studies have merged morphological and
molecular data to estimate combined-evidence phylogenies containing both extinct and extant taxa.
However, few if any studies have attempted to estimate divergence times using phylogenies containing
both fossil and living taxa sampled for both molecular and morphological data. Here, I infer both the
phylogeny and time of origin for Lissamphibia and a number of stem tetrapods using Bayesian methods,
based on a dataset containing morphological data for extinct taxa, molecular data for extant taxa, and
molecular and morphological data for a subset of extant taxa. The results suggest that Lissamphibia is
monophyletic, nested within Lepospondyli, and originated in the late Carboniferous at the earliest. This
research illustrates potential pitfalls for the use of fossils as post-hoc age constraints on internal nodes,
and highlights the importance of explicit phylogenetic analysis of extinct taxa. These results suggest that
the application of fossils as minima or maxima on molecular phylogenies should be supplemented or
supplanted by combined-evidence analyses whenever possible.




                                                                                                           579
Quadros, Ana (Instituto Butantan);

The Ophiofauna of Botucatu

Throughout the analysis of the collections JJ, CEVAP, IBSP, ZUEC and UEL, a study on the ophiofauna
of Botucatu was made. We present a preliminary list of the species of snakes here found, with small
comments on their natural history. The number of specimens studied was 943. We registered, for
Botucatu, 51 species of snakes, distributed in 31 genera and 6 families. The families here found were
Anomalepididae (1 spp.), Boidae (1 spp.), Colubridae (7 spp.), Dipsadidae (32 spp.), Elapidae (3 spp.)
and Viperidae (7 spp.). The analysis of the relative abundance shows that Dipsadidae was the most
abundant family, with n=425 (44,83%), followed by Viperidae, with n=388 (40,93%), Boidae, n=62
(6,54%), Colubridae, n=57 (6,01%), Elapidae, n=15 (1,6%) and, at last, Anomalepididae, with n=1 (0,1%).
The five more representative species were Crotalus durissus (n=135, 14,31%), Oxyrhopus guibei (n=123,
12,8%) Bothropoides jararaca (N=121, 12,6%), Bothropoides neuwiedi (N=95, 9,88%) and
Sibynomorphus mikani (N=65, 6,76%). A higher number of individuals collected was registered for the
months of january to april that, together, sum up to almost 50% of the total. The months of june to
september registered a lower number of individuals. The spacial distribution analysis shows that a higher
number of snakes was found on the country areas of Botucatu (n=270, 41,54%), specially on pastures.
Due to the lack of studies of Botucatu‘s ophiofauna, this list is probably underestimated. It is mandatory
that future studies approaching this group and its ecological components on this region are made, using
appropriate sampling methodologies, in order to form an accurate list of the species of snakes of
Botucatu.



Queiroz, Nuno (CIBIO - University of Porto); Humphries, Nicolas (Marine Biological Association of the
United Kingdom, Plymouth, United Kingdom); Mucientes, Gonzalo (IMM ¿ CSIC, Vigo, Spain); Sousa,
Lara (CIBIO - University of Porto, Vairao, Portugal); Sims, David (2Marine Biological Association of the
United Kingdom, Plymouth, United Kingdom)

Behaviour, critical habitat and fisheries interactions of pelagic sharks in the North Atlantic Ocean

Surface longlines are widely known to interact with several marine predators and are linked with declines
in targeted and bycatch species in the open ocean, including seabirds, turtles, tunas and sharks. Many
large pelagic predators, such as blue Prionace glauca and mako sharks Isurus oxyrinchus, are of current
conservation concern because of their vulnerability to overfishing and rapid declines in populations.
Management of pelagic shark populations is poorly developed and takes little account of behavioural
characteristics such as spatial and temporal movements and distributions. Recent studies show that
some species remain faithful to particular regions with males and females segregating into different
regions for at least part of the year. This raises the issue of whether fisheries concentrate in key critical
areas where, for example, the majority of a population aggregate for feeding or mating opportunities, or
where important components of a population choose to remain. Consequently, we need to know the
extent to which fisheries overlap with different components of blue and mako shark populations in space
(both vertically and horizontally) and time. Using vessel monitoring system (VMS) data from Portuguese
and Spanish surface longliners operating in the North Atlantic and recorded movements of blue and mako
sharks from satellite-linked pop-up (PAT) tags, we aimed at identifying and characterising critical habitats
of these species, for testing the extent of space-use overlap with pelagic fisheries, and thus, investigate
the vulnerability of sharks to bycatch mortality. Geolocations and behaviour of individual sharks were
related to high-resolution maps of environmental variables (e.g. sea surface temperature, frontal
boundaries, sea altimetry and productivity) to quantitatively characterise the preferred habitat and, using
GIS technology and geostatistics, the degree of spatial and temporal overlap of shark distributions,



                                                                                                         580
including migrations, with the spatial extent and density of satellite-tracked longlining fishing vessels was
quantified. Longlines were deployed over an extensive area from 0 – 60ºN and 2 – 62ºW, with fishing
effort generally concentrated in three wide-ranging areas in the North Atlantic. Tracked sharks also
occupied a broad geographical area, but displayed high space-use of specific regions over 90 to 180
days. Our results indicate that different segments of the blue shark population may be facing differential
risk from spatially heterogeneous longlining effort, depending on which geographical regions are occupied
at specific times. Preliminary results on the space-use overlap between oceanic-tagged sharks and the
longlining fleet operating in North Atlantic waters will be presented.



Ramesh, Rasika (Department of Natural Resources Management, Texas Tech University); Griffis-Kyle,
Kerry; Perry, Gad (Department of Natural Resources Management, Texas Tech University, Canada)

An Amphibian's Dilemma: Wetland Site Selection and Community Assemblages in an Urbanized
Setting

The extent of urbanization has increased dramatically over the past century, causing significant
alterations to the landscape. Rapidly expanding city boundaries and runoff from urban and industrial
areas restrict the availability of natural areas for amphibian use. Hence, improving our understanding of
amphibian populations in urbanized settings is critical to their long-term conservation. Our study focuses
on suitability of available urban wetlands for amphibian use and reproduction in the city of Lubbock,
located in northwest Texas. Amphibian ecology within urban centers of the Southern High Plains remains
poorly explored; this project is the first of its kind in the region. A mid-size city with a population of
229,573, Lubbock is an ideal system for urban amphibian studies. Ephemeral wetlands characteristic of
this landscape have been extensively modified for storm water drainage, agriculture, and construction of
roads, buildings, neighborhoods, and recreational environments. A semi-arid climate with frequent
extremes such as prolonged droughts, together with urbanization, could have an adverse effect on
resident amphibians. We gathered baseline data to assess amphibian presence, species richness, and
species-specific preferences based on site-specific (water quality, percentage of emergent vegetation,
presence of fish) and landscape-scale variables (road density in a 500m buffer, nearest wetland
distance). Between March and October of 2011, we sampled 23 urban lakes in Lubbock after rain events
using a combination of audio surveys, visual encounter surveys, and larval pipe sampling and dip netting
surveys, to document amphibian species presence. Of the 13 species that occur in this region, we
detected five: Gastrophryne olivacea, Anaxyrus speciosus, Lithobates catesbeiana, Spea bombifrons
and Pseudacris clarkii . We found amphibians at seven lakes and tadpoles at four of these lakes. We
found significant negative effects of road density on amphibian species presence and richness (p ≤ 0.05).
We also detected significant negative effects of pH on amphibian species richness (p ≤ 0.05). Negative
impacts of these two factors were also observed specifically on P. clarkii presence (p ≤ 0.05). We will
complete a second season of sampling in 2012. This data is critical for prioritizing lakes in amphibian
conservation strategies and to indirectly monitor ecosystem function in urban wetlands.



Ramirez, Edward (University of Akron);

Gecko Digital Hyperextension: Exploring Diversity and Ecological Applications

The mechanics of gecko adhesion have been tested extensively at the micro- and nanoscopic scale.
However, relatively few studies have examined the adhesive system at the whole organism level. One
feature that has been overlooked in particular is gecko digital hyperextension. The first objective of this



                                                                                                         581
study was to measure the hyperextension of the digits of three different species and test for correlations
between hyperextension and kinematic variables such as duty factor. We tested the hypothesis that
digital hyperextension measurements are significantly different between species. The second objective
was to explore ecological applications to hyperextension by running geckos across substrates of varying
surface roughness. We tested the hypothesis that the sprint speeds of species with greater
hyperextension would vary less across substrates of different roughness. Our study provides insight on
the diversity of gecko adhesion and on how species thrive in different habitats. The results of this
experiment can also contribute to engineering applications, such as synthetic adhesives and robotics.



Randall, Lea (Calgary Zoo); Smith, Des; Jones, Breana (Calgary Zoo, Calgary, AB, Canada); Prescott,
Dave (Sustainable Resource Development, Red Deer, AB, Canada); Moehrenschlager, Axel (Calgary
Zoo, Calgary, AB, Canada)

No evidence of non-assisted northern leopard frog (Lithobates pipiens) recovery in southern
Alberta, Canada

Background/questions/methods: Dramatic decreases in northern leopard frog (NLF) abundance and
distribution were first reported in western Canada and the USA in the 1970s and 80s. As a result of this
decline, the western boreal/prairie populations of NLF are designated as Special Concern by the
Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada (COSEWIC) and Threatened under the
Alberta Wildlife Act. Recovery efforts have primarily focused on reintroducing NLFs to historical portions
of their former range. Recovery efforts are hampered by the fact that little is known about the population
dynamics and current distribution of NLF in this region. To address this knowledge gap we conducted
repeat visual surveys over three summers at 68 sites spanning 90,000 km2 of southern Alberta. Sites
were selected based on historical observations of NLF and those predicted to be suitable habitat. We
used occupancy modeling to explore the population dynamics of northern leopard frogs (NLF) in southern
Alberta.

Results/conclusions: Using AIC we compared models that allowed occupancy, and extinction/
colonization to vary with equilibrium models. Only the top model had a ∆AIC<2 indicating substantial
support and comprised 57% of the AIC weight. This model was an equilibrium model with constant
occupancy and constant rate of colonization/extinction suggesting that NLF occupancy over the course of
our study was stable. While we are cautiously optimistic that the population distribution of NLFs is not
continuing to decline, there is no evidence that they are recovering in their former range.



Randrianantoandro, Christian (Madagasikara Voakajy); Andriantsimanarilafy, Raphali (Madagasikara
Voakajy, Antananarivo, Madagascar); Jenkins, Richard; Griffiths, Richard (Durrell Institute of
Conservation and Ecology, Kent, United Kingdom)

Conservation and sustainable use of chameleons in madagascar

In Madagascar, 76 species of chameleons in the genera Brookesia , Calumma, and Furcifer are
described. These species are distributed in different habitat types from savannah grassland to the primary
humid or dry forests across an elevational gradient from sea level to the highest mountains. Chameleons
are important for ecotourism and trade but not well known by Malagasy people. Recent initiatives have
been undertaken to improve the conservation and sustainable use of these species. Red List