o examine
the influence of prey abundance on habitat selection for Atlantic sharpnose sharks in a northeast Florida



                                                                                                             463
estuary.     Atlantic sharpnose sharks were caught in Cumberland Sound from 2009 – 2011 and catch
rates were compared between open sound habitat and protected creek habitat.           Stomach contents of
sharks caught in 2010 –2011 were analyzed to determine the preferred prey items of Atlantic sharpnose
sharks. The abundance of potential prey items in sound and creek habitats was determined from finfish
abundance data obtained from the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservsation Commission. Catch rates of
Atlantic sharpnose sharks in open sound and creek habitat were compared with the abundances of their
preferred prey items found in those habitats.      Understanding patterns of habitat use and foraging
behavior can provide insight on how predators select habitat, and the importance of those habitats. This
is particularly important as management efforts continue to focus on identifying essential fish habitats.



Mccardle, Logan (Southeastern Louisiana University); Fontenot, Cliff (Southeastern Louisiana
University, Canada)

Patterns of Road Mortality in Snakes along the Manchac Land Bridge in Southeast Louisiana

Roads represent significant sources of mortality for snakes in many regions. Snakes are a useful group to
assess magnitude of road mortality because they are important trophic components and are useful
indicators of trophic dynamics within an ecosytem. Snakes often occupy niches in the middle of the food
web and are controls for prey species as well an energy source for their predators. In addition, snakes
possess life history traits that may make them more vulnerable to road mortality than other fauna, and are
in decline in many areas. As part of a long-term herpetofauna monitoring study we quantified road
mortality in 13 snake species on a road that transects the wetland between Lakes Pontchartrain and
Maurepaus in Southeast Louisiana. We describe inter- and intraspecific patterns, as well as temporal
patterns, to identify species and demographic groups (sexes, and age reproductive classes) within
species that are most susceptible to road mortality. This information may be useful in future planning,
construction, and mitigation of roads through snake habitat.



McCoy, Earl (University of South Florida); Osman, Nick (University of South fForida, Tampa, FL, United
States); Hauch, Brad (University of South Florida, Tampa.Florida, United States); Mushinsky, Henry
(University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States)

Successful Translocation of the Threatened Florida Sand Skink

The Florida Sand Skink (FSS), Plestiodon reynoldsi , is a threatened fossorial lizard found only on the
central ridges of Florida.  The habitat of the FSS has been so severely reduced by development that
conservation strategies beyond land acquisition and management have become necessary.             In 2007,
more than 500 individuals were collected from a single population at a location slated for development,
individually marked, and moved to a nearby site with no existing FSS, but with apparently suitable habitat.
Three hundred of the Individuals were released into 15 20-m 2 enclosures, representing 5 habitat
treatment types. Survival and reproduction were monitored for three subsequent years.               Across
treatments, recapture rate was 37%. Survival for the first two years was estimated to be about 70%. A
decline in survival occurred in the third year, likely reflecting aging of the population.       Minimum
recruitment was 15 individuals in 2008, 17 in 2009, and 35 in 2010.             Continued monitoring to
accommodate one full generation, 4+ years, is in progress.




                                                                                                       464
McCracken, Shawn (Texas State University); Forstner, Michael (Texas State University, Canada)

Living on the edge: Oil road effects on the occupancy and abundance of anurans inhabiting an
upper canopy tank bromeliad (Aechmea zebrina) in lowland rainforest of the Yasuni Biosphere
Reserve, Amazonian Ecuador

Forest canopies are among the most species-rich terrestrial habitats on earth and one of the remaining
unexplored biotic frontiers. Tank bromeliads provide microhabitat for a high diversity of fauna and flora in
tropical forest canopies and are considered a keystone resource. A number of amphibians inhabit these
phytotelmata, yet their ecological role and status in forest canopies remains mostly unknown. For this
study, anurans were collected from an upper canopy tank bromeliad ( Aechmea zebrina ) in trees at ~20-
45 m (x̅ = 33 m) above the forest floor. Bromeliads were sampled from trees located along ~30 km trails in
undisturbed primary rainforest and the south-central portion of the Maxus oil road within the Yasuni
Biosphere Reserve of Amazonian Ecuador. The Maxus road where bromeliads were sampled has
experienced relatively little deforestation aside from infrastructure development for petroleum extraction
operations (i.e. roads, pipelines, processing facilities and related disturbances) as compared to the
northern roadway that is experiencing extensive colonization and associated deforestation. Ninety-eight
individuals from 10 species were collected from 180 bromeliads in 32 trees. Generalized Linear Mixed
Models were used to assess the effects of disturbance and a suite of ecological factors on the occupancy
and abundance of anurans collected. Analyses were conducted using the full species dataset and
reduced species sets based on a priori knowledge about their use of canopy microhabitats. Full dataset
analysis revealed bromeliads in undisturbed forest had a significantly greater occupancy and abundance
of anurans than those along the Maxus road, while recorded ecological factors had no relationship.

Reduced species set analyses demonstrated that anuran occupancy was highest in undisturbed forest;
abundance showed mixed significance results although it was also greatest in undisturbed forest, and
again the recorded ecological factors had no relationship. This study is the first to investigate upper
canopy anurans utilizing tank bromeliad microhabitat and reveals that even the minimal footprint of
petroleum extraction operations, primarily roads, in rainforest environments can have significant impacts
on a unique anuran community. Based on these results, it is recommended that future petroleum
development treat rainforest habitat as an offshore system where roads are not used and current access
roads be protected from colonization and further deforestation.



McCutcheon, Sara (Florida Atlantic University); Kajiura, Stephen (Florida Atlantic University, Canada)

Lanthanide metals as potential shark deterrents

Sharks comprise a large portion of unwanted bycatch in longline fisheries worldwide and various
technologies and modifications to fishing protocols have been proposed to reduce elasmobranch bycatch.
Since bycatch species are often trophically similar to target species, technologies need to be developed
to specifically reduce elasmobranch bycatch without impacting the catch of target species. Lanthanide
metals have been proposed as an elasmobranch-specific repellent. When submerged in a polar solution,
such as water, lanthanide metals undergo a hydrolytic reaction and release electrons, which produces a
charge distribution in the water. The charge produced by the metals likely exceeds anything that sharks
naturally encounter in the wild and will presumably overwhelm their electrosensory system. We evaluated
the efficacy of lanthanide metals as potential shark deterrents. Specifically, we quantified the electrical
charge produced by six lanthanide metals in seawater, compared their dissolution rates, and performed a
behavioral assay to determine effectiveness against two shark species. We found that there was no
difference in the voltage produced by the six tested metals in ambient seawater. The charge distribution



                                                                                                         465
decayed as a power function with distance from the metal sample. From the function for voltage decay
with distance we derived the function for the voltage gradient (ie. electric field). Based upon the median
sensitivity reported for six elasmobranch species, we calculated that sharks should detect a sample of
neodymium at a minimal distance of 65-85 cm. The dissolution rate for the lanthanides varied from -1.6
to -0.2 g/h. As the metals dissolved the voltage remained constant presumably due to more extensive
pitting which increased 3D surface area despite a decrease in mass. In a behavioral assay, neodymium
was ineffective at repelling bonnethead sharks (Sphyrna tiburo) tested individually and in groups, and
lemon sharks (Negaprion brevirostris) in groups. Therefore, due to high cost, fast dissolution rates, and
lack of deterrent effects, lanthanide metals are not recommended for use in mitigating shark bycatch.



McElroy, Eric (College of Charleston); Bergmann, Philip (Clark University, Worcester, United States)

The impact of tail loss on locomotor performance

The effect of tail autotomy on locomotor performance has been studied in a number of lizard species,
from arboreal geckos to generalized terrestrial lizards. These studies show that tail autotomy can have
a positive, a negative, or no effect on locomotor performance with a variety of mechanisms proposed to
explain these findings.     This study examines the effect of experimentally-induced tail autotomy in two
arboreal lizard species ( Takydromus sexlineatus and Anolis carolinensis ) and two terrestrial lizard
species ( Aspidoscelis sonorae and Holbrookia maculata ). This sample represents a broad range of
tail sizes; Takydromus has an exceptionally long and heavy tail, Holbrookia has a short and light tail,
and Anolis and Aspidoscelis have intermediate tails. Based on these morphological differences, we
expected loss of the tail would have the greatest effect on performance in Takydromus and the least
effect in Holbrookia . We quantified the effect of autotomy on maximum running speed and acceleration
capacity in all four species as they ran down a flat racetrack. We also ran the two arboreal species on
30 and 70 degree inclines to examine how autotomy affects climbing speed and acceleration. Finally, we
examined how several possible kinematic predictors of performance changed following autotomy.            On
the flat, running speed and acceleration were generally unaffected following tail autotomy, even though
some species exhibited marked alterations in kinematics following autotomy. It seems that the size of
the tail has very little impact on how autotomy affects running performance on flat substrates; which
agrees with the mixed results of several previous studies.         On the vertical, autotomy significantly
reduced both running speed and acceleration with several kinematic variables changing to produce this
effect. Thus, it appears that arboreal species generally rely on the tail as a functional appendage. In
addition, this result suggests that autotomy may have different effects on performance depending on the
focal species‘ habitat use and the type of performance studied (climbing vs. running vs. jumping, etc.).



McFarlane, Gordon A. (Fisheries and Oceans Canada); Cisneros, Andres (UBC, Canada); King,
Jacquelynne (Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Canada); Sumaila, Rashid (UBC, Canada)

Economic Impacts of Shark Conservation in British Columbia

Although data-deficiency often hinders formal assessments, it is widely recognized that shark species
around the world have historically been overfished. In British Columbia, three shark species have been
listed under the Species at Risk Act (SARA) as Endangered or Special Concern. Currently these listings
have not required bycatch mitigation in fisheries which encounter these shark species. It is recognized
that conservation measures in the form of fishery restrictions will have economic costs from the
adaptation of an industry to new restrictions. In the case of fisheries these costs follow from limitations on



                                                                                                          466
catch (targeted or incidental) leading to reductions in fishing effort, which can result in lowered catch and
profits. We examine the potential economic costs of mandated bycatch reduction, with a conceptual case
study. We chose two model species: bluntnose sixgill shark (Hexanchus griseus) which is the most
common SARA-listed bycatch species in the British Columbia groundfish fishery; and Pacific halibut
(Hippoglossus stenolepis) which is the most economically important groundfish fishery in British
Columbia. We ask the overarching question: ―Undercurrent fishing conditions, what effect might sixgill
shark bycatch limitations have on the BC halibut fishery?‖



McGlashan, Jessica (University of Western Sydney); Old, Julie; Spencer, Ricky-John (University of
Western Sydney, Canada)

Embryonic communication in the nest: metabolic responses of reptilian embryos to
developmental rates of siblings

Incubation temperature is a major environmental factor that affects developmental rates and defines
many phenotypes and fitness characteristics of reptilian embryos. In turtles, eggs are deposited in several
layers within the nest and thermal gradients create independent developmental conditions for each egg.
Despite differences in developmental rate, several studies have revealed unexpected synchronicity in
hatching, but the mechanisms through which synchrony is achieved may differ between species. We
determined whether embryos hatch prematurely or developmentally compensate in response to more
advanced embryos in a clutch by assessing the proximate mechanisms of synchronous hatching in an
Australian freshwater turtle ( Emydura macquarii ). Developmental asynchrony was established within a
clutch of turtle eggs and both respiration and heart rates were measured throughout incubation in
constant and fluctuating temperatures. Turtles hatched at similar developmental stages in all incubation
treatments, with less-developed embryos in experimental groups responding to the presence of more
developed eggs in a clutch by increasing both respiration and heart rates. Early hatching did not reduce
neuromuscular ability at hatching. These results support developmental adjustment mechanisms of the
‗catch-up hypothesis‘ for synchronous hatching in E. macquarii and implies some level of embryo–embryo
communication. The group environment of a nest facilitates the development of communication
mechanisms between embryos and the evolution of environmentally cued hatching.



McGuire, Jimmy (University of California at Berkeley);

Sulawesi biogeography and Wallacean flying lizards revisited: An analysis based on multispecies
coalescent phylogenetics, molecular phylogeography, and spatially-informed genetic clustering
analyses of 50 SNPs

The island of Sulawesi, Indonesia has received substantial attention from biogeographers on account if its
close proximity to Wallace‘s Line, its long period of isolation from any other major land area, its
consequent high degree of endemism, and its complex tectonic history that may have driven substantial
in situ diversification. Outstanding questions regarding Sulawesi biogeography include the primary
mechanism by which it has acquired its biota (i.e., via vicariance, by direct dispersal across land-bridges,
or by overwater dispersal), the temporal window during which major features of the biota arrived on the
island, the number of areas of endemism on the island, and the role that tectonic accretion of several
paleo-islands into the large composite island that exists today may have played in Sulawesi species
diversification. During the past few decades, molecular phylogeographic studies have been undertaken
for a diversity of Sulawesi taxa, but often with sparse geographic coverage and typically with



                                                                                                         467
mitochondrial data alone. Here we present data for the Draco lineatus Group of flying lizards, a
monophyletic assemblage that is endemic to Sulawesi and its satellite islands, as well as the adjacent
islands of southern Maluku Province. I will first present a 9-locus multispecies coalescent phylogenetic
analysis for the entire 45-species Draco assemblage in an effort to establish the timing of major
speciation events within the Draco lineatus Group. I follow this with a densely sampled standard
phylogeographic treatment of the D. lineatus group based on three mitochondrial genes and three nuclear
genes for 525 D. lineatus group samples. Finally, I present spatially-informed genetic cluster analyses of
a 50 SNP dataset obtained for 370 D. lineatus group samples, with the goal of testing whether the
multitude of within-species genetic clusters identified in the phylogeographic data set, which is largely
driven by mitochondrial divergences, in fact appear to reflect reproductively isolated cryptic lineages.
Results of these analyses are interpreted in light of the outstanding questions related to Sulawesi
biogeography outlined above.



McKelvy, Alexander (CUNY Graduate Center and CUNY College of Staten Island); Burbrink, Frank
(CUNY Graduate Center and CUNY College of Staten Island, Canada)

Phylogeography of Lampropeltis calligaster

Enumerating biodiversity across the planet is an importantgoal for evolutionary biologists and
conservationists. Cryptic diversity clearly makes this goaldifficult, even in countries with a long history of
taxonomic exploration. In addition, improperly quantifying diversitywithin groups hampers the ability to
understand processes responsible fordiversification within said group. Here we provide an example of
large vertebrate predator that likely represents more than one species. A wide ranging but poorly known
snake, the Prairie Kingsnake ( Lampropeltis calligaster ) found from Southern Florida to Virginia and
Texas north to Illinois, currently is recognized as a single species composed of three subspecies. We
sampled this species liberally throughout its known range and examined phylogeographic structure and
population demographic history using multi-locus data in a Bayesian coalescent framework. We show
deep phylogeographic structure in this taxon likely associated with the Mississippi River, suggesting that
L. calligaster is composed of more than one species. This is one of the last wide-ranging members of
the genus Lampropeltis to be studied at the phylogeographic level which upon correcting taxonomy here
will aid downstream processes used to study evolution and diversification in this genus.



McKenzie, Valerie (University of Colorado);

Landscape-scale dynamics of amphibian disease across human-altered ecosystems

The role of infectious disease and parasites in the ongoing decline of modern amphibians is emerging as
a complex interaction between host animals, pathogens, and a changing environment. Anthropogenic
landscape alterations produce changes in the environment that may either increase or decrease the
transmission of parasites and pathogens. This will depend on the life history of the parasite and the host,
as well as the type of disturbance. I will contrast bodies of work that address how land use changes
influence disease transmission in amphibian hosts, one in tropical amphibian communities, and one in a
temperate region of the United States. In Costa Rica, I examined parasites communities of three species
of amphibians (Lithobates vaillanti, Eleutherodactylus fitzingeri, and Smilisca puma) from sites in either
undisturbed rainforest or areas that had been clear-cut for cattle pasture. Land-use type contributed to
significant differences in parasite community composition for the more aquatic hosts species and less so
for the terrestrial host species. Land-use type was related to environmental characteristics such as the



                                                                                                          468
presence or absence of specific amphibian predators, water quality differences, and degree of excess
nutrient input, all of which influence the abundance of certain parasites. In Colorado, USA, I examined the
decline of native leopard frogs (Lithobates pipiens) and how it relates to land use shifts from agriculture to
urbanization in conjunction with an invasive species, American bullfrogs (Lithobates catebeiana), and the
emerging chytrid fungal pathogen, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd). In this ongoing work, we
conducted systematic resurveys of historical leopard frog sites and discovered that native leopard frog
declines in Colorado are significant and that they are regionally specific, with the most severe declines in
the northern Front Range region. Leopard frogs appear to be negatively affected in urbanized habitats,
particularly where invasive bullfrogs are present. While Bd was not significantly associated with present
day high plains populations of leopard frogs, it is widely thought to have been associated with past
declines of leopard frogs at higher elevations. These two studies underscore how infectious disease
responses to land-use change can be a complex process that is mediated by associated changes in the
biotic communities, including parasite intermediate hosts and reservoir hosts.



McLister, James (Indiana University South Bend);

Searching behaviour by male Bird-Voiced Treefrogs (Hyla avivoca): responses to females,
conspecific males, and heterospecific males

Chorusing Bird-Voiced Treefrogs (Hyla avivoca) exhibit less perch site fidelity and wander more
compared to related species. Field observations found frequent aggressive interactions among
conspecific males, aggressive interactions between male H. avivoca and male H. chrysoscelis, and
amplexus to be initiated by males leaping onto the backs of receptive females from a distance. These
observations suggest that male H. avivoca, unlike related species, actively seek out rivals and mates
within a larger territory. To test this hypothesis, individual frogs (male and female H. avivoca and H.
chrysoscelis) were placed inside clear containers 1.5 m from where a male H. avivoca was calling. Male
H. avivoca approached the frog in the container 71% of the time (n=31 trials), but did not apporach the
container if it was empty (n=5). When subjected to a similar experiment, male H. chrysoscelis showed no
response (n=20). Choice trials were done comparing the preference of H. avivoca for females,
conspecific males, or heterospecific (i.e., H. chrysoscelis) males. Male H. avivoca tended to approach
other males rather than females (31 vs 20 trials; P=0.12) and tended to approach male H. chrysoscelis
rather than conspecifics (28 vs 16; P=0.07). When the choice was between a container with a frog and
an empty container, the empty container was never chosen (10 vs 0; p<0.01). Male H. avivoca visually
seek out and confront other frogs when they are calling and this marks an evolutionary divergence in
male behavior between H. avivoca and related species.



McMahan, Caleb (LSU Museum of Natural Science); Matamoros, Wilfredo (LSU Musuem of Natural
Science, Canada); Chakrabarty, Prosanta (LSU Museum of Natural Science, Canada)

Phylogeography of the Black-belt Cichlid, Paraneetroplus maculicauda (Teleostei: Cichlidae)

The black-belt cichlid, Paraneetroplus maculicauda , is found in Caribbean slope rivers of Middle
America from Belize to the Río Chagres in Panama. This deep-bodied cichlid is typically found in
lowland stretches of rivers, as well as lagoons and back-water areas. Given its apparent tolerance to
brackish water conditions, it has been speculated that the relatively large distribution of this species could
be due to dispersal along the coast. The purpose of this study is to investigate the occurrence of
phylogeographic structure within the range of this wide-spread species using multiple mitochondrial and



                                                                                                          469
nuclear markers. These data indicate some phylogenetic structuring within this species based on the
separation of major drainages and geological regions within Middle America. Notably this species
provides a phylogenetic pattern that can aid our understanding of major geological events/regions
including the Motagua Fault, Chortis Block, and the formation of the Costa Rican/Panamanian Arc.
Information on the geologic history of Middle America, as well as major river dynamics, will be used to
better understand the evolutionary history of this species.



McMahon, Taegan (University of South Florida); Brown, Jenise; Halstead, Neal; Sears, Brittany;
Venesky, Matthew; Rohr, Jason (University of South Florida, Canada)

Direct evidence of acquired resistance to Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in Osteopilus
septentrionalis (Cuban treefrogs)

Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ( Bd ) parasitizes amphibians and has been implicated in the decline or
extinction of hundreds of amphibian species. Despite extensive research on this host-parasite system,
little is known about host immune defenses against Bd . We investigated whether Osteopilus
septentrionalis (Cuban treefrogs) could acquire resistance to Bd after zero to three episodes of Bd
exposure (11d exposure; 3x10 6 zoospores/exposure) followed by heat-induced clearance of infection
(11d at 32 °C). After each exposure and clearance period, we determined the prevalence and intensity of
Bd infection via skin swabs and quantitative PCR and evaluated tolerance to infection by examining the
relationship between Bd load and frog survival and weight. At the conclusion of the experiment, we will
investigate several aspects of immunity against Bd . We found no evidence that multiple infections
affected tolerance of Bd (i.e., mortality or growth) but Bd abundance significantly decreased with
increasing number of exposures (p = 0.01). These findings are direct evidence that O. septentrionalis
can develop resistance to Bd . The capability of frogs to acquire resistance could alter transmission and
persistence of Bd .



McNeil, Jeffie (Mersey Tobeatic Research Institute); Herman, Tom (Acadia University, Canada); Frech,
Troy (Mersey Tobeatic Research Institute, Canada); Mockford, Steve (Acadia University, Canada)

Nesting resources in space and time: a tale of fidelity and uncertainty in Blanding's turtles

Blanding‘s turtles ( Emydoidea blandingii ) occur in three small populations in Nova Scotia, which are
each separated by less than 25km. Despite their relatively close proximity, these populations have
previously been shown to be genetically and morphologically distinct, and their habitat characteristics
differ considerably. In this project we examine nesting movements, timing, site fidelity and clutch sizes
among two of the populations, KP and ML, over a 10 year period (2001-2011). We explore the influences
of differences in nesting site size, substrate, stability, and spatial distribution on turtle movements and
fidelity in the two populations. The KP population occurs inside a national park and has had an annual
volunteer-based nest protection program since the 1992. The ML population occurs in a working
landscape and has had a similar nest protection program since 2000, which has been facilitated by more
frequent radio tracking and identification of individual turtles than the KP population. Females from the
ML population lay smaller clutches than those from KP and the annual onset of nesting tends to occur a
few days earlier in the season. In both populations, nests can occur inland or on lakeshores. KP females
display strong fidelity to their general nesting area and no females have been recorded moving between
inland and lakeshore nesting sites. In contrast, many ML females show less fidelity to the general nesting
area and often make considerable movements between nesting attempts. Movements between inland



                                                                                                       470
and lakeshore nest sites are frequently recorded at ML. This variability in behaviour may be in response
to more variable water levels and less available suitable substrate at ML. The striking differences among
the populations in Nova Scotia underscore the need for site-specific management of this species and the
movements documented at ML illustrate the importance of protecting the overall area rather focusing on
individual nest sites.



McPherson, Diana (FIN Photography); Blaiyok, Kautchang (N/A, Koror, Republic of Palau); Masse,
Bruce (ENV-ES Enviornmental Stewadrship Group, Los Alamos, NM, United States); Helfman, Gene
(univ of georgia, Lopez Island, WA, United States)

Large jacks attack and kill Blacktip Reef Sharks

Adult sharks have few natural enemies aside from other sharks. Documented attacks by bony fishes are
exceedingly rare. We report several instances of highly aggressive, fatal, non-consumptive attacks on
Blacktip Reef Sharks (Carcharhinus melanopterus) by Giant Trevally (Caranx ignobilis). Our direct
observations and informant‘s reports suggest that large Giant Trevally and other carangids pursue and
ram sharks at several Indo-Pacific locales. Carangids head-butt sharks behind the gills and above the
pectoral fins, causing blood to stream from the gill region. Attacks continue until a shark is immobilized,
despite obvious injury to the head of the trevally. An attacking carangid continually outmaneuvers its
victim, restricts its escape efforts, and thwarts apparent attempts by other sharks to defend an individual
under attack. Post-mortem examination of sharks indicates damage to several internal organs. These
attacks differ from oft-reported incidents of mobbing. We seek information on similar interactions to
determine if this turning of the tables is a common phenomenon.



McPhie, Romney (Department of Fisheries and Oceans); King, Jacquelynne (Department of Fisheries
and Oceans, Canada)

Diel vertical migration of bluntnose sixgill sharks (Hexanchus griseus) in the Strait of Georgia,
British Columbia

Previous observations on the diel activity patterns of bluntnose sixgill sharks ( Hexanchus griseus ) were
most consistent with the hypothesis that foraging activity is responsible for their diel patterns of vertical
movement. However, ecosystems vary with respect to physical processes (e.g. mixing, stratification and
the depth of thermocline) as well as food web dynamics (e.g. prey abundance and availability).           We
used temporal depth and temperature data collected from pop-up satellite tags to test the foraging activity
hypothesis for sixgills residing in the Strait of Georgia . Alternate hypotheses that might explain diel
vertical migration patterns include the avoidance of predators and/or competitors, or thermoregulation.
Our results extend the spatial scale of observations made in the nearby ecosystem, Puget Sound .



McVeigh, Doreen (Hood College);

Genetic Analysis of Populations of the Cownose Ray, Rhinoptera bonasus, in the Chesapeake Bay
and Gulf of Mexico.

Cownose rays, Rhinoptera bonasus , are elasmobranchs found in the Western Atlantic from Brazil to
Massachusetts. In the spring and early summer, large schools of rays migrate into the Chesapeake Bay




                                                                                                         471
to forage. The rays also utilize the Chesapeake Bay as a nursery for young-of-the-year pups and a
breeding ground. During the summer, cownose rays migrate throughout the polyhaline portion of the Bay,
but it is not currently known if these subgroups of animals are genetically isolated. In this study, we
analyzed DNA sequence variation from portions of two variable mitochondrial genes, cytochrome b and
cytochrome c oxidase I, in samples collected from two sites in the Chesapeake Bay (St. George Island,
MD and Reedville, VA) and from Tampa Bay, FL. Preliminary results indicate that there is a statistically
significant difference in the distribution (p &lt; 0.05) of haplotypes between the two Chesapeake Bay
populations as well as a difference between Chesapeake and Tampa Bay populations. Florida and
Reedville share a haplotype that is present in substantial frequencies (34% and 23%, respectively); this
haplotype is absent from the St. George Island population. These results suggest that the two
Chesapeake locations attract different southern source populations each summer.



Means, Ryan (Coastal Plains Institute); Means, Rebecca (Coastal Plains Institute, Canada); Miller,
Debra; Gray, Matthew (University of Tennessee, Canada); Johnson, Steve (University of Florida,
Canada); Means, Bruce (Coastal Plains Institute, Canada); Brenes, Roberto (University of Tennessee,
Canada)

A conservation strategy for the imperiled striped newt (Notophthalmus perstriatus) in the
Apalachicola National Forest, Florida

The striped newt (Notophthalmus perstriatus) has a small global distribution restricted to north Florida and
south Georgia, and is a candidate for federal listing as threatened. Evidence suggests that there are two
distinct genetic groups, herein referred to as "western" and "eastern." The largest stronghold for the
western group is within the Apalachicola National Forest (ANF) of Florida, where there are 19 historically
known breeding ponds scattered throughout its native longleaf pine habitat. The entire species is
declining, but the western group's decline is more severe. No adult western newts have been observed in
the ANF since 2007 and no larvae since 1999. Currently there is only one reliable breeding pond left in
Georgia. Cause for decline is unknown, but we believe that some combination of 12-year drought, habitat
alteration, and possibly disease are to blame. We are conducting a 5-year study funded by the USFS to
investigate the cause of decline and repatriate the western striped newt back into its ANF stronghold.
Here, we report Years 1-2 of our study and discuss the remaining three. Years 1-2 were spent intensively
sampling the ANF for vestigial western striped newts. As anticipated, no western striped newts were
observed. This provided further evidence to proceed with repatriation. Also in Year 1, we began
establishment of a western group assurance colony, in collaboration with the Memphis Zoo, using an F1
generation of 21 larvae collected from the last reliable breeding pond. This colony will be the source for
repatriations later in this study. Currently we are challenge testing eastern striped newts for susceptibility
to ranavirus and surveillance testing the study area for the presence of ranavirus as precaution prior to
repatriation. Synthetic liners will be installed in Year 2 underneath the centers of the four recipient
wetlands prior to repatriations to ensure wetlands don't go dry during larval development. Liners are
expected to act as confining layers that capture rainwater in otherwise porous, drought-stricken soils.
Larval repatriation will take place in Years 3 and 4. Repatriation success will be measured utilizing
encircling drift fences, individual marking, and dipnet sampling through Year 5. This is the first repatriation
attempt for the imperiled striped newt, and to our knowledge, the first salamander repatriation to employ
pond liners in natural wetlands to enhance habitat and increase repatriation success.




                                                                                                           472
Mebert, Konrad (Freelance);

Ecological aspects on position and width of hybrid zones between Nerodia sipedon and N.
fasciata in the Carolinas

Nerodia     fasciata and N. sipedon segregate ecologically and form hybrid zones along ecotones of
water current (related to topography), salinity, and temperature in North Carolina, USA.     For example,
at the Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge, p ure N. fasciata genotypes could not be found at
salinities &gt; 0.5 ppt, whereas N. sipedon with low genetic fasciata influence (10%) were usually
collected at salinities &gt; 1.0 ppt and other N. sipedon with less fasciata influence were collected at
salinities &gt; 4.0 ppt. Farther north the hybrid zone coincides with an isotherm of annual average
temperature between 15 to 15.5 o C that parallels an east-west line approximately 10-20 km south of the
border with Virginia . N. fasciata occupies the range of increased temperatures south of the isotherm.
To the west in central North Carolina, the hybrid zone follows the Fall Line (Zone) which represents the
topographic transition between the hilly Piedmont and the flat Coastal Plain. The range of N. sipedon
west of this contact zone is associated with increased amounts of lotic water systems, whereas N.
fasciata occupies only lentic habitats below the Fall Zone, corroborating similar observations in the
southern and the Mississippi River Valley contact zones. Correspondingly, N. sipedon also expands
deeper into the coastal and alluvial plains along larger rivers. Variation in the width of these ecotones
relates to the variable width of hybrid zones, a pattern that corresponds to the geographic-selection
model.



Mebert, Konrad (Freelance);

Hybridization between the water snakes Nerodia sipedon and N. fasciata in the Carolinas: a
genetic approach

Nuclear markers generated by AFLP (Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism) method were used to
study the hybrid zone between the waters snakes Nerodia sipedon and N. fasciata in the Carolinas,
USA. The genetic characters were nearly fixed in corresponding species and so served as diagnostic
markers. They revealed extensive introgression between the two species not recognizable with
morphological characters (see poster). Lower than expected frequencies under Hardy-Weinberg
Equilibrium of both, genetic sipedon markers and specimens with a high interspecific heterozygosity,
infers selection against N. sipedon and hybrids with an increased genetic mixture (hybridization),
respectively. This is consistent with a pronounced genetic and morphological dominance of N. fasciata
characters in the hybrid zone. The genetic data support the species status of the two taxa as
independent entities under either, the Phylogenetic Species Concept due to the diagnostic genetic
markers, and the Evolutionary Species Concept due to the heterozygote deficiency of hybrids. The
suggested phylogenetic position of both species is consistent with other genetic, morphological, fossil,
and ecological data from earlier studies. The combined data suggest that the hybrid zone probably is a
constant in their evolutionary history and based on fossil records is at least 4-5 million years old. The
location of the various subsections of the hybrid zone correlates with environmental aspects and implies a
geographic-gradient model.




                                                                                                       473
Mebert, Konrad (Freelance);

Morphological differences between the water snakes Nerodia sipedon and N.                    fasciata in the
Carolinas: a look at their contact zone

A few traditionally applied characters of color pattern that putatively distinguish between the two water
snakes Nerodia sipedon and N. fasciata were compared with an additional set of morphological
characters to evaluate interspecific differences and to study their applicability to describe the hybrid zone
in the Carolinas, USA. Many of the morphological characters exhibited significant interspecific
differences, but only the number of dorsally complete crossbands yielded diagnostic quality. Higher
values in several scalation characters are found in N. sipedon compared to N. fasciata , in females
compared to males in both species, as well as in northerly populations within each species. Respective
characters include postocular scales, ventral scales, and dorsal scale rows (or farther posterior positions
of scale row reductions). N. sipedon has larger cephalic proportions, whereas N. fasciata evolved
larger eyes and an edgier head (canthus rostralis). Character variation in color pattern is large, but N.
fasciata tends more to rectangular ventral markings, a pronounced postocular stripe, and melanism than
N. sipedon , thus corroborating earlier studies. Possible relationship of morphological species differences
with environmental factors will be briefly discussed. Discriminant function analyses of morphological
characters were successful in separating both taxa with little overlap between them. Canonical scores
show the intermediacy for many specimens from the contact zone, but are unsuitable to describe the
degree of hybridization for individual specimens. Although a genetic analysis by AFLP (see oral
presentation) revealed that all intermediately patterned specimens were of mixed interspecific origin, the
often used morphological characters are not suitable to reveal the scope of interspecific introgression, as
most specimens from the contact zone classified as pure species exhibited actually a mixed genotype.



Medina, Cintia (CONICET-CENPAT); Luciano, Avila (CONICET-CENPAT, Canada); Sites, Jack W
(Brigham Young University, Canada); Morando, Mariana (CONICET-CENPAT, Puerto Madryn, Argentina)

Molecular phylogeny of the kriegi complex (Iguania: Liolaemini)

The widely-distributed lizard genus Liolaemus has the largest number of species in southern South
America (~ 235), Within Liolaemus two major groups of species are recognized: Liolaemus and
Eulaemus , and within Liolaemus sensu stricto , one of the several recognized clades is the L.
elongatus-kriegi complex.        . The kriegi-complex can be defined on the basis of several diagnostic
morphological characters, including large and stout bodies, and many             shared features of color and
scalation. All are saxicolous and viviparous, and prefer damp environments in basaltic habitats.
Latitudinally, the complex extends from 37±S, near ―El Planchón‖, the type locality of L. buergeri (VII
administrative region, Chile), to the southern distributional limit at the northern edge of Chubut province at
42±S. Originally, the kriegi complex included three described species based on morphological
characters, L. buergeri , L. kriegi y L. ceii , but more recent molecular (mitochondrial) studies revealed
four candidate species in this complex (Morando et al., 2003). In this study we test the hypotheses of
Morando et al. (2003) with an expanded molecular data set that includes six nuclear and two
mitochondrial gene regions (5,202 bp), based on a total of 30 lizards from all the type localities and
covering to total geographic distribution of the group. We present a comprehensive assessment of the
diversification history of the kriegi-complex in Patagonia Argentina, as inferred from relationships
recovered from concatenated sequences using MP, ML, and BI methods. We also reconstructed a
species tree incorporating the multispecies coalescent approach as implemented in BEAST, and we
estimated divergence times between the main clades of the kriegi complex. The recovered phylogenetic




                                                                                                          474
hypotheses were highly concordant across all methods, except for one taxon for which evidence suggest
a hybrid origin. We discuss the taxonomic and biogeographic implications of these results.



Medina, Maria Fernanda (The University of Texas at El Paso); Greenbaum, Eli (The University of Texas
at El Paso, El Paso, TX, United States); Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University, Radnor Township CDP, PA,
United States); Branch, William R. (Bayworld Herpetology, Humewood, South Africa)

Systematics of African Skinks in the Panaspis wahlbergi Complex

Snake-eyed skinks are relatively small lizards of the genus Panaspis/Afroablepharus that are mostly
endemic to the savannah areas of Sub-Saharan Africa. During an expedition in January 2010, specimens
of this genus were collected from a moss forest in Katanga Province, Democratic Republic of the Congo
(DRC). Three species, listed by de Witte (1953) and Broadley and Cotterill (2004), are known to reside in
the Katanga province: P. seydeli, P. smithii and P. wahlbergi. Only the latter species has a congruent
morphology with the newly collected specimens. To test our hypothesis of conspecificity between P.
wahlbergi (described from Natal, South Africa) and the newly collected Katanga specimens, we used
PCR to amplify the mitochondrial genes 16S and cyt b (550 bp and 614 bp respectively) and the nuclear
gene PDC (422 bp). We aligned these data for analyses with maximum likelihood (RAxML program)
optimality criteria. We reconciled the molecular and morphological datasets gathered from the newly
collected species with previously published literature. Based on the relatively long branch lengths of
lineages in our well-supported phylogeny, P. wahlbergi is a complex of at least five cryptic species.



Meiri, Shai (Tel Aviv University);

GARD ¿ mapping the global distribution of reptiles

We are mapping the distribution of all the world‘s reptile species in order to identify patterns and drivers of
richness, endemism, congruence with other taxa, and threat, and to model distribution under climate
change. We use published range maps and distribution records, museum data and expert opinion to
create species range maps. These data will allow global reptile distribution to be known for the first time.
So far we have mapped the distribution of ~4500 species of lizards, 2000 species of snakes and all non-
squamate species. Using these data we aim to identify correlates of species richness (historical correlates
/ environmental correlates): Can we predict distribution from diversification - historical components rather
than current-day climate? We will identify different types of hotspots e.g., for rarity, richness and
endemism, and examine the cross taxon congruence - both between reptiles and other taxa and within
reptiles: squamates and non-squamates, lizard and snakes, different saurian and ophidian families;
fossorial taxa etc. Adding phylogenetic information enables us to identify geographic centres of
diversifications and estimate both phylogenetic diversity and times of diversification and test whether they
are congruent in space, in time and across lineages. We use the distribution data to map traits (e.g., body
size, activity times, life history, body temperatures etc.) – and decipher how they evolve in relation to
climate. Results are analysed in a phylogenetic context to determine what aspect evolutionary history has
on the current distribution of reptiles. While increasing aridity and temperatures globally may cause wide-
ranging extinction of temperate biota, these very processes can be predicted to benefit reptiles that are
usually thought to be highly thermophilic and aridity-resistant. This, however, may not be the case, as
recent data and models suggest wide-spread population declines and extinctions. We will model reptile
distribution with current climate change projections to identify possible benefactors on the one hand and




                                                                                                           475
species that are likely to be facing greater risks of extinction on the other. The data will be further used to
advance towards the IUCN‘s global reptile assessment.



Melo, Marcelo (Universidade Federal de São Paulo);

Sex with lights on or off? The secrets for the diversification of the deep-sea swallowers
(Acanthomorphata: Chiasmodontidae)

The Processes of deep-sea fish diversification are poorly understood because the barriers are not very
clear anymore, vast areas of the oceans remain poorly sampled, and several groups still need taxonomy
and phylogeny revisions. The chiasmodontids, however, serve as good models for biogeography because
the taxonomy is fairly well solved, there are little gaps in known species distribution, the family is
monophyletic, and there is a phylogenetic hypothesis available for species interrelationships.
Chiasmodontidae is a family of exclusively deep-sea fishes, which includes four genera: two
mesopelagic, Chiasmodon Johnson (seven species) and Pseudoscopelus Lütken (17 species); and
two bathypelagic Dysalotus Mac Gilchrist (two species) and Kali Lloyd (seven species). Kali and
Dysalotus are widely distributed in all oceans and occur sympatrically; although some species usually
occurs in higher latitudes than others. Chiasmodon and Pseudoscopelus , however, have a high level of
endemism. Overlaying the cladograma on the distribution maps, it becomes evident that the actual
species range was caused by vicariant events: closely related species have disjunctive distributions with
little or no range overlapping, while members of distant-related clades can be found sympatrically.
Consistent patterns among different species of Pseudoscopelus and Chiasmodon indicate that the
mechanisms of isolation were similar and include plate tectonics, marine currents, temperature variation
and zones of oxygen depletion. Intrinsic biological characteristics also have a hole in the process: half of
family diversity is composed of species of Pseudoscopelus . Compared to the other chiasmodontid
genera, the species of Pseudoscopelus have a novel structure: photophore – absent in only two
species. The photophores are arranged in species-specific patterns on head and body, with tenuous
variation among the closely related species, but more significant variation among the distant related
species. The photophores of deep-sea organism are extremely important for the colonization of that
twilight zone: in most cases they serve as a mechanism of counter illumination for camouflage or
individual species recognition, but in other fish families can also form structures such as lanterns and
baits for predation.



Melo, Marcelo (Universidade Federal de São Paulo); Spitz, Jérôme (Université de La Rochelle, Canada);
Klepadlo, Cynthia (University of California, San Diego, Canada)

The deep-sea fish Chiasmodontidae (Acanthomorphata): a family in a taxonomic turmoil

The family Chiasmodontidae is composed of four genera and 33 valid species: Chiasmodon Johnson
(seven valid species), Dysalotus Mac Gilchrist (two valid species); Pseudoscopelus Lütken (17 valid
species); and Kali Lloyd (seven valid species). Chronologically, the taxonomic history of the
chiasmodontids can be divided into four distinct periods: the first, from the description of the type species,
Chiasmodon niger Johnson 1864, to 1892, with four nominal species described (two valid, one species
inquirenda); the second, from the beginning of the twentieth century to the mid-1930‘s, with 17 nominal
species described (13 valid); the third from 1965 to 1975, with four nominal species described (three
valid); and the fourth from 2005 to the present, with 19 species described (14 valid). Genus-level
taxonomic revisions were undertaken in the third period. In the fourth period, after neglect of more than



                                                                                                           476
30 years, chiasmodontids were once again target of large taxonomic revisions, and an increase of over
40% in their known diversity. Such dramatic increase in species descriptions, however, had a downside: a
number of papers are extremely confusing, with bizarre misidentifications and erroneous diagnosis,
description of junior synonyms, and erroneous synonyms. Such papers were published by different
authors and resulted on a plethora of taxonomic problems. This paper critically reviews recent
contributions in an attempt to untangle the taxonomy of the family and hopefully provide improved
standards for forthcoming studies on Chiasmodontidae.



Mendez, Fausto R. (Instituto de Biologia. UNAM);

Effects of climate change on nesting of reptiles

Change in the global climate is promoting modification in various scenarios. Reproduction of reptiles
may be affected in several ways. We studied the nesting of three different reptiles and have found
different effects.      In       Sceloporus aeneus lizards, which were restricted to a maximum altitude
of 3100 m , because their nests get frozen at higher altitudes,          are     currently  hatching with
success      at    the 3500 m . Nesting in crocodiles       were negatively affected due that the intensity
of rainfall decreased      temperature    of the nests and cause       mortality of eggs. This effect was
opposite to increase in temperatures in the area. In addition , sea turtles seem to have a very stable
condition because of the long nesting season and the variability of substrate provides appropriate
conditions to maintain stability and allow maintaining the sex ratio balanced . The diversity of
the effects found in     these results show that   required more studies as in some cases the effects are
opposite to expected



Meredith, Helen (Zoological Society of London & Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology,
University of Kent); Griffiths, Richard (Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology, University of Kent,
Canada); Collen, Ben; Turvey, Samuel; Durant, Sarah (Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London,
Canada); Baillie, Jonathan (Conservation Programmes Department, Zoological Society of London,
Canada)

Improving the impact of amphibian conservation programmes

Developing and optimising strategies to mitigate extinctions of amphibian species presents opportunities
for the improvement of current and future conservation programmes. I aim to address three key areas
currently impeding effective interventions within and across international amphibian conservation
programmes, namely: (i.) examining global amphibian extinction trends to aid prioritisation of future
conservation effort; (ii.) investigating the relationship between perceived ‗success‘ in species recovery
programmes and scientific research on those species, and (iii.) evaluating the degree to which current
conservation programmes have been effective in reducing threats and extinctions. Amphibian extinction
trends will be assessed using Living Planet Index and IUCN Red List data, providing a global perspective
for subsequent species-specific studies.         Taking a wide variety of existing international amphibian
conservation initiatives as case studies (&gt; 30), I will analyse the degree to which conservation science
underpins these programmes, both in terms of published and unpublished materials, and will ascertain
the methods employed to disseminate project findings, identifying factors that promote and impede this
process.     I will critically compare current accepted programme evaluation techniques, and use these
evaluation methodologies to search for both project-specific and unifying indicators of ‗success‘ across
the case studies. In focusing on these three main areas, the research will hopefully meet the needs of




                                                                                                        477
conservation practice and priority-setting, aiding mitigation of the amphibian extinction crisis through
partnership with the Amphibian Survival Alliance and constituent bodies such as the Zoological Society of
London, IUCN, Amphibian Ark and the Amphibian Specialist Group.



Metro, Kevin (Ohio University); Lattanzio, Matthew; Miles, Donald (Ohio University, Athens, OH, United
States)

Yellows are choosy but oranges are not: intraspecific variation in female mate preference of tree
lizards, Urosaurus ornatus

Assortative mating is commonly invoked as the primary force maintaining variation in coloration among
polymorphic male phenotypes. Indeed, many studies have found support for this hypothesis indicating
that, at least among the most dominant phenotypes, like prefers like. However, within-individual variation
(e.g., asymmetry) in expression of color may affect mate choice decisions, thereby perturbing the
expected selective trajectories. The ornate tree lizard (Urosaurus ornatus) is a common lizard species
throughout the southwestern US. Males and females of this species are subdivided into multiple
phenotypes based on throat coloration (hereafter morphs). In this study we examined female mate choice
by the two most common female morphs (yellow and orange) for yellow, orange, and blue male lizard
morphs. We exposed individual females to two trials in a randomized order. Each trial consisted of paired
presentation of different male morphs, and trials lasted eight hours. During each trial, we scored the
frequency of visits to each male and an overall preference score (based on proximity to male enclosure).
We found that dominant males earned higher preference scores than subordinate males from both female
morphs, but these results were only significant for yellow females (P=0.027). Yellow females preferred to
associate with yellow males (P=0.0126) and against orange throated males (P=0.035), but exhibited no
preference for or against blue males (P=0.564). Orange females did not display any preference for or
against any of the male morphs (P>0.5). Further analyses indicated that asymmetry or variation in
multivariate expression of the blue abdominal coloration common to all male morphs was unimportant for
female choice (P>0.05). Our results for yellow females primarily support the dominance hierarchy within
U. ornatus at our study site: yellow males are highly aggressive and territorial, whereas orange males are
nomadic. Effectively, male morphs are recognized in a hierarchal order by yellow females based on their
throat color. The lack of detectable choice by orange females suggests that they mate randomly, which
may act to facilitate the maintenance of blue and orange male phenotypes.



Meuche, Ivonne (Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine); Linsenmair, K. Eduard
(Department of Animal Ecology and Tropical Biology, Biozentrum, University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany); Pröhl, Heike (Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany)

Female Territoriality in the Strawberry Poison Frog, Oophaga pumilio

Females of the Strawberry Poison Frog (Oophaga pumilio) are known to be aggressive toward other
females. However, the function of this behavior in females has not been identified. We hypothesized that
females are territorial, occupying and defending specific areas in defense of food resources. To test this
hypothesis, we calculated the position and size of core areas and home ranges for each female in the
study area and the frequency of aggressive and feeding behavior exhibited by females in these areas.
We provide evidence, for the first time, that females are territorial; they defend their core area against
other intruding females. To determine the potential resource defended by females, we examined
aggressive behavior associated with defense of mates, oviposition, and tadpole-rearing sites. We found



                                                                                                      478
no evidence that females defended areas with males, or that oviposition and tadpole-rearing sites were
limited and defended by females. Instead, our observations suggest that female territoriality is most likely
associated with the defense of feeding areas.



Meuche, Ivonne (Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine); Amézquita, Adolfo (Department
of Biological Sciences, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Columbia); Linsenmair, K. Eduard (Department
of Animal Ecology and Tropical Biology, Biozentrum, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany); Pröhl,
Heike (Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany)

How many frogs do you have to kiss to find a prince?

Female frogs have often been shown to exhibit preferences for certain male traits. However, very little is
known about behavioural rules females use when searching for mates. We investigated mate sampling
tactics in the territorial strawberry poison frog (Oophaga pumilio). We found no evidence that females
compared males by visiting and courting them. Instead females mated with the closest calling male
irrespective of his characteristics (e.g. acoustic and physical traits). Additionally for the first time we
conducted playback experiments in the natural home ranges of receptive females to test their preferences
for several call parameters: high vs. low call rate, high vs. low dominant frequency, near vs. far distance
between female and speaker. Females preferred the nearest speaker, but did not discriminate between
low and high call rates or frequency. These results in combination with our behavioural observations in
the field suggest that the distance to potential mates is the crucial criterion for mate choice in female
strawberry poison frogs. We discuss our results in terms of benefits and costs of mate sampling.



Meuche, Ivonne (Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine); Linsenmair, K. Eduard
(Department of Animal Ecology and Tropical Biology, Biozentrum, University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany); Pröhl, Heike (Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany)

Territoriality and acoustic communication between competing males of strawberry poison frogs

Territoriality is a behavioural strategy essential to the breeding ecology of many species in which male
reproductive success is limited by access to females. In the present study, we investigated the relative
importance of female availability and pressure caused by male intruders for the regulation of territory size
of male strawberry poison frogs, Oophaga pumilio. We show that males defended smaller territories in
areas with a high female density. Only males in good body condition were able to defend small territories
in areas of high female density. In contrast intruding pressure caused by competing males was positively
correlated with territory size. Our results also showed that males lowered their dominant calling frequency
during agonistic interactions. Because only males in good condition were able to produce very low
dominant frequencies, the observed decrease appears to be an honest signal containing information
about fighting abilities. Thus, the negative correlation between dominant frequency and mating success of
males found in previous studies seems to be the result of intrasexual competition between males rather
than a product of female preferences for low-frequency calls.




                                                                                                        479
Meyer, Leon (North West University); du Preez, Louis (North West University, Potchefstroom, South
Africa); Verneau, Olivier (CNRS-EPHE-UPVD, Perpignan, France)

Impact of invasive parasites on the biology and conservation of indigenous terrapins in South
Africa and France

Terrapins have been distributed across the globe in pet and food trade. The juveniles are attractive but
tend to lose their colours as they grow. This results in them being released into the environment where
they establish natural populations due to their ability to adapt to a broad range of habitats. Trachemys
scripta elegans , native to the USA, is one of these species that is used in the pet trade and is being
released. It‘s estimated that between 1988 and 1994 roughly 26 million specimens were exported
worldwide. Some countries banned turtle imports. Nevertheless, 3-4 million terrapin hatchlings are
exported each year. Terrapins of the genera Chrysemys, Graptemys, Trachemys and Pseudemys were
imported into France as pets and many were released. Trachemys became an invasive threat to
indigenous species, Emys orbicularis in some habitats, as they compete for resources because
Trachemys is bigger and more aggressive. The same happened in South Africa where natural
populations of Trachemys were documented near Durban and Pretoria and probably contributed to the
local extinction of Pelusios rhodesianus . A wide variety of Terrapins are infected with various parasites.
These parasites are transported with the terrapin wherever it goes. When terrapins are released and
natural populations are established, their parasites can escape and switch hosts to infect native species.
Evolutionary old parasitic relations rarely have unfavorable effects on the host, but when host switching
take place and new parasitic relations are formed, infections often are relentless with unfavorable effects.
Monogenetic flatworms known as polystomes are found all over the world where terrapins occur This
study will determine the extent to which invasive blood and flatworm parasites spread from invasive
American freshwater terrapins to native species in France and South Africa and determine the
conservation threats posed by them.



Michaelides, Sozos (Oxford University); While, Geoffrey (Oxford University, Canada); Bell, Celia
(University of Southampton, Canada); Uller, Tobias (Oxford University, Canada)

Human introductions create opportunities for intra-specific hybridization in the non-native range
of the common wall lizard, Podarcis muralis

Intentional and unintentional introductions of species into areas where they are not native can have many
ecological, conservational and evolutionary implications. For example, introductions from multiple sources
could create opportunities for hybridisation between previously isolated lineages. Although the
evolutionary importance of hybridization is widely recognised for plants, it is generally considered to be of
minor importance in animals. Here I report on a case study of how human introductions create
opportunities for hybridization in the common wall lizard Podarcis muralis. Wall lizards are native to
southern and western Europe. The species exhibits considerable variation in biometry and coloration
pattern resulting in the description of many morphological subspecies and at least eight genetically
distinct lineages in the native range. Wall lizards have been introduced to Germany, North America and
the United Kingdom (UK) where it has successfully established several populations. In this study, we
sampled 507 individuals from 23 non-native populations in the UK. We used mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
cytochrome b sequences to establish the origin of these populations. In addition, combining historical
information and genetic data we also attempted to partly reconstruct their introduction history. We
identified 12 unique haplotypes that were combined with 175 published sequences covering the native
distribution of the species. The UK haplotypes are nested within 5 distinct clades. Several populations
harbour haplotypes from more than one clade, suggesting introductions from multiple sources. Based on



                                                                                                         480
historical and genetic data, we suggest that the majority of populations established from the mid-1980s
derived from relocations of animals in the introduced range.

In summary, human introductions have created opportunities for hybridization between genetically and
morphologically distinct lineages in the non-native distribution of the species, with potential for further
hybridization as a result of natural or human-mediated dispersal. Further research using nuclear markers
will enable to test how founder events influence admixture and genetic diversity and their relationships to
phenotypic variation in the introduced populations.



Mickelson, Lindsay (Victoria University of Wellington); Nelson, Nicola (Victoria University of Wellington,
Canada); Towns, David (Department of Conservation (NZ), Canada); Cree, Alison (University of Otago,
Canada)

Corticosterone release in tuatara (Sphenodon punctatus): Patterns, influential factors, and
directions for future studies

Glucocorticoids (GCs) are steroid hormones secreted from adrenal tissues in all vertebrates. Short-term
increases in GC levels (acute and/or ‗stress response‘) are observed in individuals exposed to
challenging stimuli. These increases cause changes in behavioural and physiological factors that help
individuals cope with environmental challenges. Although GCs are often referred to as ‗stress hormones‘,
a certain level of secretion is essential for normal activities.  Nonetheless, GC secretion can be
suggestive of an organism‘s condition and level of stress.

Corticosterone (CORT) is the primary GC hormone in reptiles, including tuatara ( Sphenodon punctatus ).
Baseline CORT release in tuatara is relatively low; and in accordance with other vertebrate species, an
elevated ‗stress response‘ to capture/restraint is detected.     Variation in basal and ‗stress-response‘
CORT release in tuatara exists and studies examining patterns of CORT release, time-series of the
CORT ‗stress-response‘, and factors influencing CORT release are limited. Here we show patterns in:
1) baseline CORT release levels; 2) ‗stress-response‘ CORT release at several points during a 24-hour
time-series; and 3) factors such as sex, reproductive status, body condition, and temperature that
contribute to observed variation in CORT release. We confirmed that gravid females have significantly
higher baseline CORT release than non-gravid females and males, suggesting increased CORT release
in females during the nesting life-history stage. Furthermore, we observed a significant increase in CORT
release in males and non-gravid females during a 24 hour ‗stress-response‘ time series. Conversely,
gravid females did not exhibit a significant increase from baseline CORT release during the time-series,
suggesting a dampened ‗stress-response‘ during nesting.         A dampened ‗stress-response‘ has been
observed in other gravid reptiles during nesting events and implies modulation of CORT release to
support nesting success. Our results demonstrate how reproductive condition and nesting stage of
females play a role in observed CORT levels and we anticipate our findings will help direct further studies
of CORT release in tuatara.



Mickle, Paul (The University of Southern Mississippi); Havrylkoff, Jeanne-Marie; Peterson, Mark;
Grammer, Paul (The University of Southern Mississippi, Canada)

Comparison of ontogenetic and inter-basin geometric morphometrics of Gulf sturgeon (Acipenser
oxyrinchus desotoi)




                                                                                                       481
Gulf sturgeon are an anadromous fish that reproduce in northern Gulf of Mexico drainages. Population
genetic studies by both Dugo et al. 2004 and Stabile et al. 1996 suggest moderate to strong site fidelity
between these different drai nage populations. Up to this point molecular data has been the sole tool
for identifying these metapopluations. Within age classes, telemetry data from the Pascagoula provide
evidence that juvenile migrations are unique to sub adult and adult migration habitats as well as
distances. Geometric morphometrics were used to quantify differences in metapopulations as well as
age classes and help explain the lifehistory differentiation that is occurring. Forty-seven Gulf sturgeon
from six drainages were measured and analyzed representing various age classes.                  Principal
Components Analysis along with Multivariate Analysis of Variance revealed strong separation between
the different populations of Gulf sturgeon as well as the different age classes. Head shape and overall
surface area were the leading differences of both comparisons. These findings suggest body shape
selection may be occurring in relation to migratory life histories within natal drainages.



Mickle, Paul (The University of Southern Mississippi); Schaefer, Jake (The University of Southern
Mississippi, Canada); Adams, Susan (USDA-Forest Service, Canada); Slack, Todd (US Army ERDC,
Canada); Kreiser, Brian (The University of Southern Mississippi, Canada)

Life history and habitat use of the juvenile Alabama shad (Alosa alabamae) in northern Gulf of
Mexico rivers

In recent years Alabama shad have declined in abundance and been extirpated from much of their native
range with the Pascagoula River containing the last remaining population in Mississippi. Habitat
degradation and barriers to migration are considered contributing factors to range contraction.
Understanding and protecting the habitats that support Alabama shad is essential to preserving this rare
species. Physicochemical data was collected in three dominant habitat types (sandbar, open channel and
bank) used by Alabama shad in June and October in three Northern Gulf of Mexico drainages:
Pascagoula (2004-2007), Apalachicola (2007-2008), and Suwannee (2007-2008) rivers.               Akaike
Information Criterion was used to select models and identify parameters correlated with Alabama shad
presence within each drainage. Understanding the recruitment needs of Alabama shad can provide
important information in the management and conservation of this species.



Miguel, Madeline (Ohio Wesleyan University); Burtt, Edward (Ohio Wesleyan University, Canada)

Diversity of frogs at different elevations in wet forests in Costa Rica

Costa Rica is known for the high diversity and species richness among numerous taxa including its
anuran species. However some researchers believe that diversity will increase or decrease depending on
the elevation an organism inhabits. Blake et al . (Auk 117: 663-686, 2000.) an elevation gradient in the
diversity of tropical birds in Costa Rica. The avian elevational diversity gradient suggests that there may
be a similar diversity gradient among frog species. This is particularly likely since some elevations are
known to have greater diversity in general. To test this idea, we made species lists of the frogs found in
low, middle, and high elevations in Costa Rica. At each of three sites frogs were recorded along a
transect. The species of frog and the number of occurrences were recorded for each transect. The date
and time were recorded. In general, previous researchers have found that plant and animal diversity is
highest at mid-elevation. Smith et al . (Evolution 61: 1188-1207, 2007.) found the highest diversity among
hylid frogs at intermediate elevations of middle America. Our results suggest that the diversity of frogs
generally is highest at mid-elevation locations in Costa Rica.



                                                                                                       482
Miles, Donald (Ohio University); Meylan, Sandrine (Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Canada); Sinervo,
Barry (University of California Santa Cruz, Canada); Massot, Manuel (Université Pierre et Marie Curie,
Canada); Clobert, Jean (2Station d'Ecologie Expérimentale du CNRS à Moulis, Canada)

Covariation of dorsal pattern, locomotor performance and escape behavior across an ecological
gradient in the lizard Lacerta vivipara

Substantial attention has been devoted to understanding the factors that influence variation in locomotor
performance. Both intra- and inter-specific analyses demonstrate that habitat structure influences speed
andm endurance. The physical structure of perches may constrain performance, but the availability and
distance from refugia may also affect performance. In ectothermic organisms open habitats enhance
thermoregulatory opportunities, but a cost of enhanced risk of predation due to greater distances to
refugia. Thus, both physiological performance and escape tactics should be influenced by habitat. In
addition, the thermal milieu may affect dorsal patterning such that individuals occupying cooler
environments should have darker pigmentation than in more open environments. Relatively few studies
have examined the interaction between habitat structure, dorsal pattern, escape behavior and locomotor
performance. These traits are expected to covary with ecological gradients, and probably represent
coadapted trait complexes.        We measured locomotor performance and escape behavior during
locomotion for 18 populations of Lacerta vivipara during 2007 and 2008. The populations were arrayed
along an elevational gradient and differed in habitat structure. Individuals within and among populations
of the common lizard, Lacerta vivipara exhibit two dorsal patterns, reticulated and linear, that vary in the
amount of melanin pigmentation. More reticulated females occurred in open habitat at low elevation sites
and linear individuals predominated at high elevation, humid sites with higher vegetation cover. We
found significant geographic variation in performance, which we attributed to elevational and habitat
differences.    Locomotor performance, endurance and maximum velocity, was greater in linear than
reticulate females, but only during 2008, a cool, wet year. Escape behaviors covaried with morphotype
and habitat.     Reticulated females from open, disturbed habitats tended to reverse and stop more
frequently when running than linear females.          Linear females from closed habitats reversed more
frequently when running on the treadmill, which mimics their escape behavior in the wild. These results
suggest that individuals varying in dorsal pattern display performance differences that correspond with
habitat and thermal opportunities. We propose that the habitat and year dependent performance values
are more the result of phenotypic plasticity than selection.



Miller, Melissa M. (Auburn University); Willson, John D. (Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Canada); Romagosa, Christina M.; Guyer, Craig (Auburn University, Canada); Snow, Ray W.
(National Park Service, Canada)

Habitat associations of snakes in Everglades National Park, FL: an occupancy modeling approach

Everglades National Park (ENP) is a unique ecosystem that contains a diverse array of Ophidian species.
Understanding the habitat associations of snakes within ENP poses a challenge because snakes are
cryptic and often have low probability of detection. Because detection is often less than one, it is difficult
to reliably estimate the species presence/absence and habitat associations. Several studies have
examined snake assemblages in ENP in regard to select habitat types, however species-specific
detection probabilities were not incorporated into analyses. We analyzed the habitat associations of
snakes throughout all habitat types occurring in ENP using site occupancy (presence/absence) models
and species-specific detection probabilities. Specifically, we repeatedly surveyed 14 transects (5 km by 1
km) in ENP during 2010 and 2011 and assessed species presence/absence in relation to major




                                                                                                          483
vegetation types (mangrove forest, scrub, pineland savanna, prairies and marshes, shrubland, exotics,
water, and anthropogenically altered sites) using program PRESENCE. Agkistrodon piscivorus ,
Thamnophis sauritus , and Nerodia fasciata were widely distributed within ENP (occupancy near 100%)
but their detection was negatively correlated with scrub and exotics, scrub, and scrub and savanna,
respectively, likely reflecting lower abundances in these habitats. Detection probabilities of T. sirtalis and
Nerodia clarkii were constant and relatively low. Occupancy of T. sirtalis was negatively correlated with
prairie and marsh and occupancy of N. clarkii was positively correlated with forest habitat. Although
detection probability of Cemophora coccinea was relatively high, this species exhibited low occupancy
that was positively associated with scrub habitat. Understanding habitat associations of snakes is
necessary for effective management and conservation practices. Our results reflect the importance of
estimating detection probabilities and the probability of site occupancy for studies that aim to reliably
estimate habitat associations of cryptic, hard to detect species.



Minting, Peter (Institute of Zoology and University of Sussex);

Dynamics of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis infection in the natterjack toad (Bufo calamita)

The chytridiomycete Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) is a parasite of many amphibians, including
the natterjack toad ( Bufo calamita). In this study, an attempt was made to model Bd infection
dynamics in natterjack populations, in order to assess the scale of the threat posed by Bd to this
species. Analysis of capture-mark-recapture (CMR) data using program MARK suggested a weak effect
of Bd infection on adult natterjack survival. Bd infection scores increased in adults during spawning and
in toadlets following rain. Environmental factors (including immersion in water and salinity) strongly
influenced Bd swab test scores. The highest salinities recorded from coastal ponds used by natterjacks
were lethal to Bd in vitro, so transmission may be limited in brackish conditions. In contrast, low levels of
salinity boosted Bd growth. This may help explain the cause of death in infected amphibians, if Bd
growth and zoospore emergence results in a systemic loss of electrolytes. In captive experiments, Bd
killed natterjacks when infection reached a critical threshold but this threshold was rarely exceeded by
adult natterjacks in the wild. There was evidence of cryptic infection with respect to the DNA swab test
used to assess levels of Bd infection when toads were sampled in dry conditions. Swabs did not reliably
assess Bd prevalence but they mayhave been a good indicator of infection activity. The annual cycle of
Bd ‗prevalence‘ or infection activity in natterjacks was difficult to explain without overwintering adults
acting as cryptic reservoirs for Bd. The history of Bd in the UK is poorly understood but Bd isolated
from one natterjack population fell within the global panzootic lineage (GPL) of Bd thought to have been
spread by humans. Bd is widespread in the UK and eight natterjack populations have been infected with
Bd for at least four years. To date, no local extinctions of this species have been observed in response to
Bd infection.



Mitchell, Aimee (Aimee Mitchell);

Endangered turtle restoration at an urbanized site: A case study of Burnaby Lake Park, BC,
Canada

The Western Painted Turtle ( Chrysemys picta bellii ) is one of four Painted Turtle subspecies, whose
range in Canada extends fro m central Ontario to the Pacific coast. This subspecies is considered stable
throughout much of their range. However, the Pacific Coast Population is listed as Endangered by the
Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada (COSEWIC). This turtle faces many threats,



                                                                                                          484
which are amplified in a highly urbanized environment, including: decreased connectivity and loss of
habitat, road mortality, predation by dogs and urban wildlife, collection, competition with exotics and
disease from released pet turtles. Burnaby Lake has been identified as containing one of the largest
populations in the Lower Mainland region, and highlights the challenges associated with endangered
species recovery in heavily impacted areas. To mitigate threats at this site we installed a fenced beach at
a known nesting area that previously experienced high disturbance and predation rates, monitored
nesting activity, collected observational data on hatchling emergence and placed predator exclosures
over nests. In 2009, prior to beach installation, up to 15 nests of an unknown number laid were destroyed
by predators. Since beach installation in 2010, we recorded high use of the nesting beach by turtles, with
20 nests known to be laid in 2010 and 14 laid in 2011. In these 2 years following beach installation there
was an apparent reduction in predation rate, with only 1 nest (5%) recorded as predated in 2010 and 7
nests (50%) in 2011. All nests (100%, n = 7 in 2010 and n = 4 in 2011) where predator exclosures were
installed were not predated. Results thus far have indicated that nesting beach installation may reduce
overall nest predation rates by providing an area with increased protection from disturbance by people
and predators. However, disturbance by park users was still noted to cause some turtles to abandon
nesting attempts. Because of this, we recommend building a blind and shrubs to further limit disturbance
by people. Predation is also still a concern at a centralized enhanced nesting site where even one
predator could destroy many nests at over a short time period. To address this, multiple beaches could be
installed to spread out nesting activity and mitigate impacts of any single predation event. As an
alternative to additional beaches, a predator exclosure could be designed and installed that covers the
beach rather than individual nests.



Mitchell, Joseph (Mitchell Ecological Research Service LLC); Johnston, Gerald (Santa Fe Community
College, Canada); Thomas, Travis (Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, Canada); Lau,
Anthony; Suarez, Eric (University of Florida, Canada)

Population Structure of the Alligator Snapping Turtle (Macrochelys temminckii) at the
Southeastern Edge of its Geographic Range

The Alligator Snapping Turtle (Macrochelys temminckii ) is phylogeographically structured into three
lineages, but little is known about the population ecology of the most genetically distinct lineage which
occurs at the southeastern edge of the species range in the Suwannee River drainage. Unlike most
known       M. temminckii populations, the Suwannee River drainage population has never been
commercially harvested for food, although it had been subject to an unknown level of legal personal
harvest until 2009. We conducted a mark-recapture study of M. temminckii in the Santa Fe River, the
major Florida tributary of the Suwannee River, between 2004 and 2011. Using baited hoop traps and
hand capture while snorkeling, we captured 109 M. temminckii (25.7 % immature, 42.2 % adult female,
32.1 % adult male). All size classes between 51 mm and 623 mm straight-midline carapace length (CL)
were represented, and the adult sex ratio was 1:1. Adult males (CL 391 – 623 mm, mean = 528.5 mm;
mass 14.1 – 54.4 kg, mean = 33.7 kg,) were significantly larger than adult females (CL 329 – 492 mm,
mean = 424.0 mm; mass 8.2 – 25.0 kg, mean = 17.5 kg). Capture rates varied significantly among habitat
types (blackwater stream, spring influenced river, spring run, sinkhole pond), and habitat-associated
variation was observed for adult male and adult female body size. This study suggests current population
stability, but a relatively low population density and slow juvenile growth rates indicate the need for
continued protection of this genetically unique population.




                                                                                                       485
Mitchell, Nicki (The University of Western Australia); Hipsey, Matthew (The University of Western
Australia, Crawley, Australia); Michael, Kearney (The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VI, Australia);
Arnall, Sophie; McGrath, Gavan (The University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia); Kuchling,
Gerald (The WA Department of Environment and Conservation, Wanneroo, WA, Australia)

Linking dynamic energy budget theory and hydrology to select sites for the assisted colonisation
of Australia's rarest reptile

Assisted colonisation (the deliberate movement of species to climatically suitable regions) is an emerging
management tool that aims to prevent the extinction of populations that are unable to migrate in response
to climate change. If this strategy is deemed acceptable, how can suitable translocation sites be
identified? Correlative climate-envelope models, which are based on occurrence data, are of limited use
for species with restricted distributions. In contrast, mechanistic models hold considerable promise for site
selection. In this project we are integrating ecoenergetic and hydrological models to assess the longer-
term suitability of the wetland habitat of the world‘s rarest chelonian, the Western Swamp Tortoise
(Psuedemydura umbrina). P. umbrina is restricted to a single breeding population in the south west of
Western Australia, where a relatively rapid decline in seasonal winter rainfall has resulted in shorter
hydroperiods and reduced foraging and breeding opportunities for tortoises. Our mechanistic model
allows us to drive the dynamic energy budget of the tortoise based on hydrological projections of its
current habitat, and the process can be repeated across a range of future climates. The same model is
also a powerful tool for identifying novel habitats where tortoises could persist under future climates. Here
we present a preliminary screening model of suitable translocation sites for P. umbrina and in so doing
demonstrate an approach to that could serve as a template for guiding the assisted colonisation of other
threatened wetland species.



Mitchell, Timothy (Iowa State University); Warner, Daniel; Janzen, Fredric (Iowa State University, Ames,
IA, United States)

Maternal and abiotic influences on physiology and survival during hatchling painted turtle
(Chrysemys picta) hibernation

Hatchlings of many species of temperate turtles hibernate within the natal nest. Intriguingly, the
microhabitat of the maternally-selected nest site at the time of oviposition can predictably influence abiotic
conditions experienced within the nest months later during hibernation. Hatchlings are vulnerable to
lethal conditions in the nest during this stage, yet most research on nest-site choice focuses on egg
incubation. We conducted an 8-year study of the hibernation ecology of painted turtles (Chrysemys picta)
in western Illinois complemented with a laboratory experiment on yolk use as a function of hibernation
temperature. Specifically, we investigated how abiotic factors (temperature and precipitation) and
maternal factors (egg size and nest-site choice) impact offspring survival during hibernation, and
quantified the strength and form of selection acting on these maternal factors. We expect interactions
between precipitation and temperature (e.g., little snowfall accompanied by substantial subfreezing
temperatures) to be the primary abiotic predictors of offspring survival during hibernation. Additionally,
we expect larger neonates typically to have higher probability of survival, and so we expect to find
positive directional selection on egg size during most years. Because nest-site choice can predictably
influence hibernation nest temperatures, nest-site choice is likely under selection during some years as
well. Because residual yolk is the primary energy source for hibernating neonates, warmer conditions in
the nest could increase metabolism, compromising these essential energy stores. Thus, we expect
warmer hibernation temperatures to disproportionately reduce residual yolk stores, which could have
detrimental effects during dispersal from nests.



                                                                                                          486
Mitchell, Timothy (Iowa State University); Maciel, Jessica; Janzen, Fredric (Iowa State University, Ames,
IA, United States)

Sex-ratio selection influences nest-site choice in a reptile with temperature-dependent sex
determination

In oviparous taxa, nest-site choice is a maternal effect that influences the early life environment
experienced by developing offspring. By selecting nests with particular attributes, females can improve
survival and partially control developmental trajectories experienced by offspring. Theory predicts that
nest-site choice is a trait that may respond to sex-ratio selection in organisms with environmental sex
determination. By experimentally manipulating Chrysemys picta nests, we explore whether maternally-
selected nest sites differ environmentally from random sites, and what consequences any differences
have on offspring survival and sex ratio, because C. picta has temperature-dependent sex determination
(TSD). To do this, we split clutches between nests constructed in the maternally-selected site and a
random site nearby for incubation. Subsequently, hatchlings were redistributed for hibernation, such that
some spent both life stages in the maternally-selected nest, some spent both stages in a random nest,
and some spent one stage in each. This design allowed us to determine how nest-site choice affects
survival and development across both stages by decoupling summer and winter nest environments.
Maternally-selected nests received more solar radiation and were warmer than random nests during
incubation, yet egg survival did not differ significantly between treatments. Sex ratio, however, did
significantly differ between treatments; maternal nests produced a nearly 1:1 sex ratio, while random
nests were very male biased. There were not significant differences between treatments for temperature
measurements or survival during hibernation. This field study provides the first experimental evidence
that sex-ratio selection is an important component of nest-site choice in a species with TSD.



Miya, Masaki (Natural History Museum and Institute, Chiba); Satoh, Takashi P.; Nishida, Mutsumi
(Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Japan)

Undetected evolutionary radiation in the pelagic realm: A novel clade in the percomorph fishes as
revealed by mitogenomic analysis

Marine pelagic realm is the largest habitat on the Earth, comprising >99.9% of the world‘s water and
harboring diverse fishes from epipelagic to abyssopelagic zones. A recent mitogenomic study found that
some marine pelagic perciform taxa formerly placed in 4 different suborders (Percoidei, Stromateoidei,
Scombroidei, Trachinoidei) unexpectedly share a common ancestry, suggesting that future addition of
pelagic species from the percomorphs with unknown identity would further expand the limits of this
previously unrecognized clade. To confirm this prediction, we extensively assembled mitochondrial (mt)
and nuclear (nc) gene sequences from all percomorphs deposited in the database and analyzed the
unambiguously aligned sequences from 6 mt and 3 nc genes separately using ML method. The resulting
mt and nc phylogenies strongly suggest that 15 families across 6 percomorph suborders (the 4 suborders
listed above plus Icosteoidei and Scombrolabracoidei) share a common ancestry and these fishes are
found to be all dwellers in the pelagic realm occuring at various depths. Based on these preliminary
results, we further assembled mt genomic data from these selected taxa (29 spp. from the 15 families)
plus various percomorphs and outgroups (67 spp.; total = 96 spp.) and subjected the data to partitioned
ML analyses. The resulting phylogenies indicated that those selected taxa from the 15 perciform families
across the 6 suborders form a monophyletic group with 100% bootstrap probabitlies. These results
strongly suggest that there has been an evolutionary radiation in the pelagic realm that cannot be
predicted from previous taxonomy and classification in the percomorphs.




                                                                                                      487
Mockford, Steve (Acadia University); Smith, Duncan (Parks Canada Agency, Maitland Bridge, NS,
Canada)

Engaging local community in the conservation of herpetofaunal species it risk

Actions taken towards the conservation and recovery of species at risk must be based on a sound
scientific assessment of the species requirements and the threats to its survival. Ideally they will also
occur within a legal framework that supports conservation and recovery. However, neither sound science
nor enabling legislation will, on their own, affect actual conservation and recovery; this will require the
participation of the citizens who share space and/or resources with the species of concern. We describe a
collaborative approach to stewardship involving government, local ENGOs, and the academic community
in engaging the larger community in conservation. This program engages communities and the general
public in directed, hands-on stewardship activities contributing to the conservation and management of a
variety of species at risk in south west Nova Scotia, Canada. This approach enhances our ability to
conduct research, as volunteer stewards assist with data collection and project design, fosters
understanding within participants of the need to change social norms regarding how people use the
environment, and ultimately creates conservation leaders in our communities. This approach has
resulted in a volunteer program engaging more than 350 people annually, who contribute over 12,000
hours of their time to these projects each year. Over the past 10 years, the cumulative contribution has
been more than 100,000 volunteer hours directly enhancing understanding and protection of these
species and has resulted in a program that is increasingly directed by the communities involved.



Moen, Daniel (Stony Brook University); Irschick, Duncan (University of Massachusetts at Amherst,
Amherst, MA, United States); Wiens, John (Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, United States)

Convergence in jumping and swimming performance in assemblages of frogs from three
continents

Do factors related to previous evolutionary history influence the ability of a species to adapt to a novel
environment? Many studies of evolutionary convergence in morphology have demonstrated that often
this is not the case – species that share similar selective environments are more similar to each other
than to closely-related species that are ecologically different. Yet morphology often is not the target of
selection – instead it is selected upon indirectly via its role in whole-organism performance capacities,
which mediate use of the environment and thus fitness (e.g. escape predators, capture food). Thus a
broader understanding of how morphology relates to performance, as well as whether convergence
occurs in performance itself, is necessary to understand adaptation to new environments. We compared
jumping and swimming performance and morphology in frogs from three regions that contain lineages of
divergent evolutionary history – southwest China, the Colombian Amazon, and northern Australia. In
each location, species using various microhabitats were measured for performance in jumping and
swimming, as well as for morphology. We then tested whether these assemblages of species likewise
show similar morphology and performance, given that across regions species that use a given
microhabitat represent many independent evolutionary transitions to utilize it. This study will be among
the first to examine the evolutionary causes of variation in performance across frogs using different
microhabitats in different regions, as well as variation within different species of differing evolutionary
history that use the same microhabitat.




                                                                                                       488
Mohammadi, Shabnam (Utah State University); Hutchinson, Deborah (Coastal Carolina University,
Canada); Mori, Akira (Kyoto University, Canada); Savitzky, Alan (Utah State University, Canada)

The evolution of toxin resistance in toad-eating snakes

Toads are chemically defended by bufadienolides, a class of cardiotonic steroids lethal to most predators,
including many snakes. Bufadienolides bind to Na + ,K + -ATPase (NKA), inhibiting the protein‘s ability to
transport ions. In cardiocytes, this inhibition causes arrhythmia and severely increased contractile
strength, which, if prolonged, lead to death. However, several species of snakes are resistant to
bufadienolides and consume toads with no ill effects. Electrocardiography of one resistant species
reveals a distinctly different cardiac response to ingestion of toads than does a nonresistant species. The
physiological mechanism underlying this resistance is unknown. Since NKA is the target protein of
bufadienolides, and since it exists in multiple isoforms, it is likely that toad-eating snakes have evolved
mutations of NKA that lower their susceptibility to bufadienolides. We hypothesize that toad-eating snakes
possess isoforms of NKA with lower affinity to bufadienolides. Our goals are (1) to quantify the degree of
bufadienolide resistance in selected species of snakes and (2) to determine whether mutations occur in
the NKA gene (ATP1a1) of snakes that are resistant to bufadienolides. Superimposing the NKA
sequences on a phylogenetic tree reveals whether resistant NKA isoforms have evolved one or more
times. Here we present preliminary data on levels of bufadienolide resistance for selected snakes.



Molinia, Frank (Landcare Research); Narayan, Edward (Griffith University, Queensland, Australia);
Germano, Jennifer (San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research, Escondido, CA, United States);
Bishop, Phil (University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand)

Non-invasive hormone analysis for gender identification and monitoring reproductive function of
anurans

Reproductive technologies are valuable tools for understanding species-specific reproductive
mechanisms and are already in use for conservation applications like managing wildlife ex situ and
species recovery in situ. In recent years enzyme immunoassays of voided urine and/or faecal samples
have been developed to non-invasively measure reproductive hormone metabolite concentrations in a
few anuran species. Established initially in dimorphic model species, there are reports now of assigning
gender of monomorphic anurans, including a New Zealand-wide study of all captive Leiopelmatid frogs
and one from Perth, Australia where juvenile Geocrinia species could be sexed prior to translocation back
to the wild. Even more exciting has been the value of this technology for monitoring reproductive hormone
cycles over time. In a recent study, seasonal profiles established a winter or early spring breeding period
in Leiopelma pakeka, a species thought to undergo mating during summer. This technology will become
mainstream as it‘s adapted to even more amphibian species, but there are two emerging opportunities to
broaden the scope of use. Firstly, given corticosterone metabolites can also be measured in the same
way to monitor stress then the effects of other factors (e.g. disease, habitat quality, and manipulations
ranging from animal handling to exogenous hormone treatments for inducing spermiation or oviposition)
could be evaluated against normative hormone profiles to guide mitigation strategies for restoring normal
reproductive function as required. The second is a technical challenge, but if hormone measures could be
obtained on-the-spot and ideally in the field, then this will streamline management of both captive and
wild populations. Being able to reliably assign gender and monitor for optimal reproductive performance
means non-invasive hormone analysis will become a key tool for conservation of declining and
endangered amphibians.




                                                                                                       489
Monteiro, Stefanny Christie Gomes (University of São Paulo); Titon Jr., Braz; Assis, Vânia Regina;
Giorgi-Barsotti, Adriana Maria; Gomes, Fernando Ribeiro (University of São Paulo, Canada)

Calling rate and immunocompetence of the treefrog Hypsiboas albopunctatus

According to the model of parasite-mediated intersexual selection, variation in male ornament condition or
sexual display rate reflects degree of resistance to parasitism. In anuran natural choruses, calls that are
louder, longer, more complex, and/or emitted at higher rates are probably more easily detected and
attract more females. Although the maintenance of higher calling rates may enhance the mating chances,
calling effort is positively associated to plasma levels of steroids potentially immunossupressive, such as
testosterone (T) and corticosterone (CORT).

Our goal was to evaluate the association between calling rates, plasma levels of CORT and T, and
immunocompetence in males of a Brazilian treefrog ( Hypsiboas albopunctatus ) from a natural chorus.
We hypothesized that: 1) males show individual variation in calling rate, plasma levels of T and CORT,
and response to the phytohemaglutinin (PHA) challenge; 2) higher calling rates are positively correlated
to plasma levels of CORT and T, and negatively correlated to response to the PHA challenge. We
conducted focal observations for 30 minutes, followed by blood collection by cardiac puncture. In the lab,
plasma samples were frozen and males were subjected to a PHA skin-swelling assay, consisting of
intraderm injection 10 μ L of PHA (20mg/mL) into the hind-right paw and 10 μ L of saline into the hind-left
paw as a control. Paw thickness was measured at 0, 12 and 24 hours of injections with a dial thickness
gauge. PHA injection resulted in significant swelling at both time-points (F 2,28 =90,793, P &lt;0,001),
with the largest effect at 12h ( P = 0,001). A principal component analysis of five variables (calling rates,
density of males in the chorus, body mass, time of observation, and air temperature) resulted in three
components with eigenvalues higher than 1.0, with the second component (29,92% of the variation)
showing an inverse association between calling rate and time of observation. Individual variation in the
response to the PHA challenge at 12h was negatively correlated to the scores of this second component
(Pearson=-0,406, P=0,04). We concluded that males call at higher rates in the first hours of the night, and
show a lower level of response to the PHA challenge. Plasma levels of CORT and T, as well as the
leucocyte profile will be also analyzed for these individuals.



Mooi, Randall (The Manitoba Museum); Gill, Anthony (Macleay Museum and School of Biological
Sciences, Canada)

Evidence for relationships among gobioid fishes (Percomorpha: Gobioidei), with special reference
to 'basal' clades

Although the Gobioidei are one of the most convincingly defined monophyletic percomorph taxa, there
remains considerable uncertainty regarding internal relationships. Over the last 10-15 years, molecular
studies have put forward several topologies, but taxonomic sampling of the 270 genera and 2000 species
has been modest or inconsistent. Although there are suggestive patterns, proposed clades have not been
diagnosed by synapomorphies and are often contradicted by morphological evidence. Despite claims of
overwhelming problems, such as small size and pevalence of developmental truncation, we have found
that gobioid morphology provides an impressive array of variable characters that can be interpreted as
homologues and analyzed with some success to provide synapomorphies and hypotheses of relationship.
Using several suites of characters, particularly from the dorsal gill arches, ventral gill arches, and pectoral
girdle, we identify more than 75 synapomorphies from over 180 genera. We will present a sample of
these to examine basal (non gobiid) gobioid relationships, and some that inform relationships within the
Gobiidae. In particular, we address the basal few nodes and the position of the cave-dwelling Western



                                                                                                           490
Australian genus Milyeringa (recently suggested to be a member of the Asiatic freshwater family
Odontobutidae) and, using synapomorphies identified from hyoid and dorsal gill arches, establish that a
clade of temperate Australian and New Zealand taxa ( Grahamichthys and Thalasseleotris ) is the sister
group of the Gobiidae (the latter defined as gobioids with 5 branchiostegal rays).  We conclude that
morphology can and should play a central role in investigating gobioid relationships, and not simply
plotted on molecular topologies to identify ad hoc "supporting evidence."



Moon, Brad (University of Louisiana at Lafayette); Delahoussaye, A. James; Arnold, Tiffany (University of
Louisiana at Lafayette, Canada); Alvarado, Alexandra (Lafayette High School and University of Louisiana
at Lafayette, Canada)

Maximum sizes of amphiumas and bullfrogs in Louisiana archaeological middens

In recent archaeological surveys of some Indian middens from southern Louisiana, amphibian and reptile
bones have appeared in large numbers. In particular, bones from Three-toed Amphiumas ( Amphiuma
tridactylum ) and American Bullfrogs ( Lithobates catesbeianus ) are abundant from two middens, and
appear to represent specimens with larger body sizes than the maximum sizes reported in the literature
for these species. To estimate the body lengths of the largest specimens in the midden samples, we
measured several variables on each of the midden bones and compared them with the same
measurements taken on bones of museum skeletal specimens with known body lengths.                For the
amphiumas, some, but not all, vertebral measurements indicated that the midden specimens were slightly
larger than the maximum size of specimens reported in the literature. Similarly, for the bullfrogs, some
bones may have come from specimens that were larger than the maximum sizes reported in the
literature. Large specimens of these animals could have been important in the diet of the people from
those areas.



Morando, Mariana (CONICET-CENPAT); Avila, Luciano; Martinez, Lorena (CONICET-CENPAT,
Canada)

Checklist of lizards and amphisbaenians of Argentina: an update

Since Cei‘s (1986, 1993) monographs on reptiles of Argentina there has been a remarkable growth in the
number of researchers working on lizards of our country, and a corresponding increase about this
herpetofauna‘s knowledge. Later, Avila et al. (2000) presented an updated checklist as part of a
categorization work on lizards and amphisbaenians. The species number continued to grow notably in the
following years, particulary on the Phymaturus and Liolaemus genera; many new species have been
described, definition of many species and the taxonomic status and nomenclature of other species have
changed. This prompted to the elaboration of a new list presented in the VII Congreso Argentino de
Herpetología that took place in Corrientes city during 2006 (Avila et al. 2006). This list was quickly out of
date, thus we continued gathering information for the publication of a new updated list that is presented
here, summarizing all the new information available since Avila et al . (2000). There are 257 described
species, being Tropiduridae the most inclusive clade and Liolaemus the most diverse genera with 150
described species for Argentina. We present detailed information by family, genera, and geographic
distribution, and we compare the growth increase in almost 12 years since Avila et al. (2000) Although the
list will surely continue to grow during the next years, we consider it appropriate to present an updated list
that can be used by the scientific community in general, as well as by those dedicated to conservation
and natural resources management.



                                                                                                          491
Morando, Mariana (CONICET-CENPAT); Avila, Luciano; Perez, Cristian HF (CONICET-CENPAT,
Canada); Hawkins, Monty; Sites, Jack W (Brigham Young University, Canada)

How many Phymaturus (Squamata, Liolaemini) are there? A molecular assessment of flat lizards
on rock outcrops.

The lizard genus Phymaturus is widely distributed in Argentina between 25° to 45° south, and ranging
from Puna environments to extra-Andean and Precordillera mountain ranges, and high plateaus in
Patagonia.      In Chile its geographic distribution is relatively small, confined to the highlands of the
western slopes of the Andes. The genus includes 34 described species distributed in two clades: palluma
or northern group and patagonicus or southern group, and all appear to be restricted to rock outcrop
habitats with deep crevices. We analyzed 24 of the described species plus 25 candidate species using
two mitochondrial (cyt-b and 12S), four protein coding nuclear, and seven anonymous nuclear genes, and
present the first comprehensive molecular phylogenetic hypothesis for the clade. We compared results
obtained from concatenated analyses with results of one coalescent-based species-tree approach
(BEST), and with both methods we identified four main clades within the palluma group (mallimaccii ,
roigorum , verdugo , and vociferator), and five main clades within the patagonicus group (calcogaster,
indistinctus , payuniae , somuncurensis , and spurcus ). We found several instances of non-monophyly
with cyt-b, for which we discuss alternative hypotheses. We also found cases of incongruence between
mitochondrial vs nuclear data suggesting that past hybridization may have played an important role in this
group‘s diversification. We also found an area where hybridization may be an ongoing process. BEST
results are mostly congruent with the concatenated nuclear data, although with lower support values,
suggesting that in this case, this method is less influenced by hybridization than combined concatenated
analyses. We discuss the taxonomic and conservation implications of these results and how the future
integration of phylogeographic and morphological approaches will allow further testing of demographic
and biogeographic hypotheses.



Morando, Mariana (CONICET-CENPAT); Avila, Luciano (CONICET-CENPAT, Canada); Dawson, Amy
(Brigham Young University, Canada); Perez, Cristian HF; Sites, Jack W (CONICET-CENPAT, Canada)

Molecular Phylogeny of Homonota (Phyllodatylidae): yet another cryptically diverse gecko clade

The genus Homonota was described by Duméril &amp; Bibron in 1886 , and currently includes eight
described species: Homonota borellii , H. uruguayensis , H. fasciata, H. darwinii , H. underwoodi, H.
andicola , H. whitii &amp; H.rupicola and one subspecies of H. darwinii ( H. darwinii macrocephala ) . It
is distributed from 15º south in southern Brazil, Bolivia, Paraguay, Uruguay and Argentina to 54º south in
Patagonia, across multiple different types of habitats. In Chile there are three related species previously
considered as Homonota : Garthia gaudichaudii , G. dorbignyi , G. penai . Several morphological
systematic studies have been completed, but for three widely distributed species in Argentina (
Homonota darwini , H. underwoodi &amp; H. fasciata ), few data are available. No phylogeographic
studies or molecular phylogenetic hypotheses are available for the genus. The objective of this work is to
present a molecular phylogenetic hypothesis for most of the described species in the genus, plus eight
candidate species. We sequenced two mitochondrial genes (cyt- b &amp; 12S) and seven protein
nuclear coding and four nuclear anonymous loci, and implemented traditional concatenated analyses as
well as species tree approaches. We discuss the taxonomic implications of these results and how the
future integration of phylogeographic and morphological approaches will allow further testing of
demographic and biogeographic hypotheses.




                                                                                                       492
Morando, Mariana (CONICET-CENPAT); Avila, Luciano (CONICET-CENPAT, Canada); Baker, Eric;
Sites, Jack W (Brigham Young University, Canada)

Molecular phylogeny of the endemic South American lizard clade Leiosaurae

The clade Leiosaurae is distributed mainly in southern Argentina, with few representatives in Chile. This
poorly-known group includes three genera: Pristidactylus , Leiosaurus and Diplolaemus . Pristidactylus
includes ten species, four of which are associated with Nothofagus forests in Chile, while the six
Argentinean species range from along the eastern side of the Andes to the mountains of Cordillera and
Precordillera, extending across the flat dry Monte habitats, and along the Atlantic coast and reaching the
isolated meadows atop the Sierra de la Ventana. Significant differences in meristic characters distinguish
Argentinian from Chilean species of Pristidactylus . The genus Leiosaurus includes four described
species, three in northwestern Argentina ( L. catamarcensis , L. paronae, L. jaguaris ) and one in
Patagonia ( L. bellii ). The genus Diplolaemus includes four species, D. bibronii in coastal regions and
arid mesetas of southern Patagonia, D. darwinii also in southernmost Argentina and reaching small area
in Chile, D. sexcinctus in north- central Patagonian Argentina, and D. leopardinus associated with the
Andean slopes in northern western Argentina and a small area in Chile. Natural history knowledge of
these species is very scarce, and unresolved taxonomic problems remain. Some phylogenetic
hypotheses have been proposed based on morphological and mitochondrial characters, but with very few
representatives (Frost et al 2001), and morphological and myological characters (Abdala et al 2009). In
this work we include most of the described species (14 of 18) with representatives from their type
localities, and we use Urostrophus vautieri as the outgroup. W e used two mitochondrial and eight
nuclear genes (7749bp) to infer phylogenetic relationships. The phylogenetic hypotheses of the Bayesian
tree shows that Diplolaemus is monophyletic, with Diplolaemus darwinii as the most basal and very
distinct lineage, and D. bibronii sister to D. leopardinus . Leiosaurus is strongly supported as
monophyletic, with L. bellii as the most basal species and L. catamarcensis sister to L. jaguaris . While
we found evidence for the monophyly of the Argentinean Pristidactylus species, P. torquatus from Chile
is not recovered within this clade and is the sister taxon of Leiosaurus .     We discuss the taxonomic
implications of our results.



Morey, Steven (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service); Westphal, Michael (Bureau of Land Management,
Hollister, CA, United States)

Lure-choice tests reveal possible association between color preference and breeding season in
live-bearing surfperch.

Sensory biases are non-mating related preferences that can predispose an individual to choose mates on
the basis of color pattern alone. Studies on livebearing surfperch of the family Embiotocidae have
suggested the existence of sensory biases towards phenotypic traits that share aspects in common with
food items. We sought to extend the investigation into surfperch sensory biases by asking whether fish
will show color preferences for artificial lures in the wild. We conducted tests of lure choice on sand-
dwelling surfperch of the subfamily Amphistichinae, focusing on two closely-related sympatric species,
Amphistichus rhodoterus and Hyperpropospon ellipticum . Two lures that varied only in coloration were
presented simultaneously in 62 hour-long bouts in surf habitat. Colors were red, black, yellow, and
orange, and a composite color we called ―pumpkinseed‖. Lures were assayed by spectrophotometry to
determine the source of variation in color. For each capture we recorded species and color of the lure.
Initial analysis of 162 captures revealed a slight trend towards a preference for orange. However, when
data were analyzed from breeding season alone, we saw a dramatic increase in captures on orange.
Spectrally, orange most resembled yellow in reflectance, showing a translation in wavelength only. Red,



                                                                                                      493
black and pumpkinseed varied from orange both in reflectance and wavelength, complicating comparison.
Because orange is a disproportionately represented pigment in both species and in their potential prey
items, it is possible that we are detecting a sensory bias. While the breeding-period shift in color
preference suggests an interaction between mating and color choice, the relationship may be indirect,
e.g. fish foraging strategies may shift during the breeding season due to new energetic requirements.
Therefore more work is required to establish whether a true sensory bias exists. One shortcoming of our
method is low power to detect choice, requiring large sample sizes. Our spectral data suggests that we
can increase power by narrowing lure choices, e.g. to orange vs. yellow exclusively. Our ultimate goal is
to understand the evolutionary processes that underlie the radiation of the sand-dwelling surfperch and in
particular the role of color pattern and color preference in that radiation. Rigorously testing for an
association between lure preference, sexual preference and color pattern is one step towards that goal.



Morgan, Ray (UMCES-AL);

Stream nutrients: Relationships to fish and benthic assemblages in Maryland streams

One of the most pressing environmental problems for the 21 st century is the presence of excess nutrient
loading in aquatic ecosystems throughout the world, often resulting in ecosystem collapses, economic
damages and human health concerns. Small freshwater stream systems (first through third order) are not
immune to nutrient loading, resulting from anthropogenic influences such as agricultural practices and
runoff, wastewater discharge, atmospheric deposition, and both urban/suburban point and non-point
sources. I used the Maryland Biological Stream Survey (MBSS) database to examine both nutrient and
benthic macroinvertebrate data collected during the MBSS Spring Index period and fish assemblage data
from the MBSS Summer Index period for Maryland. Statistical analyses indicated that stream nutrient
levels (TN, NO 3, NO 2, NH 3 and TP) minimally affected fish assemblages in first, second and third order
non-tidal streams.     However, there were strong statistical relationships of nutrient effects to several
benthic macroinvertebrate parameters, including EPT numbers (especially Ephemeroptera density), with
significant biotic reductions when TN levels exceed 4-6 mg/L. Although multiple stressors are often
present in Maryland streams, nutrients remain an important stressor to biotic assemblages, and need
increased consideration in conservation of intolerant Maryland fish species and stream biodiversity. Best
management plan development, along with implementation for nutrient management, requires
acceleration in Maryland, and potentially the Chesapeake Bay watershed.



Mori, Akira (Kyoto University); Toda, Mamoru (University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara, Okinawa, Canada)

Live long with a small body: Growth and longevity of a Japanese pitviper, Ovophis okinavensis, in
the field

As a general rule, life span of mammals and birds increases with body size. This rule has been
interpreted as the physiological consequence of warm-blooded animals based on the concept of
physiological time, which is correlated with their metabolic rate. In the case of ectotherms, it is not so
simple because metabolic rate of cold-blooded animals largely varies with their body temperature.
Snakes comprise a specious taxon of ectotherms, having approximately 3000 species with the range of
the maximum body size from less than 200mm to more than 5m. Thus, snakes would be ideal subjects to
test the concept of physiological time in ectotherms in relation to body size. We investigated growth and
longevity of a Japanese pitviper, Ovophis okinavensis, based on a long-term, mark-and-recapture study
on Okinawa-jima, a subtropical island in the Ryukyu Archipelago. Ovophis okinavensis is a small, docile



                                                                                                       494
snake: mean snout-vent length of males and females in the study site are 430mm and 481mm,
respectively. This snake is a typical ambush forager, feeding on a variety of vertebrates. Our previous
study showed that O. okinavensis is active under low temperature with mean body temperature of 16.1 C.
We marked 248 males and 202 females during a 15-year survey. Among them 100 males and 98 females
were recaptured at least once, and a total of 321 and 263 recapture records were obtained for males and
females, respectively. Thirty-seven males and 33 females were collected over more than five years. The
longest span of recapture records within a single individual was 15 years and 2 months. We estimated
that both males and females take approximately 10 years to attain the mean body size of the population.
Average growth rate during this stage was 20-30mm per year. Both males and females continued to grow
for more than additional 15 years with a less growth rate (less then 10mm per year) until attaining
approximately 500mm and 600mm, respectively. Even after attaining these sizes, some individuals
survived for nearly 10 more years with a very slow growth rate (less than 5mm per year). Consequently,
we estimated the longevity of males and females as more than 30 and 35 years, respectively. Our results
indicate that O. okinavensis, which is categorized as a relatively small-sized species among snakes, has
comparatively long life span with very slow growth. The low preferred body temperature and the ambush
hunting method of O. okinavensis, which imply low metabolic rate of this snake, may be related to this
slow life style.



Moritz, Timo (Deutsches Meeresmuseum); Rüber, Lukas (Natural History Museum, Bern, Switzerland);
Britz, Ralf (The Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom); Schliewen, Ulrich K. (The Bavarian
State Collection of Zoology, Munich, Germany)

Young living fossils? - the age of the family Polypteridae

Cladistians, the family Polypteridae, represent the most basal branch of the actinopterygians. We
conducted the first phylogenetic analyses combining mitochondrial (2096 bp) and nuclear (2634 bp) data.
Both datasets are principally in accordance, with nuclear markers giving less resolution for phylogenetic
relationships. A possible mitochondrial introgression event revealed by cytonuclear discordance is
discussed. The presence of four major clades within the genus Polypterus is confirmed, as well as the
untenable nature of the currently applied sub-species concept. We subjected the data set to molecular
clock analyses in order to estimate node ages of the evolutionary history of this lineage with very limited
fossil record. Different sets of single or combined markers in various analyses yielded drastically
inconsistent results, with nuclear data producing node ages up to ten times younger than mitochondrial
data. A combined data set under a strict molecular clock model resulted in an age of 85.7 million years for
the family Polypteridae and 52.6 million years for the genus Polypterus. Even considering the high level
of uncertainty of the results, diversification of recent Polypteridae is dramatically younger than the
separation of the cladistians from the remaining actinopterygians.



Mougey, Krista (Texas Tech University); Perry, Gad (Texas Tech University, Canada); Lazell, James
(The Conservation Agency, Canada)

Ecology and Life History Characteristics of the Repatriated Rock Iguana Population of Guana
Island, BVI

The stout iguana (Cyclura pinguis) is a critically endangered West Indian rock iguana endemic to the
British Virgin Islands. The distribution of C. pinguis was limited to the single island of Anegada until
conservation concerns in the 1980s prompted the founding of several artificially reestablished populations




                                                                                                       495
on the islands of Guana, Necker, Norman, and Little Thatch. Despite their potential conservation value,
little is known about the natural history of these reestablished populations. For the past 9 years, we have
been studying the repatriated C. pinguis population of Guana Island. As part of this long term monitoring
effort, we have been conducting a mark-recapture study, tracking population trends and recording the
demographic, morphometric, and life history characteristics of this population. The Guana population was
founded with only 8 iguanas but has grown markedly in the past several decades. Since 2003, we have
captured, measured, and PIT tagged over 300 individuals. The sex ratio of captured adults is near 1:1,
with a slight female bias. Adults are known to be territorial, but it appears that following the initial nest
dispersal movement, juveniles and yearlings exhibit some degree of site fidelity as well. The height of the
daily active period is between 9:30 and 14:30, although larger individuals tend to begin sunning earlier
and stay active later than smaller individuals. Both within- and between- year growth rates are
significantly higher in the Guana population than in the head-started Anegada population. Hatchlings
found on Guana gain an average of 115 mm snout-vent-length within the first year of development, but
growth rates decrease with increased body size. The success of the Guana population offers insights
into the importance of island management and control of introduced mammals and provides a
geographically distinct conservation hedge for this critically endangered species.