nds. Fresh mucus also contains
bacterial symbionts that are not seawater contaminants. Forty-six of 384 bacterial isolates cultured from
R. bonasus and 49 of 227 isolates from D. sabina epidermal mucus demonstrated antibiotic activity
against at least one human pathogenic tester strain in primary screens performed at Mote Marine
Laboratory. Of the 46 R. bonasus isolates, 13 demonstrated antimicrobial activity against a different
panel of pathogenic bacterial tester strains when screened at University of South Florida Center for
Biological Defense. Using the GenBank database, BLAST searches performed on 16S rDNA sequence
data identified six different genera among 22 of the 49 D. sabina -derived bacterial isolates that produced
antibacterial compounds against various tester strains. Some of the active isolates not genetically
confirmed with the database could be undescribed organisms. Culturable libraries of all isolates have
been cryopreserved.



Luhring, Thomas (University of Missouri); Holdo, Ricardo (University of Missouri, Canada)

Body Size as an Adaptation for Drought Survival in Stochastic Aquatic Environments: An Age-
Structured Approach

In the Southeastern United States, two families of ―giant salamanders‖ have evolved to live in a variety of
aquatic habitats. Amphiumidae and Sirenidae each contain species that diverged in body size and are
capable of surviving periodic droughts by aestivating in wetland sediments. Although both families have
followed different evolutionary histories, each has diversified into a few species that differ primarily in size.
Using sirenids as a case study, we constructed demographic models to investigate the effects of
environmental stochasticity (in the form ofdrought regimes) on persistence of species with contrasting life
history strategies. The two species we model differ in their time to maturation, which determines the
intrinsic rate of population growth as well as maximum size, which in turn determines survival under
drought conditions. We used an age-structured approach, with density-dependent fecundity and size-
dependent mortality data derived from published sources for the two species. Simulations (with identical
environmental parameters for both species) consisted of 5000-year runs in a simulated wetland subjected
to stochastic drought events varying in mean duration. In models without competition, persistence
decreased sigmoidally with drought duration.        Increase in body size caused an upward shift in the
threshold drought severity needed to precipitate extinction. We conducted a global sensitivity analysis for
each species model to determine what demographic parameters had the greatest influence on model
behavior. Maximum mass attained was the most important variable driving extinction events.                   For
models with competition, variation in competition strength from heterospecifics changed model output



                                                                                                             435
only when mean drought severity was low enough to permit the smaller species to persist. Results
fromthis model indicate that regional drought maintains divergent life-history strategies in sirenids as a
temporally selective agent on body size.



Luhring, Thomas (University of Missouri); Earl, Julia; Semlitsch, Raymond (University of Missouri,
Canada)

Island in the Sun; Nutrient Cycling in isolated systems is mediated by canopy cover, predation
and the complex life-histories of their transient tenants

Limitation of nutrients in ecosystems has wide-reaching effects on community composition and system
functions. Although we are beginning to understand the impacts of the movement of nutrients between
donor and recipient systems, the majority of these studies focus on trophic effects of nutrient import from
a large diffuse area into a relatively smaller and finite recipient system. In this study, we investigate the
effects of nutrient dynamics on a finite donor system (isolated wetlands) that exports nutrients (in the form
of amphibian metamorphs) into a large and diffuse recipient system (terrestrial uplands). We used
outdoor mesocosms (n=72) to simulate aquatic systems varying in canopy cover (high or low) and
community composition (four single species treatments, two multispecies community treatments, and a no
amphibian control) to test for effects of life-history differences, community effects, and predation on
nutrient cycling within aquatic systems. In addition to influencing local nutrient cycling, metamorphosed
amphibian juveniles represent a nutrient loss from the aquatic (donor) system to the terrestrial system
(recipient) that is proportional to their biomass export. Depletion of Nitrogen and Phosphorus levels in
amphibian mesocosms (compared to background rates in control tanks) were generally strongest and
related to the timing of metamorphosis of anurans. Community tanks with predators (adult newts) had
reduced anuran survivorship and higher total phosphorus and total nitrogen than community tanks without
predators. Although we tested the effects of community composition on biomass and nutrient export, bi-
phasic amphibians transport nutrients from terrestrial to aquatic (i.e., egg masses) and aquatic to
terrestrial systems (i.e., emigration of metamorphosed juveniles). The temporal separation and net
movement of these subsidies warrants future research into their ecological significance. These results not
only reinforce the role of amphibians as key players in nutrient cycling, but provide further empirical data
for investigating the effects of spatial subsidies on both recipient and donor systems.



Luken, Alissa N. (California State University, Northridge); Espinoza, Robert E. (California State
University, Northridge, Northridge, CA, United States)

Temperature-Dependent Sprint Performance of Nocturnal and Diurnal Geckos: Does Dollo's Law
Apply to Physiological Traits?

One of the most intriguing and rare phenomena in evolutionary biology is the occurrence of evolutionary
reversals because of the presumed difficulty of re-evolving ―lost‖ traits (Dollo‘s law). Previous tests of
Dollo‘s law have focused on morphologicaltraits, perhaps because physiology is considered more
evolutionarily labile. Most of the world‘s 1200+ gecko species are nocturnal and active at body
temperatures that are suboptimal for performance. Yet, geckos descended from diurnal lizards, which are
generally active near their thermal optimum. Several gecko lineages have independently reversed to
diurnality. We tested whether reversals to diurnality in geckos are associated with a return to performance
levels of diurnal lizards or whether their long history of nocturnality has compromised gecko performance.
We hypothesized that diurnality in geckos would be associated with faster sprints at warmer temperatures



                                                                                                         436
(as for typical diurnal lizards) and slower sprints at lower temperatures compared to closely related
nocturnal geckos. Following Dollo‘s law, we predicted that the maximum performance of diurnal geckos
would not approach values of typical diurnal lizards. We used a comprehensive phylogeny of geckos to
identify the nocturnal sister taxa of secondarily diurnal geckos. A total of 28 gecko species was sprinted at
five ecologically relevant temperatures and maximum sprint performance was determined for each
temperature. While most (71%) of the species in our study had typical performance curves (i.e., slowest
sprints tended to occur at the lowest body temperature and declined again at the highest body
temperature), two species had performance curves that continued to increase with temperature, two
species had curves that increased initially and then reached a plateau, and four species had curves that
fit a third-order polynomial function. Sprints of species pairs analyzed to date (three nocturnal:diurnal
pairs), show no difference in temperature-dependent sprint performance between the nocturnal and
diurnal species. This may indicate that thermal physiology is evolutionarily conserved in geckos; however,
data from additional species are needed to determine whether this pattern is widespread.



Lukey, Natasha (University of Waterloo); Cunnington, David (Environment Canada- Canadian Wildlife
Service, Canada); Ashpole, Sara; Murphy, Stephen (University of Waterloo, Canada); Govindarajulu,
Purnima (British Columbia Ministry of Enviroment, Canada)

Where do we go from here? Long-term, Adaptive Management of Invasive American Bullfrogs
(Lithobates catesbeiana) in the South Okanagan Valley, British Columbia

American Bullfrogs, Lithobates catesbeiana, significantly and negatively impact ecosystems. Alien
bullfrogs out-compete, predate upon, and transmit diseases to native amphibians. Since their introduction
in the 1950's, bullfrogs have been detected in 5 wetlands in the South Okanagan region of British
Columbia, Canada. We developed a three-tiered, adaptive management system in response to the
bullfrog threat. The first management tier is physical removal of, and active monitoring for, bullfrogs of all
stages. Removal has resulted in significant reduction in bullfrog detections from a high of 73 adults and/or
juveniles in 2005, to 4 adults and/or juveniles in 2010. Following the low number of detections in 2010, we
installed automated recording devices at 2 of the 5 infected water bodies in 2011. Continued visual and
in-person auditory detection efforts, combined with the audio recordings, yielded 0 bullfrog detections in
2011. The second management tier assesses risk levels for future colonization or recolonization post-
removal. Maximum entropy habitat suitability modeling in conjunction with effort analysis will determine
the proportion of wetlands vulnerable to recolonization post-removal, and help predict human and
financial resources required for continued population suppression. Habitat suitability modeling has shown
permanent, stagnant wetlands surrounded by agriculture to be at highest risk for bullfrog invasion. The
third management tier incorporates stakeholder awareness and education to facilitate monitoring of
bullfrog populations. We distributed surveys to stakeholder groups (school teachers, neighboring
landowners, vector businesses, and the general public), to measure each group's level of knowledge of
bullfrog presence, identification, and reporting. Fifty percent or more of all target groups were not
confident with identifying and/or reporting bullfrogs. To achieve long-term suppression and potential
eradication, we recommend continued stakeholder education to improve bullfrog identification and
reporting, reduced but continuing in-person detection effort, expanded monitoring using automated
recording devices, and continued habitat suitability model and effort analysis. This three tiered
management system provides a strong example of a successful invasive species risk assessment and
management approach to vertebrate invasions outside the Okanagan Valley, Canada.




                                                                                                          437
Lumbantobing, Daniel (The George Washington University);

Osteology of the Gill Arches of the Subfamily Danioninae (Teleostei; Cyprinidae)

 Danioninae, with approximately 320 species in 51 genera, is one of the most species-rich teleost
subfamilies. Despite such diversity, let alone the growing interest in the biology of some of its species,
little is known about danionine morphology and its utility in the systematics of the group. The osteological
aspects of the gill arches in 32 species of the subfamily Danioninae, representing 21 valid genera, have
been comparatively studied. Serving as outgroup taxa, five species of four non-danionine subfamilies
were also examined. The danionine gill arches is shown to constitute a remarkably high structural
diversity, as demonstrated by 16 variable characters, eleven of which are described herein for the first
time. Based on outgroup comparison, Danioninae is uniquely diagnosed by the presence of a
cartilaginous fifth epibranchial with a ventral tip articulating only with the posteroventral edge of the fourth
epibranchial. In contrast, the cartilaginous fifth epibranchial in all the outgroup taxa is ventrally associated
not only with the fourth epibranchial, but also with the cartilaginous dorsal tip of the fourth ceratobranchial.
Given the presence of such a danionine epibranchial articulation in Sundadanio , this enigmatic-yet-
problematic genus is here classified in Danioninae, regardless of the conflicting and poorly-resolved
topologies of the molecular trees of previous studies. The rasborin process sensu Liao et al. (2010) is
confirmed as a synapomorphy that supports the monophyly of the tribe Rasborini. In addition,
incorporation of the genera Amblypharyngodon and Pectenocypris within Rasborini according to
previous molecular studies is corroborated by the presence of the rasborin process in both taxa, which is
reported herein for the first time. Several novel osteological structures in the gill arches unique to other
danionine taxa were also discovered, particularly in the genera that exhibit highly-evolved modifications of
feeding behavior, such as Amblypharyngodon , Esomus , Pectenocypris , and Raiamas .



Lyons, Kady (California State University Long Beach); Carlisle, Aaron (Hopkins Marine Station, Pacific
Grove, CA, United States); Blasius, Mary (California State University Long Beach, Long Beach, CA,
United States); Mull, Christopher (Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada); Winkler, Chuck
(Southern California Marine Institute, Terminal Island, CA, United States); O'Sullivan, John (Monterey Bay
Aquarium, Monterey, CA, United States); Lowe, Christopher (California State University Long Beach,
Long Beach, CA, United States)

Levels of Organic Contaminants and Mercury in Four Species of YOY Lamnid Sharks

During reproduction, females have the ability to transfer accumulated contaminants to offspring by a
process called maternal offloading. Since organic contaminants are biomagnified through the food web, a
mother‘s the trophic level should highly influence the magnitude and composition of contaminants passed
to developing young. Liver contaminant concentrations were measured in four species of young of the
year (YOY) lamnid sharks caught in southern and central California to compare the degree of maternal
contaminant transfer from females with varying diets. YOY white sharks (n=19) had the highest levels of
organochlorine contaminants among all four groups (∑PCBs 14 ± 10 µg/g ww [wet weight], ∑DDTs 75 ±
87 µg/g ww), followed by mako sharks (n=4; ∑PCBs 7 ± 7 µg/g ww, ∑DDTs 13 ± 75 µg/g ww), thresher
(n=1; ∑PCBs 2.8 µg/g ww, ∑DDTs 5.7 µg/g ww) and salmon sharks (n=17; ∑PCBs 0.6 ± 0.5 µg/g ww,
∑DDTs 0.7 ± 0.6 µg/g ww). YOY white sharks also had the highest level of total mercury in their muscle
(∑Hg 1.4 ± 1.1 µg/g ww) compared to salmon sharks (∑Hg 0.3 ± 0.1 µg/g ww). YOY white sharks were
also the only species to show contaminant signatures (high DDT:PCB ratio) indicative of foraging from the
Palos Verdes Superfund site. While diet and foraging location of YOY sharks may play a role, the amount
of contaminants accumulated by these young sharks is probably highly influenced by their mothers.
Therefore, adult lamnids such as white and mako sharks that feed on highly contaminated marine



                                                                                                            438
mammals are more likely to pass higher loads of contaminants to their offspring.    The elevated
contaminant levels of these young animals are of concern since the physiological effects of these
contaminants on health and reproduction are unknown.



Lyra, Mariana (UNESP); Haddad, Célio (UNESP, Canada)

Using DNA Barcodes to estimate species richness in Neotropical amphibians

Amphibians are currently facing serious population declines and/or extinctions worldwide. At the same
time, several new species are continuously being described, suggesting that our knowledge of amphibian
species diversity is far from complete and underscoring the need for an acceleration in taxonomic
research. In this context the use of molecular tools, such as DNA Barcoding, can contribute as
alternative measure to the rapid and easy assessment of species richness in this hyperdiverse group.
Controversially, there are only a few studies using DNA barcode in amphibians and virtually no large-
scale contributions to the South American amphibian fauna. The greatest diversity of amphibians on the
planet is found in Brazil, a continental scale country comprising several biomes. Information on genetic
diversity of Brazilian amphibians, as in other groups, is still poorly known. The aims of our work are to
DNA Barcode amphibians from Brazil and make a preliminary estimate of genetic diversity in this group.
So far we have analyzed COI sequences from 220 species of amphibians (~ 1000 sequences), including
samples of all families of frogs and toads currently recognized in Brazil, six species of caecilians, and one
species of salamander. Intraspecific diversity was high among analyzed species (mean=3,8%; range 0 –
18.7%). In 39 of 220 cases, well-supported, distinct intraspecific lineages were identified which may
suggest the presence of cryptic species. Although in all cases, intraspecific lineages require additional
investigation using complementary molecular techniques and additional characters such as morphology
and acoustic data, it is clear that amphibian species richness is underestimated in Brazil. Results suggest
that diversity may be 20% greater than currently known. Moreover, the results indicate that the
incorporation of genetic data in collections is strategic and fundamental for the recognition of lineages,
and thus accelerate the characterization and quantification of the diversity of Neotropical amphibians.
DNA Barcode data can contribute effectively for          conservation and       management        of Brazilian
species.



Lyson, Tyler (Yale University); Scheyer, Torsten (University of Zurich, Canada); Bever, Gaberiel (New
York College of Osteopathic Medicine, Canada); Hsiang, Allison; Gauthier, Jacques (Yale University,
Canada)

Evolutionary developmental model for the origin and early evolution of the turtle shell: integration
of developmental data with the fossil record

The evolutionary steps that resulted in the unique, shelled body plan of turtles and the phylogenetic
position of turtles within Reptilia are interdependent problems that have fascinated and confounded
comparative biologists since the 19th century. While boney ―shells‖ have evolved numerous times during
amniote evolution (e.g., placodonts, armadillos, ankylosaurs), in all cases except turtles these structures
are clearly composites of dermal osteoderms. In turtles, however, the underlying structure of the
carapace is a unique outgrowth of intramembranous bone derived from the periosteum of the developing
ribs and thoracolumbar vertebrae. The recent discovery of the late Triassic Odontochelys semitestacea,
the oldest unequivocal stem turtle with distinctively broadened ribs and lack of osteoderms, helps break
up the historic morphological gap between early turtles and other reptiles. For example, several



                                                                                                          439
postcranial characters revealed by O. semitestacea are also present in the late Permian Eunotosaurus
africanus– whose general similarity with turtles (e.g., broadened ribs) has long been recognized but
generally assumed (but never tested) to reflect convergence rather than homology. New E. africanus
fossils reveal several unambiguous synapomorphies uniting E.africanus with turtles: number of dorsal
ribs and vertebrae reduced to nine, T-shaped ribs in cross section, elongate dorsal vertebrae, and loss of
ventral ribs and sternum. Furthermore, histological data of the broadened E. africanus ribs show dermal
bone growth from the perichondral collar of the developing rib, a mode of development unique to turtles.
These data indicate E. africanus is the earliest and basal-most turtle. The ontogenetic appearance of
turtle shell characters matches the morphologic transitions found between E. africanus                  O.
semitestacea, and more crownward stem turtles. Here we integrate developmental data with the new
fossil and histological data, and analyze the ―key‖ morphological transitions within a broader phylogenetic
framework to ultimately propose an evolutionary developmental (evo-devo) model for the origin of the
turtle shell. The model hypothesizes when specific developmental and morphological transformations
arose within the lineage leading up to extant turtles.



Mabee, Paula (University of South Dakota);

Synthesis of evolutionary and developmental data for fishes using new informatics tools

The diversity of phenotypes that evolved in fishes and other vertebrates result from evolutionary changes
in regulation of genes that drive development. Although relatively little is known about the genes that
underlie the skeletal variation among fish species, substantial data from genetics and development are
available for zebrafish, a widely studied model organism. Because developmental processes are highly
conserved, this knowledge can be leveraged for understanding the evolution of skeletal diversity.The
Phenoscape Knowledgebase (http://kb.phenoscape.org) integrates similarly structured phenotypic data
from extinct and extant vertebrates (currently teleost fishes) and model organisms (currently zebrafish).
Using ontology-based reasoning the Knowledgebase provides (1) testable hypotheses of candidate
genes involved in the evolution of phenotypes that vary across taxa and (2) the capacity to browse, sort,
integrate, and aggregate morphological data in unparalleled ways, including across different biological
levels (cell, tissue, organ, system) and according to similarity of different types. Examples these features
will be provided using the skeleton of the hyoid arch and gill arches of fishes.



Machado, Taís (Instituto Butantan); Silva, Vinícius Xavier (UNIFAL - Universidade Federal de Alfenas,
Canada); Silva, Maria José de Jesus (Instituto Butantan, Canada)

Cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 divergences among closely related species of the Bothrops
neuwiedi group (Serpentes, Squamata)

Overlapping of morphological features of species has been a problem for the taxonomy of Bothrops
neuwiedi group. Such group currently comprises eight species widespread in open areas of South
America. A previous study based on mitochondrial DNA (cytb and ND4) revealed lack of correspondence
between molecular phylogeny and the current taxonomy which could be explained by different
methodologies applied to analyze different datasets. Alternatively, we could also hypothesize that
introgression events and/or phenotypic plasticity and/or convergent morphological evolution could be
occurring and interfering in the correct identification of specimens. DNA barcoding theoretically could
provide rapid and accurate species identification, using a small standardized segment of the genome,
usually the cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (cox1), a mitochondrial gene. Successful barcode



                                                                                                        440
identification depends upon genetic diversity, which is markedly lower within than between species. This
study aims to investigate the applicability of the 680 bp sequence of cox1 as a molecular marker for
species identification in B. neuwiedi group and for reconstructing phylogenetic relationships. Sequences
from representatives of all the species of Bothrops neuwiedi group were obtained, edited/aligned with
CodonCode Aligner, and the analyses were performed using Mega 5, TNT 1.1., PhyML 3.0 and Mr.
Bayes 3.1.2. Preliminary results evinced Bothrops erythromelas, B. lutzi, B. marmoratus, B. neuwiedi and
B. pauloensis with high intraspecific divergences, which could indicate the occurrence of cryptic species,
although introgression would also be a probable phenomenon in some of these taxa. Low level of
interspecific divergence between B. diporus and B. pubescens was observed - hypothetically due to
recent evolutionary radiation. Two major geographic highly structured lineages were recovered:, one
distributed along the Brazilian coast from north to southeast and another one in the countryside from
central-west to south region. Cox1 shows less informative sites than cytb and ND4, although the analysis
of the three genes combined has been shown less polytomies of the main lineages than previously
observed.

Grants: FAPESP, CAPES



Mackessy, Stephen (University of Northern Colorado);

Biology and Venom Biochemistry of the Desert Massasauga (Sistrurus catenatus edwardsii) in
Colorado

The Massasauga (Sistrurus catenatus) is a small rattlesnake which occurs in grasslands of North
America, from northern Mexico to southeastern Canada. Although threatened in many parts of its range,
the diminutive Desert Massasauga (S. c. edwardsii) remains abundant at several locations in more mesic
regions of the shortgrass steppe of southeastern Colorado. Our numerous studies of the ecology/natural
history and venom biochemistry/genomics make Desert Massasaugas one of the better-characterized
species of rattlesnakes, and this summary will examine the interplay of animal biology and venom
biochemistry. Snakes (750) were collected on a private ranch in southeastern Colorado and were
processed in the lab (morphometrics, venom extraction and PIT-tagging; 12 snakes were also implanted
with radios for telemetry studies). Massasaugas were radiotracked for two years during the active season
to determine spatial ecology and habitat use. Venoms were subjected to a variety of biochemical and
proteomic analyses, and two snakes were sacrificed for transcriptomics studies. Massasaugas make
strongly directional migratory movements which are resource-driven. Abundant prey (lizards, centipedes,
rodents) and favorable thermoregulatory sites occur in the summer habitat, while stable hibernacula exist
in the shortgrass habitat. Long-term mark/recapture studies indicate that Desert Massasaugas are
abundant but short-lived, with average adult survivorship of <4 years. Desert Massasauga venom is quite
potent toward both lizards and rodents, and it is much more toxic to a common rodent prey species
(Perognathus) than toward rodent species not utilized (Peromyscus). Proteomic and genomic analyses
indicate that a crotoxin homolog, characteristic of other type II rattlesnake venoms, is not expressed in
this species, but genes for 5 isoforms of three-finger toxins (3FTXs) are present. Unlike most viper
venoms, only one dominant isoform of an acidic PLA2 is present in venom of S. c. edwardsii. The Desert
Massasauga is one of only a few species of viperids demonstrated to possess genes for 3FTXs, a protein
family which includes the potent α-neurotoxins of elapids and several taxon-specific neurotoxins of some
rear-fanged snakes. However, 3FTxs do not appear to be expressed in the venom. Based on 2D SDS-
PAGE, over 100 proteins comprise this venom, and serine proteinases (thrombin-like, kallikrein-like) are
abundant components which may contribute to high venom lethality in mice and lizards. The Desert
Massasauga in Colorado is an excellent model species for evaluating influences of numerous ecological



                                                                                                       441
factors on venom evolution, and continuing studies are investigating population levels of venom and
genetic variation.



Mackessy, Stephen (University of Northern Colorado); Saviola, Anthony (University of Northern
Colorado, Canada); Chiszar, David (University of Colorado Boulder, Canada)

Ontogenetic Shift in Response To Prey-Derived Chemical Cues in Prairie Rattlesnakes (Crotalus
viridis viridis)

Snakes often have specialized diets that undergo a shift from one prey type to another depending on the
life stage of the snake. Crotalus viridis viridis (prairie rattlesnake) takes different prey at different life
stages, and neonates typically prey on ectotherms, while adults feed almost entirely on small
endotherms. We hypothesized that elevated rates of tongue flicking to chemical stimuli should correlate
with particular prey consumed, and that this response shifts from one prey type to another as individuals
age. To examine if an ontogenetic shift in response to chemical cues occurred, we recorded the rate of
tongue flicking for 25 neonate, 20 subadult, and 20 adult (average SVL = 280.9, 552, 789.5 mm,
respectively) wild-caught C. v. viridis to chemical stimuli presented on a cotton-tipped applicator; water-
soluble cues from two ectotherms, (prairie lizard,           Sceloporus undulatus , and house gecko,
Hemidactylus frenatus ), two endotherms, (deer mouse, Peromyscus maniculatus and lab mouse, Mus
musculus ), and water controls were used. Neonates tongue flicked significantly more to chemical cues of
their common prey, S. undulatus, than to all other chemical cues; however, the response to this lizard‘s
chemical cues decreased in adult rattlesnakes. Subadults tongue flicked with a higher rate of tongue
flicking to both S. undulatus and P. maniculatus than to all other treatments, and adults tongue flicked
significantly more to P. maniculatus than to all other chemical cues. In addition, all three subclasses
demonstrated a greater response for natural prey chemical cues over chemical stimuli of prey not
encountered in the wild ( M. musculus and H. frenatus ). This shift in chemosensory response
correlatedwith the previously described ontogenetic shifts in C. v. viridis diet. Because many vipers show
a similar ontogenetic shift in diet and venom composition, we suggest that this shift in prey cue
discrimination is likely a general phenomenon among viperid snakes.



Mackessy, Stephen (University of Northern Colorado); Saviola, Anthony (University of Northern
Colorado, Canada); Chiszar, David; Busch, Chardell (University of Colorado Boulder, Canada)

Relocator Proteins: Identification of the Chemical Component of Venoms Allowing Prey Recovery
During Strike-induced Chemosensory Searching

Vertebrate predators utilize a broad arsenal of behaviors and weaponry for overcoming fractious and
potentially dangerous prey. In response, defenses may evolve among prey that decrease predatory
success, leading to an evolutionary arms race whose dynamics change over time. This reciprocating
compensatory response has been invoked to explain aposematic color patterns among toxic prey and
their snake predators, and a similar Red Queen effect may help explain the seemingly unnecessary
complexity of snake venoms. Among the advanced snakes, a chemical mode of dispatching prey, venom,
is commonly utilized to obtain prey rapidly and with minimal contact. Snake venoms contain a variety of
protein, peptide and small organic compounds, and a persistent issue in the study of venom evolution has
been to explain the compositional complexity of venoms. Lethal toxicity toward particular prey has
demonstrated the adaptive significance of several taxon-specific venom components, but for most venom
proteins, particularly the many low toxicity, non-enzymatic fractions, a well-defined role in envenomation



                                                                                                          442
and predation has not been established. One of these protein families, the disintegrins, are common,
well-characterized components of viperid venoms, and a major activity is to disrupt cell-cell and cell-
matrix interactions mediated by cell surfaceintegrins. Here we show that disintegrins, in addition to these
demonstrated pharmacological roles, are used by rattlesnakes to tag prey chemically, allowing for
relocation after envenomation. Enzymatic and other major protein components of size exclusion-
fractionated Crotalus atrox (Western Diamondback) venom had no effect on discrimination of
envenomated vs. non-envenomated prey by snakes, but a peak containing only the monomeric
disintegrins crotatroxins 1 and 2 elicited a statistically significant response to treated prey. The identity of
these small proteins was confirmed by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry and N-terminal sequencing. We
suggest that a major biological role of venom disintegrins for rattlesnakes is to allow these strike-and-
release predators to relocate envenomated prey effectively. In the field, this chemical tag on prey will help
minimize foraging time and greatly expedite discrimination of a trail left by envenomated prey from the
many trails of non-envenomated conspecifics. Our results demonstrate unequivocally that venom
components can have important biological roles which extend beyond those that are apparent from their
biochemically functional roles.



Mackey, Mark (University of Missouri); Semlitsch, Raymond (University of Missouri, Columbia, MO,
United States)

Using headwater streams and salamanders to test hypotheses of golf course impacts

With more than 18,000 golf courses in the U.S. encompassing over 2.7 million acres, golf has become a
significant land use. The purpose of this study was to examine the impacts of golf course management
on stream habitat and water quality and to specifically examine the influence of golf management on
stream salamander communities. We tested the following hypotheses about the effects of golf course
management on streams: golf courses 1) produce chemical runoff which affects stream salamander
communities directly downstream of courses, 2) cause direct habitat alteration which affects stream
salamander communities on golf courses, 3) cause indirect habitat alteration which affects stream
salamanders directly downstream of golf courses. We measured relative abundance and diversity of
larval and adult stream salamanders in 60 stream reaches located upstream, on, and downstream of 10
golf courses in western North Carolina. We also measured 13 biologically relevant riparian and in-stream
habitat characteristics to better understand the impacts of management on habitat quality. We made
predictions about direct (on course) and indirect (downstream) effects for each habitat variable. We also
measured nitrate and pesticide levels upstream and downstream of courses to test the chemical runoff
hypothesis. Salamander abundance and diversity did not differ in streams located upstream and
downstream of golf courses. Stream reaches on managed portions of golf courses on average contained
lower salamander abundances and diversity for adults and larvae, though only larval diversity was
significant. Nitrate was not detected at any of the stream reaches and only two of the 16 pesticide
chemicals screened for were detected in negligible proportions. On average none of the 13 habitat
variables measured differed in upstream and downstream reaches. Six of these variables were
significantly altered in the on-course streams. Overall our chemical, salamander, and habitat results did
not support the chemical runoff hypothesis or the indirect habitat alteration hypothesis. Our findings of
altered habitat characteristics and lowered larval salamander diversity in on-course streams provide
support for the direct habitat influence hypothesis. This study provides a useful starting point for
understanding the current impacts of golf course management on stream habitat and water quality, and
provides a directed transition into the next step of experimental habitat manipulation for stream
biodiversity enhancement.




                                                                                                            443
Maddin, Hillary (Harvard University); Russell, Anthony; Anderson, Jason (University of Calgary, Canada)

Morphological evolution and phylogeny of caecilian amphibians (Gymnophiona)

Caecilian amphibians remain the least well understood of the three lissamphibian orders, in terms of
many fundamental aspects of their biology and evolution. Currently, phylogenetic analyses of characters
drawn from the morphology of caecilians lack resolution, as well as complementarity with the results of
phylogenetic analyses that employ molecular data. A hypothesis of phylogeny that incorporates
morphological data permits the identification synapomorphies and provides a context for exploring
evolutionary transitions within a group. Stemming from the hypothesis that the braincase has the potential
to yield phylogenetic information, the braincases and intimately associated stapedes of twenty-seven
species (twenty-three genera) of extant caecilians were examined using images assembled via micro-
computed tomography. Thirty-four new morphological characters pertaining to the braincase and stapes
were identified and tested for congruence with previously recognized morphological characters. The
results reveal that characters of the braincase and stapes resolve generic-level relationships in a way that
is largely congruent with the results of molecular analyses. The results of a combined analysis of
molecular and morphological data provide a framework for conducting ancestral character state
reconstructions and permit the generation of a hypothesis relating to the plesiomorphic condition of the
caecilian braincase, which bears relevance to ongoing discussions about lissamphibian phylogeny. The
current analyses resulted in the identification of 70 new synapomorphies for various clades of taxa, 24 of
which appear to be unique for the taxa that possess them. Together these data demonstrate the utility of
the application of characters of the braincase and stapes for resolving phylogenetic relationships in this
group. The results are discussed as they pertain to caecilian systematics and morphological evolution.



Madelaire, Carla (USP - Universidade de São Paulo); Gomes, Fernando (USP - Universidade de São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil)

Relationship between androgens, reproductive physiology, immunocompetence, and parasitism
in anurans of Brazilian semi-arid, Caatinga.

Most of the anurans are seasonal breeders, with males presenting a circulating androgen peak during the
breeding season. Although the maintenance of high androgen levels is necessary during the breeding
season to express morphological and behavioral secondary sexual characters, they may show
immunosuppressive effects. In this way, during the breeding season, there may be an important tradeoff
between reproductive effort and resistance to parasite infection. Environments marked by drastic
seasonal energy and water availability are particularly challenging for the organisms, since energy
restriction has been shown to accentuate the tradeoffs in experimental studies on different vertebrates.
An example of this kind of environment is the Brazilian Caatinga, a large semi-arid region characterized
by high temperatures and seasonal, limited and somewhat unpredictable rainfall. In Angicos, a locality
within the Caatinga biome contaning some permanent water bodies, different species of anurans deal
with the dry season in different ways. While Pleurodema diplolister aestivate borrowed, Rhinella
granulosa and R. jimi remain in foraging activity around permanent lakes. In this way, anurans from this
locality present a very interesting model for comparative studies of the seasonal variation in the
relationship between androgens, reproductive physiology, and parasitism. We are analyzing testosterone
plasma levels, leukocyte counting and profile, intensity of endoparasites, testicular morphology, fat
reserves, organ masses, and stomach contents of males from these three species collected during three
periods: (1) dry season, (2) during the rainfall, when males are calling, and (3) in the interval between




                                                                                                        444
rainfalls, when males are foraging within the reproductive season. The implications of our findings will be
discussed.



Maerz, John (University of Georgia);

A Salamander Perspective on Earthworm Invasions of North Temperate Forest Ecosystems

Nonnative species invasions are a major component of global change.            In the eastern deciduous of
forests of North America, nonnative earthworm invasions have been transforming the structure and
function of forest floor environments and having complex effects on the plants and animals that depend
on those environments. I summarize what is known about the earthworm impacts on forest ecosystems
including effects on terrestrial salamander diet, abundance, and role in ecosystem function. In short,
earthworms are an important prey to many predators including herpetofauna.            Earthworm invasions
drive most of the spatial and temporal variation in energy intake for red-backed salamanders ( Plethodon
cinereus ), which is associated with altered salamander fecundity, social behavior and morphology.
However, the major impact of earthworm invasions is the rapid loss of leaf litter from the forest floor,
which leads to more rapid soil drying and reduced arthropod abundances.            As a result, salamander
abundance has declined exponentially among forest sites where earthworm invasions have reduced
forest litter cover.     Work using double-labeled leaf litter applied to forest plots with and without
earthworms demonstrated that earthworm invasions altered the rates and total amounts of energy and
nutrients that move from leaf litter to salamander populations. The total amount of C and N that moved
into salamander populations over four years was significantly lower on earthworm-invaded plots
compared to worm free plots, resulting in less C and N retention by salamander populations following
earthworm invasion. Collectively our research shows that despite being a potentially abundant food
source, earthworms reduce the net amount of energy and nutrients that flow from forest leaf litter to
support salamander populations and nearly eliminate the contribution of salamanders to nutrient retention
in forest ecosystems.       There is likely little that can be done to eliminate earthworms from invaded
forests, but actions to reduce the introduction of earthworms to new areas through the movement of bait
and soils could protect remaining non-invaded forests.



Maglia, Anne (US National Science Foundation);

NSF Collections Programs: Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections (ADBC) and
Collections in Support of Biological Research (CSBR)

I will discuss two collections-relevant funding opportunities in the US National Science Foundation‘s
Division of Biological Sciences---Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections (ADBC) and Collections
in Support of Biological Research (CSBR).       I will provide historical perspectives on the programs and
updates on recent changes to the solicitations. Additional information may be found at:
http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=503559 (ADBC) and
http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=503651 (CSBR).




                                                                                                        445
Mahler, D. Luke (University of California, Davis); Castañeda, María del Rosario (Museum of Comparative
Zoology, Cambridge, MA, United States)

A new organization dedicated to the conservation of Anolis lizards: The Anoline Lizard Specialist
Group (IUCN SSC)

We present a new IUCN SSC specialist group dedicated to the conservation of anoles: the Anoline Lizard
Specialist Group (ALSG). For years, the study of Anolis lizards has thrived on many fronts of research,
from genomics to ecology to macroevolution. Despite this, there have been very few coordinated efforts
to conserve anoles during this time, and the conservation status of the world‘s nearly 400 species of
anoles is largely unknown. What is known, however, is that many species of anoles are threatened by a
variety of factors, including habitat destruction, climate change, commercial trade, and threats from
invasive species. Despite this, almost none are afforded international protection. In a recent conservation
assessment project that included 54 randomly sampled anole species, 43% were found to be threatened
according to IUCN Red List criteria, suggesting that many anole species and populations are declining
(Bohm et al., in review, Biological Conservation). The ALSG aims to engage the vibrant community of
anole biologists in applied conservation activities. Our first task as a specialist group will be to assess
the conservation status of all species of anoles that have not previously been assessed. Building on this
knowledge, the ALSG will seek to identify specific threats to Anolis lizards, and will develop, through
international collaboration, plans to conserve those species that are most severely threatened.



Mahler, D. Luke (University of California, Davis); Lambert, Shea M. (Stony Brook University, Stony
Brook, NY, United States); Geneva, Anthony J. (University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, United States);
Hedges, S. Blair (Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, United States); Losos, Jonathan B.
(Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States); Glor, Richard E. (University of Rochester,
Rochester, NY, United States)

Discovery of a short-limbed giant Anolis from Hispaniola supports a deterministic model of island
evolution and community assembly

We report the discovery of a species of giant anole from Hispaniola that provides new evidence for
determinism in the evolution and assembly of Caribbean island Anolis faunas. The new species is most
closely related to Hispaniolan ―crown-giant‖ ecomorph anoles ( Anolis ricordii clade). However, it is
ecomorphologically most similar to Cuban ―giant twig‖ anoles of the Chamaeleolis clade: both are very
large anoles with short limbs and a short tail that tend to utilize relatively narrow perches in cluttered
habitats this discovery adds a new dimension to the phenomenon of among-island ecomorph matching
that characterizes Greater Antillean anole faunas. In addition, phylogenetic comparative analyses suggest
that key aspects of the similarity of Hispaniolan and Cuban ―giant twig‖ anoles may be the product of
evolutionary convergence. Being restricted to a narrow band of threatened mid-elevation forest near the
border of the Dominican Republic and Haiti, this new species should be considered critically endangered.



Mahony, Michael (The University of Newcastle);

Evidence of extensive reticulate evolution between diploid and tetreploid lineages in the
Australian Desert Burrowing Frogs of the genus Neobatrachus

Four of the nine species of the Australian desert burrowing frog of the genus Neobatrachus are bisexual
tetraploids (4n=48) the remainder are bisexual diploids (2n=24). Apart from differences in chromosome



                                                                                                       446
number four of the diploid and two of the tetraploid species have very similar but not identical karyotypes
based on chromosome morphology, nucleolar organizer region (NOR) location and C-banding. One
diploid and two tetraploid species have distinctive and unique NOR locations. The tetraploids are
distributed in the central desert regions of Australia while the diploids occur peripherally in semi-arid and
Mediterranean climate zones to the west, southwest and southeast of Australia. Extensive geographic
overlap of ranges between several of the diploid and one tetraploid occur in the southwest but in other
regions the distributions are broadly allopatric with zones of parapatry. At parapatric zones hybridization
occurs between diploid and tetraploid specie, and in most cases the resultant triploid (3n) hybrids grow to
maturity with secondary sexual features but show high levels of infertility resulting from imbalances at first
meiosis. Evidence of partial fertility comes from the detection of backcross pentaploid (5n) and hexaploid
(6n) individuals. One zone of tetraploid x tetraploid hybridization was also detected, and hybrids were
chromosomally balanced (4n) but showed a range of developmental/somatic abnormalities, with evidence
of F2 or backcrossing between hybrids and the parental species based on the number of distinctive NOR
markers. Genetic studies (allozymes and mtDNA sequencing) provide evidence that extensive reticulate
evolution occurs between the diploid and polyploid species with genes occurring often well removed from
zones of parapatry within this complex.



Makhubo, Buyisile (University of Stellenbosch); Tolley, Krystal (South Afircan National Biodiversity
Institute, Cape Town, South Africa); Bates, Michael (National Museum, Bloemfontein, South Africa)

Phylogenetic relationships among members of the Afroedura nivaria species complex in South
Africa

The Afroedura nivaria complex is one of six recognized species complexes within the southern African
endemic gecko genus, Afroedura. The A. nivaria complex is a morphologically conservative group of
medium-sized geckos endemic to South Africa. They are unevenly distributed in the Eastern Cape, Free
State and KwaZulu-Natal provinces. The complex currently comprises five described species. These
nocturnal and rupicolous geckos shelter in narrow rock crevices on outcrops. The status of these species
has not yet been confirmed using molecular methods and it is unknown whether or not additional lineages
are present on isolated outcrops. We investigated the hypothesis that endemics with a narrow distribution
(i.e., A. amatolica and A. tembulica) are single valid species, but that isolated populations in the
widespread species (A. nivaria, A. karroica and A. halli) demonstrate genetic variation at the species
level. To investigate the evolutionary relationships among these taxa, fragments of two mitochondrial
genes (16S and ND4) and one nuclear marker (KIAA) were sequenced and analysed using Bayesian
inference, maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood. All analyses strongly supported the genetic
distinctiveness of known species. However, the A. nivaria complex is not monophyletic, with some
lineages clustering within the other species complexes. The phylogeny also shows some structuring at
the species level within the three widespread species, suggesting the presence of cryptic species. In
addition, one narrow endemic (A. amatolica) also showed two distinct lineages. These findings suggest
the existence of five (up to seven) additional cryptic lineages.




                                                                                                          447
Mali, Ivana (Texas State University); Schwinning, Susan; Forstner, Michael (Texas State University,
Canada)

Toward Sustainable Worldwide Utilization of Chelonians

The commercial harvest of long-lived species with slow intrinsic population growth rates from the wild
almost always leads to overexploitation and the eventual loss of an industry unless strong and biologically
effective regulation is put in place. Due to recent and historical overexploitation without regard for
sustainability, many living chelonians of the world are now in perilous decline. The most striking recent
examples come from Asia, where increasing demand for turtles in food markets has led to the collapse of
a continental turtle fauna. Despite the collapse of the wild turtle stocks across Asia, the demand for turtles
in Asian turtle markets has remained strong. This is not an Asian continental issue, however, as the
consequences of the trade have a planetary scope. For example, the U.S. and the state of Texas, in
particular, had become a leading turtle exporter to supply the demands no longer served by native
species in Asia. Recent studies show that declines in turtle abundances in Texas are likely due to
overexploitation. As a response, current commercial harvest regulations of turtles in Texas allow the
harvest of three freshwater turtle species to occur only on privately owned land or water. Based on simple
matrix population model of red-eared sliders (Trachemys scripta elegans), we show the level of
vulnerability of turtles to additive mortality. We also provide further suggestions of how sustainability of
this unique evolutionary group can be achieved by comparing it with very successful strategies that have
been used in delisting and even achieving sustainable harvest of American alligator (Alligator
mississippiensis). We compare the cases of the American alligator and the red-eared slider to examine
the circumstances under which farming has provided a sustainable alternative to harvest from the wild.
We used matrix models of turtle and alligator growth in the wild and in captivity to estimate population
growth rates and the potential for financial gains from selling animals. By linking life histories,
farming/ranching, and economic aspect of such in these two taxa, we discuss future guidelines to be
followed in order to successfully utilize turtles as game animals worldwide.



Mandelman, John (New England Aquarium); Cicia, Angela; Coutre, Karson (University of New England,
Canada); Driggers, William; Ingram, Walter (NOAA (National Marine Fisheries Service), Canada);
Sulikowski, James (University of New England, Canada)

The survival of rajids discarded in western Northwest Atlantic commercial otter-trawling
operations

Due primarily to regulatory factors, skates from the family Rajidae are routinely discarded as bycatch
during otter-trawl commercial operations in the Northwest Atlantic Ocean, the gear type responsible for
the highest annual capture and discard biomass of skates in this region. Thus, post-release survival has a
profound impact on the overall fishing mortality, stock status and management of this group. However,
despite a presumed species-specific range in tolerance to the rigors of trawl capture and handling and
mounting management and conservation concern, few studies have investigated the post-trawl capture
viability/condition or short-term (delayed) mortality among skates indigenous to the Northwest Atlantic,
and never under true commercial conditions in the Gulf of Maine. We investigated the viability/condition
and short-term (72 hour) delayed survival of a mix of prohibited ( Amblyraja radiata ; Malacoraja Senta )
and target ( Leucoraja ocellata ; Leucoraja erinacea ) skate species subsequent to capture by otter-trawl
across a variety of capture conditions. Of the 1,288 skates evaluated, negligible immediate mortality was
observed in any species following capture, even in relation to the most heavily packed and/or prolonged
trawls. Aside from M. Senta (41%), delayed survival rates by species were high overall (82-92%), with
L. ocellata (92%) the most resilient species. Although factors varied by species, logistic regression



                                                                                                          448
modeling revealed trawl duration as the most universal predictor of survival. The overt viability/condition
of skates at the time of capture was also a strong predictor of delayed survival. Although in general
Northwest Atlantic skates appear more resilient to trawl capture and handling than previously estimated,
species differences must be accounted for when managing this group.



Mandrak, Nick (Fisheries and Oceans Canada);

Updating the Freshwater Fishes of Canada

The Freshwater Fishes of Canada by Scott and Crossman is considered to be the definitive book on
the Canadian freshwater fish fauna. The composition and distribution of the fish fauna has changed
considerably since the publication of Freshwater Fishes of Canada in 1973. There are 26 species, not
included in the 1973 book, now established in Canada as a result of new introductions, changing
taxonomy, and additional field surveys. The additional field surveys and more recently published regional
books have improved our knowledge of the distributions of all freshwater fishes in Canada. Revising the
Freshwater Fishes of Canada in its entirety is a daunting task. Rather than revise it in a single volume, a
supplement, Freshwater Fishes of Canada New to the Fauna Since 1973 , will include full species
accounts in the same format as the original book for the 26 species established since 1973. A second
supplement, An Atlas of the Freshwater Fishes of Canada Annotated with an Identification Key , will
include update distribution maps and an illustrated identification key for all freshwater fishes in Canada.
There are insufficient data to produce dot distributions maps; therefore, shaded distribution maps based
on tertiary watersheds (n=966) will be compiled based on known records and the expert opinion of
regional experts. It is expected that the two volumes will be published in 2013.



Manenti, Raoul (Università degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Biologia); Pennati, Roberta
(Dipartimento di Biologia, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy); Santo, Nadia (Centro
Interdipartimentale di Microscopia Avanzata - Cima, Milano, Italy); Ficetola, Gentile Francesco
(Dipartimento di Scienze dell¿Ambiente e del Territorio, Milano, Italy)

Environmental vs social: which processes affect spatial segregation in cave salamanders:? An
analysis with Hydromantes strinatii

The identification of processes determining the distribution of organisms is a major challenge of spatial
ecology. Two types of processes have been proposed to explain patterns of spatial segregation, at the
intraspecific level: the social and the habitat segregation hypotheses. European cave salamanders
(genus Hydromantes) are ideal organisms for the study of spatial segregation. Cave salamanders are not
obligate cave-dwellers but during warm seasons they retreat to underground environments where they
find a more suitable microclimate. Previous studies observed spatial segregation between age classes of
cave salamanders, with juveniles living more close to the cave entrance, but the processes determining
segregation have not been assessed. We tested the causes of distinct distribution patterns in H. strinatii.
In 11 natural caves we recorded the location and age class of all salamanders observed. Each cave was
subdivided in 3-m longitudinal sectors; in each sector we measured the major determinants of
salamander distribution in underground environments (temperature, humidity, illuminance and spider
abundance). We used generalized mixed models to assess spatial segregation between salamander age
classes, and to test if segregation was explained by social processes (e.g., competition, cannibalism) or
by differences in habitat selection. We found significant segregation between age classes, juveniles being
associated to the more external sectors. Multiple environmental features varied along caves. Juveniles



                                                                                                        449
were associated to sectors with high spider abundance, while adults were associated with scarce
invertebrates and lower temperature. When the effect of environmental features was taken into account,
the relationship between juveniles and adults was not negative. This suggests that segregation was
mostly determined by different habitat preferences between age classes. Juveniles require more food
than adults, and probably select external sectors because of the higher prey availability. However,
external sectors also have more predators and instable microclimate. Age classes probably have different
risk-taking strategies between age classes. For juveniles, accessing to abundant food is necessary for
growth and development, therefore they choose superficial sectors, even if this may be risky. Conversely,
after attaining sexual maturity, adults may trade off food availability in favour of safe areas with stable
micro-climate.



Mao, Jean-Jay (Dept. of Forestry & Natural Resources, National Ilan University, Taiwan); Huang, Ming-
Huei (Dept. of Forestry & Natural Resources, National Ilan University, Taiwan, Canada)

A study on evaporative water loss of semi-aquatic snakes in Taiwan

This study was based on the assumption that semi-aquatic snakes, live in habitats with sufficient water,
so their water-loss prevention mechanism will be lower than that of terrestrial snakes under the same
temperature and moisture control conditions. It was also hypothesized that the different microhabitat
conditions (e.g. water depth) utilized by each semi-aquatic snake species, may also indicate their water
requirement and aquatic habitat adaptation tendencies, which will be exhibited by a low to high water
evaporative loss gradient.         Six semi-aquatic snakes (Amphiesma stolatum, Enhydris chinensis,
Enhydris plumbea, Sinonatrix annularis, Sinonatrix percarinata, and Xenochrophis piscator ), two
terrestrial snakes ( Dinodon rufozonatum rufoznatum, and Pseudoxenodon stejnegeri stejnegeri ) of
Taiwan, and two exotic aquatic snakes (Acrochordus javanicus, and Erpeton tentaculatum), were utilized
as test subjects in this study to determine whether ecotype, microhabitats utilization, body size, or
phylogeny were the major factors that affected the water evaporative ratio. All study snakes were placed
into a controlled environment with humidity of 50% and temperature of 25℃, and their body masses were
recorded as it changed every hour to examine the water evaporative loss ratio. The study revealed that
the evaporative water loss of E. chinensis, S. annularis , S. percarinata were higher than that of other
experimental snakes, and showed a correlation between the aquatic tendency and microhabitat
distribution gradient of water depth. The gradients of evaporative water-loss ratio from the higher group
(deep water depth habitat species) to the lowers (the ecotone from water to land habitat) were E.
chinensis, S. annularis, S. percarinata, E. plumbea, X. piscator, and A. stolatum in that order . The
evaporative water-loss of the aquatic snake, A. javanicus , was noticeably higher than that of the other
semi-aquatic snakes, but the ratio of E. tentaculatum was located at intermediately between X. piscator
and A. stolatum . The evaporative water-loss ratios were negatively correlated to body mass in the ten
study snakes, which means the heavier individuals experienced lower water loss rates. The body surface
area showed a negative correlation to the water-loss ratio of E. chinensis , E. plumbea , E.
tentaculatum, S. annularis , and X. piscator , but not for that of S. percarinata .




                                                                                                       450
Mao, Jean-Jay (Dept. of Forestry & Natural Resources, National Ilan University, Taiwan); Fang, Suei-
Cyuan (Dept. of Forestry & Natural Resources, National Ilan University, Taiwan, Canada)

The influence of water level fluctuations on the Sinonatrix percarinata population in Song-Lo
Lake, Taiwan

This study mainly utilized a mark-recaptures method and focused on the population ecology of Sinonatrix
percarinata in Song-Lo Lake, northeastern Taiwan. The lake is isolate, with an intermittent watershed.
Because the floor of the lake is pervious, and rainfall is the only source of incoming water, the water level
of the lake is highly dynamic. Sinonatrix percarinata is a semi-aquatic snake, and its population depends
on the water sources changes, so the population in this locality was expected to face severe fluctuating
environments (water area about 0.5 to 4.2 ha.) in the lake region. Therefore, the study focused on the
microhabitat utilization, prey resources, and predation stress of S. percarinata at different water levels.
The hypotheses that the lower water level would increase intraspecies competition, predation risk, and
reduce the prey resources, and may be evident in S. percarinata population conditions were also tested.


The study results showed that S. percarinata selected different microhabitats within water level
fluctuations. Significant positive correlations between the water level, the depth at which the snakes are
encountered, and grass cover ratio were noted, and negative correlations with the distance to the
shoreline, and the stone and mud cover ratios were also found. In this study S. percarinata primarily
preyed on frogs ( Babina adenopleura ; 65%; n=26) and tadpoles (18%; n=26). Among months, there was
a negative correlation between the body conditions of the snakes and the relative abundance of S.
percarinata and B. percarinata respectively, and there was a positive correlation with the injury ratio of
S. percarinata . In addition, the rainfall pattern affected anuran abundance and reduced the prey
abundance, and the weather conditions thus affected snakes that were in poor body conditions, and/or
were reproducing, and the injury ratio increased during in dryer periods.

This study also found that the leech ( Hirudo nipponia ) parasitize S. percarinata , and can cause
mortality. To examine the effects of H. nipponia on S. percarinata , the leeches were sampled, as part
of a brief study, with Ortmann's funnel traps. The study found that H. nipponia are attracted by S.
percarinata , and that the numbers of H. nipponia were positively correlated with the water temperature,
and negatively correlated with the water level. Therefore, based on the results of this study, it is believed
that H. nipponia is probably an important biotic factor that influences S. percarinata populations in
constant lower water level conditions.



Marcangeli, April (Towson University); Gasparich, Gail (Towson University, Towson, MD, United States);
Snodgrass, Joel (Towson University, Towson, United States)

The Impacts of Urbanization and Spatial Scale on Genetic Diversity of Blacknose Dace
(Rhinichthys atratulus) Populations

Contemporary processes and environmental variation can be dominant forces that act on genetic
variation of fishes in freshwater stream systems. The interaction among movement of individuals, spatial
connectivity, and unidirectional flow of water in dendritic streams can determine the amount of gene flow
along and among catchments and influence population persistence. In urbanized catchments, increased
amounts of impervious surface cover surrounding urban streams results in hydrological changes that
ultimately influence connectivity, movement, and effective population sizes. However, information is
scarce regarding the effects of hydrological changes in urban streams on genetic diversity of freshwater



                                                                                                         451
fishes. We utilized microsatellites to compare genetic population structure of a headwater species,
Rhinichthys atratulus, between two urban and two rural stream systems with similar dendritic structure to
assess the effects of urbanization. Additionally, we addressed the matter of spatial connectivity within
stream networks by examining the amount of differentiation and structuring in populations separated by
different spatial scales nested within each watershed. Preliminary findings indicate higher levels of
pairwise fixation indices between two populations in different watersheds (Fst = 0.120) than two
populations in the same watershed that are separated by less than seven kilometers (Fst = 0.057).
Analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA) revealed that 31% of the molecular variance was explained by
among-population variation from populations in different watersheds, while 14% of the molecular variance
was explained by among-population variation from populations in the same watershed. Utilizing multiple
spatial scales can improve our understanding of how urbanization may be impacting genetic diversity of
fishes and can provide valuable insight into the evolutionary potential of populations in urban areas.



Marchand, Rheana (Erell Institute/Salish Kootenai College);

Microhabitat analysis of Chondrodactylus turneri

I characterized the habitat use and activity patterns of adult male, adult female, and juvenile
Chondrodactylus turneri , a common nocturnal gecko endemic to southern Africa, during December-
January 2011-2012 in the Namib-Naukluft National Park, Namibia.          I assessed their activity periods
relative to time of night and the lunar cycle, measured characteristics of habitable rocks, determined
microhabitat use by adult and juvenile geckos, and examined measurement data for size differences
among males, females, and juveniles. Of the 120 lizards that were captured and measured, 40 were
adults (snout-to-vent length (SVL) = 78.8 ± 0.6 mm) and 80 were juveniles (SVL = 41.9 ± 0.6 mm).
There was no sexual dimorphism in body length (SVL) between adult males and females, but adults did
differ in body proportions. Head width, but not head length, was significantly associated with snout-vent
length in adult males. The opposite trend occurred among adult females: head length, but not head width
was significantly correlated with snout-vent length. Rocks were considered habitable if they were at least
0.5 m wide and 0.5 m long and had at least 1 crevice that was 15 X 5 cm. Lizards were captured by hand
on habitable rocks significantly more often than on uninhabitable rocks. Juveniles were captured in the
open 84% of the time, but adults were captured equally often in the open and in crevices. Adult males
and adult females did not differ in their capture locations.      Higher rocks with more crevices were
preferred by geckoes; together, rock height and number of crevices accounted for 31.8% of the variation
in gecko captures.      Proximity to other rocks did not explain any of the variation in lizards occupying
rocks.     More detailed observations on lizard movement patterns and the characteristics of lizards co-
occurring will be provided.



Maritz, Bryan (University of the Witwatersrand); Alexander, Graham (University of the Wiwtaersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa)

Striking it rich: why ambush predators eat large meals?

Snakes that ambush prey are known to consume relatively enormous meals. While the costs associated
with consuming large meals have been investigated, few studies have attempted to quantify the relative
advantages of consuming very large meals, primarily because the frequency with which such prey items
are encountered by wild snakes remains unknown. We quantified prey availability and feeding
preferences for the African viperid Bitis schneideri in order to understand the advantages of consuming



                                                                                                      452
very large meals. We used captures from 4185 pitfall trap-nights to quantify the prey community available
to ambushing snakes. Additionally, we used observations of feeding by wild snakes, and examined the
stomach contents of road-killed snakes to quantify the relative abundance of prey types in the diet of B.
schneideri . Finally we used an individual-based modeling approach to estimate the relative energetic
advantages of the capacity to consume very large meals (largest 5% of prey items in the prey
community). We found that the prey community at my study site was dominated by lizards, particularly
Meroles knoxii , and that community structure did not vary significantly between seasons. Moreover we
found a strong, positive correlation between the relative abundance of prey types in my traps, and in the
diet of B. schneideri , suggesting that they are generalist feeders that consume prey types proportionally
to the rate at which those prey types are encountered. We found that the distribution of availability of
prey, and thus energy, was right-skewed, and that very large meals were encountered infrequently by
ambushing snakes. However, my modeling suggests that even when snakes only very rarely encountered
large meals, the ability to consume those meals increased energy intake by 1.3 times. We propose that
this represents a strong selective force, especially given the strong relationship between energy intake
and reproductive output in snakes.



Markle, Tricia (University of Minnesota); Kozak, Kenneth (University of Minnesota, Canada)

Thermal acclimation, range size variation, and the fate of thermal specialists under climate
change: a test case in plethodontid salamanders

Thermal acclimation (rapid physiological adjustment in a variable environment) may enable a species to
occupy a broader range of thermal conditions, and is predicted to be an important factor influencing
species‘ distributions. Following predictions of the climate variability hypothesis, it is anticipated that
species with greater latitudinal extents should exhibit greater thermal acclimation of metabolism than
species with restricted geographic ranges. We tested for a relationship between latitudinal extent and
acclimation ability by comparing the basal metabolic rates (BMR) of 20 salamander species acclimated to
three different temperatures (6.5°C, 14.5°C, and 22.5°C). For each acclimation temperature, BMR was
measured at three experimental temperatures (5°C, 15°C, and 25°C). Our results suggest that species
with broad vs. narrow latitudinal ranges do not have significantly different acclimation capacities.
However, some narrow-ranging montane species exhibit a significant reduction in BMR following
exposure to the highest acclimation temperature. While negative compensation of BMR in response to
high temperature has traditionally been viewed as an adaptation to survive through short-term suboptimal
conditions, recent work suggests that such a response may also be a sign of physiological stress
(metabolic depression). If so, such species may be at increased risk of population decline and local
extinction in the face of rapid climate warming.



Marques, Ricardo (Centro de Ecologia e Conservação Animal ¿ ECOA, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Católica do Salvador); Santos Tinôco, Moacir; Colombini Browne-Ribeiro, Henrique (Centro
de Ecologia e Conservação Animal ¿ ECOA, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Católica do
Salvador, Salvador, Brazil)

Colonizing recent lands: Snakes distribution at the Restinga on the north coast of Bahia, Brazil

The Restinga ecosystem consists of coastal sand dunes habitats within the Atlantic rainforest biome,
originated from the Quaternary period through marine transgressions and regressions, depositing
different sand layers on the continental newly formed terraces. This edaphic difference resulted in




                                                                                                       453
different types of vegetation colonization, providing four different habitat types: Beach vegetation
(herbaceous vegetation and many coconut trees), Humid zone (flooded land with herbaceous vegetation),
Shrub vegetation (numerous bushes separated by sandy soil) and Restinga dry forest (arboreal
vegetation not dense).This heterogeneity provides several niches for reptiles, which are well-adapted to
low water availability. Despites the aforementioned issues, Restinga‘s herpetofauna is described owning
low endemism and knowing this, we ask: Where do these species come from? From the main biome or
others surrounding formations? The aim of this study was to discuss the different snakes‘ species
assemblages found in the northern coast of Bahia‘s Restinga ecosystem and their probable origins. The
study was conducted on eight sites along 220 km northern coast of Bahia, within Restinga habitats and
followingthe permit SISBIO Nº 23355-1 - 04/2013. Surveys were conducted from June/2010 to
August/2011 every two months. Visual encounter survey and incidental encounter were used as sample
techniques. Each site was surveyed for one day during two hours by two surveyors, totalizing 1.024 h of
sample effort. Along 16 months, 75 snakes were recorded in 17 species. Among these species, 41% of
them are found on Atlantic rainforest, Cerrado and Caatinga biome. Other species as Micrurus ibiboboca
is found on Caatinga and Atlantic rainforest biome. Cerrado and Caatinga owns records of Liophis
almadensis, Helicops leopardinus, Philodryas nattereri and Micrurus lemniscatus, while Eunectes
murinus, Philodryas patagoniensis and Bothrops leucurus are recorded to Cerrado biome and forested
environments within Atlantic rainforest. Species as Bothropoides jararaca apparently is better distributed
in Atlantic rainforest biome, despites only one record to Bahian Cerrado while Pseustes sulphureus
occurs in Atlantic rainforest and Amazonian biome, evidencing forested environments preference. These
results show that Restinga‘s colonization may have occurred after sea regression by these species from
three different surrounding biomes, this could also justify its low species endemism.



Márquez, Roberto (Universidad de Los Andes); Arenas, Lina María (Universidad de Los Andes, Bogotá,
Columbia); Escovar, Tatiana (Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Columbia); Amézquita, Adolfo
(Universidad de Los Andes, Bogotá, Columbia)

Two means to an end? Evolution of the aposematic syndrome in poison-dart frogs of the genus
Phyllobates

Aposematic animals reduce predation risk by training predators to associate conspicuous, usually colour,
signals with unpalatability or toxicity. Aposematism usually involves a whole evolutionary syndrome of
phenotypically correlated traits, allegedly body size and aerobic capacity. Such correlations have been
often estimated across species and genera, at a deep phylogenetic level. To better understand the very
origin of such correlations we (1) built a phylogenetic hypothesis based on more than 2000 bp from both
nuclear and mitochondrial markers and (2) reconstructed the evolutionary changes in coloration, toxicity
and body size in a relatively small clade, the hypertoxic frogs in the genus Phyllobates. W e found strong
evidence for parallel evolution of conspicuous yellow coloration and large body size, but not in
hypertoxicity. The molecular and coloration data also suggest hybridization between two species. The
putative hybrids are, however, not intermediate in toxicity. We discuss the relative role of hybridization, as
well as directional and disruptive selection in promoting phenotypic covariation in this group.




                                                                                                          454
Marquez-Farias, J Fernando (Facultad de Ciencias del Mar. Universidad Autonoma de Sinaloa.
Mexico); Smith, Wade (Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA., Canada); Rodríguez López, Jorge
E; Lara-Mendoza, Raul E. (Facultad de Ciencias del Mar. Universidad Autónoma de Sinaloa. Mexico,
Canada)

Growth and migration of Scalloped Hammerhead Shark Sphyrna lewini from the Nursery in the
Southern Gulf of California, México

In the absence of parental care, some species shark used shallow areas for the birth of their offspring. In
these areas, the newborn will find food and protection against predation. The cohort of sharks that born in
a given season does not migrate from the breeding area until they achieve a certain size. However, prior
to migration, the cohort of newborns must survive to birth and stay alive in the nursery area. We
investigated the hammerhead sharks in the coastal zone of southern Sinaloa monitoring the artisanal
shark fishery. Based on observations of the umbilical wound condition was possible to determine the
state of development which was encoded in open (0= neonate) and closed (1= juvenile). Using a binary
logistic regression, we determined the proportion of neonates (y) that survive to birth as function of length
(x). The value of L50% of the logistic function represents when half the cohort survived the birth event
given the healed wounds. We note that sharks are born around 43 cm TL in late May and reach L50% =
53 cm TL in few weeks. The growth of juveniles continues until February of the following year. At 83 cm
TL, half the cohort born in the season has migrated from the nursery area. We discuss the sources of
natural mortality for age-0 and the implications of directed fishing in nursery grounds.



Marshall, Jonathon (Weber State UNiversity);

Perspectives on speciation research and the importance of communicating our results with a
wider audience

Speciation can be driven by a diverse array of evolutionary processes and mechanisms. These
processes, responsible for the separation of independent evolutionary lineages, can be complex and are
usually not mutually exclusive in any biological system. The multifaceted nature of speciation research
makes it difficult to understand for the non-scientist. However, with the ever-increasing attack on
evolution from religiously and politically motivated detractors makes an understanding of the speciation
process vital for its public defense. Here, I suggest several ways we as scientists might better accomplish
this task.



Marshall, Jonathon (Weber State UNiversity); Sites, Jack (Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, United
States); Ramírez-Bautista, Aurelio (Universidad Autónoma de Estado de Hidalgo, Pachuca, Mexico);
Sinervo, Barry; Bastiaans, Elizabeth (University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, United States);
Schwabb, Tyson (Weber State University, Ogden, UT, United States)

The fog of species boundaries in the Sceloporus grammicus lizard species complex of México.

Much research has been done with aim of identifying species boundaries in the Sceloporus grammicus
species complex. This has not been an easy task. Over the last 40 years morphological and ecological
data have been compared, allozymes and karyotypes scored, restriction fragment length digests
analyzed, and geographical pattern assessed and still no overwhelming consensus on clear species
boundaries has emerged. This integrative approach to species delimitation has generated important
insights into hybrid zone dynamics, chromosome evolution, relative merit and applicability of various



                                                                                                         455
species delimitation methods, and speciation in this species complex but in the end only a nebulous
picture of boundaries has resulted. To date, our best estimate at species boundaries finds four
hypothesized evolutionary lineage clusters. These clusters segregate out into groups of individual or
combined chromosome races. In this study, we add DNA sequence and environmental data to our
assessment of species boundaries. Four hundred and twenty-five individual tail samples were collected
from 85 localities across central México. The fast evolving mtDNA gene CytB was sequenced for all 429
individuals. The slower evolving 12S mtDNA gene and the nuclear gene MYH2 were then sequenced for
a subset of these individuals and locality data used to test ecological exchangeability using ecological
niche models. Analysis of DNA and ecological data to some extent supports previous delimitation but
also underscores the challenges of identifying distinct boundaries between recently evolved lineages.



Marsigliano, Kyra (University of South Carolina); Roberts, Mark (University of South Carolina, Canada);
Lampkin, John; Muhling, Barbara (NOAA/NMFS/SEFSC Miami, Canada); Ingram, Walter
(NOAA/NMFS/SEFSC Pascagoula, Canada); Quattro, Joseph (University of South Carolina, Canada)

Building A DNA Barcoding Database for Atlantic Billfishes

Effective management of the world‘s important fisheries hinges on having appropriate data about the
structure and status of individual stocks.     Stocks of Atlantic billfish, a collective term applied to two
families of large, highly migratory, predaceous fish with a large, sword-like upper rostrum, are negatively
impacted by recreational and commercial fisheries. In an effort to manage these species, larval density
is oftentimes used as a proxy for reproductive output, and therefore larval counts and geographical
locations are used in the formulation of comprehensive management strategies.           Unfortunately, visual
identification of larval billfish, frequently 2-6 mm in length, is often impractical and imprecise.
Employment of a genetic barcode – a means for identifying larval individuals to species based on short
DNA sequences – could circumvent this issue.         We have developed a genetic barcode for billfishes
based on sequences of the mitochondrial ATCD locus.         This locus has been useful for identification of
larval tunas and, in our experience, provides more accurate species identification among closely related
taxa. The         ATCD locus was amplified with universal primer sets, sequences aligned, and
unambiguously changing DNA differences between taxa identified using the computer program CAOS.
Individual unknown larval samples were compared to reference sequences from adult specimens
collected in cooperation with NOAA and NMFS and reliably assigned to species. We discuss the results
of these comparisons and the potential for visual misidentification of certain species pairs.



Martin, Jennifer (Virginia Institute of Marine Science);

Comparative ontogeny of the ink related structures in the families Radiicephalidae and
Lophotidae (Acanthomorpha, Lampridiformes)

The inkfishes, a monophyletic group containing two families, the monotypic Radiicephalidae and
Lophotidae, consisting of two genera ( Lophotus , Eumecichthys ), are rare, meso/bathypelagic fishes
distributed in all oceans except polar seas. One synapomorphy of the group is the presence of an ink
gland, which is analogous to the cephalopod ink sac. This unpaired, tubular organ overlies the hindgut
and discharges a dark, ink-like fluid into the cloaca, presumably as a fright-response. This structure is
unique to these three genera as no comparable structure exists among teleost fishes. However, beyond
the gross anatomical level, little is known regarding ink gland structure and development due to the rarity
and subsequent misidentification of these fishes, particularly during the early-life history stages.



                                                                                                         456
Undoubtedly present and functional in adults, examination of early-life stage specimens reveals the early
appearance of the ink gland in larval      Radiicephalus (18mm SL),         Lophotus    (23mm SL) and
Eumecichthys (32mm SL). New observations on the ontogeny and anatomy of this unique structure will
be compared across genera and phylogenetic implications will be discussed.



Martins, Marcio (Instituto de Biociencias, Universidade de Sao Paulo); Moraes, Renato (Instituto de
Biociencias, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Canada); Sawaya, Ricardo (Universidade Federal de Sao
Paulo, Canada); Marques, Otavio (Instituto Butantan, Canada)

Altitudinal variation in diet and morphology of Bothrops jararaca populations (Serpentes,
Viperidae) in southeastern Brazil

Widely distributed snakes are exposed to different environmental conditions throughout their ranges, what
can affect local prey availability. Thus, these species may present geographic variation in the types
and/or sizes of prey consumed, and perhaps differences in morphological characters associated to
feeding. We explore these questions using Bothrops jararaca populations from coastal and adjacent
mid-elevation sites ( 450-950 m asl) in southeastern Brazil. Bothrops jararaca is a diet generalist that
shows ontogenetic change in prey types and sizes: juveniles eat mostly frogs and lizards (relatively small
prey), whereas adults eat mainly small mammals (relatively large prey). For this study, we obtained 330
individual prey from over 900 museum specimens collected in the State of São Paulo. We considered
juveniles those individuals with SVL smaller than that of the smallest mature individual. Juveniles from
coastal sites consumed endothermic prey in significantly lower frequency than juveniles from mid-
elevation sites. This variation may reflect the fact that frogs are available throughout the year at the coast
whereas they show a marked seasonal variation in availability at mid-elevation sites. Adults from mid-
elevation and coastal sites did not differ in the frequency of different prey types in the diet. However,
snakes from mid-elevation sites consumed relatively larger prey and showed relatively larger heads and
larger and stouter bodies than those from the coast. These morphological differences may reflect
differences in the size of prey consumed, that would result from different prey availability (in size and
types) at distinct altitudes. Suggestively, among lanceheads of the genus Bothrops , species which feed
more frequently on large endothermic prey tend to have larger headand to be larger and stouter. Our
results indicate that even within a relatively small spatial scale, variation in prey availability mediated by
climatic conditions could be responsible for interpopulational variation in snake diet and morphology.



Martins, Marcio (Instituto de Biociencias, Universidade de Sao Paulo); Gaiarsa, Marilia; Alencar, Laura
(Instituto de Biociencias, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Canada)

Interannual stability in the abundance of stream frogs in the Atlantic Forest of Brazil

Three species of stream frogs, Hylodes asper , H. phyllodes , and Cycloramphus boraceiensis , are
sympatric and usually syntopic in the Atlantic Forest of southeastern Brazil (0-800 m asl). Population
declines and/or local extinctions of these species occurred at two montane sites, although there are no
additional records of decline. Characterizing temporal variation in these species is crucial for detecting
variations caused by diseases or other human-induced factors. Here we describe temporal variation in
the abundance of these three species in four streams (hereafter S1-S4) distributed along 5 km of the
coast of São Paulo State, southeastern Brazil. From January 2007 to December 2010 we monthly
sampled one trasect (100-120 m long) in each stream. We searched for frogs while walking slowly
upstream, during daytime and at night. Both active and inactive frogs were recorded. We compared



                                                                                                          457
encounter rates (frogs/100 m) among years with one way ANOVA and seasons (dry/wet) with a Student's
t-test. We gathered 5665 observations of individuals of the three species studied: 2513 of C.
boraceiensis , 2096 of H. asper , and 1056 of H.phyllodes . Hylodes phyllodes occurred in all four
streams, whereas H. asper and C. boraceiensis occurred only in S1, S2, and S4. The average
encounter rate of H. asper was 14.1±5.9 frogs/100 m (9.8-19.1 frogs/100 m), of H. phyllodes 5.2±2.3
frogs/100 m (2.2-10.5 frogs/100 m), and of C. boraceiensis 14.5±4.4 frogs/100 m (6.1-24.3 frogs/100
m). Monthly encounter rates (streams combined and streams not used excluded) were not significantly
different among years in any of the species studied. Encounter rates were significantly higher in the wet
season (October to March) than in the dry season (April to September) for H. asper and C. boraceiensis
, whereas in H. phyllodes there was no difference between seasons. Most of the seasonal variation
found for H. asper and C. boraceiensis may reflect the higher juvenile recruitment in the wet season in
both species. Although we found strong evidence that the populations studied are infected by Bd (five
dying animals with Bd infection symptoms in four years), our results indicate that these populations are
stable. Occasional observations of these same populations in 2001 (S1 only) and 2006 (all four streams),
indicate that they were similarly abundant by then; thus, these populations may have been stable
throughout the 2000s.



Mason, Robert (Oregon State University);

Chemical ecology of Gartersnakes: Pheromone receptors to behavior

We study the evolution of chemical communication systems in snakes by examining both the diversity of
chemical signals and the underlying physiological mechanisms mediating their production, expression,
and reception. Reproduction in snakes is dependent on the production and perception of sex
pheromones. Pheromones are thought to be potent reproductive isolating mechanisms.

One of the few vertebrate pheromones isolated, characterized, and synthesized is the sex pheromone of
the Red-sided Garter Snake, Thamnophis sirtalis parietalis . When males encounter a female expressing
the pheromone, they exhibit stereotyped courtship behaviors including chin-rubbing and rapid tongue-
flicks. We now know that with a single tongue-flick, a male garter snake can determine not only whether
another snake is a member of its own species, but also if it is a male or female, a female from the male‘s
own den versus another den, a large female versus a small female (larger females produce more young),
and whether a female is likely to reproduce this year or store his sperm for a following year. Our work
on the garter snakes has examined ultimatelevel questions such as male body size and mating success,
size-assortative mating, mating plugs, female mimicry, antipredator tactics, thermoregulatory behavior,
migratory behavior and others. We are currently investigating the phenomenon of multiple mating,
paternity analyses, and sperm competition in this species.

At the proximate level, we know that the pheromone, a nonpolar, hydrophobic blend of 13 long-chain (C
29 –C 37 ) saturated and monounsaturated methyl ketones, is insoluble in aqueous solutions. This
pheromone is detected by the vomeronasal organ (VNO), which is specialized for the reception of
nonvolatile chemical cues. Male garter snakes deprived of a functional vomeronasal (VN) system are
unable to detect or respond appropriately to pheromones. But the mechanism by which the hydrophobic
pheromone gains access to the aqueous environment of the VNO remained unknown. Results to date
indicate that the Harderian glands‘ (HG) secretions, which duct exclusively into the VNO in snakes,
contain pheromone-binding proteins. For over 300 years, the function of the cephalic HG of vertebrates
has been the subject of speculation. Our studies in garter snakes demonstrate that the HG serves as a
mediator in providing access for the female sex pheromone to the VNO of male gartersnakes.



                                                                                                      458
Matamoros, Wilfredo (Museum of Natural Science, Louisiana State University); McMahan, Caleb;
Chakrabarty, Prosanta (Louisiana State University / Museum of Natural Science, Baton Rouge, LA,
United States)

Biogeographic patterns of Central American freshwater fishes: an analysis of more than 500
species from the entire region and adjacent areas

A large portion of the Central American fish fauna (particularly in the north) has been poorly studied for
their biogeographic patterns including in the recognition of major areas of endemicity. Even areas that
have been studied recently for these patterns, including nuclear (Matamoros et al. 2011) and southern
Central America (Smith and Bermingham 2005), would benefit from a more complete analysis of the
entire region and adjacent areas. In order to better understand the biogeographic relationships of
obligate freshwater fishes from Central America we analyzed distributional data from 98 river drainages
(included the Atrato and Magdalena Rivers from Colombia and the Usumacinta-Grijalva River from
Mexico). The analyses included 508 freshwater fish species including members of Cichlidae, Poecillidae,
Characidae, Heptapteridaand others. Areas of endemism were determined by using multivariate analyses
and parsimony analyses of endemicity. The historical biogeography of these freshwater clades was
investigated using Brooks parsimony (BPA) and newly produced phylogenies of Poeciliidae and
Cichlidae. We recover 14 major areas of endemicity in Central America and there is a clear differentiation
among Pacific and Atlantic slope drainages throughout the region. Endemism is generally low throughout
Central America, with the lowest values in Nuclear Central America and the highest endemism is
recovered in the Tuyra River in the south and the Usumacinta River in the north. The results of the BPA
suggest that the historical biogeography of Central America is complex and is a result of both vicariance
and dispersal.



Mathew, Mercy (Walter sisulu university);

Reproductive Toxicity of        endosulfan-an      organochlorine     pesticide-on    male    toads   (Bufo
melanostictus Schneider)

Increased use of agrochemicals considered to be             one of the most important anthropogenic activity
responsible for the decline of nontarget fauna like amphibians. Persistence of organochlorine pesticides
may pose great risk to the reproductive health of organisms.The aim of this study is to evaluate the
effects of sublethal concentrations of endosulfan on the testes histoarchitecture and Gonadosomatic
index of Bufo melanostictus Schneider. Adults were exposed to two sublethal doses (0.24ppm and
0.48ppm )of endosulfan for a period of 30 days .A control group without exposure to endosulfan was
also maintained. .Up to ten days , testes of those exposed to 0.24ppm showed more or less normal
structure where as changes were very evident in the testes of those exposed to 0.48ppm from the 5th day
onwards. But after ten days of exposure, pronounced changes were observed in all the treatments.
Degenerative changes in the seminiferous epithelium, histological changes in reproductive organs,
testicular atrophy, tubule shrinking, necrosis of spermatogenetic cells,clumbing of chromatin material etc
were noticed followed by a reduction in the gonado somatic index.Significant reduction has been noticed
in the different stages in seminiferous tubule and this could affect the reproduction of male toads
negatively. The structure of the testes of pesticide exposed bufo was completely disorganised and also
an inbalance in the proliferative activity exhibited, further confirmed the lethality of pesticides on Bufo .




                                                                                                         459
Matich, Philip (Florida International University); Heithaus, Michael (Florida International University, North
Miami, FL, United States)

Resource pulses drive seasonal variability in bull shark trophic ecology

Estuaries are characterized by considerable variation in both abiotic and biotic conditions across multiple
spatial and temporal scales. This variation can lead to spatial and termporal variation in food web
dynamics. Within the Florida Coastal Everglades, much of the estuarine habitat is oligotrophic, and prey
resources for upper trophic level predators are generally scarce. Thus, resource pulses that enter the
ecotone region of the estuary during the dry season when marsh species migrate to channels, could be
important in the diets of estuarine predators.       We used stable isotope analysis of an estuarine top
predator, juvenile bull sharks, to elucidate variation in trophic interactions in space and time and with
changes in shark size.      Carbon isotopic values of bull sharks in the Shark River Estuary suggest that
they take advantage of the freshwater resource pulse during the dry season.          However, data suggest
that all sharks do not rely on this pulse of food, which may be attributed to physical tolerances, trade-offs,
prey preference, foraging experience, and/or individual specialization.       Our study shows the potential
importance of large, highly mobile predators, like bull sharks, in linking freshwater and estuarine food
webs, and the complexity of Everglades‘ trophic dynamics. Further research investigating the timing of
these resource pulses and quantifying the biomass that enters channels during the dry season may
provide insight into how the physical changes caused by proposed restoration efforts may lead to
important biological changes.



Mattox, George (Universidade de São Paulo - Brazil); Britz, Ralf (Natural History Museum, London,
London, United Kingdom); Toledo-Piza, Mônica (Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil)

Osteology of Priocharax Weitzman & Vari (Teleostei: Characiformes: Characidae): developmental
truncation in a miniature Amazonian fish

Priocharax       is a genus of Neotropical characiforms comprising two miniatures that are among the
smallest species of the order. Priocharax ariel was described from the Upper Rio Negro in Venezuela
and was subsequently recorded from other localities along the Rio Negro in Brazil, and P. pygmaeus is
only known from its type locality in the Upper Rio Amazonas. In the original description, Priocharax was
hypothesized, although tentatively, to be closely related to species of the characid subfamily Characinae,
and a subsequent phylogenetic analysis of this subfamily resulted in a basal position of Priocharax as
the sister-group to the remaining 11 genera of the Characinae. In a more recent phylogenetic study of the
Characinae, this subfamily was found to be non-monophyletic and divided into two not closely related
clades: a more restricted Characinae and Heterocharacinae. Priocharax was recovered as a member of
the latter subfamily. However, the profound modifications in the skeleton of Priocharax prevented a better
evaluation of its relationships to the rest of the Heterocharacinae, and therefore a more detailed
anatomical study was initiated to address this question. The osteological study of Priocharax revealed
that 17 bones are absent and 12 other skeletal structures are simplified when compared to related
characids. Comparison of the skeleton of adult Priocharax with early developmental stages of other
characids revealed that most of the absences and simplifications of Priocharax can be interpreted as
developmental truncations, i.e. terminal deletions. The most striking developmental truncations were
found in the pectoral fin, in which the whole endoskeleton remains cartilaginous and only posttemporal,
supracleithrum, cleithrum and a single postcleithrum are present. Other interesting truncations are in the
ethmoid region of the skull, in the infraorbital series and in the Weberian apparatus, where the claustrum
is absent. Our study also revealed some sexual dimorphisms in Priocharax , especially in the pelvic
girdle (e.g., presence of bony hooks on pelvic fin of males, contralateral pelvic bones of males articulated



                                                                                                          460
with each other and anterior elongation of the pelvic bone in males). These new data will be now included
in a phylogenetic reanalysis of the Heterocharacinae.



Mattox, George (Universidade de São Paulo - Brazil); Britz, Ralf (Natural History Museum, London,
London, United Kingdom); Toledo-Piza, Mônica (Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil)

Skeletal development of Salminus brasiliensis (Teleostei: Characiformes Characidae) with a
sequence of ossification for the species

Ontogenetic data for Neotropical fishes are still scarce despite their vast diversity and information on their
skeletal development is even lacking entirely. Among the Ostariophysi, skeletal development has been
studied in selected representatives of the Gonorhynchiformes, Cypriniformes and African Siluriformes,
leaving the diversity of Neotropical Characiformes, Siluriformes and Gymnotiformes still unexplored.
Starting to fill this gap, we studied the development of the entire skeleton of a putatively basal characid,
Salminus brasiliensis , to provide a sequence of ossification for a representative of the Characiformes that
can be used in further comparative investigations. Our study was based on 86 specimens (3.2-22.4mm
NL/SL) covering approximately 30 days post hatching and including ossification data for 150 bones.
Specimens were cleared and stained and presence of a bone was scored whenever a mineralized
structure was detected. First ossifications start at 5.0mm (cleithrum and UP4 and CB5 tooth plates).
Ossification continues with the remaining tooth bearing bones (premaxilla and dentary at 5.4mm, maxilla
at 6.4mm), opercle (5.4mm) and branchiostegal rays (6.4mm). The first bone to ossify in the
neurocranium is the parasphenoid (7.4mm) followed by the basioccipital around the notochord (8.0mm),
exoccipital (9.4mm), frontal and lateral ethmoid (12.0mm). The hyopalatine arch begins ossification with
quadrate (8.0mm) and hyomandibular (8.5mm). Branchial arches commence their ossification with CBs
(CB1 at 8.3mm), followed by EBs (11.2mm) and PBs (12.0mm). The infraorbital series is the last complex
to ossify starting with the antorbital (16.8mm). The first ossifications of the axial skeleton are vertebral
centra (9.9mm) followed by neural arches (11.1mm), hemal arches (12.0mm), ribs and hemal spines
(12.7mm). Weberian apparatus starts with vertebral centra (9.9mm), neural arches (11.1mm),
intercalarium and scaphium (12.4mm). Fin rays form first in the caudal fin, followed by dorsal and anal
fins (9.9 and 10.4 mm, respectively), pelvic fin (15.7 mm) and the pectoral fin (16.8 mm). The
endoskeletal fin supports begin to ossify with the proximal radials of the anal and dorsal fins (12.7 and
12.9mm, respectively), pelvic bone (17.2mm), coracoid and scapula (18.4mm). A diagram of the complete
sequence of ossification is provided. Significance of this kind of information is briefly exemplified with the
case of the miniaturized characiform Priocharax .



Maxfield, Jessica (San Francisco State University); Van Tassell, James (American Museum of Natural
History, Canada); St. Mary, Colette (University of Florida, Canada); Joyeux, Jean-Christophe
(Universidad Federal do Espirito Santo, Canada); Crow, Karen (San Francisco State University, Canada)

Extreme gender flexibility: Using a phylogenetic framework to infer the evolution of variation in
sex allocation, phylogeography, and speciation in a genus of bidirectional sex changing fishes
(Lythrypnus, Gobiidae)

The genus Lythrypnus is a group of marine gobies that exhibit extreme gender flexibility as bidirectional
sex changers. The genus consists of 20 described species and several undescribed species that are
distributed in the Americas. Five species have been characterized with respect to sex allocation and
gonad morphology. The hormonal, morphological, and behavioral aspects of sex change have been



                                                                                                          461
studied extensively for one species, L. dalli . These data, however, have not been interpreted in an
evolutionary context because a phylogenetic hypothesis has not previously been proposed for the genus
Lythrypnus . We propose the first phylogenetic hypothesis for the genus based on molecular data from
three mitochondrial genes ( 12s, ND2 , and cytb ), a nuclear gene Rag 1 and nuclear intron S7 . We
also include four previously undescribed Lythrypnus species. Our results support the monophyly of the
genus with L. heterochroma , an Atlantic species, as the basal taxon. After the divergence of L.
heterochroma , there are two main clades, one comprised of species distributed in the Atlantic, the other
comprised of species distributed in the Pacific. These data indicate an Atlantic origin for the genus,
followed by divergence after the closure of the Isthmus of Panama. Our data also support the monophyly
of three previously described species complexes, the L. rhyzophora complex and L. dalli complex in
the Pacific, and the L. mowbrayi complex in the Atlantic. The Brazilian taxa, including three previously
undescribed species, are not monophyletic and occur in two distinct Atlantic clades. We mapped patterns
of sex allocation within this genus onto the fully resolved and supported topology, and found that sexual
plasticity and gender flexibility is likely a synapomorphy for the genus. Overall our results create a well-
supported framework to understand the phylogeography of the genus, and to interpret the evolution of
sex allocation in Lythrypnus gobies.



Mayer, Michael (Trier University, Biogeography Department); Schulte, Lisa M. (Trier University,
Biogeography Department, Trier, Germany); Schulte, Rainer (INIBICO, Tarapoto, Peru); Lötters, Stefan
(Trier University, Biogeography Department, Trier, Germany)

Do frogs respond to modified calls of congenerics? Field experiments on Mullerian mimic poison
frogs from Peru

We studied acoustic communication in two Peruvian poison frogs, Ranitomeya variabilis and R. imitator,
which are Mullerian mimics. In both species males make strong use of their advertisement calls to
communicate with conspecifics. This explains why vocalizations in these species are structurally different.
The goal of our study was to understand: What is in a call of R. variabilis that R. imitator does not
respond. We conducted phonotaxis experiments with loudspeakers in the natural habitat with (i) original
R. imitator calls for reference, (ii) R. imitator calls at different frequencies, and (iii) four modified calls,
artificially produced and intermediated between the two species. Experiments were videotaped and
response intensity was measured (N = 30), with help a defined grid over which frogs approached the
sound source: number of jumps, jump angles, time and straightness of paths in terms of spatial and
temporal patterns. Results suggest that frequency is more important than pulse rate. Of the modified
calls, R. imitator interacted best with its own call when played with in note frequency or interval as in R.
variabilis . It showed limited response to R. variabilis calls when modified with R. imitator attributes.



Mazerolle, Marc (Université du Québec en Abitibi-Témiscamingue); Perez, Amélie; Brisson, Jacques
(Université de Montréal, Montréal, PQ, Canada)

Impact of the exotic common reed (Phragmites australis) on larval development of the wood frog
(Lithobates sylvaticus)

In the context of declining amphibian populations, the introduction of alien species has been the subject
of numerous studies but few were dedicated to exotic plants. We hypothesized that the establishment
ofthe exotic common reed ( Phragmites australis ) would lengthen larval anuran development and
decrease the survival rate by modifying habitat structure, changing water characteristics, and decreasing



                                                                                                            462
food availability. We tested these hypotheses by studying the larval development of the wood frog (
Lithobates sylvaticus ) during a experiment in field enclosures. Within each enclosure, we created
habitats with three different reed densities (none, medium, and high). Tadpoles were placed in the
enclosures and were followed for six weeks up to metamorphosis during which we monitored water
quality and phytoplankton composition. At the end of the experiment, survival, developmental stage and
morphological traits were determined. We found no impact of reed density on most abiotic factors such as
temperature, pH, or total phenolic concentration, but water depth tended to be lowest at high reed
densities. Tadpole survival rate, weight, and morphological measurements did not vary across
treatments. However, tadpole development was delayed for nearly two Gosner stages at the highest reed
density (i.e., 104 shoots m -2 ) compared to the control. Phytoplankto abundance varied with reed
density, but the patterns varied across groups. Our results suggest that common reed affects amphibian
species with rapid development such as wood frogs. Though larval survival rates were similar across
treatments, slower development under high reed densities implies a longer exposure to the risk of the
pond drying out.



Mazerolle, Marc (Université du Québec en Abitibi-Témiscamingue);

Road impacts on amphibians and reptiles: paving the way for future research

With the increase of the human population and expansion of road networks, many efforts have been
devoted to investigating the effect of roads on amphibians and reptiles in different areas of the globe.
Habitat loss and individual mortality on the road from collisions with vehicles are direct results of road
establishment. However, road effects can extend to adjacent populations and manifest themselves
through occurrence and abundance patterns or genetic structure. Behavior and movement patterns can
also be disrupted by road structures and vehicular traffic, but other impacts are more insidious. For
instance, road runoff modifies water chemistry and can decrease larval development or survival. Salt and
other deicing agents are of particular concern in Canada, as these substances are spread on roads in
very large quantities. Forestry and mining activities in northern Canada are increasing due to demand for
natural resources and are generating large road networks. However, their effects are largely
undocumented. Despite the wealth of observational studies on the effects of roads on amphibians and
reptiles worldwide, manipulative experiments remain scarce. For instance, studies could be bonified by
using controlled impact (BACI) designs (before and after road construction) to distinguish the effects of
habitat loss from the effects of traffic intensity, and quantify these effects across time. Another research
need involves the estimation of vital rates for individuals in populations adjacent to roads differing in traffic
intensity.



McCallister, Michael (University of North Florida); DiGirolamo, Tony (Florida Fish and Wildlife
Commission, Canada); Gelsleichter, Jim (University of North Florida, Canada)

Understanding the effect of prey abundance on habitat selection for the Atlantic sharpnose shark
(Rhizoprionodon terraenovae) in a northeast Florida estuary

Sharks are considered top predators in many marine ecosystems, and can play an important role in
structuring those communities. As a result, it is important to understand the factors that influence the
abundance and distribution of sharks.      One hypothesis is that the abundance and distribution of
predators is driven by the abundance of potential prey resources. The goal of this study was to examine
the influence of prey abundance on habitat selection for Atlantic sharpnose sharks in a northeast Florida



                                                                                                             463
estuary.     Atlantic sharpnose sharks were caught in Cumberland Sound from 2009 – 2011 and catch
rates were compared between open sound habitat and protected creek habitat.           Stomach contents of
sharks caught in 2010 –2011 were analyzed to determine the preferred prey items of Atlantic sharpnose
sharks. The abundance of potential prey items in sound and creek habitats was determined from finfish
abundance data obtained from the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservsation Commission. Catch rates of
Atlantic sharpnose sharks in open sound and creek habitat were compared with the abundances of their
preferred prey items found in those habitats.      Understanding patterns of habitat use and foraging
behavior can provide insight on how predators select habitat, and the importance of those habitats. This
is particularly important as management efforts continue to focus on identifying essential fish habitats.



Mccardle, Logan (Southeastern Louisiana University); Fontenot, Cliff (Southeastern Louisiana
University, Canada)

Patterns of Road Mortality in Snakes along the Manchac Land Bridge in Southeast Louisiana

Roads represent significant sources of mortality for snakes in many regions. Snakes are a useful group to
assess magnitude of road mortality because they are important trophic components and are useful
indicators of trophic dynamics within an ecosytem. Snakes often occupy niches in the middle of the food
web and are controls for prey species as well an energy source for their predators. In addition, snakes
possess life history traits that may make them more vulnerable to road mortality than other fauna, and are
in decline in many areas. As part of a long-term herpetofauna monitoring study we quantified road
mortality in 13 snake species on a road that transects the wetland between Lakes Pontchartrain and
Maurepaus in Southeast Louisiana. We describe inter- and intraspecific patterns, as well as temporal
patterns, to identify species and demographic groups (sexes, and age reproductive classes) within
species that are most susceptible to road mortality. This information may be useful in future planning,
construction, and mitigation of roads through snake habitat.



McCoy, Earl (University of South Florida); Osman, Nick (University of South fForida, Tampa, FL, United
States); Hauch, Brad (University of South Florida, Tampa.Florida, United States); Mushinsky, Henry
(University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States)

Successful Translocation of the Threatened Florida Sand Skink

The Florida Sand Skink (FSS), Plestiodon reynoldsi , is a threatened fossorial lizard found only on the
central ridges of Florida.  The habitat of the FSS has been so severely reduced by development that
conservation strategies beyond land acquisition and management have become necessary.             In 2007,
more than 500 individuals were collected from a single population at a location slated for development,
individually marked, and moved to a nearby site with no existing FSS, but with apparently suitable habitat.
Three hundred of the Individuals were released into 15 20-m 2 enclosures, representing 5 habitat
treatment types. Survival and reproduction were monitored for three subsequent years.               Across
treatments, recapture rate was 37%. Survival for the first two years was estimated to be about 70%. A
decline in survival occurred in the third year, likely reflecting aging of the population.       Minimum
recruitment was 15 individuals in 2008, 17 in 2009, and 35 in 2010.             Continued monitoring to
accommodate one full generation, 4+ years, is in progress.




                                                                                                       464
McCracken, Shawn (Texas State University); Forstner, Michael (Texas State University, Canada)

Living on the edge: Oil road effects on the occupancy and abundance of anurans inhabiting an
upper canopy tank bromeliad (Aechmea zebrina) in lowland rainforest of the Yasuni Biosphere
Reserve, Amazonian Ecuador

Forest canopies are among the most species-rich terrestrial habitats on earth and one of the remaining
unexplored biotic frontiers. Tank bromeliads provide microhabitat for a high diversity of fauna and flora in
tropical forest canopies and are considered a keystone resource. A number of amphibians inhabit these
phytotelmata, yet their ecological role and status in forest canopies remains mostly unknown. For this
study, anurans were collected from an upper canopy tank bromeliad ( Aechmea zebrina ) in trees at ~20-
45 m (x̅ = 33 m) above the forest floor. Bromeliads were sampled from trees located along ~30 km trails in
undisturbed primary rainforest and the south-central portion of the Maxus oil road within the Yasuni
Biosphere Reserve of Amazonian Ecuador. The Maxus road where bromeliads were sampled has
experienced relatively little deforestation aside from infrastructure development for petroleum extraction
operations (i.e. roads, pipelines, processing facilities and related disturbances) as compared to the
northern roadway that is experiencing extensive colonization and associated deforestation. Ninety-eight
individuals from 10 species were collected from 180 bromeliads in 32 trees. Generalized Linear Mixed
Models were used to assess the effects of disturbance and a suite of ecological factors on the occupancy
and abundance of anurans collected. Analyses were conducted using the full species dataset and
reduced species sets based on a priori knowledge about their use of canopy microhabitats. Full dataset
analysis revealed bromeliads in undisturbed forest had a significantly greater occupancy and abundance
of anurans than those along the Maxus road, while recorded ecological factors had no relationship.

Reduced species set analyses demonstrated that anuran occupancy was highest in undisturbed forest;
abundance showed mixed significance results although it was also greatest in undisturbed forest, and
again the recorded ecological factors had no relationship. This study is the first to investigate upper
canopy anurans utilizing tank bromeliad microhabitat and reveals that even the minimal footprint of
petroleum extraction operations, primarily roads, in rainforest environments can have significant impacts
on a unique anuran community. Based on these results, it is recommended that future petroleum
development treat rainforest habitat as an offshore system where roads are not used and current access
roads be protected from colonization and further deforestation.



McCutcheon, Sara (Florida Atlantic University); Kajiura, Stephen (Florida Atlantic University, Canada)

Lanthanide metals as potential shark deterrents

Sharks comprise a large portion of unwanted bycatch in longline fisheries worldwide and various
technologies and modifications to fishing protocols have been proposed to reduce elasmobranch bycatch.
Since bycatch species are often trophically similar to target species, technologies need to be developed
to specifically reduce elasmobranch bycatch without impacting the catch of target species. Lanthanide
metals have been proposed as an elasmobranch-specific repellent. When submerged in a polar solution,
such as water, lanthanide metals undergo a hydrolytic reaction and release electrons, which produces a
charge distribution in the water. The charge produced by the metals likely exceeds anything that sharks
naturally encounter in the wild and will presumably overwhelm their electrosensory system. We evaluated
the efficacy of lanthanide metals as potential shark deterrents. Specifically, we quantified the electrical
charge produced by six lanthanide metals in seawater, compared their dissolution rates, and performed a
behavioral assay to determine effectiveness against two shark species. We found that there was no
difference in the voltage produced by the six tested metals in ambient seawater. The charge distribution



                                                                                                         465
decayed as a power function with distance from the metal sample. From the function for voltage decay
with distance we derived the function for the voltage gradient (ie. electric field). Based upon the median
sensitivity reported for six elasmobranch species, we calculated that sharks should detect a sample of
neodymium at a minimal distance of 65-85 cm. The dissolution rate for the lanthanides varied from -1.6
to -0.2 g/h. As the metals dissolved the voltage remained constant presumably due to more extensive
pitting which increased 3D surface area despite a decrease in mass. In a behavioral assay, neodymium
was ineffective at repelling bonnethead sharks (Sphyrna tiburo) tested individually and in groups, and
lemon sharks (Negaprion brevirostris) in groups. Therefore, due to high cost, fast dissolution rates, and
lack of deterrent effects, lanthanide metals are not recommended for use in mitigating shark bycatch.



McElroy, Eric (College of Charleston); Bergmann, Philip (Clark University, Worcester, United States)

The impact of tail loss on locomotor performance

The effect of tail autotomy on locomotor performance has been studied in a number of lizard species,
from arboreal geckos to generalized terrestrial lizards. These studies show that tail autotomy can have
a positive, a negative, or no effect on locomotor performance with a variety of mechanisms proposed to
explain these findings.     This study examines the effect of experimentally-induced tail autotomy in two
arboreal lizard species ( Takydromus sexlineatus and Anolis carolinensis ) and two terrestrial lizard
species ( Aspidoscelis sonorae and Holbrookia maculata ). This sample represents a broad range of
tail sizes; Takydromus has an exceptionally long and heavy tail, Holbrookia has a short and light tail,
and Anolis and Aspidoscelis have intermediate tails. Based on these morphological differences, we
expected loss of the tail would have the greatest effect on performance in Takydromus and the least
effect in Holbrookia . We quantified the effect of autotomy on maximum running speed and acceleration
capacity in all four species as they ran down a flat racetrack. We also ran the two arboreal species on
30 and 70 degree inclines to examine how autotomy affects climbing speed and acceleration. Finally, we
examined how several possible kinematic predictors of performance changed following autotomy.            On
the flat, running speed and acceleration were generally unaffected following tail autotomy, even though
some species exhibited marked alterations in kinematics following autotomy. It seems that the size of
the tail has very little impact on how autotomy affects running performance on flat substrates; which
agrees with the mixed results of several previous studies.         On the vertical, autotomy significantly
reduced both running speed and acceleration with several kinematic variables changing to produce this
effect. Thus, it appears that arboreal species generally rely on the tail as a functional appendage. In
addition, this result suggests that autotomy may have different effects on performance depending on the
focal species‘ habitat use and the type of performance studied (climbing vs. running vs. jumping, etc.).



McFarlane, Gordon A. (Fisheries and Oceans Canada); Cisneros, Andres (UBC, Canada); King,
Jacquelynne (Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Canada); Sumaila, Rashid (UBC, Canada)

Economic Impacts of Shark Conservation in British Columbia

Although data-deficiency often hinders formal assessments, it is widely recognized that shark species
around the world have historically been overfished. In British Columbia, three shark species have been
listed under the Species at Risk Act (SARA) as Endangered or Special Concern. Currently these listings
have not required bycatch mitigation in fisheries which encounter these shark species. It is recognized
that conservation measures in the form of fishery restrictions will have economic costs from the
adaptation of an industry to new restrictions. In the case of fisheries these costs follow from limitations on



                                                                                                          466
catch (targeted or incidental) leading to reductions in fishing effort, which can result in lowered catch and
profits. We examine the potential economic costs of mandated bycatch reduction, with a conceptual case
study. We chose two model species: bluntnose sixgill shark (Hexanchus griseus) which is the most
common SARA-listed bycatch species in the British Columbia groundfish fishery; and Pacific halibut
(Hippoglossus stenolepis) which is the most economically important groundfish fishery in British
Columbia. We ask the overarching question: ―Undercurrent fishing conditions, what effect might sixgill
shark bycatch limitations have on the BC halibut fishery?‖



McGlashan, Jessica (University of Western Sydney); Old, Julie; Spencer, Ricky-John (University of
Western Sydney, Canada)

Embryonic communication in the nest: metabolic responses of reptilian embryos to
developmental rates of siblings

Incubation temperature is a major environmental factor that affects developmental rates and defines
many phenotypes and fitness characteristics of reptilian embryos. In turtles, eggs are deposited in several
layers within the nest and thermal gradients create independent developmental conditions for each egg.
Despite differences in developmental rate, several studies have revealed unexpected synchronicity in
hatching, but the mechanisms through which synchrony is achieved may differ between species. We
determined whether embryos hatch prematurely or developmentally compensate in response to more
advanced embryos in a clutch by assessing the proximate mechanisms of synchronous hatching in an
Australian freshwater turtle ( Emydura macquarii ). Developmental asynchrony was established within a
clutch of turtle eggs and both respiration and heart rates were measured throughout incubation in
constant and fluctuating temperatures. Turtles hatched at similar developmental stages in all incubation
treatments, with less-developed embryos in experimental groups responding to the presence of more
developed eggs in a clutch by increasing both respiration and heart rates. Early hatching did not reduce
neuromuscular ability at hatching. These results support developmental adjustment mechanisms of the
‗catch-up hypothesis‘ for synchronous hatching in E. macquarii and implies some level of embryo–embryo
communication. The group environment of a nest facilitates the development of communication
mechanisms between embryos and the evolution of environmentally cued hatching.