nges in body form apparently related to the more arboreal habits. The
other three island species, B. alcatraz , Bothrops sp. 2, and Bothrops sp . 3 are dwarf forms within
the B. jararaca complex. Bothrops alcatraz feeds mainly on centipedes, but also on lizards, Bothrops
sp. 2 feeds mainly on lizards, but also on centipedes and conspecific snakes, and Bothrops sp. 3 feeds
on frogs. The three dwarf forms are terrestrial and show a body form similar to that of young B. jararaca
from the mainland. Our data corroborate the diet alteration hypothesis and suggest an adaptive plasticity
of B. jararaca regarding body morphology and diet. Indeed, unpublished data on altitudinal variation in
the biology of mainland B. jararaca indicate that variation in prey availability is associated to variation in
size and morphology. This plasticity may have played an important role in body form and size shifts in this
snake complex, perhaps facilitating the persistence of insular forms in depauperate habitats.



Schalk, Christopher (Texas A&M University);

Community structure of tadpoles along environmental gradients in the Bolivian Gran Chaco

Communities of tadpole species are assembled in association with multiple environmental gradients, in
particular pond hydroperiod and canopy cover, resulting in non-random distribution of species in
breeding ponds and across entire landscapes. The relative strengths of these abiotic and biotic factors
that constrain species‘ distributions often change along environmental gradients. Species distibutions
often reflect their ability to cope with these abiotic and biotic constraints. I studied the role of
environmental gradients contributing to assembly of tadpole communities in the Bolivian Gran Chaco, a
semiarid thorn forest that receives approximately 450 mm of rainfall annually. Rainfall is sporadic and
results in a highly dynamic pond presence across the landscape. Ponds in this region not only contain
invertebrate and fish predators, but the carnivorous tadpoles of Ceratophrys cranwelli . I sampled 35
ponds to determine community composition and species abundance of tadpole species associated with
these environmental gradients across the landscape. At each pond, I quantified abiotic variables (pond
dimensions, physiochemical factors, and canopy cover) and predator abundance and diversity. A
Canonical Correspondence Analysis and Cluster Analysis showed that community structure was primarily
associated with abiotic factors, specifically forest canopy cover, pond depth, and pond area. Both
tadpole richness and abundance increased with increasing pond area and pond depth, but decreased
with increasing canopy cover. These results suggest greater species diversity and abundance in these
ponds is dependent on large, open canopy ponds. These species may be unable to cope with increasing
canopy cover due to the low productivity within these pond types. Tadpole richness and abundance had
weak associations with predator abundance and diversity. Tropical dry forests, such as the Bolivian Gran
Chaco, are currently threatened with habitat loss and among the most endangered ecosystems in the
world. The implications for conservation of this study are that both species diversity and variation in
community structure depends on pond structure. Conservation strategies may be developed that take
into account the environmental factors associated with community assembly as well as maintenance of
species diversity.



Schiller, Nicole (Thompson Rivers University); Larsen, Karl (Thompson Rivers University, Canada)

Life in fluctuation: the ecology of western painted turtles in a northern reservoir

Hydroelectric operations have increased in response to growing energy demands, and are often
considered a ‗green‘ energy source. However, the catchment of hydroelectric reservoirs and fluctuations



                                                                                                          636
in water levels (drawdown zone) can have significant impacts on aquatic ecosystems. For herpetofauna
that live in cold climates these human-induced alterations may affect their ability to manage and tolerate
their environment. Our objective was to investigate the ecology of an extreme northern population
(Revelstoke, British Columbia) of western painted turtles ( Chrysemys picta bellii ) that inhabits an
environment constantly fluctuating due to hydroelectric operations. Our data suggest that all age and sex
classes utilize the drawdown zone. Telemetry and early spring surveys revealed that adult and juvenile
turtles overwinter within the drawdown zone and it appears that there is a communal hibernating site
within a floating mass of vegetation (island). Nest inundation as a result of reservoir operations was not a
significant threat to the animals, simply because all nesting sites detected, thus far, lay above the high-
water mark. Similarly, no incidents of mortality to turtles could be attributed to the reservoir operation.
However, changes in water levels affect habitat availability. Areas of use and basking sites during early
spring are lost as water levels rise, while as other areas flood, more ‗usable‘ habitat becomes available
for turtles than would normally be accessible. Comparisons between turtle movements and water levels
(elevation in meters) may suggesthat variations in movements increase, and that larger movements are
made when water levels rise. Differences in movements may be related to changes in available habitat
(including temperatureranges) and/or other resources (e.g. food availability, cover from predation, nesting
and overwintering locations, shelter) or they may be affected by changes in water levels. This potentially
could lead to higher energetic costs or predation risks for those turtles that are moving greater distances.
Perhaps most interesting is that the size-frequency distribution of the turtles appears consistent with that
reported for other northern turtle populations, yet there is a very strong female bias (1♂ : 6 ♀). Possible
reasons for this bias will be discussed. Overall, this project provides the foundation for a long-term
monitoring program for these animals, and suggests that the population seems stable in this extreme
environment. However, some life-history attributes (e.g. movements) may in part be explained by
differences in exposure to reservoir levels, changes in water temperature, and habitat availability.



Schloegel, Lisa (EcoHealth Alliance);

Wildlife trade: species introductions and disease vectors

The transport of live wildlife across geographic boundaries has allowed for the co-mingling of disease
vectors and potential hosts contributing to the emergence and global spread of emerging pathogens (e.g.
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Ebola Reston virus, and HIV-2). A series of data analyses, field
sampling, laboratory experimentation and molecular techniques have shown a clear link between the
transport of anurans for the food and pet trades with the spread of two lethal amphibian pathogens (
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis and ranaviral disease). Data indicate the international transport of
vectors could not only introduce pathogens into new regions, but could also facilitate the mixing of
pathogen genotypes and the inadvertent spread of strains of unknown virulence that could negatively
impact animal health. In 2008, data collected were instrumental in the decision to list the first and only
amphibian diseases to the World Organization for Animal Health‘s Aquatic Animal Health Code,
providing guidelines to limit the spread of these pathogens through the trade (e.g. quarantine
procedures). The evidence that will be presented reinforces the need for urgent action to minimize the
potential spread of diseases through international trade routes, for the benefit of wildlife health and
sustainability.




                                                                                                        637
Schmidt, Benedikt (University of Zurich);

Use of state-space models to analyse amphibian time series collected by volunteers

During spring, many amphibians migrate to the breeding sites. On the way to the breeding sites, the
amphibians often must cross roads where they may get killed by cars. At many sites, volunteers have
used drift fences for years or decades to capture amphibians and to reduce road mortality. Such
conservation activity thus yields long-term time series of amphibian populations from many sites that
could be used to estimate large-scale population trends. However, the methods used by volunteers differ
among sites and there is observation error. State-space models are a relatively new statistical tool to
analyse data collected by volunteers because they take observation error into account. Here, I will
present the results of an analysis of the amphibian time series data in the Swiss national amphibian data
base. The aim is to assess the reliability of the data (i.e., observation error) and to test whether there are
population declines.



Schneider, Christopher (Boston University); Crawford, Nicholas; McGreevy, TJ; Messana, Nick (Boston
University, Canada)

The genetic basis of phenotypic variation and divergence in Anolis marmoratus

Understanding the process of population divergence and speciation is a central goal of evolutionary
biology. Ultimately, understanding this process requires that we link phenotypic variation to underlying
genetic variation. Traditionally, such analyses were restricted to model organisms. However, advances in
genomic technology, and complete genome sequences of phylogenetically diverse vertebrates, have
opened the opportunity to link phenotype to genotype in non-model organisms. Here we examine the
genetic basis of phenotypic variation in Anolismarmoratus, a polytypic species complex from the
Caribbean islands of Guadeloupe. We examine genetic variation on a genome-wide scale with RAD-tag
and bulk-segregant analyses and identify loci that show signatures of divergent natural selection. We are
able to relate variation at many of those loci to patterns of phenotypic variation among populations,
providing candidate loci for studies of adaptive divergence. Interestingly, on a genome-wide scale, there
is little evidence for restricted gene flow among populations and, while portions of the genome show
signatures of adaptive divergence, most of the genome remains homogeneous. This suggests that the
genome is porous, with segments of the genome (adaptive islands) maintained at alternate states by
divergent selection while the rest of the genome is homogenized by gene flow and recombination. We
discuss the implications of these results for understanding the genetics of adaptation and speciation in
Anolis .



Schock, Danna M (Keyano College); Soos, Catherine (Environment Canada, Canada); Machin, Karen
(University of Saskatchewan, Canada); Pauli, Bruce (Environment Canada, Canada)

Health of amphibian populations as indicators of ecosystem health in the Oil Sands region of
northeast Alberta.

 Several economically important projects related to oil sands mining and upgrading are taking place in the
boreal forest ecosystem in northern Alberta. Although substantial economic benefits are derived from this
natural resource, the poorly understood ecological costs of these operations have drawn scrutiny. Our
research is evaluating the health of wild amphibian populations in north-eastern Alberta. Amphibian
populations are integral components of boreal ecosystems, linking terrestrial and aquatic food webs by



                                                                                                          638
virtue of their lifecycles, and may also serve as valuable indicators of ecosystem health in general.
Amphibians may be especially vulnerable to organics and heavy metals from mining processes because
their breeding ponds are primarily filled by snowmelt in the spring. Previous studies have shown that
snowmelt contains particularly high levels of toxic organic compounds such as polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAH). Thus, amphibians in the boreal forest may be receiving high doses of oil sands
related substances when their breeding ponds fill in the spring. Specifically, we are using wood frog (
Lithobates sylvaticus = Rana sylvatica ) populations in northeast Alberta to test for correlations between
proximity to oil sands operations and: prevalence of infectious diseases (ranavirus, chytrid fungus),
malformation rates, biomarkers of chronic stress (metabolomics), and concentrations of priority
substances (heavy metals, PAH, naphthenic acids) in amphibian tissues and breeding pond water. The
suite of parameters we are investigating will shed light on effects of oil sands mining on amphibian
populations in particular, and the boreal forest ecosystem in general. The new knowledge being
generated by our research is providing tractable parameters that can be measured and interpreted by
regulatory agencies, industry, and other groups responsible for monitoring and managing land in the
boreal forest of Alberta.



Schock, Danna M (Keyano College);

Infectious diseases as a threat to Canadian amphibian populations.

Infectious diseases are a normal component of all ecosystems. However, they can threaten the long-term
persistence of host populations under several circumstances. For example, situations that compromise
host immune defences can be expected to intensify or prolong the impacts of pathogens. Consequently,
environmental stressors such as contamination and altered environmental conditions can interact with
pathogens in ways that tip disease dynamics in directions that promote the collapse of host populations.
The spread/translocation of novel pathogens (or novel strains of pathogens) into new geographic areas
can also threaten host populations (or species) with no innate immune defences to the pathogen.
Sublethal effects of infectious diseases can also present serious threats to host populations. Although
mass mortality events of hosts are often recognized for the potential effects that they may have on host
population ecology, sublethal effects are often overlooked. Growth rates, predator avoidance, and
fecundity rates can all be affected by infectious diseases, and the effects are much more difficult to
detect, particularly in the absence of long-term monitoring. A key characteristic of most pathogens,
including amphibian pathogens, is the fact they are capable of infecting and completing their lifecycles in
multiple species. Another characteristic of many amphibian pathogens is that there can be marked
differences among amphibian species in the levels of disease that results from infection. As a result,
some amphibian species may serve as reservoirs of infection for other species. This can become a critical
challenge for conservation measures when a widespread, resistant host species can harbour pathogens
that cause lethal infections in rare host species. Amphibian pathogens documented in Canada include
ranaviruses, chytrid fungus, Saprolegnia , opportunistic bacteria such as Aeromonas , and a variety of
relatively poorly understood parasites such as ―protists‖ like trypanosomatids, and helminths such as
tapeworms and lungworms. Each of these groups of infectious agents will be discussed as case studies
that highlight the scenarios described above where infectious diseases can become threats to amphibian
populations.




                                                                                                       639
Schoen, Alan (Redpath Museum, McGill University); Boenke, Morgan; Laroche, Philippe; Green, David
M. (Redpath Museum, McGill University, Canada)

Tagging fowler's toads with digital fingerprints

Fowler‘s toads have spot patterns which identify individuals like fingerprints. We automated visual
identification to develop an alternative to physical tagging. A small, endangered, population of fowler‘s
toads lives on the north shore of Lake Eerie. The Canadian government has severely restricted the use
to toe clipping on these animals because data that suggests the method is harmful to animals. In order to
continue conducting mark-recapture studies, we required a different method for marking individuals.
Identifying the toads by eye would allow us to study the toads without harming them, but would require an
unreasonable amount of labor for large samples. We developed software to automate most of the
recognition process, so only about a minute of work was required per picture. The software compensates
for a variety of differences in picture condition so it can be used with pictures taken in the field. We tested
the software with 1593 pictures taken in 7 years of field research. The pictures were collected as part of
the standard field protocol, without the knowledge that they would be used by software. We found that
the software correctly identifies 87% of the known matches from the toe clipping protocol, which is
comparable to the success rate for toe-clipping. We conclude that digital fingerprinting is a viable method
for large-scale population surveys. It also opens new ways to conduct population surveys, since
interested amateurs can contribute pictures of toads with GPS coordinates.



Schriever, Tiffany (University of Toronto); Williams, Dudley (University of Toronto Scarborough, Toronto,
ON, Canada)

Ontogenetic diet shifts within and among amphibian species using stable isotopes and gut
content analyses

Community assembly, composition, and trophic dynamics are the underlying mechanisms responsible for
variation in food web structure. Niche variation can occur among individuals of a population, between
species, and change throughout development. Typically, the trophic niche is measured by quantifying gut
contents, but the use of stable isotopes to define niche width is becoming a popular and powerful
accompaniment. The goals of this project were to quantify amphibian diet throughout development and
test for inter- and intra-specific niche divergence among larval amphibians. Stable isotopes and mixing
models were used to quantify the diets of Pseudacris crucifer (spring peeper), Lithobates sylvaticus
(wood frog), Lithobates clamitans (green frog), and Hyla versicolor (grey treefrog) throughout their
larval development to illustrate community dynamics. Isotopic niches overlapped considerably among the
anuran species, however trophic partitioning was clear when assessed across ontogeny because species
that co-occurred showed opposing δ 13 C trajectories across development. We also found substantial
individual variation within species suggesting specialization within generalist populations. In all species,
greater than 50% of assimilated resources were derived from detritus (allochthonous source). This study
shows that aquatic larval amphibians are tightly linked to the terrestrial ecosystem, and highlights how
stable isotopes and gut content data can illuminate details of complex pond food webs. Stable isotopes
provide a high resolution of individual and population level niches, and across development however, this
requires many individuals and repeated sampling to collect all stages to improve our understanding of
amphibian ecology.




                                                                                                           640
Schulte, Lisa Maria (University of Trier);

The smell of danger: The use of chemical cues in the breeding behavior of poison frogs

Chemical signaling and communication in amphibians is especially well documented in salamanders and
newts, but several studies have also identified chemical communication in anurans. In adult frogs for
example, pheromones are used for sex recognition or aggressive male-male behavior. Anuran larvae are
able to use intraspecific chemical cues for kin recognition and recognition of con- and heterospecific
tadpoles. We investigated chemical communication between adult frogs and their tadpoles in the poison
dart frog species Ranitomeya variabilis . As known for many poison dart frog species, the males of this
species deposit tadpoles singly into different phytotelmata. The exploitation of these small pools is
advantageous as it lowers the risk of predation, but it is more costly because of limited resource
availability. Additionally, poison frog larvae are often cannibalistic, so the identification and avoidance of
conspecifics represents an adaptive behaviour for these amphibians. Here we report that parental R.
variabilis are able to recognise the presence of tadpoles in phytotelmata without invoking visual or
physical stimuli, but are able to accurately determine the presence of tadpoles via chemical cues.
Furthermore, it appears that these frogs can distinguish between different kinds of cues, produced by
tadpoles of different species. Moreover, we found that visual cues may not play a major role in tadpole
deposition, as we found that artificial tadpoles did not elicit a response in adult frogs. Current research is
focused on the identification of the specific chemical cue(s) produced by the tadpoles that elicit responses
in adults. Therefore we extract and fractionate the cues and test those different fractions by presenting
them to the frogs in the field. That way we try to get closer to the special cue(s) avoided by the frogs.



Schulte, Ulrich (Trier University); Beninde, Joscha (Trier University, Trier, Germany); Veith, Michael
(Trier University, Biogeography Department, Trier, Germany, Trier, Germany); Hochkirch, Axel (Trier
University, Trier, Germany)

Rapid genetic assimilation of native wall lizard populations (Podarcis muralis) through extensive
hybridization with introduced lineages

The Common Wall Lizard ( Podarcis muralis ) has established more than 150 non-native populations in
Central Europe , stemming from eight geographically distinct evolutionary lineages. While the majority of
these introduced populations are found outside the native range, some of these populations also exist at
the northern range margin in south-western Germany . In order to a) infer the level of hybridization in
contact zones of alien and native lineages and b) compare the genetic diversity among purebred
introduced, native and hybrid populations we used a combination of maternally inherited markers
(mtDNA: cyt b ) and Mendelian markers (microsatellites). O ur results suggest a rapid genetic assimilation
of native populations by strong introgression from introduced lineages. Discordant patterns of mtDNA and
nDNA variation within hybrid populations may be explained by directed mate choice of females towards
males of alien lineages. In contrast to previous studies we found a non-linear relationship between
genetic diversity and admixture level. The genetic diversity of hybrid populations was substantially higher
than in introduced and native populations belonging to a single lineage, but reaching rapidly a plateau of
high genetic diversity at an admixture level of two. However, even introduced populations with low
founder sizes and from one source population retained moderate levels of genetic diversity and no
evidence for a genetic bottleneck was found. The extent of introgression and the dominance of alien
haplotypes in mixed populations indicate that introductions of non-native lineages represent a serious
threat to the genetic integrity of native populations due to the rapid creation of hybrid swarms.




                                                                                                          641
Schulze, Arne (Senckenberg Forschungsinstitut und Naturmuseum);

Tadpole diversity and reproductive modes of Bolivia´s lowland anuran communities

Tadpole diversity and reproductive modes of Bolivia´s lowland anuran communities Arne Schulze1,2,3
1. Biodiversity and Climate Research Centre (BiK-F), Senckenberganlage 25, 60325 Frankfurt am Main,
Germany; 2.         Senckenberg Forschungsinstitut und Naturmuseum, Senckenberganlage 25, 60325
Frankfurt am Main, Germany; 3. Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University, Institute for Ecology, Evolution
&amp; Diversity, BioCampus – Niederursel, Max-von-Laue-Straße 9, 60438 Frankfurt am Main
arne.schulze@senckenberg.de The eastern lowlands of Bolivia can be valued as a region of distinct
regional faunal diversity and seen as a climatic and biogeographic transition zone. In the last decades
studies on amphibian diversity increased and many new species were discovered. Only recently, an
integrative anuran inventory has revealed hidden diversity and suggested several divergent lineages and
cryptic species complexes. In contrast, information on anuran larval stages and reproductive strategies
are still scarce. However, tadpoles can be a good tool for assessing local biodiversity and are often found
more easily and in greater amounts than adults. The aim of this study was to differentiate all tadpoles
within the studied anuran communities and assign them to their respective adult stage. Therefore, a
combined approach composed of morphology, DNA barcoding, and tadpoles raised in captivity from
identified adults was conducted to assure correct tadpole identifications. The preceding integrative
species inventory of adult amphibians formed the basis for confirmed tadpole identifications. The selected
study areas consisted of open Cerrado savannahs and endemic Chiquitano Dry Forest, and provided a
variety of habitats for amphibian reproduction. In detail, savannah puddles, rock pools, flooded wetlands,
ponds, small streams, and flooded forest floor were sampled for eggs, larvae, and amplectant pairs. The
tadpoles of more than 50 different species of Bufonidae, Dendrobatidae, Hylidae, Leiuperidae,
Leptodactylidae, and Microhylidae could be distinguished and described for the Bolivian lowlands. All
tadpoles were classified into the established ecomorphological guilds, containing different lotion and lentic
forms like benthic, nektonic, carnivorous, and suspension feeder, among others. Some of the identified
tadpoles are described for the first time or clearly show deviations compared with associated tadpole
descriptions from neighbouring countries. Additionally, different oviposition strategies were recorded and
assigned to the known classifications of reproductive modes. The range of observed reproductive
strategies included for example generalized oviposition and development of eggs and larvae in lentic
water bodies, semi-aquatic oviposition with terrestrial foam nests or clutches on leaves with tadpoles
completing their development in water, up to strictly terrestrial oviposition and development. The results of
my study on reproduction biology and developmental stages of lowland amphibians emphasise the
capacity of the Bolivian lowlands for conservation efforts and further studies on the still underestimated
amphibian diversity.



Schwarzkopf, Lin (James Cook University);

Fragmentation Processes: Why do reptiles avoid some habitats?

Fragmentation breaks up large continuous tracts of preferred habitats, and surrounds them with non-
preferred matrix habitat. Research into effects of fragmentation often focuses on features of habitat
fragments, evaluating factors such as size, and shape of fragments or mortality rates in fragments:
aspects of fragments that influence population viability. Knowledge of processes driving habitat
preference in fragments, and avoidance of matrix habitats can also be useful, because one strategy for
mitigating effects of fragmentation would be to make matrix habitat more attractive to target species, i.e.,
increasing preference or reducing avoidance. I have examined habitat use by reptiles inside matrix and




                                                                                                         642
preferred habitat areas, in several different habitat types in Australian tropical ecosystems. There are 3
main, non-independent factors that could cause avoidance of matrix habitat: reduced food availability,
increased predation risk, and inappropriate structure. In mammals and birds, absence of food and
increased predation strongly influence habitat use. Interestingly, for small, insectivorous reptiles, matrix
habitat can have similar or increased food availability and reduced predation rates compared to preferred
habitat, but reptiles will still avoid areas that fail to provide adequate structure. Thermoregulatory
opportunities, retreat sites, and, surprisingly, composition, size, and shape of leaf litter can strongly
influence habitat use by reptiles. Because reptiles respond strongly to certain habitat features, corridors
between highly suitable habitat fragments may require only some of these features to remain useful to
reptiles.



Schweiger, Susan (Institut für Spezielle Zoologie und Evolutionsbiologie, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität
Jena); Müller, Hendrik (Jena University, Department of Comparative Zoology and Evolutionary Biology,
Jena, Germany)

Skeletal and muscular ontogeny of the direct developing frog Arthroleptis xenodactyloides
(Anura: Arthroleptidae)

Direct development is widespread throughout the animal kingdom and raises interesting questions in
evolutionary and developmental biology. The development of direct developing taxa is characterized by
the loss of the aquatic, larval stage and usually differs considerably from taxa with the plesiomorphic,
metamorphosing life-cycle. In frogs direct development is widespread, both phylogenetically and in terms
of species numbers, but surprisingly little information is available on the development of direct developing
species. In this study, we examined the skeletal and muscular development of the direct developing, East
African squeaker frog        Arthroleptis        xenodactyloides      (Arthroleptidae) using whole mount
immunohistochemistry. The focus of investigation lies on characters involved in larval feeding, which have
often been altered in comparison to biphasic frogs. Embryonic development in A. xenodactyloides is
altered in comparison to taxa with a free-living aquatic larva shows similarities to other direct developing
anurans, such as Eleutherodactylus coqui and Philautus silus . In A. xenodactyloides , the absence of
nearly all larval cartilages typical for the ancestral life-history is an obvious feature of embryonic
development. In metamorphosing frogs, bone formation occurs post-hatching, whereas cranial
ossification in A. xenodactyloides has been advanced into the embryonic period. Furthermore, the
plesiomorphic cranial muscle ontogeny in metamorphosing anurans differs considerably from that seen in
the direct developing A. xenodactyloides embryos. Comparing the limited, available data on direct
developing anurans, the degree to which direct development deviates from the ancestral life-history
appears to vary substantially between species that evolved direct development independently.



Scott-Prendini, Elizabeth (American Museum of Natural History); Oliver, Lauren (Louisiana State
University, Canada); Visser, John (National Museum of Namibia, Canada); Lewis, Amanda (Louisiana
State University, Canada)

Morphological variation in African Bullfrogs (Pyxicephalidae: Pyxicephalus), assessed from CT
scan data and morphometrics.

 African bullfrogs ( Pyxicephalus ) are large, impressive anurans which display reversed sexual
dimorphism, male-male combat and male parental care. Three species are currently recognized from
throughout the arid savannas of Africa. Morphometric data have traditionally underpinned the diagnoses




                                                                                                        643
of species within Pyxicephalus . However, the two most commonly encountered species ( P. adspersus
and P. edulis ) are problematic to diagnose: none of the four traditionally used characters separate all
individuals from all regions. This study aimed to examine the morphology of all previously named taxa
(valid or synonymized), assess the extent of geographical variation across Africa, and identify consistent
diagnostic characters for each species. The rarity of some material, and general poor results obtained
through double staining and clearing large vertebrates preclude this method for Pyxicephalus .
Computed Tomography (CT) scanning was used to create non-destructive 3D images of the skeletons. A
dataset from external morphology and osteology from discrete characters was compiled. Various notable
skeletal characteristics specific to Pyxicephalus were discovered, some of which appear to be correlated
with its fossorial lifestyle, whilst others may be the result of structural constraints caused by large body
size, or even ecology. We found that many of the traditional morphometric characters are not reliable for
species diagnosis, and examined the osteological basis for this. Further work on genetics and
vocalizations of Pyxicephalus is underway, and may reveal further cryptic taxa.



Searcy, Christopher (University of California - Davis); Gray, Levi (University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM, United States); Trenham, Peter (Western Washington University, Bellingham, WA,
United States); Shaffer, H. Bradley (University of California - Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United
States)

Delayed life history effects, multilevel selection, and evolutionary tradeoffs: Mass and date of
metamorphosis in the California tiger salamander

Delayed life history effects (DLHEs) occur when fitness in one life stage affects fitness in subsequent life
stages. Given their biphasic lifecycle, pond-breeding amphibians provide a natural system for studying
DLHEs. In this study, we use numerous mark-recapture techniques (visual implant alphanumeric tags,
visual implant elastomer, and photographic pattern recognition) and a large drift fence array (221 fences
monitored over a six-year period) to document selection in a population of the endangered California tiger
salamander (Ambystoma californiense). We find that DLHEs are prominent across all life stage transitions
and that there is variation in whether selection acts at the individual or cohort level. We also demonstrate
that there is large variation in average cohort fitness (> one order of magnitude), which is the variation
that DLHEs act upon. A literature review reveals that this high level of intercohort variation is not
restricted to A. californiense, but also occurs in numerous other pond-breeding amphibians, and that
appropriately documenting the magnitude of intercohort variation requires long-term studies (~two
population turnovers). Given the profound effect that DLHEs can have on population dynamics,
understanding intercohort variation in average metamorph quality and the action of selection at the
individual or cohort level is critical for developing realistic models of population dynamics. When
developing models of population dynamics, greater attention should be paid to variation in average fitness
rather than focusing exclusively on variation in total numbers. Finally, we empirically document an
evolutionary tradeoff between mass at metamorphosis and date of emergence. This tradeoff may play a
role in maintaining the variation in mass (fitness) at metamorphosis.




                                                                                                        644
Sears, Brittany (University of South Florida); Snyder, Paul (University of Georgia, Canada); Rohr, Jason
(University of South Florida, Canada)

Can tadpoles turn the tide on their parasites?

Anuran tadpoles can exhibit behavioral resistance against parasitic trematode cercariae by dislodging
attempted infections. Although this behavior does not prevent all infections, it might serve to deflect
parasites away from crucial body areas (i.e., craniofacial) and towards areas less compromised by
infection (i.e., tail). To investigate intraspecific variation in anti-parasite behavior and subsequent
encystment location, tadpoles from seven anuran species were exposed to trematode cercariae while
anesthetized, to remove behavioral resistance, or without anesthesia. Species differed significantly in
their use of anti-parasite behavior and, in the pinewoods tree frog (Hyla femoralis) , behavioral resistance
resulted in tail infections, whereas infections in anesthetized tadpoles occurred significantly more
frequently in the craniofacial region. Because tadpoles reabsorb their tails at metamorphosis, they might
also reabsorb parasite cysts, resulting in little or no net loss of fitness. Given that H. femoralis was the
most susceptible species in our study, the shunting of parasites to less vulnerable regions may be a
heretofore undescribed mechanism by which hosts cope with parasitic infections.



Sears, Jennifer (Institute of Zoology);

Presence of an Introduced Amphibian Predicts the Presence of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis

The multi-host amphibian fungal pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) was first identified in the
UK in 2004. While it has now been found in widely geographically distributed sites across the country, its
effects on native amphibians and the speed and route of its spread is not well understood. During a three
year study at a pond system in South East England I aimed to investigate the occurrence and spread of
Bd in the UK on a fine scale. Nineteen amphibian breeding ponds within a 4km radius of a known Bd-
infected site were were sampled twice per year during the spring breeding season (March-June). Over
2000 samples were collected during the course of the study, comprising of five native and one introduced
species. The presence of infection at a site appeared strongly associated with the presence of a non-
native amphibian, the European alpine newt, Mesotriton alpestris. This species was introduced to the
area in the early 1990s and in recent years has begun to successfully disperse through the pond system.
No cases of Bd were detected at sites where the alpine newt was not found, despite extensive sampling
of native species, including the Bd -susceptible Bufo bufo. It appears that presence of M. alpestris
predicts the occurrence of Bd in this system, with potential implications for the understanding of Bd in the
UK.



Secondi, Jean (GECCO, University of Angers); Sourice, Stéphane (GECCO, University of Angers,
Canada); Théry, Marc (CNRS/MNHN, Canada)

Why habitat quality matters? Insights from a sensory ecology perspective on the effect of nitrate,
turbidity and UV transmission on mate assessment in aquatic breeding amphibians

Habitat selection is the response of a species to a combination of factors affecting its probability of
presence. Such a general definition does not say much about the proximal factors affecting local selection
processes and particularly the selection of sexual partners. Mate choice depends on the reliable
assessment of individual quality which itself depends on the expression of sexual signals and the
transmission of signals across the medium. From a sensory ecology point of view, mate assessment is



                                                                                                        645
increasingly difficult as niche breadth widens. It may become critical for ubiquitous species as contrasting
habitat conditions may be encountered over a small spatial scale so that gene flow may strongly
counteract local adaptation and hinder the optimization of communication. We investigated in a series of
experiments how properties of breeding habitats that vary in space and time (nitrate concentration,
turbidity, UV transmission) affected sexual communication in Lissotriton newts. These water breeding
species display large sexual ornaments and a complex courtship involving both chemical and visual
communication. Nitrate has indirect toxicological effects on oxygen transfer and is considered as an
endocrine disruptor. Water turbidity reduces light transmission and the efficiency of visual signaling.
Dissolved organic carbon is generated by decaying vegetation and absorbs ultraviolet light so that the
use these wavelengths for communication may be impaired in forested environments. Thus, mate
selection is likely to be influenced by habitat characteristics in newts. We found that (i) realistic nitrate
concentration reduced the expression of male sexual ornaments and olfactory attractiveness to females,
(ii) the size of male ornaments was negatively related to turbidity level, and (iii) the availability of UV
wavelengths affected male attractiveness and species recognition, which is the first demonstration of
functional UV signaling in Amphibians. Results highlight the importance of considering environmental
constraints bearing on sexual communication and mate assessment in Amphibians. They question how
optimal mate choice and more largely local adaptation are achieved in species with large breeding habitat
niches. Beyond the evolutionary issue, identifying proximal habitat factors affecting mate choice is also
relevant to optimize conservation strategies.



Semba, Yasuko (National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries); Shono, Hiroshi (Kagoshima
University, Kagoshima, Canada); Yokawa, Kotaro (National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries,
Shizuoka, Japan)

Distributional pattern of shortfin mako, Isurus oxyrinchus, by ontogenetic stage and sex in the
western and central North Pacific

Shortfin mako, Isurus oxyrinchus , is a large pelagic shark with wide distribution from the tropical to
temperate oceans. This species are suggested to have long life span and be sexually dimorphic in
various aspects such as maximum size and life history traits. Recent studies on life history traits suggest
that females grow larger and live longer than males with much longer time to attain sexual maturity.
These aspects are suggested to be closely linked to their behavioural aspects, which was supported by
the report on the sexual segregation of this species. Considering the long life span and difference of life
history schedule between the sexes, ontogenetic stage is also important factor to affect the distributional
pattern of this species.

 This study focused on the ontogenetic aspects of the distributional pattern of this species and described
the temporal and spatial pattern by ontogenetic stage (i.e. juveniles and adults) and also by sex, based
on the fishery and research data in the western and central North Pacific Ocean. In the juvenile stage,
both males and females frequently occurred in the northwestern part ( higher than 30°N and west of the
dateline ), while the distribution of females in the subadult stage tended to shift to the south and the east.
In adult stage, males exclusively occurred in the southeastern part ( lower than 30°N and east of the
dateline ) with some seasonal fluctuation, while females, both pregnant and non-pregnant, were caught
widely across the North Pacific from subtropical and temperate areas. The results in this study suggest
the clear ontogenetic difference in the distributional pattern and possible sexual difference in each
ontogenetic stage.




                                                                                                          646
Further research and effort to collect the size data by sex are necessary to understand the complex
distributional pattern of    I. oxyrinchus  by sex and ontogenetic stage. Combination of fishery and
research data would provide important information on the ecology of sharks, especially for species with
wide distribution in the pelagic ocean.



Semlitsch, Ray (University of Missouri);

Initial dispersal and habitat resistance of metamorphosing salamanders in fragmented landscapes

The movement of individuals is a critical ecological process that maintains populations through dispersal
and connectivity. However, the ability of an individual to cross a landscape depends on the interaction
between landscape structure and species-specific behavior. Habitat loss and alteration disrupts functional
connectivity and can lead to reduced dispersal and subsequent population declines. Although there has
been a sharp increase in studies of landscape structure, especially fragmentation, links with individual
behavior are stilling missing. The real challenge for research is to understand species movement
behavior such as rate of movement, distance, mortality risk, and habitat resistance. Research on the
juvenile dispersal stage of amphibians in my lab has begun to address these questions using mark-
recapture studies, fluorescent powder tracking, and habitat enclosures. We found that initial orientation of
newly metamorphosed salamanders was predominantly nonrandom. Emerging metamorphs initially
traveled short distances using a correlated random-walk pattern. Distance traveled by metamorphs was
greater in forested habitat than non-forested habitat. Juveniles initially traveling through open-canopy
habitats switched at a higher rate to forested habitat than juvenile moving through forested habitat.
Perception distance to forested habitat by metamorphs released into open grasslands was found to be no
more than 5-10 meters. Substrates such as gravel and asphalt used for roads caused salamanders to
move faster and straighter whereas mowed grass caused individuals to move very slowly in a sinuous
path and stop for long periods of time. Together, our results indicate that habitat structure and substrate
features can significant influence both movement and settling behavior of salamanders, and could
strongly affect functional connectivity.



Serena, Alyssa (Simon Fraser University); Palen, Wendy; O'Regan, Sacha (Simon Fraser University,
Canada); Combes, Stacey (Harvard University, Canada)

Using thermal performance assays to predict climate change impacts for pool breeding
amphibians

Global climate change may affect amphibian species through many pathways, including changing habitat
suitability, altered species distributions, vulnerability to disease, and increasing metabolic demands.
However, empirical studies thus far have primarily focused on large-scale changes in species distributions
and interactions between climate and disease. Thermal changes in amphibian habitats may also affect
locomotion performance, and locomotion influences predator evasion, foraging success, and territory
defense. This has the potential to shift species closer to or beyond their thermal performance optima, and
for species with overlapping distributions creates potential repercussions for ecological interactions and
habitat suitability in the future. We conducted a physiological experiment of the potential thermal
performance differences between three amphibian species, Spea intermontana , Rana aurora ,
Pseudacris regilla , encompassing a wide range of life history characteristics and thermal environments.
We incubated tadpoles of each species at equal densities from 5 – 35°C over a 96 hour period. Tadpole
startle responses to a mild electrical stimulus were then recorded with high-speed video. We calculated



                                                                                                        647
average swimming performance, maximum velocity (V max ) and maximum acceleration (U max ), after
digitizing video footage and applying a Butterworth smoothing function to reduce high frequency
fluctuations associated with tail-beats. We found that swimming performance differed substantially among
the three species, with S. intermontana achieving the highest swimming speeds, approaching 40cm · s -
1 . Species also differed in peak performance temperatures, where estimated thermal optima were 22ºC,
28ºC, and 35ºC for R. aurora, P. regilla , and S. intermontana respectively. These results suggest that
all three species have the physiological scope to benefit from a warmed climate, as all three are often
found well below our estimates of thermal performance optima. We propose that thermal performance
assays are a useful tool for setting ecological expectations for how changing climates may influence the
relative performance and persistence of species in novel environments.



Seret, Bernard (Institut de Recherche pour le Développement);

Deep-sea sharks from La Reunion (SW Indian Ocean)

Two research programs are currently carried out at La Reunion island (south-western Indian Ocean). One
concerns the evaluation of the deep-sea resources and the other program, BIOLAVE, deals with the
impact of the recent volcanic eruptions on the marine life. In the frame of these programs, deep-sea
elasmobranchs have been collected. Preliminary results are presented, with a focus on the taxonomic
status of Squalus species, commonly caught in the deep-sea around this volcanic island.



Servidio, Katharine (Warnell School of Forestry and Natural Resources, University of Georgia); Maerz,
John (Warnell School of Forestry and Natural Resources, University of Georgia, Canada); Warren, Robert
(School of Forestry and Environmental Studies, Yale University, Canada)

Effects of Plethodon Foraging Behavior in the Southern Appalachians on Woodland Biodiversity

The diet composition of two species of Plethodon in the Southern Appalachians reveals the key role
played by salamanders in their ecosystem and their potential effects on woodland biodiversity. Recent
research shows Plethodon shermani and Plethodon teyahalee within the hybrid zone at the Coweeta
LTER in Otto, North Carolina forage heavily on ants (&gt;50% of all prey items consumed; found in 94%
of samples). As most vascular plants in the Southern Appalachians rely on ants for seed dispersal, this
significant predation on ants, especially Aphaenogaster , reveals an intriguing and important relationship
between these salamanders and the vascular plant abundance and distribution within their ecosystem. As
consumption of ants increases with high temperatures and low relative humidity indicating that, with
climate change, the effects of Plethodon foraging behavior on woodland biodiversity will be amplified.
With increased predation on ants, we expect a further reduction in ant populations, limiting the dispersal
of local vascular plants. Additionally, Aphaenogaster populations are predicted to decline under climate
change due to their habitat requirements. The additional stress of increased predation on the population
may precipitate dramatic changes in the vascular plant distribution within the Southern Appalachians.
Using a paired design, we are placing removal plots along an elevational gradient within the hybrid zone
at the Coweeta LTER, to observe and quantify the effect of Plethodon foraging on ant communities,
seed dispersal, and vascular plant distribution. Both occupancy and foraging rates of ants, with a focus on
Aphaenogaster , will be monitored using artificial nest boxes and direct observation/counts of foraging
ants. Data analysis will consist primarily of information theoretic approaches to reveal the relationship
between salamander population density and ant populations and foraging within the greater context of
climate change in the Southern Appalachians.



                                                                                                       648
Setlalekgomo, Mpho (Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University); Winter, Deo (Nelson Mandela
Metropolitan University, Port Elizabeth, South Africa)

The effects of gender, body mass, temperature and seasonal acclimation to the resting oxygen
consumption of adult angulate tortoises (Chersina angulata)

Metabolic rate in animals is commonly known to be influenced by several factors. These include gender,
body mass, temperature and photoperiod. We investigated the combined effects of the above mentioned
factors on the resting oxygen consumption in adult Chersina angulata. Eight female tortoises of mass
range 358.00 to 765.55 g and 9 male tortoises of mass range 360.02 to 867.81 g were used in the study.
The resting oxygen consumption (RVO2) rates were determined at varying experimental temperatures in
tortoises acclimated at either summer or winter temperatures and photoperiods. The RVO2 for males and
females at different experimental temperatures during different seasons were not statistically different
from each other (P>0.05). The RVO2 of C. angulata increased with body mass and experimental
temperature at all temperatures tested at both summer and winter acclimations. An inverse relationship
was observed between mass-specific resting oxygen consumption and body mass. The mass scaling
exponents obtained for C. angulata at different temperatures and seasons have a broad range (0.48 -
1.67) and are within the range reported for other chelonians but were higher than the theoretical values
for turtles. The exponents are not significantly influenced by season, but show three distinct ranges
within the temperature range of 14 - 40°C in summer-acclimated tortoises. The variation between the
intraspecific mass exponents among chelonians, as well as the deviation of most intraspecific mass
exponents from the theoretical value for turtles, show the danger of using generic values and the
importance of determining a species-specific relationship to be able to reasonably estimate the energy
demands of any given species of tortoise.



Sever, David (Southeastern Louisiana University); Rheubert, Justin (Saint Louis University, Saint Louis,
MO, United States); Trauth, Stanley (Arkansas State University, State University, United States); Siegel,
Dustin (Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau, MO, United States)

Recent Advances in Our Knowledge of Comparative Cytology of Sex Accessory Organs in Male
Squamates

Sex accessory organs are the genital ducts and derivatives of these structures. In lizards and snakes,
these include the rete testis, ductuli efferentes, ductus epididymis, ductus deferens, ampulla ductus
deferentis, the ampulla ureter (AUR) or ampulla urogenital papilla (AUP), and the sexual segment of the
kidney (SSK). Our recent work has provided new comparative ultrastructural data for the lizards
Hemidactylus turcicus and Scincella lateralis and the snakes Pantherophis obsoletus, Seminatrix
pygaea, Tantilla gracilis, Pelamis platurus, Agkistrodon contortrix, and A. piscivorus. These
observations are compared to findings on other amniotes including the few published cytological studies
on additional squamate taxa. The ultrastructure of the rete testis and ductuli efferentes is highly
conserved among all amniotes heretofore examined, but the ductus epididymis is highly variable. A
comprehensive study on the ductus deferens at the cellular level does not exist for squamates, but the
distal end of the ductus deferens, the ampulla ductus deferentis, is variable among the four taxa of
squamates that have been studied. An AUR (ureter distally enlarged) is the ancestral condition in
squamates and the AUP (chamber at junction of ureter and ductus deferens) is derived in some elapids
and colubroids. Only cursory cytological observations occur on the AUR/AUP for three snake taxa. The
ancestral condition of the SSK in squamates is the presence of simple columnar epithelium specialized
for secretion of a protein + carbohydrate product that matures and is released seasonally. Thus, the




                                                                                                      649
general cyctology of the SSK is conserved, but ultrastructural studies on 10 disparate squamate taxa
reveal much variation in cellular details.



Shaffer, H. Bradley (University of California Los Angeles);

A genomic perspective on hybridization between invasive and native tiger salamanders

Invasive species can be conservation nightmares as well as amazing opportunities to study real-time
evolutionary ecology unfold on natural landscapes. For two decades our lab has studied the invasion
dynamics of non-native tiger salamanders as they hybridize with, and genetically invade the endangered
California tiger salamander (CTS) in California. Based on studies ranging from physiological analyses of
locomotor performance to natural selection on genotypic composition, our work indicates that hybrids and
pure non-native salamanders consistently outperform pure native CTS, even on California landscapes
where natives should have an advantage. This non-native advantage often takes the form of more rapid
larval growth rates, leading to larger larvae, the emergence of paedomorphosis as a novel life history, and
shorter times to sexual maturity in metamorphosing populations. In addition, a small fraction of the non-
native genome is superinvasive, and those genomic regions are sweeping to fixation across the CTS.
Laboratory genetic analyses indicate that these superinvasive genes act synergistically to produce
metamorphs that are exceptionally large and rapidly-growing, and that hybrids are most strongly favored
in human-modified ecosystems. Our analyses suggest that many of these same phenomena occur in
natural hybrid zones, but their transient nature may render them very difficult to observe under most
conditions. In the future, we hope to use our extensive tissue samples extending back 25 years to track
the movements of this genetic invasion in real time, with thousands of mapped genetic markers, as it has
moved across the California landscape.



Shaffer, H. Bradley (University of California Los Angeles);

Invasive genomics of western Tiger salamanders

In the 1950s, tens of thousands of non-native tiger salamanders were introduced into central California,
where they hybridized extensively with native California tiger salamanders (CTS). Fifty years later, the
CTS was listed under the US Endangered Species Act. Comprehensive population genetic data from our
lab indicates that about a quarter of the range of the endangered CTS is now an admixture of native and
non-native genes, and that two classes of non-native genes exist on the landscape. In Central coast
regions near the sites of original introduction, hybrid swarm populations have replaced pure native CTS;
these populations are often greater than 70% non-native alleles, and have life history features associated
with the non-native species. In addition, about 5% of the genome is superinvasive, consisting of highly
favored non-native genes that have spread another 100 km beyond the hybrid invasion front. A key
question is how to manage this invasion in the context of an endangered species. Should hybrids be
protected, particularly those with only superinvasive alleles? Should we manage for genetic purity, for
ecological authenticity, or simply for the greatest fraction of native genes that we can? Given that it
appears virtually impossible to remove the non-native genes, what is the most appropriate conservation
target for this system? And at a larger scale, how should we manage genetic invasions that threaten the
ecological and evolutionary integrity of endangered native taxa and communities?




                                                                                                       650
Shaney, Kyle (Weber State University); Marshall, Jonathon (Weber State University, Ogden, UT, United
States); Leavitt, Dean (San Diego State University, San Diego, United States); Grover, Mark (Utah
Division of Wildlife Resources, Springville, UT, United States)

Investigating a Potential Hybrid Zone in Eastern and Western Fence Lizards (genus Sceloporus)

The state of Utah in the USA is home to four different species of Spiny lizards (genus Sceloporus). In
southwestern Utah (Washington County) four species of Sceloporus come into close proximity of each
other. The distribution of two of these species the Eastern Fence lizard (Sceloporus undulatus) and the
Western Fence lizard (Sceloporus occidentalis) overlap in several localities in the Pine Valley Mountain
area of Washington County. This is the only region in the world that these two species meet. Based on
morphological observations several employees of the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources believe these
two species of lizards are occasionally breeding and forming hybrid offspring. During the summers of
2010 and 2011, lizard tail samples were collected from 60 lizards morphologically identified as S.
occidentalis, S. undulatus, or potential hybrids. These tissue samples were taken from four different
potential hybrid zone localities in the Pine Valley mountain area. In this preliminary hybrid zone one
study, we use sequenced mitochondrial ND1 genes to assess evidence of hybridization resulting in gene
flow between species.



Shaw, Ashley (College of Charleston); Sancho, Gorka (College of Charleston, Canada); Frazier, Bryan
(South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Canada)

Trophic ecology of an estuarine predatory fish community in South Carolina assessed by stable
isotope analysis

Estuaries serve as habitats and nurseries for many recreationally and commercially important fish,
contributing recruits into adult populations that remain in close proximity to estuarine environments.
Understanding the diet and trophic relationship dynamics of the fish populations within the estuarine
community is essential to effectively managing these species. Upper-level predatory fish are among the
most sought-after fisheries species, and studying the trophic ecology of this community can infer the
probability of competition and niche partitioning within this highly productive ecosystem. To establish
these trophic relationships, relative trophic levels and dietary niche overlap of the predator community in
the Cape Romain National Wildlife Refuge (specifically Bulls Bay and its surrounding tidal creeks) were
assessed using stable isotope analysis. The main predators examined in this study include teleosts such
as red drum, spotted seatrout, and southern flounder, in addition to elasmobranchs, which include
bonnethead, scalloped hammerhead, Atlantic sharpnose, sandbar and finetooth sharks. Fish, collected
with cooperation of South Carolina Department of Natural Resources via trammel nets, gillnets and
longlines in the channels and along the banks of the estuary, were measured, muscle biopsied, and then
released. Tissue samples were taken from the dorsal musculature with a 4 mm biopsy punch and frozen
until analysis. Samples were examined for carbon (C 13 ) and nitrogen (N 15 ) isotope ratios. Isotopic
signatures of potential prey were collected and used to elucidate the predators‘ diets. In addition,
stomach content of predators was collected during sampling when a live release was not possible.
Results may have implications for ecosystem-based management of the Cape Romain estuarine system
that can be applicable to other estuaries.




                                                                                                       651
Sheil, Christopher (John Carroll University); Harrington, Sean (John Carroll University, Canada)

Intraspecific Variation in Timing of Ossification Affects Inferred Sequence Heterochrony

Numerous studies have addressed heterochrony in the relative timing of ossification in the skeleton of
amphibians and reptiles.       These studies synthesize information from an impressive body of literature
that describes the developmental origins of skeletal elements. Recent methods have been developed to
automate the process of inferring ancestral sequences of ossification (e.g., Event-Pair Cracking;
Continuous Analysis, and PGi), and that allow one to identify shifts in the relative timing of appearance of
bones across phylogeny.        Other major contributions to these studies have come through advances in
phylogenetic techniques that yield impressive and robust evolutionary hypotheses for an incredible
number of taxa (e.g., hundreds of species of amphibians spanning global diversity in this clade).
Though these methods facilitate faster studies of sequence heterochrony across increasingly larger
datasets, the problem of intraspecific variation in timing of ossification remains.        The few studies of
variation in developmental timing of ossification that exist suggest that it can be quite large, and it remains
to be determined whether this variation can affect inferred sequence heterochrony.              To explore the
influence of intraspecific variation on sequence heterochrony, we used PGi to analyze pairs of datasets
collected from lab-raised and field-caught amphibians, and analyzed them with identical methods,
parameters, taxa, and phylogenetic topologies. Each taxon represented a species for which ossification
sequences had been collected from lab-reared or wild-caught specimens, and for which these data had
been collected with comparable methods. Results from these paired analyses yielded radically different
scenarios of sequence heterochrony, and few instances of congruence were identified.                Sequence
heterochrony differed for specified taxa when data were collected from the lab or field. These results
suggest that caution should be taken when data are combined from specimens collected and raised in the
lab and wild.



Sherratt, Emma (Harvard University); Gower, David J.; Wilkinson, Mark (The Natural History Museum,
London, United Kingdom); Klingenberg, Christian P. (The University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom)

Modularity influenced evolution of the caecilian skull

Morphological integration is the internal coordination among morphological subunits. The related concept
of modularity, the degree of integration within and between these subunits, can be inferred from patterns
of covariation among measured traits. We used geometric morphometrics to investigate modularity in the
cranium across the order of Gymnophiona (caecilians - limbless and mostly burrowing amphibians that
use their head as a tool for locomotion). Taking a developmental and evolutionary perspective, we
examined covariation at three levels of variation: within individuals (fluctuating asymmetry), within species
and among species. We evaluated two a priori hypotheses of modularity that defined functionally distinct
regions of the cranium as modules, and found support for one, where the cranium is modular with respect
to the snout and the braincase with cheek region. This hypothesis was supported at all levels, indicatin g
there is a developmental basis for the modularity, which is shared among all species of caecilians. We
examined patterns of evolutionary shape variation for each module and found that they substantially
differ, where the snout has undergone greater morphological diversification during history of caecilians
than the braincase with cheek region module. We interpret this pattern as support to the theory that
modularity may facilitate adaptive evolution by allowing independent changes to underlying
developmental interactions within a module without disrupting the function of the entire organism.




                                                                                                           652
Sherratt, Emma (Harvard University); Losos, Jonathan B. (Harvard University, Canada)

The deep history of Anolis habitat specialists.

Anolis lizards are an upcoming model system for studies of evolutionary diversification; they represent an
excellent example of a rapidly multiplying lineage, in which the members display great diversity in their
ecology, behavior and observed characteristics. Our inferences about the evolutionary history of these
lizards are based solely on comparisons of modern species‘ DNA and statistical inferences about the
likely characteristics of ancestors. Now we have the opportunity to test hypotheses laid down by these
comparative methods using evidence from the fossil record, specifically from amber inclusions.
Dominican amber - fossilized tree resin from the Caribbean island Hispaniola - is highly sought after by
antiquity collectors and scientists alike because of its well-preserved animal and plant inclusions.
Vertebrate inclusions, such as lizards, are considered quite rare, and to date just three anoles have been
described from Dominican amber. We present a large sample of previously unpublished amber anole
fossils from private collections and museum collections world wide. These fossils were imaged using
high-resolution x-ray computed tomography in order to examine the internal structure of the specimens
and the morphology of the fossil inclusions. We reconstructed models of the skeletons, and where
possible soft tissue, and used morphometrics to compare the body and head shape of these fossils to
modern Dominican species. From these data, we reveal new insights on the evolution of this fascinating
system.



Shiffman, David (University of Miami); Gallagher, Austin; Wester, Julia; Hammerschlag, Neil (University
of Miami, Canada)

Catch and release recreational shark fishing in Florida: economic, social, and policy implications

Catch-and-release fishing represents a non-extractive use of sharks that furthers the frequently-used
conservation principle that sharks may be worth more alive (to ecotourism businesses) than dead (to
extractive fishermen). Recreational fishing is economically and socially important in the state of Florida,
and sharks are a popular sportfish. 137 charter fishing businesses throughout the state of Florida that
advertise shark fishing trips were identified. Using content analysis of charter fishing business websites
and trade publications, as well as surveys of charter fishing captains, the extent of the catch and release
shark fishery was estimated. Catch and release practices are commonly utilized by charterboat fishing
captains, with only two businesses explicitly advertising "catch and kill" practices. The most commonly
targeted species of sharks are mostly locally abundant, with the exception of great and scalloped
hammerheads, which are declining in population and are the least likely to survive catch and release
fishing. The wording used by charterboat businesses on company websites and trade publications was
analyzed to show attitudes towards catch and release fishing. For many businesses, shark fishing trips
are the most expensive service offered, suggesting that sharks are economically valuable to these
charterboat captains. Survey results are also discussed. Applicable fisheries management policies are
reviewed.




                                                                                                       653
Shin, Jaehyub (Seoul National University);

Effects of amphibian chytrid fungus (Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis) on reproduction of fire-
bellied toads (Bombina orientalis)

Emerging infectious disease, especially the amphibian chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis
(Bd), may be responsible for population declines and extinctions of many amphibian species. Recently Bd
has been discovered in Korea, but no reports have surfaced of mortality or morbidity associated with
infection. Furthermore, no animals showing clinical signs of chytridiomycosis have been found. However,
Bd may cause more subtle effects that require examination. I investigated the clutch size and hatching
rate of Bombina orientalis collected from wild populations in Korea as a function of the Bd-infection
status and load of the female parent. I observed amplexed pairs in the field and brought them back to the
laboratory where they oviposited. I tested each parent for Bd infection and Bd load by nested PCR and
quantitative PCR, respectively. I estimated clutch size by counting samples of egg masses and I
measured hatching rate of these samples in laboratory conditions. I expected to find that infected animals
may suffer reduced clutch size or hatching rate. Analyses of results to test this hypothesis are still
underway. I also am examining interactions between Bd and life-history traits by comparing fecundity and
hatching-success measures among individuals based on their major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
genotypes. This research should contribute to the development of a better understanding of the
population dynamics of Korean amphibians and how they are influenced by Bd infection.



Shine, Rick (University of Sydney);

Invasive cane toads in Australia: the ecological and evolutionary effects of a big frog in a strange
land

Cane toads are the animals that Australians love to hate. Introduced to Queensland in 1935, toads have
now spread across much of northern Australia. In this talk, I will review recent scientific advances in our
understanding of toad biology and impact. Large predators have been decimated by toad arrival, whereas
many other native species have benefited. Remarkably, the toad invasion has induced rapid evolutionary
changes both in native predators (that have evolved to deal with the toads‘ presence) and in the toads
themselves (that have evolved to become more effective invaders).



Shirk, Philip (Virginia Commonwealth University); Patrick, David (Paul Smith's College, Canada); Howell,
Kim (University of Dar es Salaam, Canada); Harper, Elizabeth (Paul Smith's College, Canada); Vonesh,
James (Virginia Commonwealth University, Canada)

Community and population-level responses of an Afromontane chameleon assemblage to forest
fragmentation

Habitat modification in the form of fragmentation and loss is a leading cause of biodiversity decline. The
basic predictions from island biogeography theory that species richness and population size decrease
with declining area and increased isolation have received considerable support. However much of this
research has focused on birds and mammals in temperate regions or the Neotropics, limiting our ability to
generalize to other taxa and regions. Reptiles in particular are understudied and have not shown a clear
response. Here we examine          the community and population-level responses of an Afromontane
chameleon assemblage to forest fragmentation. The East Usambara Mountains of Tanzania have high
rates of endemicity within a highly fragmented forested landscape. Within this fragmented habitat are



                                                                                                        654
eight species of chameleon, many of which are of conservation concern. We used repeated distance-
based sampling in a large forest block and 11 forest fragments in order to estimate species‘ densities and
overall richness. This allowed us to quantify the population and community-level responses to habitat
fragmentation while accounting for differences in detectability. Chameleon richness decreased with both
decreasing fragment size and with increasing isolation. The chameleon communities of 10 of the 11
forest fragments were subsets of the community of the largest block sampled, suggesting that smaller
fragments contribute little to landscape-level biodiversity. Chameleon densities are better predicted by
fragment area alone than by any model including isolation, but species‘ responses differ. Rhampholeon
temporalis shows a strong decrease in density with decreasing fragment area, while Trioceros
deremensis ‘ density decreases only slightly with decreasing fragment area. Neither species was found in
the two smallest forest fragments (&lt;3.5 ha), suggesting that each has a similar fragment area threshold.
The combination of Kinyongia matschiei and K. vosseleri show an increase in density as fragment area
decreases. Due to the alteration of chameleon communities in smaller fragments, with declines in species
richness and species-dependent changes in density, several small blocks are not equivalent to a single
large block. A possible functional cause for this non-equivalency is altered vegetation characteristics in
smaller fragments. In some cases the vegetation variables are more strongly correlated with species‘
density than is fragment area.



Shirley, Matthew (University of Florida);

Phylogeographic perspective on the population histories of sympatric Central African crocodiles

Recent molecular phylogenetic studies have shown that the three traditionally recognized extant African
crocodilian taxa ( Crocodylus niloticus , Mecistops cataphractus , and Osteolaemus tetraspis ) are each
comprised of highly divergent, cryptic lineages. Interpreting these results in light of continent-scale
biogeographic events indicated several common, putatively vicariant, patterns. Our study represents the
first comparative study across Africa crocodilian taxa. Cryptic African crocodile complexes provide a
unique opportunity for comparison because they are of different evolutionary age yet display similar levels
of distributional stability. Despite being broadly sympatric throughout western Africa, they each exhibit
significant niche partitioning and life history differences, as well as different capacity for dispersal.
Comparative phylogeographic analyses provide a framework under which genealogical concordance
between sympatric species is used to test the strength of geographic features in structuring regional
biotas. Comparing phylogeographic structure between these crocodile species complexes will produce
significant insights into the relative role of vicariance, notably basin entrapment, and the effects of
paleoclimatic change on forest distribution and desertification.

Individuals of all three crocodile species were sampled from throughout their known distributions from
both wild populations and museum collections and sequenced at up to five homologous gene regions
including both mitochondrial and nuclear markers. Individuals of Mecistops and Osteolaemus were
additionally genotyped for 10 homologous microsatellite loci. Sequence data for all three species was
analyzed under a comparative, statistical phylogeographic framework to test congruent vicariance and
divergence timing between the Congo and Ogooué Basins, as well as across the Cameroon Volcanic
Line. Both sequence and microsatellite data were used to test for patterns of comparative structure
between Mecistops and Osteolaemus within the Ogooué Basin. Preliminary results show congruent
patterns of high interbasin differentiation, though not for all species complex pairs, with low intrabasin
structure. These results support the importance of both species specific and landscape-level factors in
driving the evolution of faunas across regions over time.




                                                                                                       655
Shirley, Matthew (University of Florida);

Range-wide Hierarchical Processes Structuring Slender-snouted Crocodile Populations

The factors shaping landscape-level population genetic structure are dynamic and dependent on both fine
and coarse spatial and temporal scale processes. Therefore, a comprehensive understanding of regional
evolutionary processes can best be gained by integrating data that are affected by factors operating at a
broad spatiotemporal scale. The slender-snouted crocodile ( Mecistops cataphractus ) is an old (min. 10-
12 mya), widely distributed habitat specialist (forest-restricted) that has undergone large-scale
anthropogenic population reductions. We assessed the phylogenetic, phylogeographic and landscape
genetic structure of this species with the objectives of elucidating regional biogeographic process and
better managing wild populations of this increasingly threatened crocodile. Samples from wild individuals
from throughout the range were collected and sequenced for four mitochondrial genes and unlinked
nuclear loci, as well as genotyped for 14 unlinked microsatellites. Phylogenetic and coalescent-based
methods were used to test for cryptic, species level diversity between the three major biogeographic
zones of western Africa following expectations from sympatric crocodile species, and to test the relative
importance of historic versus contemporary events on population structure. Phylogenetic analysis
provided support for two highly divergent, monophyletic clades with no support for finer-scale structure
within each independent biogeographic zone; though the observed phylogeographic pattern is
incongruent with expectations from closely related crocodile species suggesting that M. cataphractus
may be older than evidenced by the fossil record. Within the Ogooué Basin, preliminary results support
drainage structured populations with higher isolation between more distantly distributed populations likely
exacerbated by anthropogenically-mediated population declines. In the face of rapid environmental
change, studies aiming to impact the conservation of biodiversity can no longer afford to be narrow in
scope. This project utilized a novel, multi-level approach to species conservation that integrated field and
molecular techniques to improve our understanding of the ecological and evolutionary processes driving
population structure and persistence in the slender-snouted crocodiles across western Africa.



Shivji, Mahmood (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA and Guy Harvey Research Institute, Nova
Southeastern University); Horn, Rebekah (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA and Guy Harvey Research
Institute, Nova Southeastern University, Canada)

A meta-analysis of matrilineal population genetic structure in fishery exploited sharks

Assessment, management and conservation of resources by their individual populations/stocks is a
central goal of fishery managers. This goal also applies to shark fisheries, but management of sharks on
a population basis is still infrequent partly because information on their population delineation is limited
(although growing). This limitation is particularly acute for species that have widespread distributions and
constitute major components of the global fishery catch. Contrary to expectations given the apparent
potential for long-distance movement by many large shark species, studies that have examined their
population structure are revealing notable levels of genetic differentiation at various spatial scales. We
present a ―first-look‖ meta-analysis of maternal lineage (mitochondrial DNA-based) population genetic
structure in sharks based on published and unpublished data. At the minimum, inter-ocean basin or inter-
hemispheric population differentiation based on mitochondrial markers is present in nearly all species with
global distributions. For some species, statistically significant, matrilineal population structure has been
detected within ocean basins, and in some cases this structure is present over relatively small geographic
scales (1000-2500 km) and even continuous coastlines. Although more detailed information on shark
population structure is still required (i.e., studies with many more sampling locations and more statistical
power using more markers and/or larger sample sizes), the growing evidence that sharks consist of



                                                                                                        656
genetically differentiated populations bodes well for assessment and management of sharks on a
population-specific basis, the ability to track the population origin of shark products in fisheries and trade
for fishery law enforcement efforts, and monitoring landings and markets to detect if certain populations in
less-regulated fisheries are being inadvertently overexploited.



Shuker, Jon (Griffith University); Simpkins, Clay; Hero, Jean-Marc (Griffith University, Canada)

Abiotic and biotic factors associated with the distribution and abundance of the threatened
wallum sedge frog (Litoria olongburensis) in mainland eastern Australia

Natural resource managers responsible for conservation of a threatened species require knowledge of
important environmental influences on survival and reproduction of the species. In an environment that is
subject to changing conditions, managers need to know the environmental limits, or ecological niche,
within which the threatened species can thrive. Various methods have been devised to model a species‘
niche. However, few studies have successfully described the ecological niche of terrestrial vertebrate
species. Ecologists often assume that environmental relationships are straight-lined, or at least
monotonic, even though unimodal responses can occur due to, for example, physiological tolerance
limits or niche overlap with predators or competitors. Herein we describe relationships between
environmental      factors and the relative density of the threatened wallum sedge frog (Litoria
olongburensis) throughout its mainland distribution during the breeding season. The relative importance
of the relationships have been determined by a multi- factorial analysis that considers unimodal forms of
response. Abiotic factors examined were acidity, water depth, turbidity and salinity, while biotic factors
examined were plant species abundance, potential competitor frogs and potential predators of the frog‘s
aquatic larvae. The two factors most strongly related to frog density were acidity and water depth.
Models of the species‘ ecological niche derived from Liebig‘s Law of the Minimum were used to obtain
estimates of optimal conditions, and unsuitable conditions, for each factor. This data is critical for the
long-term management of the species.



Siddons, Spencer (University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point);

The Occurrence of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis among Populations of Lithobates pipiens and
L. clamitans in Wisconsin, USA

Despite the global concern regarding the spread of the Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis , the fungus that
causes amphibian chydtridiomycosis, and the increasing number of studies documenting its presence
and distribution, very little has been reported from the state of Wisconsin. Herein we report the results of
a survey for B . dendrobatidis performed throughout Wisconsin during September 2009 and June and
July 2010. Swab sampling of Lithobates clamitans and L. pipiens , two species known to be susceptible
to infection by B. dendrobatidis , occurred at 50 sites representing all 24 of Wisconsin‘s water
management units. PCR analysis of swab samples revealed B. dendrobatidis to be widely distributed in
Wisconsin, infecting both Lithobates clamitans and Lithobates pipiens .                Proportions of water
management units, individual sites, and individual species testing positive for B. dendrobatidis will be
discussed. Whereas B. dendrobatidis is apparently widespread and common in Wisconsin, none of the
frogs sampled exhibited visible evidence of chytridiomycosis, nor could any such reports be found in the
literature. The potential significance of these findings, suggestions for future research, and conservation
implications will be discussed.




                                                                                                          657
Sidlauskas, Brian (Oregon State University); Hoekzema, Kendra (Oregon State University, Corvallis,
OR, United States); Sabaj Pérez, Mark (Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA,
United States)

Macroevolutionary Implications of an In-Progress Molecular Phylogeny for Anostomoid Fishes

The anostomoid fishes of South America (Order Characiformes) include more than 300 omnivorous,
herbivorous, invertivorous and detrivorous species with a spectacular range of jaw and head
morphologies. A phylogeny based on nearly 500 anatomical characters supports their current taxonomy
and formed the framework for recent cladewide studies of the group‘s ecomorphological diversification.
However, little molecular data has been available to contrast with the wealth of morphological information.
Herein, we present an in-progress phylogeny for anostomoid fishes based on likelihood and Bayesian
analysis of mitochondrial (COXI, 16S, CytB) and nuclear (Myh6) loci that includes representatives from
most major lineages in the morphological phylogeny. Support values using this set of loci vary across
the tree and some relationships are in flux, but much of the molecular tree agrees well with the
morphological hypothesis. Perhaps the most interesting difference lies in the relationships of two groups
of anostomid fishes with upturned jaws, Laemolyta on the one hand, and a diverse assemblage
including Anostomus and Pseudanos on the other. Morphological analysis places these groups as
sisters and nests them deeply within family Anostomidae. The molecular tree indicates a similar
placement for Laemolyta , but suggests that the clade including Anostomus and Pseudanos branched
off from the rest of Anostomidae early in evolutionary history.        This molecular hypothesis implies
substantial morphological convergence, including multiple evolutionary origins of the greatly elongated
quadrate that results in one of the most extreme head morphologies seen in the group. Analysis of head
morphometrics in the context of the molecular hypothesis using Brownie 2.0 suggests that anostomid
fishes experienced a faster rate of evolution along the axis in morphospace corresponding to that
convergence. These results are provocative and may imply a different macroevolutionary scenario than
previously proposed for this group, but they are also preliminary. Substantially more taxa and loci will
need to be added before the depth of the molecular dataset approaches that of the morphological.



Sidlauskas, Brian (Oregon State University);

The Collection in the Classroom and Beyond

In addition to their well-documented role in catalyzing scientific discoveries, natural history collections
provide exceptional resources with which to engage students in hands-on learning about biodiversity,
evolution, ecology, morphology and geography. For example, it is one thing to tell a student about how
fishes modify their fins for a variety of purposes (swimming, gliding, sucking, fishing!) and another to
confront them with specimens showing those diverse adaptations, ask them to compare and contrast the
fins that they see, and hypothesize how they might be used. University collections are well suited for
collections-based education because they bring the specimens into close proximity with students ranging
from grade school through the doctorate. During this talk, I‘ll highlight two programs at Oregon State
University that draw on the diversity of students in order to teach the diversity of fishes. In the Discovery
Units, undergraduate and graduate students design and lead hands-on sessions for groups of precollege
students using the teaching collection.      In the Systematics of Fishes course, undergraduates work in
teams to compare and contrast specimens, discover diagnostic characteristics and learn how to identify
fishes. We are in the early stages of developing an online version of this course based on a virtual
teaching collection that will preserve the observational, group-learning environment as much as possible.
Both programs are founded on the complementary ideas that active, hands-on engagement with
collection objects strengthens learning by allowing students to make discoveries themselves, and that



                                                                                                         658
mastery of a subject is best achieved by helping others grasp the material in turn. While my examples are
ichthyological in nature, these techniques translate easily to other taxa and represent some of the many
ways that collections can impact education broadly.



Sidor, Christian (University of Washington);

Tetrapods from the Permian and Triassic of Africa: New data on biogeographic provincialism.

The Middle Permian to Middle Triassic rocks of South Africa‘s Karoo Basin record detailed baseline data
on the composition of end-Paleozoic and early Mesozoic terrestrial ecosystems at moderate southern
paleo-latitudes.    The broad geographic distribution of several Karoo genera (e.g., Diictodon,
Lystrosaurus) has been considered compelling evidence for the unrestricted dispersal of tetrapods across
a coalesced Pangaean landscape as well as for interpreting Karoo data as a model for global patterns,
especially regarding the effects of the end-Permian extinction. Recent expeditions have targeted
equivalent strata in Niger, Tanzania, and Zambia to gauge the degree to which patterns observed in
Karoo data are basinal, regional, or continental in scale.

The Moradi Formation of northern Niger has yielded an Upper Permian fauna that is strikingly different
from those known elsewhere. All Moradi tetrapods are endemic and the taxonomic composition of the
fauna is unlike that of any coeval fauna, being dominated by large reptile (captorhinid and pareiasaurian)
herbivores. Most surprisingly, dicynodonts have yet to be discovered in the Moradi Formation, and
therapsids are represented by only two gorgonopsian fossils.

The Ruhuhu Basin of Tanzania and the Luangwa Basin of Zambia both host Upper Permian tetrapod
assemblages that are very similar to each other, as well as to the Karoo. Each area records some
endemic genera (e.g., Peltobatrachus in Tanzania; a new tusked cistecephalid in Zambia), but the bulk of
tetrapod genera are found in all three basins. Both the Usili Formation (Tanzania) and upper
Madumabisa Mudstone Formation (Zambia) contain a single fauna that correlates most closely with that
of the Cistecephalus Assemblage Zone of South Africa.

Middle Triassic (Anisian) rocks are present in South Africa, Tanzania, and Zambia and record faunal
assemblages postdating the Permo-Triassic mass extinction by approximately five million years. In
contrast to the single, broadly distributed faunal structure featured in the Upper Permian, the Anisian was
characterized multiple faunal provinces, the more equatorial of which contained dinosaur predecessors
unknown elsewhere. The results of newly developed network methods suggest that the end-Permian
mass extinction was responsible for the regionalization of tetrapod faunas within a geographically limited
area of southern Pangaea.



Siegel, Dustin (Southeast Missouri State University); Aldridge, Robert; Rheubert, Justin (Saint Louis
University, St. Louis, MO, United States); Gribbins, Kevin (Wittenberg University, Springfield, OH, United
States); Sever, David (Southeastern Louisiana University, Hammond, LA, United States); Trauth, Stanley
(Arkansas State University, State University, AR, United States)

The genital kidney of male Ambystoma maculatum (Amphibia, Urodela, Ambystomatidae)

In male salamanders sperm from the testes travel to the Wolffian duct via the vasa efferentia, afferent
epididymal ducts, epididymal renal corpuscles, epididymal nephrons, and efferent epididymal ducts. The
longitudinal collecting duct that often is found adjoining the vasa efferentia and afferent epididymal ducts



                                                                                                        659
longitudinally is ultrastructrually identical to that of the vasa efferentia. A complete ontology of the
―epididymal complex‖ in male salamanders is presented. We hypothesize that the vasa efferentia,
longitudinal collecting duct, and afferent epididymal ducts are derived from testicular tissue and are thus
homologous to the retia testium of amniotes. We tested the hypothesis that the genital kidney nephrons
are modified for sperm transport and no longer function in urine concentration/dilution by examining the
genital kidney with transmission electron microscopy. This novel approach resulted in support of our
hypothesis by the finding of an extended proximal segment of the proximal convoluted tubule that is
heavily ciliated, the absence of a basal labyrinth in the proximal convoluted tubule, and an apparent
decrease in absorptive function of the apical plasma membrane in the proximal convoluted tubule.



Sieggreen, Marcy (Detroit Zoological Society); Pratt, Kevin; Johnson, Becky (Detroit Zoological Society,
Royal Oak, United States)

Mudpuppy Population Size and Status Throughout the Great Lakes in Canada and the USA

The mudpuppy (Necturus maculosus), sometimes called ―slime-dog‖ or ―snot-otter,‖ is the largest
amphibian found throughout the Great Lakes ranging between 8 and 15 inches in length. Little is known
about their behavior, migration and population status in the wild. Over the last ten years, several hundred
have washed on shore. However, because so little is known about these animals, the causes of these
events or their impacts on the population cannot be determined. The Detroit Zoological Society began
informal surveys in 2005 to determine the health and population size of animals within the Detroit River.
In 2009, a more formal and scientific approach was developed, including water quality and atmospheric
recordings. Since then, consistent data has been collected and surveys conducted on a monthly basis.
Additionally, increasing interest from other zoos has resulted in a collaborative effort of monitoring and
surveying these animals throughout the Great Lakes. These data are being compiled along with most of
the historical and anecdotal data. This will allow us to determine the status of the population, monitor it for
changes, and intervene if necessary.



Simmons, John (Museologica);

Looking back at moving forward-an historic view of how new technologies and discoveries
changed collections

The first natural history collections contained only specimens that could be preserved dry.       Individual
specimens were rarely marked or labeled, and collections care was limited.            Post-1600 advances in
preservation technology included the introduction of glass and other stable containers; the use of
embalming chemicals to dehydrate tissues; specimen preparation using wax injections; the application of
arsenic and other pesticides; and the discovery of several fluid preservatives, most significantly ethyl
alcohol. During the 1800s, improvements were made in containers and seals; cataloging and labeling of
individual specimens became common; the concept of the study skin was developed; and formaldehyde
fixation was introduced. Post-1975 collections grew increasingly larger and more complex, and the use
of specimens and collection data extended beyond taxonomic uses. These larger, more heavily used
collections required more care, resulting in the advent of the profession of collections management. The
use of electronic databases greatly improved the management of collection records after 1980, but
diverted significant time away from collection care.    In 1985 the Society for the Preservation of Natural
History Collections began promoting preventive conservation based collections management
emphasizing collections storage environments and measures to prolong the useful life of specimens and



                                                                                                           660
associated data. With the widespread application of electronic database systems and digital imaging,
collections and specimen data have become an international resource. To meet future research needs
while properly managing collections, specimen preservation techniques should be diversified; more
reliable means of DNA preservation must be developed; methods for cost-effective archival storage of
collection information in electronic formats developed; and collection database systems must become
comprehensive collections management tools that track specimen interactions with storage environments
and individual specimen use histories.



Simpfendorfer, Colin (Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries and Aquaculture); Rigby, Cassandra
(James Cook University, Cairns, Q, Australia)

How low is too low? Depletion reference points for deepwater chondrichthyans

Deepwater chondrichthyans are among the most vulnerable to human impacts because of their late ages
of maturity and low reproductive rates. While this vulnerability is being increasingly recognized,
understanding how to best manage these populations is still limited. Here we use life history data to
calculate levels of population productivity and estimate the levels of depletion at which Maximum
Sustainable Yield (MSY) occur. These estimates of the population levels at which MSY are achieved
provide target reference points for conservation and management of deepwater chondrichthyans. The
patterns in these reference points with factors such as depth, taxonomy and reproductive mode are
examined. Gaps in our knowledge that will help improve the conservation and management of deepwater
species are also identified.



Simpkins, Clay (Griffith University); Hero, Jean-Marc (Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia)

Use of anthropogenic habitats by 'acid' frogs associated with wallum heathland along the eastern
Australian coastline

Anthropogenic waterbodies may play a pivotal role in amphibian conservation, especially when
amphibians are under threat from climate change or when attempting to compensate for habitat loss.
However, no studies have examined the suitability of anthropogenic waterbodies for ‗acid‘ frog species
restricted to wallum healthland vegetation along the eastern Australian coastline. We surveyed amphibian
assemblages within 12 natural and 25 anthropogenic waterbodies in wallum heathland over the summer
period of 2011/2012. Anthropogenic habitat usage was dependant on the amphibian species, with a
majority of generalist/non-threatened amphibian species favouring anthropogenic over natural
waterbodies. Threatened amphibian species were recorded from both anthropogenic and natural
waterbodies, with density being highest in natural waterbodies. The total number of species present
within natural waterbodies was lower then anthropogenic waterbodies. Quantitative analysis was
conducted for two amphibian species, which were recorded from more than ten waterbodies, to determine
what variables were influencing their distribution within the waterbodies surveyed. We found that the
threatened acid frog species, Litoria olongburensis (Wallum Sedge Frog), was detected in both natural
and anthropogenic waterbodies. However, the highest densities of L. olongburensis were associated with
natural waterbodies where aquatic sedge cover was the highest. Additionally, a majority of waterbodies
where L. olongburensis occurred were below pH 4.5. The non-specialist frog, Litoria fallax, a potential
competitor of L. olongburensis, was strongly associated within anthropogenic waterbodies. Additionally, L.
fallax abundance was associated with pH, salinity and turbidity. The presence of adult frogs does not
reflect breeding success; with tadpoles of L. olongburensis found in a majority of natural waterbodies and



                                                                                                       661
present in only 2 of the 25 anthropogenic waterbodies. Our findings demonstrate that the Wallum Sedge
Frogs of eastern Australia have specific habitat requirements that must be maintained in natural systems,
and adjacent anthropogenic wetlands, to ensure the long-term conservation of acid frogs in wallum
heathland.



Sinervo, Barry (University of California); Miles, Donald B. (Ohio University, Athens, OH, United States);
Mendez de la Cruz, Fausto (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México, D.F., Mexico);
Ibargoyaguentia, Nora (INIBIOMA-CONICET, San Carlos de Bariloche, Río Negro, Argentina); Corl,
Ammon (University of Lund, Uppsala, Sweden); Bastiaans, Beth (University of California, Santa Cruz, CA,
United States); Sites, Jr., Jack W. (Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, United States)

The rock-paper-scissors social system and the origin of viviparity and high rates of speciation

We present a brief overview of the rock-paper-scissors mating system (Sinervo &amp; Lively 1996,
Nature) in the side-blotched lizard and the genetic control for color, life history traits (Sinervo et al. 2000,
Nature), and social behaviors (Sinervo et al. 2006 PNAS). We then present patterns of phylogenetic
changes in number of color morphs in side-blotched lizards (Corl et al. 2010, PNAS) and new data on
morphs across all the phrynosomatid lizards of the US and Mexico. The phylogeny for Phrynosomatidae
shows 13 origins of the RPS game, and that the speciation rate more than doubles when the RPS
originates, largely because lineages that are RPS give birth to many daughter lineages in which morphs
are lost, thus producing dimorphic and monomorphic lineages at a high rate. Furthermore, the origin of
viviparity appears to be related to the origins of trimorphic RPS systems in phrynosomatid lizards, in
lacertids of Europe and in liolaemids of South America. We also show that speciation rate among lizard
families of the world is related to the origin of color polymorphism, and that viviparity is also related to
origins of morphs. Therefore the rock-paper-scissors mating system has been responsible for the
evolution of considerable diversity in color, social systems and life history traits, including the origins of
viviparity. Rock-paper-scissors social systems generate conditions for the origin of more complex social
systems, including kin cooperation and other forms of genic cooperation, and perhaps even more
complex social systems in the context of viviparity. When morphs are lost, genes for life history and social
system present in dimorphic and monomorphic descendant species evolve rapidly from the ancestral
trimorphic RPS species, promoting reproductive isolation, divergence in social traits, and thus,
contributing to a rapid speciation process.



Singer, Randy (Florida Museum of Natural History);

Are Dehydrated Specimens A Lost Cause? A Case Study To Reclaim Dehydrated Fluid-Preserved
Specimens

Fluid-preserved specimens in collections persist only as long as their preservative is maintained. When
preservatives evaporate due to neglect or container malfunction, collection managers are often forced to
discard the specimens. Subjecting specimens to a rehydration process can be both time consuming and
hazardous. A recent development in vertebrate specimen rehydration that mitigates these hazards and is
relatively simple to conduct is discussed. Through the use of concentrated water vapor, and gradual
staging in various concentrations of preservative, dehydrated museum specimens can be rehydrated.
Similar techniques have been applied to invertebrates for decades, and more recently to herpetofauna.
Herein a new technique is applied to both fishes and mammals and its efficacy for most other groups is
indicated.




                                                                                                            662
Sinsch, Ulrich (University of Koblenz-Landau, Department of Biology. Koblenz, Germany); Dehling, J.
Maximilian (University of Koblenz-Landau, Dep. Biology, Koblenz, Germany)

Acoustic niche partitioning in an anuran community inhabiting an afromontane wetland (Butare,
Rwanda)

The species richness and calling activity of an anuran community inhabiting an agricultural wetland area
at 1 645 m asl near Butare, Rwanda, was assessed with visual and acoustic transects. The community
included 15 species which were readily distinguishable using morphological, bioacoustic and molecular
features. Eight species (Xenopus victorianus, Amietophrynus regularis, Ptychadena anchietae, P.
porosissima, Kassina senegalensis, Afrixalus quadrivittatus, Hyperolius kivuensis, H. lateralis) were
taxonomically identified. The remaining seven species (3 species of Hyperolius , 2 Phrynobatrachus , 1
Amietia , 1 Ptychadena ) represent undescribed or currently unrecognized taxa suggesting a significant
magnitude of overlooked a mphibian diversity in afromontane communities. Acoustic niche analysis of
the 14 species producing airborne advertisement calls integrated the spatial dimension, i.e. the
microhabitat used for calling, the temporal dimension, i.e. the daytime at which calling takes place, and
the call structure dimension, i.e. the physical features of the advertisement call . Average standardized
acoustic niche breadth was narrow (measured: 0.08, predicted: 0.07) and showed low variability (0.04 -
0.16) among species, which means that empiric data are in full agreement with the predictions of
stochastic niche theory for species-saturated communities. Niche segregation was mainly based on
advertisement call features, whereas spatial and temporal niche dimension contributed less. Measured
average niche overlap (0.30) was intermediate between random overlap (0.51) and minimum possible
overlap (0.11) indicating significant acoustic resource partitioning. The only taxon group with widely
overlapping acoustic niches were Ptychadena spp. which might indicate a recent invasion of the
community by one or two of the three species.



Sinsch, Ulrich (University of Koblenz-Landau, Department of Biology. Koblenz, Germany); Neukirch,
Sarah (University of Koblenz-Landau, Koblenz, Germany)

Diel vocalization activity of the afromontane umbrella species Hyperolius castaneus under
controlled conditions

The highland anuran communities (2000 – 2800 m) of the Albertine Rift in Rwanda and DR Congo
include Ahl´s reed frog ( Hyperolius castaneus ) which represents a suitable umbrella species for
threatened highland Albertine Rift endemics. H. castaneus is easily detected in field based on the
characteristic advertisement and aggression calls which were emitted during the day and at night. In
captivity (LD 12:12, temperature range 20-27°C), we recorded continuously calling activity of nine males
collected in the Nyungwe National Park at 2370m, using a Song Meter SM2 (Wildlife Acoustics, Inc .).
Responses to acoustic stimulation by playback-advertisement calls and of simulated rainfall were tested.
During trials frogs gave predominantly advertisement calls and rarely aggression calls. Independent of
ambient humidity, call activity was significantly greater during darkness, but never ceased. Acoustic
stimulation increased daytime activity to night levels, but direct vocal response to playback-advertisement
calls were rare. Calling activity decreased with rising temperature. Our study supports that advertisement
of H. castaneus occurs throughout the whole year day and night, making this species an ideal umbrella
species for the rapid assessment of threatened anurans in montane Rift communities.




                                                                                                       663
Sion, Guy (Hebrew University);

Can minor directional asymmetry of the eye reflect brain laterality? The gecko Ptyodactylus
guttatus as a model

Fear and fear processing are known in primates and other mammals to be correlated with the intensity of
brain laterality, and this association was confirmed using fMRI and EEG particularly in humans. The
presented study aims to demonstrate such an association in a gecko, Ptyodactylus guttatus.

1) Minor directional asymmetry (DA) in eye diameter of the gecko is correlated with levels of fear: We
found that geckos which have a right eye larger than the left (right-biased), have higher levels of
corticosterone and also tend to forage closer to cover, presumably indicating a higher level of fear.

2) In a different set of experiments, geckos that tend to bypass an obstacle from the left (i.e., are also
right-biased) have had a significantly higher testosterone level and higher breathing rates.

3) Assuming that eye DA and the detour DA are associated with brain laterality, we can conclude that fear
is correlated with brain laterality also in the gecko Ptyodactylus guttatus. Further study on the lizard brain
might unravel whether this similarity between the gecko and the primates is more than a coincidence or is
derived from a common evolutionary process.



Sipiorski, Justin (Department of Biology and Museum of Natural History, University of Wisconsin
Stevens Point); Howard, Michael (University of Wisconsin - Stevens Point, Appleton, United States);
Enright, Caitlin; Nickel, Adam (University of Wisconsin - Stevens Point, Canada)

An efficient method for georeferencing frequently collected localities for historical, non-
referenced ichthyological collections.

A wealth of ecological data exists within the ichthyological specimen collections of universities and natural
history museums. A great deal of data mining within existing collections begins with georeferencing. In
order to obtain meaningful data quickly, we constructed a geographic information system (GIS) basemap
of all public access localities for the Plover River system, which encompassed Portage, Marathon, and
Langlade counties in Wisconsin. Public access sites were referenced using the North American Datum
1983 (NAD83) coordinate system via web resources. Public Land Survey System (PLSS) coordinates
assigned to specimen lots collected in the Plover River system were converted to the NAD83 system as
well using a number of online resources and government publications. By referencing all possible
collection localities in an often-collected region, historically collected lots may be referenced in batches
rather than iteratively. All lots collected through time from one location (matched by common locality) can
be georeferenced simultaneously. The specific attributes of each collection lot associated with the Plover
River were translated into map layers as well. To test our georeferenced lots, we created a map layer
identifying black spot parasite spread and persistence throughout the Plover River system.




                                                                                                          664
Skerratt, Lee (James Cook University); Berger, Lee (James Cook University, Canada); Murray, Kris
(James Cook University and Ecohealth Alliance, Canada)

Determining how disease can cause mass global decline and extinction of species: the example of
the epidemiological investigation of chytridiomycosis

A vital step towards mitigating the enigmatic decline of several hundred species of amphibians was
determining its cause. The outbreak investigation progressed significantly when a ―One Health‖ approach
was adopted approximately 14 years after initial amphibian declines by herpetologist Keith McDonald.
This then led to analysis of outbreak data by an epidemiologist and a tentative diagnosis of a novel
pathogen spreading into naïve amphibian populations (Laurance et al 1996). A key factor in progress was
incorporating prior knowledge of disease gained from studies of disease in animals including humans by
epidemiologist Rick Speare. Recruiting a veterinary PhD student, Lee Berger, to conduct a pathological
investigation of the outbreak at Big Tableland, Queensland, Australia led to the discovery of
chytridiomycosis and its impact on amphibians (Berger et al 1998). Additional epidemiological
investigations revealed that the spread of chytridiomycosis is the worst disease affecting vertebrate
biodiversity in recorded history and had caused the severe decline of up to 200 species of amphibians
globally with many of these now believed to be extinct (Skerratt et al 2007). Additional epidemiological
investigations have shown the key determinants of the disease‘s impact such as environmental
preferences (Murray et al 2009, 2011). These findings are now being used to estimate risk and guide
management in terms of surveillance, biosecurity and emergency response and as a framework for
investigation of other wildlife diseases and declines (Skerratt et al 2009).



Skipwith, Phillip (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, UC Berkeley); Bauer, Aaron; Jackman, Todd
(Villanova University, Canada)

Phylogeography and Population Structure of the New Caledonian Gargoyle Gecko (Rhacodactylus
auriculatus)

Rhacodactylus auriculatus is a representative of a species-rich and morphologically diverse diplodactylid
gecko radiation endemic to the South Pacific island of New Caledonia.            This species is unique in a
number of behavioral, morphological, and ecological aspects. The recent discovery of R. auriculatus in
the northern province of the Grande Terre has increased the known range of this taxon, making it the
most widespread of the giant geckos currently assigned to the paraphyletic genus Rhacodactylus .
Phylogenetic analysis using concatenated mtDNA (ND2 + WANCY) and nucDNA (RAG1, MXRA5,
KIAA1549, KIF24, PDC) recovered two reciprocally monophyletic groups, a northern one comprising
individuals restricted to the northern ultramafic peaks and a southern assemblage containing all other
localities. Bayesian clustering analyses with S tructure support the presence of two populations with little
or no admixture. Dating analyses suggest that the two populations began diverging around 2.8 mya. The
relative isolation of the northern ultramafic peaks results in a high degree of structuring between sites in
the combined analysis and dating analyses support that this isolation occurred relatively early. The lack of
geographic structure within the southern population seen in the haplotype networks suggests that a
combination of widespread gene flow and incomplete lineage sorting may have played a role. This lack of
structuring may have been facilitated by historically continuous habitat in the southern province. The
divergence between the northern and southern clades as well as the structure seen within the northern
population may be linked to the fragmentation of suitable habitat during the Pliocene due to climate
change.




                                                                                                        665
Skutschas, Pavel (Saint Petersburg State University);

Mesozoic lissamphibians from Middle Asia and Siberia

Mesozoic terrestrial deposits are widely distributed in Siberia (central and Eastern part of Russia) and in
Middle Asia     (Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and South Kazakhstan) and have
yielded diverse vertebrate faunas. Three groups of lissamphibians are known from the Mesozoic of
Middle Asia (albanerpetontids, frogs, and salamanders) and only two (frogs and salamanders) from
Siberia. Albanerpetontids are extremely rare in Mesozoic of Asia and their fossil record is limited to the
Cenomanian Khodzhakul and the Turonian Bissekty formations (Uzbekistan). Albanerpetontid from the
Khodzhakul Fm. Represents the first record of the genus Albanerpeton in Asia. In Siberia record of
Mesozoic frogs is limited to one taxon with possible discoglossid affinities from the Barremian?-Aptian
Khilok Fm. in Transbaikalia. In Mesozoic of            Middle Asia frogs are diverse and        are known
predominantly from the Khodzhakul Fm. (four taxa with uncertain affinities), Bissekty Fm. (numerous
names gobiatids and ―discoglossid‖ taxa some of which are obvious synonymous). Except these
geological units, rare and poorly definable remains of frogs are also known from the Cenomanian
Dzharakuduk Fm. and Turonian-Coniacian Aitym Fm. in Uzbekistan and Santonian Yalovach Fm. in
Tajikistan. Salamanders in Siberia are known from the Bathonian Itat Fm. in Krasnoyarsk Region (stem
salamander Urupia monstrosa and two undescribed taxa) and the Aptian-Albian Ilek Fm. in Kemerovo
Province (crown-group salamander Kiyatriton leshchinskiyi ). In the Jurassic of Middle Asia salamanders
are represented by Kokartus honorarius (Bathonian Balabansai Fm. in Kyrgyzstan) . The younger
record of salamanders from Middle Asia is restricted to only two Late Cretaceous salamander genera: b
asal crown group salamander with possible cryptobranchoid affinities Nesovtriton ( Turonian Bissekty
Fm. ) and cryptobranchid Eoscapherpeton (Cenomanian-Campanian, Khodzhakul, Dzharakuduk,
Bissekty and Aitym formations in Uzbekistan and Yalovach Fm. in Tajikistan). The composition of the
Late Cretaceous      lissamphibian    assemblages is different between Middle Asia and Euramerica:
albanerpetontids are rare in Middle Asia (in contrast to North America) and there is no evidence of any
salamander families that were common for Middle Asia (and whole Asia) and Euramerica.



Slimani, Tahar (cadi Ayyad University); Abderazzak, FATTAH (Cadi Ayyad University, Faculty of
Sciences, Laboratory of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, PO Box 3290, Marrakech 40 000,
Morocco, Canada); El Hassan, EL MOUDEN; Mohamed, RADI (Cadi Ayyad University, Faculty of
Sciences, Laboratory of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, PO Box 3290, Marrakech 40 000,
Morocco., Canada); Stefano, DOGLIO (Società Romana di Scienze Naturali, Ente di Ricerca Pura, via
Fratelli Maristi 43, ¿Villa Esmeralda¿, 00137 Roma (Italy), Canada)

Ecology and population parameters of Pseudepidalea brongersmai (Hoogmoed, 1972) living in
small temporary ponds in the arid area of Jbilets (Western Morocco)

Climate Change including more or less extended drought periods in arid environments may be one of the
major causes of animal populations decline. The object of this work is to study the population
demography and ecology of        Pseudepidalea brongersmai, a Moroccan endemic amphibian living in an
arid environment. The study was conducted in the central Jbilets (Western Morocco) during 4 years
(2008-2011). The relative abundance of the species in two nearby located temporary ponds (maximal
diameter of 4 and 6 meters, respectively) was 86 individuals. The adult sex ratio was close to 5.4 for
males. The average size of individuals was 43.8 mm (min: 35.5 mm to max: 48.1 mm), with an average
weight of 5.8g (min: 5g to max: 6.4g). The specimens with size between 40 and 45 mm represented over
53% of the sample. The study of the reproduction and behaviour activity provided us extensive
knowledge about the adaptation of this toad to an arid and unpredictable environment. In fact, there is a



                                                                                                       666
strong connection between this species phenology and the rainfalls: an early activity and reproduction
occurred immediately after the rains, apparently as an adaptation of this species to its constraining
environment (to optimize the chances of tadpoles survival). The diets of adults analyzed from faecal
contents and based on the occurrence frequency and          the relative number of prey showed that
Coleopteran and Formicidae constitute the dominant dietary items. This study has been supported by
the Hassan II Academy for Science and Technique – Project " ICGVSA".



Sloan, Leah (Humboldt State University); Marks, Sharyn (Humboldt State University, Canada)

Where Have All the Young Turtles Gone? Western Pond Turtle (Actinemys marmorata) Population
Health in Lentic Habitats along the Trinity River, California

As populations of a species decline, an understanding of the regional variation in population health can
aid in focusing conservation efforts. Over the past century Western Pond Turtle ( Actinemys marmorata
) populations have declined throughout much of their range (Baja California through Washington) as a
result of habitat loss, verexploitation, introduced species, and water course alterations.            The Trinity
River, in northwestern California, has been modified from its natural state by damming and flow
regulations; these alterations have decreased river quality for turtles.         We investigated the health of
Western Pond Turtle populations in alternative, lentic habitats adjacent to the Trinity River and its
tributaries using four indicators of population health: 1) age structure, 2) size structure, 3) adult size, and
4) growth rate of young turtles.       Of six lentic habitats sampled, four were biased towards large, old
turtles.    These habitats had prolific Bullfrog populations, while the other two sites lacked Bullfrogs.
Given that Bullfrogs will eat hatchling turtles, it appears that Bullfrogs are inhibiting turtle recruitment. The
same four lentic habitats also had turtles with faster growth rates and larger adult sizes, likely a result of
warmer water temperatures.           Overall, conservation efforts should focus on creating or preserving
ephemeral lentic habitats that dry in late summer; turtles and native anurans do not require permanent
water, but Bullfrog larvae usually take two years to metamorphose.



Smid, Jiri (National Museum); Carranza, Salvador (Institute of Evollutionary Biology, Barcelona, Spain);
Gvozdik, Vaclav (Nationa Museum, Prague, Czech Republic); Kratochvil, Lukas (Charles University,
Prague, Czech Republic); Moravec, Jiri (National Museum, Prague, Czech Republic)

Cryptic diversity of Arabian geckos of the genus Hemidactylus

The genus Hemidactylus includes over one hundred species, majority of which occurs in tropical Africa
and Indian subcontinent. The Arabian Peninsula is known to host 13 species, some of them described
very recently suggesting that overall diversity of these geckos in this particular region is still
underestimated. In our study we used material comprising more than 200 specimens densely covering
Oman, Yemen (including Socotra Island), UAE, Jordan as well as several localities from adjacent
Northwest Africa (Egypt, Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia) and Iran. Sequence data gained from up to four
mitochondrial (12S rRNA, ND4, tRNAs and cytochrome b) and four nuclear genes (RAG-1, RAG-2, C-
mos, MC1R) were used to infer the phylogenetic relationships among all known Arabian species from the
Arid clade species group. As our results suggest, the real diversity of Hemidactylus in Arabia is much
higher than ever expected. Analysis of mtDNA revealed about nine new main lineages (depending on the
level of accepted intraspecific variation), all of them were also clearly identifiable and supported by
nuclear data. Most of these new lineages inhabit mountain areas in northern Oman and southern and




                                                                                                             667
central Yemen. In addition, several oversea dispersal events of the gecko fauna across the Gulf of Aden
are reported.



Smith, Freya (Institute of Zoology); Durrant, Chris; Peniche, Gaby; Cunningham, Andrew (Institute of
Zoology, Canada)

Temporal Changes in the Prevalence of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in Temperate Mixed
Species Amphibian Assemblages

Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ( Bd ) is an amphibian pathogen that has received global recognition as
a fundamental driver underpinning amphibian declines worldwide. Heralded by the Amphibian
Conservation Action Plan as ‗the worst infectious disease ever recorded among vertebrates‘ this
extraordinary organism is known to infect amphibians of over 450 species and can be found in almost
every habitat in which it has been sought. Taking into consideration, also, that amphibians are frequently
to be found within mixed species communities, this presents an enormous diversity of ecological systems
within which to study the epidemiology of this pathogen. In 2010 we undertook an intensive regime of
sampling at 8 mixed-species breeding sites in the UK, all of which had a history of infection with Bd . The
primary aim was to gain a greater understanding of Bd dynamics at system level, but with a wider goal
of identifying trends which might be more generally applicable. Specifically, our objectives were (1) to
identify differences in infection prevalence between UK species and (2) to identify differences in infection
prevalence through time. To achieve this, each of the 8 selected sites was surveyed on 5 separate
occasions during the breeding season (March-June). At each time point, the surveyor was tasked with
catching and sampling the maximum number of metamorphosed amphibians as was possible, within a 6
hour time frame. Samples for Bd were collected by swabbing the skin with a dry-tipped rayon swab and
were subsequently analysed using qPCR. In total, over 2,500 samples were collected, representing all 6
UK native species and 2 introduced species of amphibian. Primary analyses suggest a number of
significant results, including both temporal and species components of Bd infection. The final results of
this study will be presented and their implications for Bd surveys of temperate, mixed species amphibian
assemblages will be discussed.



Smith, Geoffrey (Utah State University);

Do habitat characteristics limit population densities of American alligators in Arkansas?

Abstract—Once threatened with extinction, American alligators have recovered across most of their
historic range.    Alligators reach the northwestern boundary of their range in Arkansas, where habitat
characteristics might limit populations.     Although low population densities have been dismissed by
managers as consequences of poor habitat, no habitat studies have been performed for alligators in
Arkansas. It is crucial that habitat requirements of alligators throughout the range be better understood
to protect this species from future population declines.        Towards this goal, we conducted habitat
assessments and population surveys for nineteen bodies of water within the known range of alligators in
southern Arkansas to determine which habitat characteristics were most important.            Nine habitat
characteristics, including depth, Secchi depth, canopy cover, vegetative cover, shoreline canopy cover,
shoreline vegetative cover, shoreline development, area, and corridor distance were incorporated into a
stepwise multiple regression model with alligator population density as the dependent variable for all
sites. Vegetative cover near the shoreline was the most important component of the model, followed by
distance to the nearest river corridor.    Although significantly higher population densities of alligators



                                                                                                        668