                                                                                  WORLD CONGRESS OF
                                                                                  HER P ETOLOG Y
                                                                                  V A N C O U V E R                       2 0 1 2




Please Note: Abstracts are organized by author‘s last name. Due to some issues upon export, some abstracts may not have formatted
as desired. Please visit the registration desk if you would like clarification on an abstract. Due to scheduling changes, some abstracts
may no longer be part of the academic program. Please check the WCH-7 website for the most up-to-date schedule.
Abbasi Ghadikolaei, Hodeis (researcher's club islamic Azad university Iran); Abbasi Ghadikolaei,
maryam (PNU university, Qaemshar, Iran)
The Systematic reviewed and the specimens of Muraenidae in the Persian Gulf and Oman Sea's
Iranian waters

Species belonged to Muraenidae family from Anguiliformes order was apart of fish fauna in the Persian
Gulf and Oman Sea. It has ornamental, commercial and nourishing value. This research revising the
samples classification and systematic specimens of Muraenidae in south coast of Iran such as: Bushehr,
Chabahar, Bandar Abbas, Bandar lengeh and the rest from museums, universities and research centers
in Iran (Fishing area51) form2007-2008.The whole Ichthyology valid published references in this area
were considered. The result showed that:

Among 27 eels samples 13 samples are in Muraenidae family's. Gymnothorax undulates is a native
specie in Iranian Sea zone and seven samples as: Gymnothorax sp, Gymnothorax kidako, Gymnothorax
phasmatodes, Gymnothorax johnsoni, Rhinomuraena quaestia and Strophidon sathete were record and
reported for the first time in the Persian Gulf and Oman Sea's waters.

Key words: Muraenidae, Taxonomic, Revising specimens, Persian Gulf, Oman Sea



Accary, Claudine (Lebanese University); Sadek, Riyad (Biology Department, American University of
Beirut, P.O.Box 11-0236, Riad El Solh 1107 2020, Beirut, Lebanon; (rsadek@aub.edu.lb)., Canada);
Hraoui-Bloquet, Souad (Faculty of Sciences II, Lebanese University,, Fanar, Lebanon); Hleihel, Walid
(4Faculty of Sciences, Kaslik University, Jounieh, Lebanon. walidhleihel@usek.edu.lb, Canada); Fajloun,
Ziad (Azm Center for the Research in Biotechnology and its Applications, Lebanese University, El Mittein
Street, Tripoli, Lebanon. (zfajloun@ul.edu.lb), Canada)

Preliminary proteomic analysis anti-bacterial and anti-aggregate activities of the crude venom of
the Lebanon Viper Montevipera bornmuelleri.

Venoms of Viperidae snakes represent a source of efficient bioactive components that have already led
to the development of several new drugs. Here, we describe a first proteomic analysis of the venom of
Montevipera bornmuelleri, from the Lebanese mountains. We analyzed the content of the venom through
Liquid Chromatography coupled to Electrospray Ionisation Mass Spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS) techniques
and identified some bioactive molecules included in the crude product. Sodium dodecyl sulfate
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was used to separate proteins according to their
electrophoretic mobility. Sephadex G-75 gel filtration was used for the elution of different molecular size
components and LC-ESI-MS for the analysis of different fractions collected. Using these methods, we
have accumulated much data on molecular masses and retention times and demonstrated the presence
of PLA2, serine protease proteins, metalloproteases, bradykinin peptides and C-type lectin toxins. The
anti-bacterial activity of crude venom and different fractions collected after Sephadex gel filtration, were
studied on three bacterial strains: Escherichia coli , Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus
aureus . However, the highest antibiotic effect of the crude venom was observed against Staphylococcus
aureus . The effect of crude venom on bleeding and/or platelet aggregation on blood and citrated plasma
was investigated showing an anti-aggregate effect on human platelets. This could be associated with
various compounds disrupting hemostasis and leading to hemolysis of blood. Finally, our work will lead
to development of an approprite methodology for characterization of a new therapeutic molecule of
natural origin.




                                                                                                          2
Acuña-Gómez, Paola (CEQUA); Ovando-Pacheco, Fernanda; Figueroa-Delgado, Tania (CEQUA,
Canada); García-de-León, FJ (CIBNOR, La Paz, B.C.S., Mexico)

Preliminary mitochondrial DNA sequences for study of geographic structure hakes reveal
surprising similarity of Merluccius australis and M. productus

Though southern ( Merluccius australis ) and long tail hakes ( Macruronus magellanicus ) have similar
distributions ( Southeast Pacific and Southwest Atlantic of southern Chile and Argentina), published
assessments of genetic structure indicate a strong level of differentiation among populations of southern
hake but little or no geographic structure for long tail hake. Being interested in evaluating this conflict we
began to sample individuals of both species in Punta Santa Ana in the Strait of Magellan with the intent of
analyzing diverse genetic markers. Our first preliminary sample provided partial sequences of three
mitochondrial genes (COI, Cyt b and 16S ARN) of both species that we compared to sequences
deposited in Genbank. Surprisingly, our southern hake COI sequences showed a high degree of similarity
with Pacific hake ( Merluccius productus of the Pacific coast of North America). We discuss these
preliminary results and our future research plans in the context of the old hypothesis that Pacific and
southern hakes may represent the same species, at least in the Patagonia region.



Adams, Cory (Southern Research Station); saenz, daniel (US Forest Service, nacogdoches, TX, United
States)

Leaf litter of invasive Chinese tallow (Triadica sebifera) negatively impacts anuran hatching
success and hatchling size

Chinese tallow ( Triadica sebifera ) is an aggressive invasive tree species found in the southeastern
United States and California. It has been documented that Chinese tallow has increased in abundance as
much as 500 percent in parts of its invaded range, in just the last two decades. It has the capability of
producing monocultures, which can be in or near wetlands that are utilized by breeding amphibians. The
purpose of this study was to determine if Chinese tallow leaf litter affects hatching of a common anuran,
the southern leopard frog ( Lithobates sphenocephalus ) , when compared to leaf litter of native tree
species. In the lab, Chinese tallow and red maple ( Acer rubrum ) reduced hatching success of L.
sphenocephalus eggs. Water containing Chinese tallow and red maple leaf litter had lower pH and
dissolved oxygen than other treatments. The reduced hatching success we observed could be due to
these effects. We suggest that Chinese tallow could have a much greater impact than native species that
produce similar hatching success, since Chinese tallow can occur in much higher densities than native
species. We also observed that hatchlings from eggs exposed to Chinese tallow leaf litter were
significantly less developed at hatching and significantly smaller in total length than other treatments. As a
result, Chinese tallow leaf litter may reduce hatching success of amphibian eggs as well as significantly
impact development leading into the larval stage.



Adams, Dean (Iowa State University)

Rates of morphological evolution in Plethodon salamanders

Characterizing the pace of evolutionary change is essential for understanding how morphological, and
ultimately, biological diversity is generated and maintained. Frequently, likelihood-based approaches are
utilized to quantify evolutionary rates for phenotypic traits in a phylogenetic context, which are then used
to identify shifts in evolutionary rates along a phylogeny, or to compare evolutionary rates between two or



                                                                                                            3
more clades. However, comparisons of evolutionary rates between ecologically-relevant traits remain
uncommon, because likelihood approaches for evaluating such patterns have only recently been
developed. In this study I compared evolutionary rates for several ecologically-relevant morphological
traits in Plethodon salamanders. I obtained linear measurements for three phenotypic traits (head
length, forelimb length, and body width) from 311 adult individuals, representing 44 of the 45 species of
eastern Plethodon . Two of these traits (head length and forelimb length) are elated to competitive
interactions, which in Plethodon are often mediated through aggressive displays, biting, and differential
prey acquisition. Thus, prior work on Plethodon suggest the hypothesis that morphological traits
associated with species interactions may have elevated rates of evolution as compared to other
phenotypic attributes.      Using amulti-gene, time-calibrated phylogeny for the genus I estimated the
evolutionary rate of change for each of the three traits. I then used likelihood methods to determine
whether or not these traits evolved at similar evolutionary rates. Likelihood ratio tests and AIC
comparisons revealed that both head length and forelimb length displayed considerably higher
evolutionary rates relative to body width, but the evolutionary rates for these two traits were not
distinguishable from one another. These findings suggest that different morphological traits in Plethodon
evolve at distinct evolutionary rates. Additionally, because head length and forelimb length are related to
aggressive encounters, these observations are consistent with the hypothesis that interspecific
interactions in Plethodon may increase the evolutionary rate of traits important for such encounters,
which subsequently contributes to the morphological diversification of the group.



Adams, Michael (US Geological Survey); Muths, Erin (USGS, Fort Collins, United States); Corn,
Stephen (US Geological Survey, Missoula, MT, United States); Grant, Evan; Miller, David (USGS, Laurel,
United States)

Trends in Amphibian Occupancy in the US: Data from the Amphibian Research and Monitoring
Initiative

The monitoring component of the Amphibian Research and Monitoring Initiative (ARMI) is a US network
of independent research projects that each include a temporal element. Each project has its own
methods and objectives but all use statistically unbiased analytical methods to estimate either the
probability of site occupancy by amphibians or abundance of amphibians at the sites. As of 2011, ARMI
had accumulated 635 estimates of occupancy for 118 time series where a time series is a temporal
sequence of occupancy estimates for a species at a monitoring area. Each of these estimates applies to
a defined range of inference that typically covers 10s to 100s of potential amphibian habitat units. Each
project requires multiple surveys of a subset of units within the range of inference so that the probability of
detecting a species that is present can be incorporated into an estimate of occupancy. ARMI has 39
monitoring areas across the U.S that produce occupancy estimates for 50 species of amphibian. Time
series range from 2 to 9 years. In aggregate, these data represent the most comprehensive and
quantitative data on amphibian trends across the US. Overall, ARMI estimates that the probability of site
occupancy for the amphibians monitored has declined 4.5% (95% CI = 1.2 – 8.0) annually since 2002.
The individual trends are variable but 61.8% (73 of 118 time series) show a declining trend. The species
and places monitored were chosen for various reasons related to local objectives so are not necessarily
representative of other species and places. In some cases, species were chosen for study because of
concern for their conservation status but, overall, there does not seem to be a bias towards selecting
species that are threatened. Instead, ARMI projects often monitor a suite of species that occur in a
particular habitat. We note that ARMI began after some of the severe declines in the US are thought to
have occurred. While the primary objective of ARMI is not to provide broad trend information, ARMI data
are a unique resource in the ongoing global assessment of amphibian decline.



                                                                                                             4
Agorreta, Ainhoa (The Natural History Museum, London (UK); University of Navarra (Spain)); Rüber,
Lukas (Natural History Museum, Bern, Switzerland)

Are there limits in phylogeny reconstruction in gobioid fishes?

Multilocus phylogenies are increasingly used to reconstruct the Tree of Life. However, there is also a
realization that some nodes in the Tree of Life remain unresolved even using multilocus approaches, and
that adding more data in some cases can result in an increased level of systematic error leading to a
convergence on erroneous phylogenies with strong statistical support. An important factor regarding the
prospects of accurately reconstruct a phylogeny is stemminess, the relative length of internal versus
external nodes. It is thought that accurate phylogeny reconstruction of trees that show short internal
branches and long terminal branches due to ancient speciation events closely spaced in time may be
extremely hard or impossible due to a combination of two factors: (a) the presence of short internal nodes
supported by few synapomorphies and (b) long terminal branches showing a high frequency of
homoplastic characters. The percomorph order Gobiiformes ( sensu Wiley and Johnson 2010) comprises
over 2200 species worldwide that are found in most freshwater, brackish, and marine environments, and
show a spectacular variety in morphology, ecology, and behavior. The accuracy of previous phylogenetic
studies might have been affected by episodes of ‗explosive radiations‘ in some parts of the tree
characterized by exceedingly short internal branches, e.g., Thacker (2009) for Gobiiformes based on
mitochondrial DNA (see also Rüber and Agorreta (2010)) and Thacker and Roje (2011) for Gobiidae
based on mitochondrial and nuclear data. We have assembled a large data matrix of three mitochondrial
and three nuclear genes for representatives of the major lineages of gobies (about 250 terminal taxa) to
ask whether episodes of rapid radiation obscure phylogeny reconstruction in this group.



Ahmadzadeh, Faraham (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig); Flecks, Morris
(Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Bonn, Germany); Carretero, Miguel A. (CIBIO,
Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, Universidade do Porto, Canada);
Böhme, Wolfgang (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Canada); Ilgaz, Cetin (Dokuz
Eylül University, Canada); Engler, Jan O. (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig,
Canada); Harris, D. James (CIBIO, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos,
Universidade do Porto, Canada); Rödder, Dennis (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig,
Canada)

Ecological diversification, range and Grinellian niche evolution in a lizard radiation

Diversification and fast radiation is well documented in lacertid lizards. In the framework of this study, we
investigated the relationship between niche evolution and phylogeny in a wide spread clade of Green
Lizards of the Lacerta media - and trilineata -groups. A fossil-calibrated, dated phylogeny, based on
three mitochondrial genes including all species of Lacerta s. str., identified several evolutionary lineages
within this clade. These are in concordance with current subspecies taxonomy in case of the L. media -
group, whereas the L. trilineata -group (including L. pamphylica ) consists of only three major lineages.
Species distribution models were generated for each lineage and combined with the phylogeny to
reconstruct ancestral climate niches. All extant lineages (i.e. species) are associated with humid climates,
but there is extensive variation in their climatic niches implying pronounced shifts in climatic niche
dimensions. Basically, the studied taxa are adapted to two kinds of main climatic conditions. While L. (m.)
media , L. (m.) ciliciensis , L. (m.) isaurica , and to some extent L. (t.) dobrogica are occurring in
mountainous or continental climates, they are missing in the Mediterranean climatic zone, where the
remaining species are distributed. Taking into account the divergence time between taxa and geological
events in Anatolia, it appears that first mountain formation caused the fragmentation of the hypothesized




                                                                                                           5
ancestral species and later the process of cladogenesis was completed by the Quaternary climate
oscillations. Phyloclimatic reconstructions based on each species‘ available climate space transformed in
orthogonal principal components (PCs) indicate divergent evolution within subclades and convergent
evolution among clades and less niche conservatism. However, this pattern was not evident in each
major niche axis. For example, PC2 was dominated by precipitation of the coldest quarter and the
phyloclimatic reconstruction based on this PC exhibits greater differences among clades than within
clades. This indicates a higher degree of niche conservatism and reflects especially the adaptation of the
sister species L. (m.) media and L. (m.) ciliciensis to continental climates with cold winter temperatures
and relatively moderate precipitation occurring mostly in summer.



Akcali, Chris (Hendrix College); Harper, George (Hendrix College, Canada)

Mimicry in Cemophora coccinea

Batesian mimicry occurs when a palatable species mimics the color pattern of a dangerous species and
thereby benefits from a predator‘s instinctual avoidance of the mimicked color pattern. The non-
venomous scarlet snake, Cemophora coccinea , is presumed to be a Batesian mimic based on the fact
that its red, white, and black body bands closely resemble the red, yellow, and black body bands of the
eastern coral snake, Micrurus fulvius , and the Texas coral snake, Micrurus tener , with which it co-
occurs. Previous research on another putative Batesian mimicry complex (Scarlet Kingsnake,
Lampropeltis elapsoides , and M. fulvius ) shows that the resemblance between models and mimics is
highest at the edge of the model‘s range (edge sympatry), lower in regions where the model is abundant
(deep sympatry), and lowest where the mimic occurs in the absence of the model (allopatry) as predicted
by Batesian mimicry theory. To determine whether C. coccinea varies in its resemblance to M. fulvius
and M. tener in a similar manner, a morphometric analysis of all three species was conducted.
Photographs of preserved C. coccinea (665), M. tener (324), and M. fulvius (242) collected throughout
the geographical range of each species were taken. Measurements of the width of each band on the
dorsum of each snake from the snout to the cloaca were taken. These measurements were then used to
compute the proportion of the snake‘s dorsum that is red, black, and white/yellow. Over the entire
geographical range, the color pattern of C. coccinea was more variable than the local models. However,
when specific pattern characteristics (proportion of color, band number, band width, etc.) were compared
between C. coccinea and their local model (either M. tener or M. fulvius ), there was weak overlap
between most pattern characteristics. Contrary to previous research on other putative Batesian mimicry
complexes, the results suggest the possibility that the color pattern of C. coccinea may not be mimetic.



Alam, Mohammad Shafiqul (Hiroshima University); Islam, Mohammed Mafizul (Hiroshima University,
Canada); Khan, Md. Mukhlesur Rahman (Bangladesh Agricultural University, Canada); Hasan,
Mahmudul (Hiroshima University, Canada); Wanichanon, Ratanasate (Department of Anatomy,
Phramonkutklao Medical College, Rajawithi Rd., Bangkok 10400, Thailand, Canada); Sumida, Masayuki
(Hiroshima University, Canada)

Postmating isolation among six species of three genera (Hoplobatrachus, Euphlyctis and
Fejervarya) from the family Dicroglossidae (Anura), with special reference to spontaneous
production of allotriploids

The nature of species evolution and speciation process is an important step to evaluate species
delimitation, contemporary integrative taxonomy and other biological aspects. According to biological




                                                                                                         6
species concept, reproductive isolation is an important property, and in the present study we performed
laboratory experiments using six species from three genera ( Hoplobatrachus , Euphlyctis and
Fejervarya ) of the family Dicroglossidae to explore the postmating isolation among dicroglossid frogs.
We found gametic isolation among these genera ( Fejervarya , Euphlyctis and Hoplobatrachus )
although the intergeneric hybrids between female E. cyanophlyctis and male H. chinensis were inviable
at tadpole stage, and the hybrids between female E. cyanophlyctis and male H. tigerinus were inviable
at the hatching stage, showing complete hybrid inviability between

these two genera. Almost, all interspecific hybrids between female H. tigerinus and male H. chinensis
died of underdevelopment at the tadpole stage, whereas several hybrids developed normally, and
survived to maturity. Chromosomal observations and mtDNA and allozyme analyses confirmed that
these mature hybrids were allotriploid consisting of two maternal genomes and one paternal genome. The
present results suggest that the allotriploids were produced spontaneously, and histological observations
confirmed their sex as sterile males. Furthermore, we also investigated the molecular relationships among
H. tigerinus , H. chinensis and their hybrids by mitochondrial Cyt b , 12S and 16S rRNA gene analysis.
The maternal inheritance mode of mitochondrial genomes was retained in the hybrids. Finally, the results
advocate that hybrid sterility is frequent in interspecific hybrids than hybrid inviability in intergeneric
hybrids. We also speculate that allotriploids may be possibly produced via hybridization in the nature that
might occur among the cryptic species of the genera studied in the Indian subcontinent. Further additional
detailed study is needed to elucidate the polyploidization process.



Alatoom, Mohammad (UNDP)

Movement patterns and habitat use of soft-released translocated spur-thighed tortoises, Testudo
graeca

Abstract Wildlife translocations, the deliberate movement of animals from one part of their distribution to
another, are increasingly used as a conservation method for the reestablishment of rare and endangered
species. The objective of this study was to examine the movement patterns and macro- and microhabitat
use of translocated and resident spur-thighed tortoises. This translocation was considered a soft-release
as the tortoises were forced to be relatively inactive due to their being released at the beginning of the
aestivation season. Our results suggest that forced aestivation soft-releases may succeed in reducing
dispersal by forcing spur-thighed tortoises to spend time at the release site as the majority of translocated
tortoises had similar activity range sizes and movement path tortuosity as resident tortoises. Spur-thighed
tortoise conservation will require protecting habitat at multiple scales, with the remaining native forests in
the country of Jordan being important to the spur-thighed tortoise during the activity and aestivation/
hibernation seasons, as this macrohabitat was used significantly more than the human-modified habitats.
Microhabitat structures such as leaf litter and availability of large stones may also be especially important
in human-modified landscapes, as these microhabitats may help reduce the effects of habitat
degradation.




                                                                                                            7
Albe, Monica (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, UC Berkeley); Spencer, Carol (Museum of Vertebrate
Zoology, Berkeley, CA, United States); Cicero, Carla; Trapaga, Ann (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, UC
Berkeley, Berkeley, United States); Koo, Michelle (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, UC Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA, United States)

Engaging Students in Hands-On and Project-Based Learning: Using Specimen Preparation As An
Educational Tool in the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology Undergraduate Program

Any zoological researcher or institution that has long-term projects and research goals should be
concerned with the creation of a scientific legacy and with training the next generation of scientists. In a
recent New York Times article ―Why Science Majors Change Their Minds,‖ the problem of retention of
science majors in top institutions was emphasized. Although project-based learning has been found to be
more effective than lectures in engaging students and in teaching them the scientific method, few
institutions have found ways to implement it on broader scales. Project-based learning that directly
involves students in research takes time and resources, and thus many institutions struggle to find ways
to increase the number of students involved without compromising the quality of data collection and
analysis. And yet, if we find more ways to engage students in science, it will benefit our long term goals
as zoologists as well as science in general. In response to this challenge, the Museum of Vertebrate
Zoology (MVZ) has created a tiered system of learning, with introductory museum courses that allow for
entry level students with no previous knowledge of zoology to learn the basics of vertebrate anatomy and
evolution, specimen preparation, and gathering quality data in a supportive, hands-on learning
environment. From there, MVZ undergraduate students can pursue molecular or specimen-based lab
work, field work, and eventually, their own independent research projects. The MVZ Undergraduate
Program has over 120 students involved each semester, with a high rate of student retention. In 2008, it
won the UC Berkeley Education Initiatives Award. This poster will present the MVZ approach to
undergraduate education, specifically highlighting our specimen preparation lab, which benefits the
students, the museum, and the broader University. Our program also increases undergraduate
awareness about the scientific method and possible career paths in organismal biology and museum
science.



Albert, Kristin (University of Arizona); Parker, Mickey; Goode, Matt (University of Arizona, Canada)

Potential effects of military aircraft operations on the Flat-tailed Horned Lizard (Phrynosoma
mcallii)

Vulnerability of the Flat-tailed Horned Lizard (FTHL; Phrynosoma mcallii ) due to habitat loss and
degradation is an ever-growing concern. A fragment of their current limited range may be further
threatened with the construction of the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Auxiliary Landing Field on the Barry M.
Goldwater Range (BMGR) in Yuma County, Arizona, USA. Here we present findings from Year 1 of a
planned 4-year study conducted on behalf of Marine Corps Air Station-Yuma. The study was designed to
evaluate broadly utilized FTHL mitigation measures. We estimated FTHL abundance from ten four-
hectare mark-recapture plots, situated along paved roads, lizard-barrier fences, power lines, and near the
end of planned runway locations of the JSF airfield. We used scat plots, scat transects, and live captures
on mark recapture plots as indices of FTHL relative abundance. We used radiotelemetry to track and
monitor 27 individuals to determine how roads and traffic may have an effect on movements and home
ranges. This will allow us to examine potential changes resulting from traffic increases once the facility
becomes operational. We also conducted road cruising surveys on 4551 miles of paved road in the FTHL
habitat area within BMGR. In addition to FTHLs, we recorded the total number of live reptiles
encountered, as well as avian and mammalian predators. We will compare road-kill data to natural



                                                                                                          8
mortality in a modeling framework. This first year of the study enabled us to collect baseline, pre-
construction data to compare to post-construction data. In addition, we were able to refine techniques on
this cryptic, difficult-to-study species. We have purposely taken a detailed natural history approach to
better understand the ecology of FTHLs and to interpret our results in this context.



Alexander, Graham (University of the Witwatersrand); Maritz, Bryan (University of the Witwatersrand,
Canada)

Movement Patterns and Behavior of an African Viperid, Bitis arietans

Ambush-foraging snakes rely on crypsis and surprise to capture prey and avoid predators. Thus, many
ambush-foraging snakes are well camouflaged and highly sedentary. However, they must move in
response to certain cues: they leave lie-ups after shedding, defecation, during mate-seeking, after being
discovered by prey, and when the site proves to be unproductive or risky. Bouts of movement represent
periods of greatly-increased risk of predation, and activity patterns are thus likely to be under intense
selective pressure. We quantified the frequency and distance moved by Puff Adders ( Bitis arietans) in
relation to season and sex, over a 27-month study. We also quantified the proportion of time that snakes
spent moving, resting, basking and in ambush. Bitis arietans is a widespread, abundant, highly
venomous viperid, making it one of the most medically-important snakes in Africa. We tracked 30
telemetered Puff Adders and located snakes every 2.45 days on average, resulting in a total of 2686
behavioral observations. Puff Adders spent more than 90% of their time on the surface, usually under
grass or leaf litter, and only rarely entered termitaria, mainly during the fire season. We assessed the
sensitivity of our measures to sampling frequency by resampling our database and corrected our
measures of Mean Daily Displacement (MDD) and frequency of movement accordingly. Sampling
regime had a significant effect on movement estimates; in comparison to a daily sampling regime,
sampling every 2.45 days underestimated MDD by 30% (and as much as 51% in mate-searching males)
and movement frequency by 19%. Corrected MDD was 112.3 m.day -1 for males during the mating
season, but dropped dramatically to 10.1 m.day -1 for males and females during all other seasons.
Corrected frequency of movement was low, with snakes moving every 4.7 days on average. Puff Adders
spent 68% of their time resting; 16% in ambush, and 11% basking. Males spent a greater proportion of
their time moving (6%) than did females (2%). All behaviors showed significant trends in seasonality. The
emergent pattern is one of Puff Adders as sedentary animals that move primarily during the mating
season in autumn. Our study reveals the potential impact of sampling regime on measures of movement,
and we propose that researchers explicitly account for such effects by reporting measures of
displacement and movement frequency adjusted to a daily sampling regime.



Alford, Ross (James Cook University); Richards, Stephen (Museum and Art Gallery of the Northern
Territory, Darwin, NT, Australia); Rowley, Jodi (Australian Museum, Sydney, N, Australia); Iwai, Noriko
(University of Tokyo, Seto, 29, Japan); Roznik, Elizabeth (James Cook University, Townsville, Q,
Australia)

Behavior and ecology of steam-associated frogs and tadpoles of Australian tropical rainforests

Most of the endemic aquatic-breeding frogs of Australian tropical rainforests are associated with streams.
We have studied the behavior and ecology of these species intensively since the late 1980s. Although
these species are commonly thought of as ―stream-dwelling frogs,‖ the strength of their association with
streams varies widely within and among species. Males of most species can be found near streams in all




                                                                                                         9
seasons, but females tend to spend more time near streams during the summer wet season. Some
species actually spend substantial proportions of their time in or near the water, while others regularly
venture into the forest, some spending extended periods well away from streams and in the forest
canopy, and rarely contacting water. Males and females of the same species can behave quite
differently, and there can be large differences among individuals of the same species and gender.
Because of these behavioral differences, the actual thermal and hydric environments frogs experience
differ widely among species and vary greatly within species. These differences are likely to affect their
vulnerability to a variety of threats, including chytridiomycosis and climate change.

Stream-associated species have extended breeding seasons concentrated in the summer wet season.
Tadpoles of all species can be present in streams throughout the year. Because of their extended
breeding seasons, multiple distinct cohorts of tadpoles of some species can be present; for example a
spring cohort can be approaching metamorphosis in late summer, while an autumn cohort that will
overwinter as tadpoles are just beginning growth and development. Different cohorts experience very
different physical and biological environments, and can undergo complex inter- and intra-specific
competitive interactions. This does not end at metamorphosis; postmetamorphic frogs belonging to
different cohorts must encounter very different environmental challenges.

Australian tropical rainforest streams are usually very oligotrophic. Tadpoles are often the dominant
omnivorous consumers, and their feeding activities can be an important source of the fine particulate
organic material and regenerated mineral nutrients used by other consumers and producers. Because of
this, reductions in the density and diversity of tadpoles caused by frog declines are likely to have negative
effects across a wide range of freshwater taxa.



Allen, Katherine (University of South Carolina);

Evaluation of fisheries induced changes in effective population size and genetic composition in
gag grouper (Mycteroperca microlepis)

Over the last two decades, molecular data has gained recognition as a valuable component to the
development of effective management plans for commercially harvested fish species. This is due, in part,
to the growing body of evidence that the genetic effective population size (N e ) is often several orders of
magnitude smaller than the census size (N c) for many species. A reduced N e may correspond with a
decrease in genetic diversity and/or lower reproductive capacity, which both have important
management implications. In protogynous species ( females transition to male at a certain age/size) t he
discrepancy between N e and N c is likely exacerbated by overfishing, where size selective fishing has
been shown to alter sex ratios. Here we employ molecular data (8 microsatellite loci and a 204bp
fragment of the mitochondrial control region) to assess the impact that extensive, directed fishing efforts
have had on the genetic diversity and effective population size of gag grouper (Mycteroperca microlepis ),
a protogynous species commercially harvested in the South Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico. Samples from
two time periods (1993 – 95 and 2009 – 10) are analyzed in order to quantify potential temporal changes
over the past ~15 years.




                                                                                                          10
Allen, Larry G (ASIH; AES); Andrews, Allen (NOAA Fisheries, Aiea, HI, United States)

Bomb radiocarbon dating and estimated longevity of Giant Sea Bass (Stereolepis gigas)

 In January 2010, a massive giant sea bass (500 lbs, 227 kg; near maximum reported size of 557 lbs,
253 kg) was captured off Santa Cruz Island by commercial gill-netters. This specimen presented a unique
opportunity for a first-time estimation and validation oflongevity for the largest nearshore teleost of the
northeastern Pacific. A transverse section of the sagittal otolith produced consistent counts of 62 opaque
annuli along two different axes of the ventral sulcus region, translating into an estimated birth year of
1948. This age estimate was supported by measurements of radiocarbon ( 14 C) in the other sagittal
otolith core (within the first year of growth), relative to ∆ 14 C reference records used for bomb
radiocarbon dating. Two otolith core samples produced ∆ 14 C values that were classified as pre-bomb
(prior to ~1958-59), indicating a minimum lifespan of 51 years. It is possible that giant sea bass can
normally live more than 60 or 70 years, but a previous estimate of up to 100 years remains unfounded.



Allison, Allen (Bishop Museum);

Patters of Distribution and Diversity of Pacific Reptiles

The tropical Pacific region (Micronesia, Melanesia and tropical Polynesia) is inhabited by at least 389
species of lizards and 151 species of snakes, including the sea snakes. Most of these are from the island
of New Guinea which includes 222 species of lizards (150 endemic) and 128 species of snakes (55
endemic). The remaining species are mostly found on the high Melanesian islands of the southwest
Pacific, including the Bismarcks: 35 lizards (3 endemic), 21 snakes (5 endemic); Solomon Islands 54
lizards (15 endemic), 19 snakes (4 endemic): Vanuatu: 25 species (8 endemic), 11 snakes (0 endemic),
New Caledonia: 84 lizards (76 endemic), 19 snakes (3 endemic); and Fiji: 25 lizards (9 endemic), 4
snakes (1 endemic). There are 42 lizards (19 endemic) and 11snakes (4 endemic) occurring in the
geographically dispersed islands of Micronesia. Patterns of distribution and diversity of the Pacific reptile
fauna are closely related to the geological and tectonic history of the region. Asexpected species richness
and endemism is highest on the high islands of the Pacific, where there have been impressive radiations
of species, but recent work has demonstrated that some of the widely distributed taxa are members of
species complexes and that patterns of distribution and diversity are much more complicated than
originally thought.



Almeida Santos, Selma (Instituto Butantan); Kasperoviczus, Karina (University of São Paulo, Canada)

Copulatory plugs in Neotropical viperid snakes

Copulatory plugs or vaginal plugs, by which males occlude the female reproductive tract, may be an
example of a trait that has evolved under the selective pressure of sperm competition. Besides
precopulatory combats and establishment of mating hierarchies, there are different methods to prevent
sperm competition to occur including a copulatory plug, uterine muscular twisting or chemically induced
deterioration of the previous males‘ sperm. The plug has been interpreted as a sexually-selected
adaptation to reduce sperm competition by preventing re-mating of copulated females or provide
pheromonal cues to discourage courtship by rival males or to decrease receptivity by females. Here, we
report for the first time the occurrence of gelatinous copulatory plugs in several species of Neotropical
viperid snakes of the genus Bothrops. Observations were obtained directly after mating in nature.




                                                                                                          11
Additional data for copulatory plugs in B. moojeni , B. neuwiedii and B. jararaca were obtained from
preserved specimens in museums. In the field, copulatory plugs in the vagina entrance were observed in
B. alcatraz and B. insularis females. Male Bothrops deposited a thick gelatinous plug that harden and
adhere firmly inside the female cloaca and occluded both vaginal openings. The presence of copulatory
plug probably is indicative of recent mating. Literature suggests that the plug remains in the vagina for 2
to 4 days and is then expelled by the female. Movements by the female expel the plug and possibly force
to sperm into the oviducts. However, most preserved females checked remained with plugs.

Dissection indicates that the plug occupies the urodaeum, anterior to the openings of both the ureter and
the intestine. The plug is composed of two sections: a firm, translucent plug matrix and opaque, creamy
white, sperm dense fluid that covers the oviductal orifices and extends into the uterus and possibly blocks
both oviducts. In genus Bothrops , the induction of oviductal muscular contraction by semen may
function as mating plug.

Several hypotheses for the function of plugs are discussed:

(i) plugs function as ―chastity belts‖; (ii) plugs reduce female attractiveness to rival males and (iii) ―sperm
protection‖ function of male postcopulatory mate guarding in squamate reptiles.



Alshammari, Ahmed (University Of Hail);

Reptiles of the Faid Protected Area, Ha'il region, Saudi Arabia

A reptile survey was carried out in the Faid protected area, Ha‘il region, Saudi Arabia from January to
December 2011. The protectorate occupies 3200 km 2 , and lies between 26° 20` N, 41° 23` E and 27°
34`       N, 42° 31`E.     Faid, the major city, is one of most famous in the Ha‘il region because of its
historical records and monuments. The study area was classified into five major study sites including all
available habitat such as sandy, gravel, mountainous, and cultivated areas. Highways and roads
connecting Faid City with villages were surveyed while driving during the day and night time periods. This
study revealed twenty one species of reptiles, including one amphisbaenian,      Diplometopon zarudnyi ;
15 lizards and five snakes. Lizards were represented by five families; Family Lacertidae, including five
species, Acanthodactylus boskianus, A. opheodurus, A. schmidti, Mesalina guttulata, and M.
adramitana ; Family Gekkonidae, comprising four species, Bunopus tuberculatus , Ptyodactylus
hasselquistii,      Stenodactylus doriae, and S. slevini ; Family Scincidae, encompassing three species,
Chalcides ocellatus, Scincus mitranus mitranus         and Scincus scincus conirostris ; Family Agamidae,
comprised of two species, Trapelus ruderatus fieldi and Uromastix aegyptia ; and Family Varanidae,
included one species, Varanus griseus griseus . Snakes were represented by five species belonging to
four families as follows: Family Atractaspididae, including one species, Atractaspis engaddensis ; Family
Colubridae, comprised of two species, Coluber elegantissimus, and Spalerosophis diadema ; Family
Viperidae, one species, Cerastes gasperetti, and Family Elapidae , one species, Walternessia
aegyptia. The following species: Acanthodactylus schmidti, Stenodactylus doriae, S. slevini and
Chalcides ocellatus were recorded for the first time in the Faid protected area.




                                                                                                             12
Alvarez-Silva, Luisa Olivia (Universidad Michoacana de San Nicolás de Hidalgo); Huacuz-Elías,
Dolores del Carmen; Herrerías-Diego, Yvonne; Gómez-Rodríguez, Jessica (Universidad Michoacana de
San Nicolás de Hidalgo, Morelia, Mexico)

Ectoparasites of Ambystoma andersoni in Laguna de Zacapu, Michoacán.

Ambystoma andersoni is a neotenic species, endemic to lagoon Zacapu, located in west central Mexico.
The species has a high ecological value because it acts as a keystone species within the ecosystem and
can be used to recover this. Therefore is important to examine ectoparasites, in order to learn more about
this species for their conservation. Studies on ectoparasites suggest that these may be cause of
malformations, epidermal irritation, loss of corporal condition and immunological status among other.
Monthly samples were taken during the months of May, 2011 to January 2012, reviewing the integument
as well as all cavities, having a total of 134 individuals, resulting with some type of ectoparasite the
31.34%. We found ectoparasites of the genus: Lerneae spp, Argulus spp and some helminths. We
obtained a prevalence of 33%, with an abundance of Argulus of 66.95%, followed by Lernea with 19.49%
and helminthes with 13.56%, also we found a relationship with temperature, because as it descends, the
number of ectoparasites also descended. This may be due to a temperature below 16 °C certain
ectoparasites cannot reproduce. This study allows us to recognize the state of the lagoon also
understand the relationships between these organisms and others who live in this system, which would
be to define conservation actions to take.



Amarello, Melissa (Arizona State University); Smith, Jeffrey J. (The Nature Conservancy, Canada)

Social snakes? Arizona black rattlesnake aggregations exhibit hallmarks of sociality

Social structure affects many aspects of ecology including reproductive success, gene flow, and space
use. Here we describe the social structure of a fission-fusion society of Arizona black rattlesnakes (
Crotalus cerberus ) in central Arizona using social network analysis. We used remote time-lapse
cameras to semi-continuously sample rattlesnake behavior at social basking sites during the spring
emergence period in 2011. We calculated an association index for each pair of rattlesnakes (proportion
of time they spent in association) and used these indices to construct a weighted, undirected social
network. We characterize social behavior at multiple levels from individuals to the population. We ask,
for example, are there active companionships and avoidance behavior within a rattlesnake aggregation?
And, is gregariousness variable among individuals, and if so, is it predicted by sex or size class? Social
bonding, active companionship, and avoidance behavior support the idea that rattlesnake groups are
societies where individuals are attracted to one another rather than an arbitrary aggregation of animals
drawn to a common resource. Social behavior may be subtle and easily overlooked in squamates; only
recently has complex sociality been documented in several lizard and snake species. New tools such as
remote photography and molecular genetics will likely reveal that complex sociality is more widespread in
squamates than previously thought.




                                                                                                        13
Ambrosino, Christine M. (Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology); Tricas, Timothy C. (University of Hawaii at
Manoa, Canada)

Ampullary structure and receptor field dependent orientation in the scalloped hammerhead shark,
Sphyrna lewini

Elasmobranch fishes use their ampullary electrosense to detect bioelectric dipole fields produced by
hidden prey or potential mates. Gel-filled canals project from the ampullary subgroups and have unique
somatotopic and spatial distributions. We tested the functional subunit hypothesis that predicts that
different orientation behaviors are controlled by different ampullary groups. Premanipulation orientation
behavior of juvenile Sphyrna lewini to electric dipole stimuli was recorded on video. Ampullary pores of
two subgroups, the buccal (BUC) and superficial ophthalmic anterior (SOa), were then inactivated by
application of a non-conductive jelly on the skin and tested again to observe changes in orientation
behavior. This non-invasive jelly blockade of the electroreceptor system affected the shark‘s ability to
orient to an electric field, but had no effect on feeding and swimming behavior. Orientation frequency
decreased after subgroup inactivation in both BUC and SOa treatments. However, average orientation
distance did not differ among the treatment groups. In unmanipulated sharks, the spiral and turn
approach behaviors were most frequent. Sharks with the BUC pores inactivated showed decreased
accuracy in spiral behavior. This indicates the animals were unable to accurately follow the dipole field
lines to locate the simulated prey source. Sharks with the SOa pores inactivated demonstrated impaired
initial field detection through increased overshoot behavior. These responses to the blockade of
ampullary subgroups support the functional subunit hypothesis and demonstrate that the ampullary
subgroups may play different roles in the electro-orientation behavior of sharks. Also, as the BUC and
SOa treated sharks often missed biting in the proper target area, accurate orientation paths may require
information summation from all ampullary subgroups.



Amézquita, Adolfo (Universidad de los Andes);

Evolutionary ecology of egg-eating frogs (Dendrobatidae: Oophaga)

Poison frogs in the genus Oophaga are known for their astounding variation in coloration patterns, the
geographic distribution around the Central-South American bridge, and their wide ecological tolerance
allowing them to inhabit from beach side forests in Caribbean islands to some of the rainiest places on
earth. During the last years, my collaborators and I have developed a research program aiming to
integrate the historical and ecological aspects that explain the current distribution and diversity of the
genus. A phylogenetic reconstruction of Oophaga suggests that (1) the genus originated in Central
America and secondarily invaded South America, (2) the current taxonomic classification is at least
incomplete and fails to recognize the paraphyletic condition of several taxa, and (3) colour polymorphism
is a rather ancestral trait, present in all evolutionary lineages. The current distribution of major lineages
supports a role for geologic events and climate in the pattern of diversification. On the other hand,
whereas most of the theoretical background predicts syntopic convergence in coloration in aposematic
animals, Oophaga exhibit spectacular diversity among and often within populations. Our data from
combined mate choice, predation, and predator learning experiments suggest that sexual selection,
hybridisation and predation played a role on the evolution of this complex phenotype, but the relative
importance and direction of each effect probably varied between lineages.




                                                                                                          14
Anderson, Brenda (University of North Florida); Gelsleichter, Jim (University of North Florida, Canada);
Frazier, Bryan (South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Canada); Belcher, Carolyn (Georgia
Department of Natural Resources, Canada)

Evaluation of Gonadal Steroid Chemiluminescence Immunoassays (CLIA) for Non-lethal
Characterization of Reproductive Status for Elasmobranchs

Information regarding reproductive biology is an important element needed in the management of shark
fisheries. Characterization of reproductive cycles has historically involved culling many individuals to
examine gross morphology to assign reproductive status. This practice, while necessary at first, is
counterproductive to the conservation of these populations. Nonlethal alternatives for determining status
include using blood samples to determine sex hormone concentrations, typically using
radioimmunoassays (RIA). However, RIAs are often problematic for many researchers because of the
use of radioactive isotopes, the need for large sample volumes, and time and equipment needed for pre-
extraction are intensive. Commercially available chemiluminescence immunoassays (CLIA) are routinely
used for human plasma steroid evaluation, but have not been previously examined for use with shark
plasma. CLIAs use small sample volumes, equipment used is found readily in most laboratories, and pre-
extraction is typically not necessary. In this study, we validated the use of CLIAs for the gonadal steroids
17β-estradiol, testosterone, and progesterone for examining reproductive endocrinology of
elasmobranchs, focusing on the bonnethead shark ( Sphyrna tiburo ) and the blacknose shark (
Carcharhinus acronotus ). Plasma steroid concentrations measured using CLIA were compared to
morphological/histological assessments of reproductive status from a subset of culled specimens in both
species as well as to previous measurements of plasma steroid concentrations determined via RIA in S.
tiburo. Measurements of gonadal steroids using CLIA were generally higher than those previously
measured using RIA in S. tiburo . However, seasonal changes in CLIA-determined plasma steroid
concentrations were consistent with those determined using RIA and with morphological assessments of
reproductive status. C. acronotus male testosterone CLIA concentrations were consistent with
morphological assessments as well. However, 17β-estradiol CLIA concentrations showed an
unpredictable seasonal pattern in female C. acronotus . Therefore, CLIA appears to be a reliable method
for determining reproductive status in S. tiburo males and females and C. acronotus males but the
variability in female C. acronotus morphology and reproductive status may lend to inconsistent 17β-
estradiol CLIA concentrations.



Anderson, Christopher V. (University of South Florida); Tolley, Krystal A. (South African National
Biodiversity Institute, Canada); Deban, Stephen M. (University of South Florida, Canada)

Thermal selection on movements powered by elastic recoil and muscle contraction: contrasting
thermal effects in chameleons along a temperature gradient

Temperature is known to have a strong effect on muscle contractile velocity, and thus the performance of
muscle-powered movements, but movements powered by elastic recoil have been shown to be less
thermally dependent than muscle-powered movements. While both adaptation and acclimation to low
muscle temperature are known to mitigate strong thermal effects in muscle-powered movements at low
temperature, natural selection might act differently on movement types that benefit from high performance
and lower thermal dependence, such as elastic recoil powered movements. In chameleons, elastic recoil
projects the tongue with extremely high performance, while tongue retraction is powered by muscle
contraction directly, providing a control and comparison to typical muscle-powered movements. While this
elastic recoil mechanism reduces, but does not eliminate, the thermal dependence of tongue projection,
tongue retraction exhibits strong thermal dependence. We hypothesize that between closely related



                                                                                                         15
chameleon taxa found along an environmental temperature gradient, performance of muscle-powered
movements (tongue retraction) will be higher at lower temperatures, and lower at higher temperatures, for
taxa found in colder environments than for taxa found in warmer environments. Conversely, performance
of elastic recoil powered movements (tongue projection) will vary significantly less between taxa found
along this temperature gradient. To test these hypotheses, we imaged three dwarf chameleon taxa (
Bradypodion sp.) living along a strong elevation and temperature gradient in South Africa feeding at 15-
35ºC. We found that performance for both tongue projection and tongue retraction was higher at 15ºC for
taxa from colder environments than taxa from warmer environments. Further, performance of tongue
projection declined in all taxa as temperature increased from 30 to 35ºC (30-35ºC Q 10 <1.0), while
performance for tongue retraction continued to increase (30-35ºC Q 10 >1.0). This decline in tongue
projection performance was smaller for taxa from warmer environments and larger for taxa from colder
environments. Finally, we found that Q 10 values between 15 and 25ºC for tongue retraction are higher
for species from colder thermal environments than warmer thermal environments while Q 10 values
between 30 and 35ºC were higher for species from warmer thermal environments. These results indicate
that the thermal performance curve for both muscle-powered and elastic recoil powered movements in
taxa from colder environments is shifted to lower temperatures than in taxa from warmer environments.
The implications are that chameleons from colder environments may experience a proportionately larger
decline in feeding performance than taxa from warmer environments should temperatures rise as
predicted (+2.5-4ºC) by the International Panel on Climate Change.



Anderson, James (University of Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology); Johnson, Ryan (Oceans Research,
Canada); Bester, Martin (University of Pretoria, Canada); Swanson, Stephan (Oceans Research,
Canada); Gennari, Enrico (Rhodes University, Canada)

Impact of small scale chumming activities on the movement patterns of white sharks
(Carcharodon carcharias) in Mossel Bay, South Africa

Shark cage diving has become both a popular and controversial activity at numerous locations around the
world. Such activities are widely argued to have economic and educational values with minimal impacts
upon a natural resource. Critics of the cage diving industry claim increased risks for public safety, as well
as environmental and ecological impacts. In South Africa, the cage diving industry is largely focused on
the white shark (Carcharadon carcharias) at three main centers; Mossel Bay, Gansbaai and False Bay. It
is documented that at least 15% of the white shark population in these areas move between these sites,
whilst Mossel Bay supports a semi-resident population of female white sharks, that may stay in the area
for upwards of six months. Movements of white sharks (n=15) in Mossel Bay were analyzed in relation to
the activity of the sole cage diving operator between 2005 & 2009. Sharks were tracked over several days
both with and without concurrent cage boat activity. Putative behavioral change was observed in
individual sharks both in relation to the activity of the cage boat and as a function of experience. The
study demonstrates natural behavioral patterns of sharks may be altered by methods employed by cage
dive vessels (chumming), but such behavioral changes may be short term and reversible. No reliable
evidence was gained to either support or refute that such behavioral change conveys increased risks for
public safety, or may have long term ecological impacts.




                                                                                                          16
Anderson, James (University of Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology); Manoi, Kehau; Donachie, Stuart
(University of Hawaii at Manoa, Canada); Holland, Kim (University of Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology,
Canada)

Investigating ecological connectivity between distinct elasmobranch populations using oral
bacteria: A proof of concept study

Ecological connectivity is a term used in reference to the movement of organisms from one place or
habitat to another. In a marine context, understanding ecological connectivity has important applications
in conservation, and in fisheries management and planning. A synthesis of knowledge from satellite tag
derived movement data, as well as biophysical modeling largely focusing on larval dispersal and
reproductive phenology demonstrates a level of inter and intra-specific connectivity in marine
environments at differing scales. These approaches have some significant drawbacks including
equipment costs, difficulty of data recovery, and life-history specificity. This project begins to address
connectivity among elasmobranch species through the analysis of oral bacteria cultivated from the teeth
of live, line-caught sharks. Analysis of oral micro-flora will determine the utility of this concept for
elucidating connectivity. Here we aim to describe bacteria, yeasts and fungi cultivated from the teeth of
prevalent shark species caught in waters around the Main Hawaiian Islands. We aim to isolate specific
marker species to provide real-time evidence of connectivity between elasmobranchs at both species and
population levels. These data can be compared with satellite derived movement and habitat-use data to
elucidate possible connectivity.



Anderson, Jason (University of Calgary); Maddin, Hillary (Harvard University, Canada); Wilson, Sian;
Pardo, Jason (University of Calgary, Canada)

New insights into the origin of extant amphibians from the fossil record and High Resolution
Computed Tomography

The origin of frogs, salamanders, and caecilians (collectively Lissamphibia) has been contentious
question for a number of years. This controversy stems from the fact that extant amphibians and various
archaic fossil groups represent two non-overlapping data sets; the morphology of lissamphibians are
highly derived with respect to characters found in archaic fossils, and the fossils are not available for
molecular work. With the publication of the stem batrachian Gerobatrachus , many of the morphological
gaps were spanned at least between frogs and salamanders and one group of fossil amphibians, the
amphibamid temnospondyls. However, that study hypothesized that caecilians were sister group to
another group, the brachystelechid lepospondyls. This topology, assuming the consensus placement of
lepospondyls as sister group to amniotes and their stem is correct, is at odds with all molecular studies,
which find support for a monophyletic origin of lissamphibians.

Subsequent to this study, work has continued to test this lepospondyl-caecilian relationship, primarily
though the exploration of internal braincase anatomy in extant and fossil amphibians using micro-
Computed Tomography (micro-CT). Our work has extensively documented the range of variation within
the braincase of caecilians, and has found a number of morphological characters that are congruent with
current molecular phylogenies of this group. Work on the morphology of caecilian inner ears has
highlighted previous studies that suggest that there is a progressive regression, and ultimate loss, of
sensory epithelia related to both high-frequency tympanic and low-frequency opercular hearing pathways,
which would be inconsistent with a lepospondyl origin for caecilians. Detailed micro-CT studies of
lepospondyls have demonstrated some new potential characters linking microsaurs and caecilians, but
the preponderance of characters linking these two groups is correlated with fossorial locomotion. Ongoing



                                                                                                        17
work is expanding the comparative sample of both fossil and modern amphibians scanned, and are
exploring new questions related to tooth development and patterns of 3D morphometric change during
ontogeny of the salamander cranium.



Anderson, Matthew (Oklahoma State University); Fox, Stanley (Oklahoma State University, Canada)

Changes in Vegetative Diversity and Size of Territories in the Lizard Uta stansburiana Following
Tail Autotomy

Autotomy of an appendage (the tail in lizards) can aid in escape from predators, but it comes with
associated costs. In previous studies, decreases in territory size and overlap with conspecifics followed
tail loss in lizards. We measured the impact of tail autotomy on territory quality in the lizard Uta
stansburiana , a species with intense predation pressure and consequently frequent natural tail loss.
Territory quality was indexed by assessment of vegetative diversity and territory size. Multiple
georeferenced sightings for each individual were taken in the field and these sightings were used to
estimate the territory boundaries. We examined the impacts separately for each sex, as U. stansburiana
is strongly molded by sexual selection and tail autotomy is known to affect the behavior of the sexes of
this species differently. To measure changes in territory quality we compared two groups of lizards
(control lizards with intact tails throughout, and treatment lizards with induced tail autotomy halfway
through the breeding season). Control and treatment groups did not differ in vegetative diversity or
territory size during the initial phase, when all lizards had intact tails. However, the treatment group
showed changes in territory quality following tail autotomy, unlike the control group. Territories of
treatment lizards decreased in vegetative diversity and decreased in size after autotomy. We attribute
these changes to sex-specific behavioral strategies following tail autotomy. Females make the best of a
bad situation and switch to defending lower quality, suboptimal territories, leading to less fighting and
possible diversion of energy to egg production and tail regeneration. Males do not have this option, and
must fight to maintain large, diverse territories to attract females. However, without the tail, males are at a
disadvantage and lose more fights. These lost fights result in the loss of territory area and diversity for
tailless males.



Anderson, Nils (University of Alberta); Paszkowski, Cynthia (University of Alberta, Canada); Hood,
Glynnis (Augustana Faculty: University of Alberta, Canada)

Beaver canals provide movement corridors for dispersing wood frogs

 Beavers ( Castor canadensis ) rely on both aquatic and terrestrial habitats, as do amphibians. Unlike
amphibians, beavers are adept at modifying their surroundings to suit their needs. Beavers not only
create ponds by damming streams, they can also dramatically modify existing ponds. In low gradient
areas, beavers commonly dig extensive networks of canals towards nearby forest cover where they
forage and collect construction materials. Canal digging is an aspect of the beaver‘s role as an ecological
engineer that has received little attention, yet these canals could offer connectivity between wetlands and
uplands for species other than the beaver. Moist movement corridors can be attractive to amphibians,
and may be particularly important for young of the year animals whose small size makes them vulnerable
to dehydration. The wood frog (Lithobates sylvaticus) is one of the most common amphibians across
much of boreal Canada, making it an excellent candidate for examining the effect of beaver canals on
wetland-upland connectivity. Our study was conducted in Miquelon Lake Provincial Park, Alberta, a
morainal landscape of small hills and basin ponds with little surface connectivity. From late July to the end



                                                                                                            18
of August, 2011 we counted young-of-the-year frogs along shoreline transects of 14 ponds. We also
counted frogs on 4.5 m long drift fences set perpendicularly across beaver canals on 4 ponds. From the
shoreline transects, we found that relative abundance of wood frog young-of-the-year was higher on
beaver canals than on unmodified shoreline.      On the drift fences, the number of frog encounters was
highest at the beaver canal, and declined with distance from the canal. With canals reaching lengths of
over 100m, and typical wood frog dispersal distances of 400 m, canals may reduce mortality in vulnerable
young-of-the-year wood frogs and potentially increase dispersal distances. In a landscape of isolated
wetlands, beaver canals could play a role in metapopulation dynamics.



Anderson, Roger (Western Washington University);

Effects of prey availability and climate across a decade for a desert-dwelling ectothermic
mesopredator

The long-nosed leopard lizard Gambelia wislizenii is a prominent diurnal, ectothermic mesopredator in
desert scrub biomes of western North America. This mesopredator eats primary consumers such as
grasshoppers, and secondary and tertiary consumers such as robber flies and lizards. Assuming food is
limiting, then food abundance in desert scrub will directly affect this mesopredator‘s rates of production as
growth, storage and reproduction. It was expected that among-year variation in climatic factors would
yield predictable effects on the abundance of arthropod and lizard prey of G. wislizenii, and the effects on
the prey would transduce into effects on individuals and the population of G. wislizenii. Across a decade,
the effects of 1) arthropod and lizard prey availability and 2) climatic factors on the population structure,
population density, and lizard body condition (mass/SVL) of G. wislizenii were measured at a single field
site in the northern Great Basin desert scrub in mid-summer. Correlative analyses provided strong
inferential support for linkage between climate and productivity among trophic levels in this desert
ecosystem.



Anderson, Thomas (University of Missouri); Whiteman, Howard (Murray State University, Canada)

Overall competitor density, not species identity, affects facultative paedomorphosis in the mole
salamander, Ambystoma talpoideum

Factors that promote phenotypic plasticity frequently include biotic mechanisms, such as density-
dependent

competition. Specifically, phenotypic plasticity is thought to develop in environments with low interspecific
competition, which increases the number of exploitable niches that would promote alternative phenotypes
and thus would reduce intraspecific competition intensity. Mole salamanders ( Ambystoma talpoideum )
exhibit phenotypic plasticity that involves either undergoing metamorphosis, or remaining aquatic as
sexually mature paedomorphic adults. The role of interspecific competition in producing each phenotype
in this species has not been explored, however, and could be important given the high incidence of
sympatry with competitors. We examined this question by experimentally manipulating larval densities of
A. talpoideum and A. maculatum (spotted salamander). Larvae were reared in outdoor experimental
mesocosms within a response surface design, which manipulated both overall larval density and
frequency of each species. The fate of each individual (i.e., phenotype) was recorded, as well as body
size/condition with conspecific and congeneric densities as potential predictor variables. Overall
competitor density was a significant factor that influenced phenotype production for A. talpoideum , but



                                                                                                          19
interspecific competitor frequency had no clear effect; survival was nearly equal across all treatments.
Paedomorphs occurred significantly more often in the low and medium overall densities compared to the
high overall density. Metamorph production for A. talpoideum was approximately equal across the three
overall densities.

Additionally, a significantly amount of individuals delayed maturity by overwintering as immature larvae in
the high density treatment compared to the low/ medium densities. These results indicate that competition
is important to the production of the different phenotypes and heterochrony in A. talpoideum , and that
overall competitor density, not species identity or frequency, was most critical. These findings also
provide some support for previous hypotheses of paedomorphosis, but augment our understanding of this
process in A. talpoideum by incorporating delayed maturity as a potential outcome. As survival was not
affected by competition, overall density of larval salamanders likely has important consequences that
affect the size and age structure of aquatic A. talpoideum, and can influence both population and
community dynamics.



Andrade, Denis (Depto. Zoologia, UNESP);

Narrowing the gap between physiological measurements and biological reality: temperature
effects on the metabolism of Squamate reptiles

Metabolic measurement of animals by indirect calorimetry is a tool largely used in ecophysiological
studies, as it allows for the quantification of the energy exchanged between animals and their
environment, under a variety of circumstances. Moreover, considering that any activity an organism
engages (or even just being alive) requires energy, metabolic measurements also provides a common
currency that integrates physiology, behavior, and ecology into a unique and relevant denominator. Rates
of chemical reactions underling metabolic activity are affected by temperature and, therefore, also the
rates of energy expenditure. For ectotherms, such as Squamates, which does not rely on metabolically
generated heat to regulate body temperature, metabolism is thus altered up or down concurrently to
temperature increase or decrease, respectively. Once this fact was recognized, immediately become
apparent that any metabolic measurement obtained for Squamates (and any other ectotherm organism),
to be acceptable, needed to be performed under temperature controlled conditions. Thus, and probably
deriving from our own mammalian thermoregulatory paradigm, the vast majority of metabolic
measurements in Squamate reptiles were performed submitting the animals to constant temperatures
regimes, sometimes for days on a row. Although such approach is valid and yield relevant data in many
cases, it ignores basic thermoregulatory features exhibited by most Squamates, particularly the fact that
body temperature naturally fluctuates along the day. Herein, using examples derived from metabolic
determinations obtained from lizards and snakes under a variety of situations, I will discuss some of the
possible implications and consequences of different thermal regimes to metabolic measurements in
Squamate reptiles. I will argue that the incorporation of a more ecologically relevant control of ambient
temperature, coupled with the monitoring of body temperature while doing metabolic measurements,
often yield results that provide deeper insights into an animal´s energetic and thermal biology.




                                                                                                         20
Andreadis, Paul (Denison University);

Dispatch from the Gulf Theater: Burmese Pythons in southwestern Florida, USA

While the growing population of exotic Burmese Pythons in Everglades National Park (ENP) has drawn
considerable attention, I have been conducting python reconnaissance on the northwest edge of the
invaded range. The southwestern part of Collier County (SCC) is the northernmost (26.009° N) site in
Florida for which evidence of python reproduction currently exists. The second hatchling python from
SCC was recorded during road surveys in August 2011. Although potential differences in detectability are
unknown, comparative hatchling encounter rates suggest that the density of reproductive females is much
lower in SCC than in ENP. Nonetheless, notably fewer mammals have been sighted during road surveys
in SCC than in a reference area further inland and north, where pythons are rare. Recently initiated
removal efforts at Rookery Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve (RB) provide insights into the SCC
python population. Numerous large pythons have been collected from a manmade peninsula that extends
into mangrove habitat. Phenologically, removals in January/February 2012 were all large males, and
numerous shed skins were recovered from the site. One captured individual may be the largest wild male
Burmese Python on record. Pythons at RB appear to regularly use mammal/reptile burrows, in contrast to
ENP where a burrowing macrofauna is lacking. The RB site underscores (1) the importance of mangroves
as a habitat which can sustain large individuals, and (2) the potential of this species to use natural
burrows for surviving cold winter temperatures. These points can inform detection and control measures.



Andreone, Franco (Museo Regionale di Scienze Naturali); Rabemananjara, Falitiana C.E. (University of
Antananarivo, Madagascar, Canada); Weldon, Ché (North-West University, South-Africa, Canada)

Policymaking and preventing the introduction of Chytrid Fungus in Madagascar

The amphibians of Madagascar exhibit a great number of species (more than 290) and an exceptionally
high endemicity rate. Being Madagascar a large island, it is also particularly relevant to understand the
relationships in terms of biogeography and commercial and pathogenic exchange it could have with other
nearby countries. The presence of the lethal chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) was for
long-time unreported in Malagasy amphibians, although continental African countries not far from
Madagascar already revealed its occurrence. Due to this peculiar situation, an official national anti-chytrid
plan was launched in 2010 within the framework of the Sahonagasy Action Plan, and subsequently
approved by Malagasy governmental agencies. The situation was suddenly changed when positivity
occurrence was reported for the Makay Massif, a remote area in the West of the island. The occurrence
at this site was particularly unexpected, since Makay did not seem to be the most suitable locality where
the Bd should occur. At least this was what turned out from predictivity analyses, and due to the fact that
tourism and commercial exchange occurred at a very low rate in that area. No mass mortality was
observed so far in two occasion visits, and therefore we still wonder whether this situation reflects a real
and objective presence of the Bd, a non-lethal situation, or whether it is the effect of being just the
beginning of an epidemic event. The chytrid monitoring planning launched in 2010 dealt with the
screening analysis by means of nested PCR of 8 sites in Madagascar (and now also includes Makay as a
potential Bd site), chosen for their geographic location and potential suitability due to high tourist level,
proximity to towns and commercial harbours. For each site samples ( N > 50) are being taken twice a
year, during the dry and the rain season. Considerations about the long-term success of such a plan
depend – among the other things – on the political stability of the country and possibility to form local
people to routine surveys and captive breeding programs.




                                                                                                          21
Andrews, Kimberly M. (UGA Savannah River Ecology Lab); Waldron, Jayme L. (University of South
Carolina, Canada)

Comparative overwintering ecology of a coastal and an inland population of Canebrake
Rattlesnakes (Crotalus horridus) in the southern United States

The timber rattlesnake (Crotalus horridus), the rattlesnake species with the broadest geographical range,
exhibits a high level of phenological variability in breeding season, reproductive frequency, and
hibernation patterns. Here, we investigated timber rattlesnakes in the southern part of their range. Data
on 35 telemetered individuals were examined using coastal (Beaufort Co.) and inland (Hampton Co.) field
sites in South Carolina. Surface activity, the number and types of hibernacula (i.e., structure) used by
snakes, and physical posturing behaviors between October and April were analyzed for variation among
field sites and the potential effects of body condition, sex, temperature, precipitation, and photoperiod on
seasonal, monthly, and daily time scales. Differences among coastal and inland sites and influences from
temperature were found at all temporal scales for surface activity and hibernacula use. Within a season,
surface activity, hibernacula use and physical body posture varied with month. Decreasing surface activity
correlated with increasing photoperiod but snakes were more likely to be in ambush posture with
increasing photoperiod. Further, snakes were observed more frequently in ambush posture in ingress
(Oct-Nov) than egress (Mar-Apr). Lastly, the two sites were significantly different in the dominant
hibernacula and structure types (e.g., stump, root mass, armadillo burrow) used. These data not only
allow us to further understand variability of this species within a region, but provide insight into the
flexibility of this ectothermic, low-maintenance predator to slight differences in its environment. These
differences have implications for seasonal energy expenditures which translate to effects on mortality risk,
reproductive output, and therefore population demographic structure and viability. Additionally, these
results that articulate activity season and overwintering patterns are relevant to biologists and managers
who assign wildlife and habitat management techniques and land use planners and developers as the
activity cycle of this venomous animal influences seasonality of human encounter rates and safety
precautions. Lastly, surface activity influences detectability which has incredible conservation
implications, particularly in coastal regions where development is increasing and heightened detectability
and movement in the winter further increase mortality risks from roads and intentional mortality.



Andrews, Kimberly M. (UGA Savannah River Ecology Lab); Colbert III, Joseph E. (Jekyll Island
Authority Georgia Sea Turtle Center, Jekyll Island, GA, United States)

Effects of initial landscape development on home-range size of Timber Rattlesnakes (Crotalus
horridus)

Conversion of undeveloped and rural areas is rapidly occurring through the process of expanding
urbanization. Consequently, habitat loss and degradation have had pervasive effects on wildlife, which
can result in the alteration of movement patterns and space use. This study focuses on home ranges of
timber rattlesnakes (Crotalus horridus) in coastal South Carolina, at a field site in the early stages of
residential and recreational development. Home ranges were calculated using minimum convex polygons
(MCP), fixed kernel distributions, and LoCoH nearest neighbor convex hulls (NNCH). Sex affected all
home range area estimations where males had larger home ranges than females. Additionally,
development affected full (95%) range sizes. Overall, home ranges in developing areas were significantly
larger than in undeveloped areas. This effect was observed for MCP and fixed kernel calculations, but not
for NNCH. These latter LoCoH analyses revealed that snakes are not necessarily using more space in
developed areas, but are using broader and more fragmented ranges to accomplish the same activities in
the same relative amount of space. When analyzing breeding, foraging, and wintering kernels separately,



                                                                                                         22
sex influenced breeding and foraging areas, but development only affected foraging ranges. These data
provide information that is readily translatable to the multiple stakeholders (biologists, managers,
developers, local land planners, general public) that are inherent and necessary in the process of
conserving wildlife in developing landscapes.



Angeli, Nicole (University of Maryland, College Park); Lips, Karen (University of Maryland, College Park,
College Park, United States)

Prime real estate matters: effects of population density on spatial distributions of a Neotropical
glassfrog

Global amphibian declines have reduced population density in many species, and quantifying density-
dependent change in spatial patterns of animal dispersion can inform variation in species ecology,
behavior, and evolution. Many species of glassfrogs (Amphibia: Centrolenidae) actively defend areas
along mountain streams using vocalizations and physical combat. Individuals may aggregate due to
biotic (e.g. social behaviors) or abiotic (e.g. unevenly distributed resources) reasons. The territorial
glassfrog Espadarana (Centrolene) prosoblepon wasone of the most common arboreal amphibian
species found along mountain streams at Omar Torríjos Herrera National Park in central Panama before
populationsdeclined in 2004 following the arrival of the pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd).
Today this speciespersists at ~15% of historic abundances, although numbers vary annually. We
hypothesized that thedecline of E. prosoblepon observed over 12 years altered patterns of male
dispersion. We compared the distribution of E. prosoblepon along three 200 m stream transects (Loop,
Guabal, Cascada) between 4 years of pre-decline surveys and 8 years of post-decline surveys using a
                                       2
Ripley‘s K density function and a χ goodness-of-fit quadrat method to detect spatially patterns of
dispersion. Prior to declines in 2004, males were aggregated across transects, especially in high-density
      2                   2                               2                               2
50 m ―hotspots‖ (Loop χ 11=161.75, p < 0.001; Guabal χ 11=93.82, p < 0.001; Cascada χ 11=124.13, p <
0.001) . Post-decline patterns varied with abundance (p ≤ 0.045). Immediately post-decline, males were
randomly dispersed within the pre-decline hotspots (p ≤ 0.02). Seven years post-decline, abundances
                                                                                               2
increased by ~35% and males were aggregated both within and around hotspots (Loop χ 11=73.84,
                    2                                2
p<0.001; Guabal χ 11=86.00, p<0.001; Cascada χ 11=74.84, p < 0.001) . Because the same physical
locations were hotspots throughout the 12 year period, regardless of male density, we hypothesize that
males select territories based on physical attributes rather than conspecific males. Alternatively, males
may persist in microhabitats that do not support disease, and empty territories support higher levels of
disease. Future studies should quantify fine-scale microhabitat use, infection levels, and occupancy of
males to distinguish whether intraspecific behaviors, microhabitat partitioning, or disease prevalence,
affect dispersion patterns.



Angilletta, Michael (Arizona State University);

Ecological and evolutionary responses to thermal change

Phenotypic plasticity enables ectotherms to respond to thermal change on many temporal and spatial
scales. Adaptive phenotypic plasticity is manifested in terms of thermoregulatory behavior and thermal
acclimation. Theoretical models assume that these strategies will coevolve according to their respective
costs and benefits. Experimental studies of terrestrial ectotherms have revealed costs of thermoregulation
and costs of acclimation. For salmon, such costs should depend on the temporal and spatial patterns of
water temperature. Moreover, genetic variation in thermoregulatory behavior and acclimation capacity
may be limited in salmon populations. These costs and constraints of phenotypic plasticity have important
implications for the ecological and evolutionary responses of salmon to changing environments.




                                                                                                        23
Angilletta, Michael (Arizona State University); Levy, Ofir (Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United
States); Buckley, Lauren (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States); Keitt, Timothy
(University of Texas, Austin, TX, United States)

Predicting biological responses to climate change with mechanistic models

Mechanistic models have been used increasingly to infer the impacts of climate change on the
distributions of species. These models explicitly describe the processes by which environments impact
organisms and are thus sensitive to assumptions about environments, organisms, and the interactions
between them. We present an individual-based approach that uses phenotypic data for a widespread
group of lizards ( Sceloporus undulatus species group) to predict population dynamics and geographic
ranges under contemporary and future climates. Our individual-based model extends previous models by
incorporating stochastic thermal variation and a dynamic life cycle, with transitions among embryonic,
juvenile and adult stages. Using this approach, we explore how the complexity of a model, including both
environmental and organismal features, influences its predictions. Preliminary analyses showed that the
resolution of climatic data greatly impacts the outcome of our simulations. Embryos had a lower chance of
surviving to the hatchling stage in simulations using hourly temperatures than they did in simulations
using mean monthly temperatures. Moreover, lizards were less likely to survive the winter in simulations
with hourly temperatures, because of a decrease in the potential duration of activity prior to brumation.
Our results indicate that a greater resolution of climatic data would improve our understanding of
population dynamics and geographic ranges.



Anthony, Carl (John Carroll University); Hickerson, Cari-Ann; Stuczka, Angela; Reiter, Marcie; Acord,
Megan (John Carroll University, Canada)

Exploring Niche Divergence in Eastern Red-backed Salamanders, Plethodon cinereus

Polymorphic species provide an opportunity to study the role of reproductive isolation in populations that
may be diverging in sympatry. The Eastern Red-backed Salamander ( Plethodon cinereus ) is
polymorphic for dorsal coloration with red-striped and all black unstriped individuals representing the most
common phenotypes. Numerous studies have now established that the two common phenotypes differ in
ecologically important ways that have the potential to affect when and where salamanders feed and
whether or not they establish territories. Territory acquisition is a critical component of reproductive
success in this species and has the potential to impact mate choice. Research in our laboratory has
focused on mating behavior and on differences in diet and territorial behavior between the two
phenotypes. We present a model where the striped phenotype exhibits a territorial strategy that
maximizes access to high quality, prey rich territories and mates. Assortative mating by phenotype, a
crucial first step in the evolution of reproductive isolation, may be one byproduct of this adaptive strategy.
In the field, we observed more same color male/female pairs than expected by chance alone and striped
salamanders were more apt to hold territories compared to unstriped salamanders. When salamander
density peaked in spring and fall, the diets of the two phenotypes diverged, suggesting that competition
for prey occurs during these seasons. In laboratory trials, striped salamanders were more aggressive and
were more likely to exhibit residency effects compared to unstriped salamanders. Taken together, our
results suggest that polymorphic populations of red-backed salamanders show potential for ecological
divergence and that territorial behavior may play a central role in this process.




                                                                                                           24
Apodaca, JJ (Florida State University); Godwin, James (Environmental Institute, Auburn, AL, United
States)

Conserving the Red Hills Salamander (Phaeognathus hubrichti) has a long way to go, but at least
there is light at the end of the burrow.

Conserving the Red Hills Salamander (Phaeognathus hubrichti) has a long way to go, but at least there is
light at the end of the burrow. Joseph J. Apodaca1 and James C. Godwin2 1Department of Biological
Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32306-4340, USA 2Alabama Natural Heritage
Program, Environmental Institute, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA The Red Hills salamander
(Phaeognathus hubrichti) is a monotypic plethodontid that is endemic to six counties in southern
Alabama, U.S.A. P. hubrichti is restricted to the Red Hills geologic formation, a narrow belt of Eocene
aged claystone, silt stone, and sand stone, and limited by the Alabama and Conecuh rivers. P. hubrichti
was listed as a federally threatened species by the USFWS in 1976 in response to the concerns of local
herpetologists based on the impact that forestry practices were having on the few known populations at
the time and their naturally restricted range. Since the listing it has become abundantly clear that
uninhibited timber practices have continued to have a strong negative effect on the persistence of P.
hubrichti, yet until relatively recently the species lacked any long-term protection. The last decade has
seen a large increase in conservation research, land acquisition, and our overall understanding of the
biology of P. hubrichti. These successes are a solid starting point for the preservation of the Red Hills
salamander that we hope can lead to continued protection and perseverance of this rare species.



Araujo, Maria Lucia (FAPESE/UFS); Melo, S.M.V. (Secretaria do Meio Ambiente, Canada)

Impact of ornamental fishery on reproduction of Potamotrygon sp C (CHONDRYCHTIES -
POTAMOTRYGONIDAE)

The species Potamotrygon sp C, is a small freshwater stingray that it exhibits as reproductive mode
matrotrophic viviparity, with the reproductive potential of the species directly proportional of female size.
Recent speculations on reduction of its population by ornamental fishing have been point out without
any data onpopulation abundance. The purposeof this study is to measurethe impact of ornamental
fishingon wild stocksof PotamotrygonspC. To fishing impact assessment were considered theminimum
size ofreproduction (DW50 andDW95 ) with 95% CI andreproductive potentialof the species in areas with
different levels of fishing effort. DW50 andDW95 of the area with higher fishing impact (area 1) were 17.30
cm (17.08- 17.52) and 19.09 cm(18.53-19:66), respectively. The averageof uterine fecundity was2.08 (±
1.35). DW50 andDW95 of the areas with lower fishing impact (area 2) were 16.71 cm (15.91-17:43)
and21.31cm(18.57-24.04), respectively. The average of uterine fecundity was 2.28 (± 1.07). Cerrato
testshowed nosignificant differences on DW50 andDW95 between the two areas. (χ20.05=78.15; Likelihood
ratio = -53. 96 ). The t test showed no significant differences between average of uterine fecundity (p
=0.33). These results indicatethat, although theDW95 of the area 1 is lower than area 2, the reproductive
potentialof the specieshas not been compromised, and therefore ornamentalfishingdid not
causesignificant impacts on wild populations.




                                                                                                          25
Archambeault, Sophie (San Francisco State University); Crow, Karen (San Francisco State University,
Canada)

Molecular evolution and expression patterns of posterior HoxA and HoxD genes in teleost paired-
fin diversity: novel observations from non-model taxa

There are over 27,000 species of teleost fishes with an astounding array of fin shapes, sizes, positions
and specialized modifications, yet the molecular evolution and development of paired fins has not been
well characterized. Hox genes are associated with the evolution of novelty and diversity, and are
expressed during growth and development of fins and limbs. Teleost fishes share a whole genome
duplication that may be associated with the success and diversity of the group, and Hox paralogs appear
to be disproportionately retained. Interestingly, comparison of Hox gene expression during the
development of forelimb buds in tetrapods with pectoral fin buds in zebrafish and paddlefish suggests that
changes in Hox expression patterns are associated with novelties, such as the tetrapod autopod. Many
teleost fishes form a larval pectoral fin, which transforms into an adult fin later in development. Though
the development of the larval pectoral fin has been characterized in the zebrafish, Danio rerio , the
pectoral fin morphogenesis has not been fully characterized for gene expression, yet must be involved in
the growth and patterning of the diverse adult fin structures observed in teleosts. To explore the
molecular basis of fin diversity in teleost fishes, we examined the molecular evolution and expression
patterns of Hox genes during pectoral fin morphogenesis and pelvic fin development in Danio rerio and
compared it to the non-model, derived teleost, Lythrypnus dalli , the blue-banded goby. We sequenced
posterior HoxA and HoxD paralogs of 25 species of teleosts and tested for evolutionary trends correlating
to adult fin morphology. In addition, we documented Hox gene expression patterns using whole mount in
situ hybridization during various stages of fin morphogenesis and pelvic fin development in Danio rerio
and Lythrypnus dalli . These comparisons shed light on the role of genome duplication in the evolution of
teleost diversity, and fill in important comparisons in the development of paired fins and limbs by looking
at pelvic fin development and morphogenesis of the adult pectoral fin structure. We conclude that both
molecular evolution and divergence of expression patterns have aided in the evolution of diversity of
teleost paired fins.



Archie, James (California State University Long Beach); Quijano, Marc Oliver (California State University
Long Beach, Long Beach, CA, United States)

Fine Scale Phylogeography of Sceloporus occidentalis (Phrynosomatidae) in the Transverse
Ranges of California

The Transverse and South Coast Mountain Ranges of southern California have undergone substantial
geological changes affecting resident taxa of reptiles and amphibians. The western Transverse Ranges
originated from a >90° crustal rotation of a continental block that resulted in the uplift of the Santa Inez
Mountains. Crust folding and uplift along strike-slip faults occurred further inland forming the South
Coast Ranges. The eastern extension of the transverse ranges is part of a second continental margin
region that experienced drift associated with two different fault systems (San Gabriel and San Andreas).
This complexity has resulted in at least four distinct geological regions that have been associated with
phylogeographic breaks in studies of different taxonomic groups of reptiles and amphibians. However,
sampling in those studies were inadequate to associate phylogeographic complexity with               the full
complexity of the geological history of the region. To determine whether additional phylogeographic
structure was present, we sampled western fence lizards ( Sceloporus occidentalis : Phrynosomatidae)
from ±150 populations along the Transverse Ranges and adjacent Los Angeles Basin. Individuals were
sequenced for 1550bp of mtDNA (NADH4 and NADH4L) and phylogenetic analyses were carried out.



                                                                                                          26
Nearly all sequences were distinct (<1% were identical) and maximum corrected differences exceeded
7%. Five major clades were identified: 1) Eastern Transverse Ranges plus the LA Basin, 2) Ridge Basin
+ Sierra Pelona, 3) Western Transverse t Ranges north of the Cuyama River drainage, 4) Western
Transverse Ranges south of the Cuyama River drainage, and 5) Pine + Topatopa Mountains region. A
Great Basin clade was most closely related to a sample from the northeastern Western Transverse
Ranges.       Additional geographic structure exists at an even finer scale within each of these clades.
Geographically circumscribed micro- clades were often not most closely related to adjacent clades. The
distribution of some of the clades coincides with major fault blocks and geological regions resulting from
recognized geological processes that began during the Miocene but were completed in the Holocene.
Others do not. Only some of these have been identified in studies of other taxa. The results of the study
reveal a finer scale of phylogeographic structure than has been found any other species examined in
this region.



Armstrong, Doug (Massey University);

Hierarchical biphasic models for understanding growth of long-lived ectotherms

Somatic growth rates are critical to the population dynamics of long-lived ectotherms. While the von
Bertalanffy (VB) function has been used extensively to model growth of such animals, the conventional
form of the model fails to account for individual variation or for changes in resource allocation after sexual
maturation. Bayesian modelling has recently been used in the fisheries literature to fit a modification of
the VB model that is both hierarchical (allowing individual variation in growth parameters) and biphasic
(allowing an age-specific change in growth rate). We extend this approach by developing a range of
hierarchical biphasic models allowing a size- rather than age-dependent change of one or more growth
parameters in one or both sexes. We applied the approach to a long-term data set of growth
measurements for snapping turtles (Chelydra serpentina), as data on nesting status show females begin
nesting predictably at about 24 cm carapace length. The data consisted of 1,996 carapace-length
measurements taken from 1972-2005 in Algonquin Park, Canada, from 317 individual turtles. These
included 24 turtles of known age, most of which were juveniles of unknown sex, and 293 turtles of
unknown age, most of which were adults of known sex.

The modelling revealed substantial individual variation in both the asymptotic size (a) and growth rate (k)
parameter, and clear evidence of biphasic growth. The model that best explained the data (based on
DIC) was that males and females grow similarly until they reach 24 cm, after which females shift trajectory
toward a reduced asymptotic size target. The number of years taken to reach 24 cm was estimated to
range from 11-44 years in 95% of individuals, with asymptotic size ranging from 38.2-40.9 in males and
31.0-33.6 in females. Our approach is applicable to a range of long-lived ectotherms likely to have size-
dependent biphasic growth, and provides essential information for modelling the long-term dynamics of
populations under threat.



Arntzen, Pim (NCB Naturalis);

Deep phylogeography

Phylogeograpy is the study of historical processes responsible for the contemporary geographic
distribution of individuals. Mostly mtDNA genetic data is employed. Thanks to PCR and direct sequencing
techniques a present day study will - not be restricted to large organisms and - be based upon ca. 10^5



                                                                                                           27
more data than in the old days. Comparative phylogenetics has yielded some important insights on e.g.,
the effects of climate change on the distribution of genetic variation. However, more prominent is the
absence of general patterns, even among species with near-identical ranges. What will another five
orders of magnitude data increase from nuclear DNA bring us ? I argue that we should not repeat the
research agenda of the last four decades but focus on groups of organisms that are especially
informative, such as Triturus newts. In this colloquium I will present an update on my work on T.
marmoratus – T. pygmaeus in Portugal and Spain. In short, this system is ideally suited to explore
dispersal as a function of the environment across multiple spatial and temporal scales. At the end of my
talk I will highlight the correspondence of the Iberian work with ongoing projects in France and the
Balkans.



Arribas, Rosa (EBD-CSIC); Gomez-Mestre, Ivan; Diaz-Paniagua, Carmen (EBD-CSIC, Canada)

Effects of native and invasive predators on amphibian larvae and their consequences for aquatic
trophic webs

Amphibians are keystone species in the trophic network of aquatic systems, as they have important and
long lasting effects on primary production and nutrient cycling. Nevertheless, relatively few studies have
focused on interactions between amphibians and organisms in lower trophic levels of aquatic
communities. The effect of amphibians on the community structure and dynamics in turn depends on their
interactions with competitors and predators. Predators in particular can have cascading effects through
alterations in tadpole density, alterations in tadpole behavior and morphology, or both. The main aim of
our study was to investigate how the presence of both native (beetle larvae, family Dytiscidae) and
invasive (red swamp crayfish, Procambarus clarkii) predators can affect the interactions between
amphibian larvae and organisms in lower trophic levels of temporary ponds, such as macrophytes,
phytoplankton and zooplankton. We used a mesocosm array at Doñana National Park in south-western
Spain to experimentally test for a) effects of the local amphibian community (larvae from six species) on
macrophytes, plankton and water chemistry, b) density-dependent effects of native and invasive
predators on pond structure associated to reduced amphibian survival, and c) density-independent effects
of native and invasive predators on the trophic ecology of amphibian larvae, quantifying its consequences
to the ponds‘ food webs. We observed decreased macrophyte biomass, increased turbidity and nutrient
content in the water at high tadpole density and when red swamp crayfish roamed free in the tanks. The
effect of the red swamp crayfish on plants was carried over into the following hydrological cycle. Invasive
predators caused greater mortalities of amphibian larvae than native predators. Our results highlight the
ecological importance of amphibian larvae, how their interactions with organisms at lower trophic levels
can be altered by the presence of tadpole predators and how disruptive of the entire pond structure can
invasive species be.



Arroyo, Bryan (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service);

New Era of Policy-Making for Invasive Species

Invasive species are an increasingly serious global problem. Throughout history, problems of such
magnitude have been dealt with by forming alliances, sometimes with unlikely partners. The U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service is looking at new ways to deal with the long list of wild animal species that could
become seriously invasive in the United States. Our current process for listing a species as injurious
under the Lacey Act is lengthy and expensive. By the time we list something as injurious, it is often too



                                                                                                        28
late. Now, too, the industries that trade in live animals are realizing that many of their trade species are
becoming invasive problems. Do we have alternatives to listing that would be faster and accomplish what
we need? The Fish and Wildlife Service is collaborating with the live animal trade industries to create a
new way of preventing new species from entering the United States. We are working with the industries
that trade in live, nonnative species on voluntary ways that they can prevent importation without affecting
their commerce. These industries include pet, bait, aquaculture, food, and display. We are focusing on
aquatic species that are not yet found in the United States but have shown a history of invasiveness in
other countries and could survive in our climates. By using a newly developed rapid-screening method,
we can provide the industries with technical assistance so they can decide which species that they would
voluntarily refrain from importing. State conservation agencies can also use this information to aid with
their management of potentially invasive species and to work with industry on their own agreements for
regionally risky species. The rapid screening process will be explained and several examples of results
will be shown.



Arruda, Mauricio Papa (Department of Structural and Functional Biology, Institute of Biology, University
of Campinas (UNICAMP)); Costa, William Pinheiro (Botucatu Institute of Biosciences, São Paulo State
University (UNESP), Botucatu, Brazil); Recco Pimentel, Shirlei Maria (Department of Structural and
Functional Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil)

Genetic deterioration of the critically endangered species Proceratophrys moratoi (Anura:
Cycloramphidae) populations

Proceratophrys moratoi is a small toad (snout vent length up to 35 mm) endemic from state of São
Paulo, Brazil, and due to its restricted distribution it was listed as critically endangered species in the Red
List of International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), and in the official list of endangered species
of Brazil (IBAMA) and of the state of São Paulo (SMA). This species is found in open areas of Brazilian
savanna (cerrado) in dirty field (i.e. grassland with scattered small shrubs) always near the headwaters of
streams. So far, only six populations of this species are known: two of them were recorded on the right
side of the Tietê River (municipalities of Brotas and São Carlos), and the remainder four, are found in the
left side of the same river (municipalities of Avaré, Bauru, Botucatu and Lençóis Paulista). Additionally,
recent evidence of population declines (e.g. Lençóis Paulista and Avaré) and extinctions (e.g. Botucatu
population) has also been reported for populations on the left side. In the present study we evaluated the
levels of genetic variability using DNA samples extracted from buccal epithelial cells of individuals in the
remaining populations, by genotyping of 15 microsatellite polymorphic loci. The PCR products were
separated by electrophoresis on 6% denaturing polyacrylamide gel, stained with silver nitrate. Intra-
population genetic diversity was estimated by calculating the observed and expected heterozygosity,
percentage of polymorphic loci, number of alleles, effective allele number (POPGENE 1.32), allele
richness and inbreeding (FSTAT 2.9.3.2).

These analyses showed a low genetic diversity in P. moratoi when compared to other researches of
amphibians. Some differences were identified in amount of genetic diversity among the populations,
based on the reduction of the number of alleles, percentage of polymorphic loci and effective allele
number within populations of the left side, but no significant difference ( p > 0.05) was observed in other
parameters (heterozygosity, allele richness and inbreeding). The low genetic diversity exhibited in P.
moratoi may be due to small populations sizes and therefore, provides a greater susceptibility to
extinction by the action of stochastic factors (demographic, environmental and genetic factors), which
helps to explain the recent extinctions of populations.

Financial Support: Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP)



                                                                                                            29
Ashpole, Sara (University of Warterloo); Bishop, Christine (Environment Canada, Canada); Murphy,
Steve (University of Waterloo, Canada)

Cummulative effects on wetland landscapes: Can we reconnect Amphibian habitat through small
pond creation on private land?

The arid south Okanagan Valley, British Columbia is a highly modified landscape, where wetland and
riparian habitat loss exceed 85%. Increasing regional land development, agricultural contamination,
invasive predatory species, and roadway expansion provide a multi-stressor landscape for amphibian
species at risk. During 2003 to 2006, 74% of discrete valley bottom wetland sites had less than two of six
native amphibian species detected annually. Moreover, absence of reproductive success or low relative
amphibian abundance (<10 individuals) was observed among 67% sites. Consequently a collaborative
multi-stakeholder approach to habitat restoration and species recovery was adopted through private
landowner stewardship. The goal was to increase the quantity and quality of lowland wetland habitat by
reconnecting known amphibian-breeding sites with constructed and/or enhanced ponds. Amphibian
monitoring data determined strategic locations for wetland construction and/or restoration (N2003 = 24
sites; N2004 = 53 sites; N2005 = 71 sites; N2006 = 108 sites). These sites were selected based on: 1)
proximity to known breeding locations, 2) distance to adjacent water bodies, 3) at least 500m to
roadways, and 4) historic infilling knowledge or partnership with local Conservation Authorities. Since
2006, 21 wetlands were restored within the study area, effectively doubling the number of available
fishless ponds. Restoration outcomes include ten newly constructed ponds, eight re-contoured wetlands
after historic infilling, and invasive predatory species ( Lithobates catesbeianus; Carassius auratus )
mitigation at three sites. Restored sites and surrounding priority wetlands are monitored annually for the
presence of adults, eggs, and metamorph emergence. Early signs of immigration and metamorphic
success for Great Basin Spadefoot (Spea intermontana) and Pacific Chorus frog( Pseudacris regilla )
populations have been observed in twelve of 21 restored ponds. Wetland restoration has increased the
number of available breeding ponds within the study area, engaged landowners, and possibly aided
species recovery. Yet, local threats to upland terrestrial and breeding habitat continue to escalate which
impedes amphibian movement corridors and population expansion.



Assis, Ananda (Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo); Barreto, Cristine (Universidade
Católica de Brasília, Brasília, Brazil); Navas, Carlos (Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo,
São Paulo, Brazil)

Analysis on the bacterial microflora on the amphibian skin of Atlantic Forest fragments and its
effectiveness against pathogens

Microbial communities have been identified on the skin of the amphibians and often include bacterial
isolates capable of producing substances that can inhibit the growth of pathogens, at least in vitro. The
composition of these communities is likely affected by both microhabitat and the natural history of the
amphibian host, and such considerations are important for populations of anuran inhabiting fragmented
forest environments. This study focuses on comparing the cutaneous microbial communities of anuran
populations from fragmented and continuous landscapes of Atlantic Forest. Specifically, we tested the
hypotheses that 1) resident cutaneous microbial communities found on anurans vary among sympatric
species; 2) for each species, the degree of habitat preservation affects the communities of cutaneous
microflora, and these communities differ between populations found in fragmented and continuous
forests; and 3) these bacterial communities exhibit antimicrobial properties that vary between species and
environmental settings. Indeed, we found that the microbial communities in anuran populations from
fragmented forests grew to greater densities and included more morphotypes when cultured than the



                                                                                                          30
communities from populations of the same species inhabiting continuous tracts of forest. Such differences
were noted for species that include Proceratophrys boiei, Aplastodiscus leucopygius, Dendropsophus
minutus and Phyllomedusa distincta. A total of 214 morphotypes of bacterial colonies were isolated from
these species, 27 of which exhibited inhibition against species of pathogenic bacteria. The greatest
diversity of isolates, and the greatest number exhibiting antimicrobial properties, were grown from
samples taken from P. boiei. I identified 68 isolates from these communities, which were dominated by
members of the Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Bacteriodetes and Actinobacteria, which are all typical of
forest environments. These results suggest that the environment determines the profiles of the microbial
communities of the anurans in this study. Although the ecological implications of these differences is not
yet understood, there may be species-specific communities found within particular taxonomic groups of
anurans that may be predicted by the characteristics of the environment, life history traits, or inherent
physiology of each group. The presence of bacteria with antimicrobial properties may be of primary
importance for these amphibians as they protect against pathogenic microrganisms. In this way, the
environment could act as a buffer to the susceptibility of the amphibians infectious diseases, and
alterations to these landscapes would compromise this barrier of protection.



Aubret, Fabien (SEEM CNRS à MOULIS);

Body size evolution on islands: are adult size variations in tiger snakes a non-adaptive
consequence of selection on birth size?

Mean adult size has been used as the traditional measure of body size to explain trends of insular
gigantism and dwarfism in a wide array of taxa. However, patterns of variation in body size at birth have
surprisingly received little attention, leaving open the possibility that adult body size differences are non –
adaptive consequences of selection acting on neonate body size.                 Here, I used an empirical and
correlative approach to test this hypothesis in a mosaic of 12 island and mainland snake populations in
Australia. Data collected on 597 adult and 1084 neonate tiger snakes showed that (1) both adult and
neonate mean body size varied strongly across populations; (2) prey diversity and size convincingly
explained birth size variations: birth size, notably gape size, correlated with prey size; (3) neonate snout -
vent length was significantly correlated with neonate gape size; and (4) neonate snout - vent length was
significantly correlated with adult snout - vent length. Post - natal growth rates recorded under common
garden conditions differed across populations and were correlated with mean prey size. These data
collectively suggest that (1) prey size is the main driver for the evolution of body size at birth in gape -
limited predators; (2) adult size variations may reflect selective forces acting on earlier life stages; and (3)
adult size variations may also reflect resource availability during ontogeny (notably prey diversity).



Austin, Christopher (Louisiana State University); Perkins, Susan (American Museum of Natural History,
New York, NY, United States)

Green Blood in Lizards: Hypotheses for an Enigmatic Physiology

The bile pigments biliverdin and bilirubin are cytotoxic and neurotoxic physiological waste products that
when chronically elevated cause jaundice and can induce death, particularly with liver disease. Toxicity
due to bile pigment accumulation is common in individuals with decreased liver function, patients with the
life-threatening Gilbert‘s and Crigler-Najjar syndromes, and newborn babies. In contrast, some
extraordinary lizards from the megadiverse island of New Guinea have evolved green blood. The green
coloration of the blood is due to high levels of the green colored bile pigment biliverdin that overwhelms



                                                                                                             31
the intense color of the red blood cells. These lizards have blood concentrations that would cause
jaundice and death in humans and other vertebrates. The adaptive significance of hyperbiliverdism is
unknown, but three hypotheses are addressed.



Austin, James (University of Florida); Zamudio, Kelly (Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States);
Lougheed, Stephen (Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada)

Distinctiveness in spite of gene flow? Elucidating the role of inter-specific gene flow in the
divergence of a rare endemic frog

The Florida bog frog ( Rana okaloosae ) is known from approximately three-dozen tributaries of the East
Bay, Shoal and Yellow Rivers in Santa Rosa, Okaloosa, and Walton counties, Florida, USA (an area of
less than 20 km2). It is a member of the Rana catesbeiana species group, and mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) phylogenetics has indicated a sister-species relationship with the widespread bronze frog ( R.
clamitans ). More specifically, these mtDNA of two species are polyphyletic, and include shared
haplotypes. This could reflect recent divergence with incomplete lineage sorting, a genetic sweep of bog
frog mtDNA from bronze frogs during a recent secondary contact, or continuous ongoing gene flow
between the two species. Bronze frogs are found syntopically with bog frogs, leading to occasional
hybridization as demonstrated by microsatellite DNA and anecdotal information from field observations.
The extent of historical introgression between these species is of interest as a study of recent speciation,
but also as a conservation question. When one species is widespread and is syntopic with a rare
geographically restricted species, recurrent gene flow can pose the risk of extinction of the latter.
Whether inter-specific gene flow has persisted, and at what rate over the history of these species, can be
insightful in light of recent evidence of contemporary hybridization. The objective of this project is to use a
combination of variable nuclear microsatellite markers and mitochondrial DNA sequences to elucidate the
recent evolutionary history of bog and bronze frogs. The evolutionary history of this species pair is
examined using a combination of coalescent modeling, a comparison of Bayesian gene flow models
using Bayes factor analysis, and isolation-with-migration models.



Avendaño Casadiego, Karina (Universidad del Tolima); Montealegre Delgado, Xiomara Katherine;
Bernal Bautista, Manuel Hernando (Universidad del Tolima, Canada)

Effect of habitat size on survival, developmental time and growth rate in tadpoles of Engystomops
pustulosus and Rhinella humboldti

It has been recognized that growth rate, developmental rate and length of the tadpole period are strongly
affected by environmental factors such as temperature, oxygen, amount of food, larval density, water
volume and pond drying. Tadpoles of many anuran species develop in ephemeral ponds, and particularly
two species, E. pustulosus and R. humboldti breed in temporary ponds with strong differences in the
habitat size (space and water volume). So, we were interested in testing the effect of three permanent
habitat sizes (large, medium and small), with some similar environmental field conditions, on the survival,
developmental time and growth rate in tadpoles of these two species. We placed 15 containers in an area
of the laboratory five of them for the large habitat (size: 34 X 27X 12.5 cm with 2000 ml of previously
aerated water ),other five for the medium habitat (16.5 X 16.5 X 9 cm with 1000 ml of water), and five
more containers for the small habitat (13.5 X 9.5 X 3.5 cm with 100 ml of water ).In each one of the
containers we placed 4g of soil obtained from the University botanical garden, one macrophyte, and 10
tadpoles at Gosner stage 25. After starting the experiment, every day we supply 0.01 g of fish food for



                                                                                                            32
tadpoles of each container, every six days we changed 50% of the water and every twenty days we
removed all the water and materials and measured the accumulated survival, the developmental rate and
the growth rate. We finished the experiment when all tadpoles completed the metamorphosis or died. For
the two study species we found similar results. Survival was higher in the large habitat than in the
medium and small ones (E. pustulosus: 44%, 2% and 1%, respectively; R. humboldti: 4%, 0%, 0%).
Developmental time was also faster in the large habitat (in E. pustulosus: stage 46 was reach at 81 days
Vs 120 days for the other habitats; in R. humboldti, the stage 42 was reach after 160 days only in the
large habitat), and the growth rate was significantly higher in tadpoles from the large habitat size (Anova
p< 0.001 for all cases). Physicochemical conditions of the water in the containers were not significantly
different between and within treatments: temperature 23°C, dissolved oxygen varied between 5.98 and
4.7 mg/L and pH 6.7. Therefore, we concluded that under natural conditions tadpoles of E. pustulosus
and R. humboldti are less likely to survive to reach metamorphosis in small ponds with less water volume.



Avila-Pires, Teresa (Museu Paraense Emilio Goeldi); Hoogmoed, Marinus (Museu Paraense Emilio
Goeldi, Belem-PA, Brazil)

Herpetofauna of Serra dos Martírios / Andorinhas, Pará, Brasil, a transitional Amazonian forest-
savannah region

Amazonia represents the largest continuous area of tropical rainforest, encompassing parts of eight
South American countries. Even though forest environments predominate, it harbors open vegetation
enclaves with distinct physiognomies, and it borders in the east and south on savannah habitats. It is
believed that Amazonian limits varied during its history, expanding or retracting during respectively wetter
and drier periods. Moreover, present deforestation processes tend to allow the invasion of species
adapted to open areas into previously forested areas. The study of areas situated in the ecotone
Amazonian forest–savannah may help us understand both the historical interplay between these
physiognomies and the consequences of present day deforestation. The State Park Serra dos Martírios /
Andorinhas (54,000ha, elevation up to 600m), is located in SE Pará (Brazil), on the southern edge of the
Amazonian forest and close to the Cerrado. It presents a mosaic of vegetation types, from open, grassy
or rocky fields, through sclerophyll, deciduous, and subperenifolial forests, to perenifolial, periodically
inundated forest along the Araguaia River. Besides, even within the park there are inhabitants and farms,
and cows freely enter Cerrado areas. We studied the local herpetofauna from October 22–November 4,
2012, through active search, 16 pitfall traps with drift fences (each a line of four 60L buckets), and four
funnel traps placed in creeks and pools for aquatic species. We found 34 amphibians (anurans) and 36
reptiles (20 lizards, nine snakes, five chelonians and two caimans). The mosaic of physiognomies put
together forest and cerrado species, like Polychrus marmoratus and P. acutirostris, and four distinct
species of Mabuya, and it apparently allows some typically forest species to penetrate the cerrado to a
certain extent (e.g., Dendrobates galactonotus, Leptodactylus mystaceus, Kentropyx calcarata) and vice-
versa (e.g., Leptodactylus syphax, Gymnodactylus amarali, Tropidurus oreadicus). A number of species
was able to occupy anthropogenic environments. Part of the fauna was not previously recorded from
Pará, a few specimens (e.g. Colostethus sp. and Mabuya sp.) may represent undescribed species, and
others, like eight specimens of different size classes of Mesoclemmys, raised taxonomic questions that
will be discussed.




                                                                                                         33
Backlin, Adam (US Geological Survey); Santana, Frank (San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation
Research, Escondido, CA, United States)

Lessons learned from 13 years of recovery with the critically endangered mountain-yellow legged
frog (Rana muscosa) in southern California

The once abundant mountain yellow-legged frog ( Rana muscosa ) has declined from 99% of its former
range in southern California since the late 1960‘s. It is currently listed as endangered by both the US Fish
and Wildlife Service and the state of California. The mountain yellow-legged frog is a high elevation
species that requires at least two years to complete metamorphosis.            The US Geological Survey has
been monitoring the remaining populations and involved with restoration for this species since 2000. The
San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research has been conducting captive husbandry and
restoration since 2006 and were the first to successfully breed this species in captivity in 2010. Captively
bred animals were released in 2010 and 2011 in an attempt to reestablish a single site. The nascent
nature of the captive breeding program has presented us with challenges in our reestablishment effort.
Small sample sizes, low post-release detectability, and unavailability of frogs from multiple life stages has
limited our ability to develop a standardized reintroduction methodology for the species. We will discuss
some of the challenges and successes of managing anuran reintroductions during the nascent stages of
captive breeding programs.



Bailey, Larissa (Colorado State University);

An Introduction to Occupancy Estimation Techniques for Amphibians

Concern about worldwide amphibian declines intensified in the 1990s when scientists became aware of
the scope of the problem and the attention highlighted the dearth of long-term, large-scale studies of
amphibian systems and their dynamics. In response, the U.S. Geological Survey established a nation-
wide program to evaluate amphibian population status across the entire U.S., using species occurrence
as a response or state variable in a variety of studies, many of which are highlighted in this symposium.
Recent advances in estimation methods have emphasized that reliable inferences can be made from
these types of studies if detection and occupancy probabilities are simultaneous estimated. A key feature
of occupancy estimation methods is that they generally require both spatial and temporal replication. In
this presentation, I will give a brief overview of occupancy models in the context of existing amphibian
studies. I will discuss questions commonly encountered during both the design and analysis phase of
occupancy studies and describe resources and software available to practitioners.



Baird, Troy (Department of Biology, University of Central Oklahoma); Baird, Teresa (Department of
Biology, University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, OK, United States); Shine, Richard (University of
Sydney, Sydney, N, Australia)

Conditional male social tactics in an Australian dragon's lair: The roles of body size, territory
takeover by aggression, and coloration signals in a high density population

The evolution of alternative male social tactics is expected when intense competition coupled with the
superior competitive ability of some individuals limits access to resources and reproductive opportunities
for other individuals. We conducted observational and experimental studies on eastern Australian water
dragons ( Physignathus lesueurii ) in a high density population where competition is intense, to test the
hypotheses that mature males adopt alternative social tactics that are plastic (conditional), and that large



                                                                                                          34
size and dimorphic coloration are important for resource-holding potential (RHP) and social signaling.
Approximately one-half of mature males ( N = 14) defended territories using high rates of patrol and
advertisement display, whereas 16 mature, but smaller males utilized non-territorial social tactics. The
plasticity of social tactics in this species, and their dependence on body size, was confirmed by two
instances of spontaneous eviction of territory owners by non-territorial males, and by marked shifts in
tactics by the latter in response to temporary experimental removals, followed (usually) by their expulsion
when original owners were reinstated. Home ranges of females overlapped those of several territorial and
non-territorial males, but females interacted more frequently with males that defended territories. We
describe three behavior patterns, exhibited primarily under unstable social conditions that display the
dimorphic coloration characteristic of male water dragons. Diminished responses by territorial males to a
supra-normally large and colorful model intruder, also support the hypothesis that water dragon males
display dimorphic ventral coloration only to convey a high level of aggressive intent, whereas routine
advertisement involves less intense (and costly) head-movement displays. Chronic high energetic costs
of territory defense (due to high local population density) may select for males of this species to cycle
between territorial and non-territorial social tactics depending upon their changing energetic status and
the level of intrasexual competition.



Bakkegard, Kristin (Samford University); Godwin, James (Auburn University Environmental Institute,
Canada); Hoss, Shannon (San Diego State University, Canada); Wines, Michael (Auburn University,
Canada)

Movement within a population of Red Hills Salamanders, Phaeognathus hubrichti

The Red Hills Salamander, Phaeognathus hubrichti , is an IUCN Red List Endangered plethodontid
endemic to the Red Hills region of southern Alabama. This fossorial species lives in burrows
predominantly on steep, north facing slopes. A cryptic species, nothing is known of movement between
different burrows on a slope. We report on an ongoing study of a PIT- tagged population of Red Hills
Salamanders in Monroe County, Alabama, USA. Salamanders were implanted with 134.2 kHz ISO tags
(Biomark TX 1440) and detected with a Biomark 2001F-ISO reader with a racquet antenna. With a
maximum tag-read depth of 30 cm, we can detect tags through soil and rocky substrate, thus allowing
recaptures without needing to see the animal. Burrows were individually numbered and geo-referenced
using Trimble Real Time Kinematic GPS equipment for control point establishment and Trimble 5600
Total Station to map burrow entrances. Salamanders (N = 115) were tagged Dec 2007 – Feb 2008 then
released into their capture burrow. They were monitored five times during March – May 2008, monthly
(except August) in 2009, and six times during 2010-2012. We detected 72.2% of the salamanders at least
once post release; mean number of detections was 3.9 (range = 1–11); 63.4% were detected at least
twice. Of those, 53.4% changed burrows zero or one time; 24.6% moved at least 3 times. The longest
occupancy time for the same burrow was 23 months (6 detections). Distance moved was calculated
starting 1 month post release. Mean distance moved for all detections was 5.1 m (SD = 37.6; N = 236
detections; 77 salamanders); for mean distance moved including only when a salamander changed
burrows was 14.2 m (SD = 55.5; N = 106 detections; 48 salamanders). These means are right skewed.
Based on maximum distance moved, 75.3% moved less than 2 m and 92.2% of salamanders moved less
than 10 m. Maximum distance moved was approximately 400 m (by a female and juvenile) to new
burrows in an area adjacent to the main slope. The next longest movement was 83.2 m by a female. The
longest distance moved by a male was 77.7 m. Red Hills Salamanders apparently do not move often or
far. We recommend that all populations of this patchily distributed species be protected against habitat
destruction because of the limited dispersal capability of this salamander.




                                                                                                        35
Balaz, Vojtech (Department of Biology and Diseases of Wildlife Faculty of Veterinary Hygiene and
Ecology University of Veterinary and Pharmaceutical Sciences Brno); Civis, Petr; Vojar, Jiri (Department
of Ecology, Faculty of Environmental Sciences, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague, Prague, Czech
Republic); Literak, Ivan (Department of Biology and Diseases of Wildlife Faculty of Veterinary Hygiene
and Ecology University of Veterinary and Pharmaceutical Sciences Brno, Brno, Czech Republic); Garner,
Trenton (Zoological Society of London, London, United Kingdom)

Amphibian chytrid fungus surveillance in the Czech Republic

The fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis became exemplary emerging pathogen owing to its rapid
spread and devastating impact on amphibian populations in many parts of the world, including Europe.
However many European countries show no evidence of disease-mediated declines hence the intensity
of research is limited. Awareness of the chytridiomycosis danger rapidly declines on the way to east and
so the knowledge of its presence in amphibian species of the area of Central and Eastern Europe. The
Czech Republic harbours surprisingly rich amphibian diversity (21 species) and many species are present
in relic or edge-of distribution populations, these receive a lot of conservation attention. Data on B.
dendrobatidis in the Czech Republic are being collected since 2008. The overall prevalence is similar to
surrounding countries but significantly varies in hosts, time and geography. Intensity of infection detected
by real time qPCR is in general very low, with exceptions in case of Pelophylax kl. esculentus, Bombina
variegata and Bufo viridis. Mortality caused my chytridiomycosis was detected only once. Bombina
variegata, Bufo calamita and Bufo viridis showed ability to clear infection. Genus Rana and Pelobates
fuscus remain negative even when infected amphibians of other species share the same water-body with
them. Models on habitat suitability show lowlands to harbour more infections than mountains. We
conducted first attempts to collect the fungus for cultivation. Proper genetic typing of the local lineage is
crucial for planning surveillance and future conservation activities.



Balaz, Vojtech (Department of Biology and Diseases of Wildlife Faculty of Veterinary Hygiene and
Ecology University of Veterinary and Pharmaceutical Sciences Brno); Vörös, Judit (Hungarian Natural
History Museum, Budapest, Hungary); Garner, Trenton; Bielby, Jon (Zoological Society of London,
London, United Kingdom)

Taxonomic and geographic selectivity of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in Europe: Assessing
risk and directing future monitoring

The global amphibian decline is a generally accepted phenomenon affecting communities on global scale
in the last decades. Several processes have been shown to be primary drivers of species loss and
reductions of amphibian populations. Of these, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) represents the most
important of the emerging pathogens. Declines are non-randomly distributed across the Amphibia and
consistently carry a phylogenetic signal. In Europe some amphibians are susceptible to both infection and
mortality attributable to chytridiomycosis, whereas others seem less likely to harbour the pathogen.
Because Bd in Europe appears to be expanding its range as well as causing local amphibian mortality
and declines it is receiving considerable attention. We have generated primary data on infection in six
Central and Eastern European countries and integrated them with previously published and unpublished
European data. Altogether 44 native and one introduced species were included in the final dataset that
consisted of 7403 individual samples. We used contingency tables and randomisation tests to compare
background prevalence with the prevalence observed in focal clades. The analyses showed that brown
frogs in the genus Rana and subfamily Salamandrinae are consistently under-infected, while the
phylogenetic lineage formed by families Alytidae and Bombinatoridae is significantly over-infected. Clades
Pelophylax, Bufonidae and Pleurodeliane showed inconsistent trends that varied depending on the




                                                                                                          36
country. Although several taxonomic gaps exist this study provides guidelines for initiating new and
expanding current Bd research in Europe, useful especially in cases when resources for detection are
limited.



Baldi, Ludmila Cristina (Fisheries Institute); Santos, Fernanda Bastos (Fisheries Institute, São Paulo,
Canada); Neves, Pedro Verdan; Carvalho, Katerine Pereira; Esteves, Katharina Eichbaum (Fisheries
Institute, São Paulo, Brazil); Hipólito, Márcio (Biological Institute, São Paulo, Brazil); Ferreira, Cláudia
Maris (Fisheries Institute, São Paulo, Brazil)

The Anuran community in riparian zones under influence of sugar cane cultiviation: preliminary
results

The riparian zone occurs at the interface between aquatic and terrestrial environments. Several studies
indicate that important interactions occurs in this region, with high biodiversity and great diversity of
environmental processes. Considering the widespread cultivation of sugar cane in São Paulo State, and
the limited information about the effect of this culture on aquatic environments, this study aims to analyze
its effects on the anuran community. We chose three streams under different riparian conditions: 1-
predominance of sugarcane cultivation (site A), 2- predominance of secondary forest with sugar cane
cultivation on the vicinity (site B) and 3-riparian vegetation with preserved native forest (site C), with three
repetitions each one, located in regions of high density sugar-cane plantations in the basins of the
Piracicaba-Capivari-Jundiaí rivers (PCJ). We collected the anurans with pit falls traps using fence guides
and active searching by visual encounter. Altogether, we found individuals belonging to the following
families: Leiuperidae, Leptodactylidae, Bufonidae, Microhylidae and Craugastoridae. In site A, 93
individuals of six different species were recorded: Physalaemus cuvieri (62), Physalaemus centralis (18),
Physalaemus marmoratus (2), Elachistocleis cesarii (5), Leptodactylus fuscus (4) and Pseudopaludicola
sp (2). In site B we found 6 individuals of three different species: Physalaemus cuvieri (2), Physalaemus
centralis (1) and Rhinella ornata (3). In site C we found 12 individuals of six different species:
Physalaemus cuvieri (1), Physalaemus centralis (2), Rhinella ornata (5), Haddadus binotatus (2),
Eupemphix nattereri (1) and Leptodactylus mistacynus (1). The results indicated higher Margalef richness
in site C (2,012) compared to site A (1,086) and B (1,116), and higher Shannon diversity in site C (1,583)
compared to sites A (0,999) and B (1,011). Simpson dominance higher in site A (0,508) (especially of
Physalaemus cuvieri, which is a generalist species found in impacted habitats), compared to sites B
(0,266) and C (0,181). These preliminary results, indicate the importance of the riparian zone for the
preservation of the anuran community, what ensuring a good water quality and shelter to the animals,
both indispensable to the anuran life cycle.



Ball, Lydia (Colby College); Bevier, Catherine (Colby College, Canada)

The role of epibiotic bacteria in modulating skin secretion production in the Spring Peeper,
Pseudacris crucifer

Amphibian skin glands synthesize and secrete many important compounds, including antimicrobial
peptides (AMPs) important for protection against pathogenic bacteria and fungi. The mechanisms of how
these are produced and their composition remains unclear. This study explored the mechanism in male
Spring Peepers, Pseudacris crucifer. Specifically, we tested the hypothesis that minimal exposure to
bacteria after being maintained in a sterile environment is sufficient to stimulate the production of
potentially protective skin secretions. Using sterile techniques, treatment frogs were collected in the field



                                                                                                             37
and swabbed to sample resident microbial species. At each phase, we also collected skin secretions
using mild electrical stimulation, quantified the protein content, and qualitatively assessed the complexity
using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). After five recovery days, treatment frogs were
sampled for bacteria again, depleted of skin secretions, treated with antibiotics to sterilize the skin
surface, then exposed to colonies of the bacterium, Aeromonas hydrophila. This species is commonly
found in natural aquatic habitats in Maine and causes red-leg disease in frogs. Results from a pilot study
suggest that the sterilization treatment is effective in minimizing resident bacteria during experiment
treatment, and that skin secretion production is induced by exposure to bacteria. It appears, then, that
epibiotic bacteria play an important role in the immune response in frogs, and that secretion production
may be induced by exposure to a transient pathogen.



Ballouard, Jean-marie (SOPTOM-CRCC); Caron, Sébastien; Gravier, Camille; Fournière, Kévin;
Servant, Laure (SOPTOM-CRCC, GONFARON, France); Michel, Catherine Louise (CEBC-CNRS, Villiers
en bois, France); Bonnet, Xavier (CEBC -CNRS, Villiers en bois, France)

Impact of field managements on body condition, thermoregulation and stress level of Testudo
hermanni

All tortoise species face strong decline, especially in the arid Mediterranean areas. The Hermann tortoise
( Testudo hermanni ) notably is critically endangered in Western Europe. In France, this species subsists
in the Var district (South Est) where small patchy populations are particularly vulnerable due to habitat
destruction, urbanization, uncontrolled fires and closing of other areas owing to changing agricultural
practices. It has been assumed that open habitats are critical in providing opportunities for
thermoregulation, laying sites, and favoring the growth of food resources. Water availability supposedly
relaxes environmental constraints. Therefore field management actions have been set up through a
conservation Life+ program (2010-2014). We evaluated the effect of habitat openings and of the creation
of water ponds in two independent sites. We used a simple experimental design comparing control versus
managed areas. In 2010, before managements, we performed initial surveys and monitored 38 tortoises
fitted with radio transmitters and temperature data loggers. In 2011, following managements, we monitor
40 tortoises (20 per experiment). We evaluate the impact of management on tortoises using physiological
indexes such as body condition, basal stress level, and hydric stress. Thermal profiles of the tortoise are
also recorded. This study will provide important information to better estimate the usefulness of field
managements which could be implemented at national and European levels. The results will be also
important to organize reintroduction or reinforcement programs.



Bangley, Charles (East Carolina University);

Potential competitive and predatory interactions between spiny dogfish (Squalus acanthias), and
striped bass (Morone saxatilis) in the coastal waters of North Carolina.

Spiny dogfish and striped bass are high-level predators in the Northwest Atlantic ecosystem that have
recently recovered from overfishing, and both species overwinter in North Carolina waters. Striped bass
and spiny dogfish abundance, salinity, temperature, and depth data were taken from winter trawl surveys
conducted in North Carolina waters from 1996-1998 and 2006-2010. Diet data were collected from striped
bass in 2006-2007 and from spiny dogfish in 2006-2007 and 2010. Spatial and dietary overlaps were
determined between the two species and the importance of striped bass in the diet of spiny dogfish was
assessed. Spatial overlap was consistently high and abundance was more strongly correlated with




                                                                                                         38
environmental factors than the abundance of the other predator.           Dietary overlap was less than 40%
between striped bass and dogfish sampled in 2006-2007 but was over 84% between striped bass and
spiny dogfish sampled in 2010. Atlantic menhaden (Brevoortia tyrannus) and bay anchovy (Anchoa
mitchilli) were the most important overlapping prey species. Spiny dogfish in North Carolina waters may
have consumed 0.91% of the striped bass stock during the winter. These data suggest that spiny dogfish
are occasional predators of striped bass and there is potential for competition between the two predators,
but these interactions are insufficient to affect the abundance and distribution of either species. However,
the stability of these interactions may depend on the availability of their shared prey.



Bangs, Max (University of Arkansas);

Decline of the Savannah River Redeye Bass (Micropterus coosae) due to Introgressive
Hybridization with Invasive Alabama Spotted Bass (Micropterus punctulatus henshalli)

Invasives can promote extirpation or extinction of native species through a myriad of biological
mechanisms. Introgressive hybridization, for example, can be just as detrimental in this regard as
predation and competition especially in fishes that have limited reproductive barriers. Despite this, it is
often overlooked as an issue due to the necessity of employing molecular genetic techniques. On two
occasions, (2004 and 2010), we sampled individuals (n=623, n=653 respectfully) from four reservoirs of
the Savannah River drainage system (South Carolina) in an attempt to quantify temporal and spatial
evidence of hybridization and introgression between introduced (Alabama Spotted Bass, Micropterus
punctulatus henshalli ; Smallmouth Bass, M. dolomieu ) and endemics (Redeye Bass, M. coosae ;
Largemouth Bass, M. salmoides ). We utilized three bi-allelic nuclear (nDNA) loci and one mitochondrial
(mtDNA) locus and our results indicate overwhelming introgression between spotted and redeye bass
coupled with strong selection for spotted bass in the lakes. Introgression is limited to the reservoirs with
strong selection for spotted bass genotypes, whereas refugial areas in the tributaries allow for persistence
of endemic and rare lineage redeye bass.



Banyal, Harjeet S. (HIMACHAL PRADESH UNIVERSITY, SHIMLA);

Laudakia tuberculata Hardwicke & Gray, 1827, a rock agama lizard from Kalaop-Khajjiar Wildlife
Sanctuary in Himachal Pradesh, India

India is home to 456 species of reptiles—244 species of serpents, 178 of lizards, 31 of testudines and 3
species of crocodilians. Laudakia tuberculata Hardwicke & Gray, 1827, the Kashmir Rock Agama lizard is
hereby reported for the first time from the vicinity of lake at Khajjiar, the Mini Switzerland, at 1920m amsl.
The omnivorous lizards are diurnal, terrestrial and seen settled on rocks or large stones in the area with
less vegetation during sunny daytime. When sunlight was low the lizards remained in crevices or
underneath the rocks. A large number of individuals were seen from April to October and the count
declined in March or November while the lizard hibernated during winter months. Laudakia tuberculata is
sturdy with flattened head and body. Adults are 10-12 cm with abnormally long tail. In male limbs and tail
are bluish with light spots all over the body. Fore and hind limbs strong, former being stout and shorter. A
complete account of the lizard will be presented at the conference.




                                                                                                           39
Barbo, Fausto Erritto (Museu de Zoologia da Universidade de São Paulo); Gasparini, João Luiz
(Universidade Federal do Espírito Santo, Canada); Almeida, Antonio de P. (ICMBio - Projeto Tamar,
Canada); Grazziotin, Felipe G. (Museu de Zoologia da Universidade de São Paulo, Canada); Ferrarini,
José Mario G.; Sawaya, Ricardo J. (Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Canada)

Another modified population of lancehead in the Bothrops jararaca complex in a continental
island of the Brazilian coast

The genus Bothrops includes about 50 species, distributed in six groups: B. alternatus , B. atrox , B.
jararaca , B. jararacussu , B. neuwiedi , and B. taeniatus . The B. jararaca group is composed by B.
jararaca , a widespread species from Atlantic forest, and two insular species, B. alcatraz and B.
insularis , from Alcatrazes and Queimada Grande islands, respectively. Other two insular forms from
Vitória and Buzios islands, in the coast of São Paulo state are under description. Here we recorded
another new insular and modified population of lancehead from Franceses island, ca. 4 Km off the coast
of Espírito Santo state, southeastern Brazil. This island is covered mainly by the Atlantic forest formation
with a total area of about 15 ha. This population presents some particular characters, as a small adult
size, and the diet specialized in ectothermic prey, mostly lizards, but also centipedes and conspecific
snakes. This population can be distinguished morphologically from B. alcatraz and the form from Vitoria
island by its higher number of ventral and subcaudal scales. Despite overlapping the number of ventral
and subcaudal scales with most of mainland B. jararaca , and the form from Buzios island, this
population can be distinguished by the smaller adult size. From B. insularis , this population can be
distinguished by the smaller adult size, higher number of ventral scales, and the color pattern. This new
population is very abundant on the island (ca. two snakes per hour-person of visual search) and can be
found acitve on the leaf litter. Fourteen out of 33 individuals found presented remnants of prey in stomach
and gut contents, including lizards (N = 9), centipedes (N = 4), and conspecific snakes (N = 1). All youngs
(N = 5) presented yellowish tail-tip, as observed in the juveniles of the mainland B. jararaca . The
modifications presented by this insular population, specially the small adult size, should be related to
ecological agents as prey availability.



Barichivich, William (USGS-SESC); Calhoun, Daniel; Brown, Mary; Cressler, Alan; Dalton, Melinda;
Hughes, William; Walls, Susan (USGS, Canada)

Environmental monitoring of the amphibian chytrid fungus (Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis) in
the southeastern United States: Any evidence of disease-related population declines?

Pathogens and infectious diseases are of significant concern in biological conservation. In many parts of
the world population declines and extinctions of amphibians have been attributed to the pathogenic
amphibian chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), which causes chytridiomycosis.
Considerable effort has focused on detecting Bd in its amphibian host but, until recently, little was known
about the temporal and spatial distribution of this pathogen in the environment. Herein we report the
results of concurrent host and environmental sampling of Bd on public lands in the southeastern United
States. Between April 2008 and April 2010 we swabbed 1206 amphibians and filtered water (315
samples) from 71 sites. Sites included isolated wetlands, streams, and caves from nine national parks
and wildlife refuges extending from the (Southern) Appalachian Mountains to the Florida Keys.
Additionally, a wide variety of frogs (20 species), as well as salamanders (21 species), was sampled.
Results from quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) of swabs and filters showed Bd to be
common and widespread throughout the region. Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis was detected in each
state and in seven of nine US Department of Interior lands sampled. In most cases these were the first




                                                                                                         40
records of Bd on the properties sampled and are only the second and third records for Florida and
Alabama respectively.

Our results illustrate a lack of detection of Bd on amphibians does not imply an absence of this pathogen
in the environment. Discordance between water and biological samples underscores the need to conduct
both environmental and biological sampling to elucidate the distribution of this pathogen in the
environment and its potential to infect amphibians. Contrary to the pattern of declines and extinctions
observed in Mesoamerica and Australia, Bd is quite ubiquitous in the southeastern US without noticeable
changes to amphibian populations. However, mortality events associated with other know amphibian
pathogens (e.g. ranavirus and the perkinsus like organism) were observed during the course of this study.




Barlow, Axel (Bangor University); Baker, Karis; Hendry, Catriona; Peppin, Lindsay (Bangor University,
Canada); Phelps, Tony (Cape Reptile Institute, Canada); Tolley, Krystal (South African National
Biodiversity Institute, Canada); Wuster, Wolfgang (Bangor University, Canada)

Retracing Pleistocene refugial isolation in southern Africa: a case study of the widespread African
puff adder (Bitis arietans).

Phylogeographic studies of widespread African savannah mammals have typically found distinct
mitochondrial clades in East, West or southern Africa, leading to the hypothesis that these areas served
as open habitat refugia during the Pleistocene, isolated from each other by expanding tropical forests
during warm and humid interglacial periods. However, comparative data from widespread African reptiles
is currently lacking. We present a phylogeographic investigation of the widespread African puff adder (
Bitis arietans ), a snake that inhabits open habitat formations throughout sub-Saharan Africa. Multiple
parapatric mitochondrial clades occur across the current distribution of B. arietans . These include a
widespread southern clade that is subdivided into four separate clades, suggesting a history of refugial
isolation in southern Africa. We investigated the possible causes of isolation using a species distribution
model derived from locality records and environmental data. The results indicate that range reduction and
fragmentation occurred in southern Africa during Pleistocene cold phases (glacial maxima) with
subsequent range expansion during warmer interglacials. The spatial pattern of range fragmentation also
corresponds well with the geographic location of the common ancestor of each clade inferred from the
genetic data using a coalescent spatial diffusion model, further supporting the hypothesis of refugial
isolation. Interglacial expansion has resulted in secondary contact between refugial populations
(mitochondrial clade contact zones). Data from five anonymous nuclear loci reveal male-mediated gene
flow across these contact zones. However, the geographic extent of admixture varies considerably
between clades, suggesting varying periods of contact between different refugial populations. Overall, our
study reveals a complex history of refugial isolation and secondary expansion for puff adders in southern
Africa. Critically, although range contraction and isolation in widespread savannah mammals is thought to
have occurred during warm interglacials, in southern Africa the sympatric puff adder shows the opposite
pattern of range contraction during cooler glacial periods.




                                                                                                        41
Barnes, Cody (University of Arkansas at Little Rock); Gifford, Matthew (University of Arkansas at Little
Rock, Little Rock, AR, United States)

Digestive energetics in plethodontid salamanders

For over a century, specific dynamic action (SDA) has been extensively researched in a wide variety of
taxa. Yet to date no attempts to quantify the postprandial up-regulation of metabolism in plethodontid
salamanders have been pursued. Our study is the first to quantify and compare the SDA response in a
montane endemic lungless salamander and its lowland congener (Plethodon ouachitae and P. albagula,
respectively). Metabolic performance curves were fit for the SDA response of each species measured at
10ºC. Interspecific differences were not detected in the standard metabolic rate, peak, or time to peak.
However, the duration of the SDA response and the overall energy expended in SDA differed between
species. In addition, patterns observed in both species were substantially lower than in ambystomatids
and other taxa. The further reduced investment in SDA by P. albagula could pose a mechanism driving
the occupation of a larger distribution range and reflect physiological tradeoffs in the montane endemic.



Bart, Hank (Tulane University Museum of Natural History);

Fish collections as a resource for cyber-enabled discovery and innovation

Images of specimens from natural history collections are increasingly being used in scientific research.
Some of this research (cybertaxonomy) aims to increase the traditionally slow pace of new species
discovery and taxonomic description. A collaborative research project funded by the U.S. National
Science Foundation is using 2-D and 3-D images of specimens from the Royal D. Suttkus Fish Collection
to develop a computer-based species recognition and taxonomic diagnosis system. In one component of
the project machine learning techniques are being used to train a computer algorithm to select features
from images of specimens useful for distinguishing one collection of specimens from other known
taxonomic groupings.    A second component of the project involves using novelty (outlier) detection to
distinguish unknown species from known species. This interdisciplinary research project is an example of
technology and innovation at the crossroads of biology and computer science.



Bastiaans, Elizabeth (University of California, Santa Cruz);

Color morphs in an incipiently speciating lizard: from polymorphism to interpopulation
divergence

When different environments favor different reproductive strategies, the presence of alternative
reproductive tactics within populations may accelerate speciation by decreasing gene flow between them.
Many lizard species exhibit genetically based polymorphisms in color patches used in sexual signaling,
and often they are linked to alternative reproductive tactics. The presence and/or frequencies of color
morphs often vary between populations of the same or closely related species, providing ideal systems in
which to examine links between behavioral polymorphism and speciation. The karyotypically diverse
mesquite lizard (Sceloporus grammicus) species complex may represent a case of incipient speciation.
Robertsonian fissions have produced eight chromosome races whose diploid numbers range from 32 to
46, and several hybrid zones have been described between neighboring populations belonging to
different chromosome races. I will describe intrapopulation color polymorphisms and associated
alternative male and female reproductive tactics in the S. grammicus complex, variation between




                                                                                                       42
populations in the presence and frequencies of color morphs, and the behavioral characteristics
associated with the morphs. Several populations of the S. grammicus species complex exhibit
orange/blue/yellow throat color polymorphisms in males, similar to those previously shown to correspond
to ―rock-paper-scissors‖ strategies that cycle under negative frequency dependent selection in the side-
blotched lizard (Uta stansburiana).        Other populations of the S. grammicus complex exhibit
orange/white/yellow polymorphisms, and contact zones between populations with each polymorphism
correspond, in some cases, to hybrid zones between chromosome races. I will discuss the phylogenetic
context in which these polymorphisms occur and relate them to previously documented karyotypic
variation.



Bates, Michael (National Museum, Bloemfontein); Broadley, Donald (Natural History Museum,
Bulawayo, Canada); Barlow, Axel; Wuster, Wolfgang (Bangor University, Canada); Tolley, Krystal (South
African National Biodiversity Institute, Canada)

Taxonomy and distribution of the African egg-eating snakes of the genus Dasypeltis

Carl Gans (1959, 1964) conducted detailed studies of morphological variation in the pan-African egg-
eating snake genus Dasypeltis. His taxonomic conclusions were conservative however, and he
recognized only six species: D. scabra, D. palmarum, D. inornata, D. fasciata, D. medici (two subspecies)
and D. atra. Since then large collections of Dasypeltis from throughout the continent have accumulated in
various museums. In 2006 Trape & Mané reviewed the genus in West Africa and described three new
species: D. confusa, D. sahelensis and D. gansi (two subspecies); and another new species from this
area is currently being described (S. Trape pers. comm.). We have initiated morphology-based revisions
of Dasypelis in the W half of Southern Africa, E half of Southern Africa, central Africa, and NE Africa &
SW Arabia. A separate molecular phylogenetic study (mitochondrial and nuclear genes) has now been
extended to provide pan-African coverage of the genus. Where possible we have used both
morphological and genetic data to resolve taxonomic problems. Preliminary phylogenetic results indicate
that apart from the basal species D. medici, there are two distinct Dasypeltis clades: 1) populations from
W, SW and central Africa (D. s. loveridgei, and sister species D. palmarum and D. confusa), and 2)
remaining species analysed so far (D. inornata, D. scabra, and sister species D. fasciata and D. atra). D.
scabra in Southern Africa consists of three clades, with two possible new species. Molecular and
morphological data indicate that D. s. loveridgei of Namibia and adjacent regions in SW Africa, currently
considered a synonym of D. scabra, is in fact a distinct species sympatric with the latter in north-central
Namibia. Populations in S Namibia and N Cape of South Africa, as well as NW Namibia and SW Angola,
respectively, appear to represent new subspecies of ―D. loveridgei‖. A morphology-based revision of
Dasypeltis in NE Africa & SW Arabia confirms the validity of D. abyssina, a species with unusual dorsal
and ventral colour patterns, and high ventral counts, and identifies a new subspecies of D. abyssina from
Ethiopia, Eritrea and the Arabian Peninsula. Distribution ranges of the various taxa have been mapped
and will be illustrated. Although previously considered restricted to W Africa, D. confusa is widely
distributed through central Africa to Uganda and as far south as S Angola; while D. atra extends from S
Tanzania to central Ethiopia and westwards into E DRC.




                                                                                                        43
Batista, Abel (Senckenberg Institute);

Amphibian and Reptiles of eastern Panama: results of recent explorations.

Eastern Panama is recognized as an important biodiversity hotspot due to its great variety of habitat, high
endemism, and fast habitat loss. The diversity of ecosystems within this region makes it an interesting
place to study its fauna, especially in unexplored places and those which some herpetologists visited
many decades ago. The conservation status of many endemics and rare species in this region remain
unknown. Now Panamanian scientists and national authorities have emphasised the urgency of surveys
to determine conservation strategies for the herpetofauna in this region. During July to December 2011, I
went to the mountain ranges of Maje, Pirre, Jingurudo, Filo del Tallo and Cerro Sapo in Eastern Panama.
I did an integrative approach to assess the biodiversity of the eastern Panamanian herpetofauna using
molecular genetics, GIS, morphology, bioacustics (in the case of anurans), and ecological aspects.
During opportunistic searches at night I found 88 species of amphibians and 66 species of reptiles. These
results include new records for the region and data about the abundance status of some endangered
species (e.g., Atelopus spp ., Strabomantis spp.). Throughout the integrative approach I detected the
presence of cryptic and candidate species of the genera Bolitoglossa, Colotethus, Craugastor,
Diasporus, Ecnomiohyla, Lepidoblepharis, Pristimantis (Pristimantis cruentus species group), and
Silverstoneia. Also, I obtained interesting findings of rare and endangered species as Atelopus certus, A.
glyphus, Bolitoglossa cuna, Anolis latifrons , Imantodes phantasma, Pristimantis adnus, P ristimantis
moro, P ristimantis pirrensis and Ptychoglossus myersi. I recorded for the first time the advertisement
call of the recently described species Pristimantis adnus . This new findings are considered as a relevant
contribution to the knowledge of the area's herpetofauna. However, many areas still remain unexplored,
and a detailed assessment of the species status is urgently required.



Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University); Feldman, Anat (Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel); Das, Indraneil
(Universiti Malaysia Sarawak, Kota Samarahan, Sarawak, Malaysia); Khela, Sonia (Zoological Society of
London, London, United Kingdom); Itescu, Yuval; Meiri, Shai (Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel)

Distribution patterns of Indian reptiles and their environmental and phylogenetic correlates

The herpetofauna of India is highly diverse and exhibits high levels of endemism. However, until recently
it was extremely difficult to obtain an accurate overview of patterns of diversity due to a lack of vouchered
records and the prevalence of taxonomic problems in many groups. An increase in the number of reliable
sight and photo-vouchered records obtained by many active field herpetologists in India, coupled with the
resolution of at least some major taxonomic issues, has made reliable estimates of species distributions
possible for the first time. We developed maps for more than 450 terrestrial and freshwater species of
reptiles occurring in India. We analyzed species richness at a scale of one degree grid cells with respect
to a diversity of environmental correlates, including median annual temperature, median annual
precipitation, net primary productivity, mean elevation, and range in elevation (difference in height above
sea level between the highest and lowest point in each cell). Overall reptile richness increased with
increasing temperature, range in elevation, and precipitation. The model incorporating these variables
explains ~30% of the variation (not corrected for spatial autocorrelation). Turtle diversity was positively
correlated with precipitation and negatively so with elevational range. Lizard richness increased with
increasing temperature, and range in elevation, but was negatively associated with net primary
productivity and was uncorrelated with precipitation. Snake richness increased with all variables
considered, with the model considerably better than that for lizards or turtles, explaining 45% of the
variation. Both lizard and snake richness peak in South India, particularly in the Western Ghats, but
snakes are also very rich in Northeast India, as are turtles. Other areas of high diversity and endemism



                                                                                                          44
are the Eastern Ghats and the Western Himalayas, in contrast to the Deccan Plateau, Central Highlands,
and much of the Gangetic Plain. Substrate requirements, such as soil type or rock crevice availability,
limit particular clades of reptiles to certain geographic regions and the current and historical distribution of
these probably accounts for much of the variation in spatial diversity not explained by standard
environmental models. Uropeltid snakes and Cnemaspis geckos are examples of such taxa for which
distribution is strongly linked to phylogeny and historical biogeography.

Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University); Heinecke, Matthew; Jackman, Todd (Villanova University, Villanova,
PA, United States)

Substrate-mediated endemism in southern African geckos

Southern Africa has a rich lizard fauna, within which gekkonid geckos are a dominant group. High
species-richness in geckos is associated with substrate-specificity which, in conjunction with the complex
geological history of the subcontinent, has resulted in extensive cladogenesis and narrow endemism in
most rupicolous species. Phylogenetic analyses of each of several major clades of southern African
geckos: the Pachydactylus group (Pachydactylus, Rhoptropus, Colopus, Chondrodactylus,
Elasmodactylus), Goggia and Afroedura recovered well-resolved trees with most branches receiving
significant support. Divergence timing and diversification analyses reveal that an increase in the rate of
speciation in the most species- rich genus, Pachydactylus, was associated with a shift from terrestriality to
rock-living in the late Oligocene to early Miocene. Rupicoly is ancestral in both Goggia and Afroedura.
Basal lineages in these two taxa are present in the southwestern Cape of South Africa where several
species of Pachydactylus also occur, but their chief diversification has been in the temperate Cape Fold
Mountains (Goggia) and along the Eastern Escarpment and into the Eastern Cape (Afroedura), where
Pachydactylus is poorly represented. Conversely, Pachydactylus and its related genera have their
greatest diversity in the arid regions of the Northern Cape and Namibia, where the other genera are
represented by only two species each. The approximately contemporaneous diversification of these
genera suggests that ecological interactions between them may have contributed to their largely
complementary distributions.



Bautista, Jeremiah (Cal State University Northridge);

Reproductive biology of the barred sand bass, Paralabrax nebulifer of Southern California

Years of intense fishing pressure has caused the fishery of the barred sand bass, ( Paralabrax nebulifer)
of southern California to decline precipitously in the first decade of the 21st century.This species forms
large aggregations during their summer spawning season have left them vulnerable to fishermen who
remove them by the tens of thousands each summer. Commercial fishing has been prohibited since the
1950‘s, but the increasing popularity of this sport fish and relative ease of capture has drawn in thousands
of anglers annually. Specifically this proposed study into the reproductive biology of barred sand bass
aims to 1) document, for the first time, the gonado-somatic index (GSI) for both male and female for a full
year, 2) determine fecundity for a wide size range of females, 3) investigate the possibility of a sexual
dimorphic trait in the eye crest morphology, size, and coloration, and 4) up date the age assessment for
fishery management related issues. Understanding the reproductive cycles and the duration of energy
allocation towards reproduction is important for the proper management of this fishery.            Historically,
barred sand bass have played a prominent role in the recreational fishing industry of southern California
and must be protected and properly managed to prevent further decrease in the stocks, the loss of
genetic diversity, the shifting of size and sex classes, and the ultimate collapse of the fishery.




                                                                                                             45
Baxter-Gilbert, James (Laurentian University); Lesbarrères, Daivid; Litzgus, Jacqueline (Laurentian
University, Canada)

On the road again: measuring the effectiveness of mitigation structures for reducing reptile road
mortality

Many reptile populations are negatively impacted by roads, especially because seasonal migratory
movements increase individual encounters with traffic. The Highway 69/400 corridor, connecting southern
and northern Ontario, runs along the eastern Georgian Bay Coast, one of Canada‘s richest areas of
reptile biodiversity. A section of new 4-lane highway has been designed to include mitigation structures (
e.g., eco-passages, fences) intended to lessen the detrimental effects this major roadway poses to
numerous Species-at-Risk (SAR) reptiles. Using a Before-After-Control-Impact-Paired (BACIP) study
design, we will quantify reptile road mortality present on the existing, non-mitigated 2-lane highway (in
spring and summer 2012) and compare it to mortality on the new, mitigated 4-lane highway (in spring and
summer 2013). In both years of the study, a control site without any mitigation measures will also be
monitored. If the exclusion structures ( e.g., fences) of the new highway are effective, animals should be
prevented from accessing the road and we should therefore observe a reduction in road mortality. Radio
telemetry and wildlife cameras will be used to monitor reptile movements around and under the road via
population connectivity structures ( e.g., eco-passages). Additionally, a ―willingness to utilize‖ experiment
will be conducted, which will assess turtle behaviour in response to the eco-passage. If the population
connectivity measures are effective, movements between habitats on either side of road, and use of the
eco-passages are expected. Conclusions drawn from our study will allow development of
recommendations for future road mitigation structures to reduce road mortality, and counteract the
decline of reptile biodiversity.



Beachy, Christopher (Minot State University); Beachy, Hyla (Jim Hill Middle School, Minot, ND, United
States)

The effect of temperature on post-maturation metamorphosis in western Tiger Salamanders,
Ambystoma mavortium

The western tiger salamander (Ambystoma mavortium) exhibits facultative paedomorphosis throughout
many parts of its range (western North America). Like other western tiger salamander populations,
growth is very rapid and individuals can attain large sizes (>100 mm SVL) in their first summer of life. In
North Dakota, populations are completely metamorphic when ponds are ephemeral (and can reach high
tempetures), completely paedomorphic in deep cattle ponds that always have water and do not freeze
completely (and are always cool), and are mixed metamorphic/paedomorphic in larger shallow lakes that
dry periodically (e.g., once every 10-20 years). We hypothesized that temperature variation among these
types of habitats is a significant cause of life cycle variation. We collected 20 salamanders using minnow
traps from flooded Agsite Pond in Ward County in northwestern North Dakota. This site is characterized
by a mixed population of paedomorphic and metamorphic salamanders. We tested two hypotheses: (1)
metamorphosis is temperature dependent and (2) metamorphosis is dependent on maturation status. We
placed large (>85 mm SVL) larvae in individual boxes and placed 10 larvae in a cooler at 15 degrees C
and 10 larvae in a cooler at 20 degree C. 7 of high temperature larvae metamorphosed, while 1 low
temperature larvae metamorphosed. In addition, the propensity to metamorphose was contingent on
maturation status: large larvae that were already sexually mature were less likely to metamorphose.




                                                                                                          46
Beamer, David (Nash Community College); Lamb, Trip (East Carolina University, Greenville, NC, United
States)

A comprehensive, range-wide molecular phylogenetic survey of the dusky salamanders
(Desmognathus)

The dusky salamanders ( Desmognathus ) constitute a large, species-rich group, and while a
considerable body of literature addressing systematic relationships and adaptive trends exists, these
issues have heretofore been approached in piecemeal fashion.           A few recent, seminal papers have
substantially revised our understanding of the diversity contained within this lineage and its tempo and
direction of adaptive divergence. Tilley & Mahoney (1996) revealed considerable cryptic species level
divergence within mountain duskies; Titus & Larson (1996) presented data which completely reversed
former hypotheses regarding the direction of adaptive trends in the genus; Chippindale et al. (2004)
provided strong evidence for a reversal in reproductive mode within the Desmognathus lineage; and
most recently, the work of Kozak et al. (2005), which has highlighted that Desmognathus is more lineage
rich than previously believed. All of these have served to demonstrate how complex the evolutionary
history of Desmognathus is, and taken together, these works manifest a need for more sampling in
areas and within lineages that have thus far been sparsely evaluated. We designed and carried out a
sampling regimen that focuses on level iv ecoregion X independent river drainages. We sampled over
600 populations across the distribution of all described dusky salamander ( Desmognathus ) species and
DNA sequence data was collected for each population. A Bayesian phylogenetic reconstruction of mtDNA
reveals more than fifty independent evolutionary lineages; for exemplars of each mtDNA lineage we
sequenced three nuclear-encoded regions.           We analyzed this dataset with several methods that
accommodate gene-tree heterogeneity to produce a Desmognathus species tree.



Beamer, David (Nash Community College);

The role of head shape evolution in an adaptive radiation of salamanders

Microhabitat partitioning amongst Desmognathus species involves a size component, with very large
species being aquatic and small species being terrestrial. However the mid-sized species range from
aquatic to terrestrial and some species demonstrate microhabitat shifts in different portions of their range
or when they are found sympatrically with congeners. I investigated head shape with size independent
geometric morphometric techniques.         A MANOVA of head shape variables found highly significant
differences between populations occupying different microhabitats.     Discriminant analysis was able to
correctly classify microhabitat based on the head shape variables 64% of the time. These results suggest
that head shape is correlated with microhabitat. Since lineages do not represent independent data points
I used independent contrasts to control for phylogeny and found a significant correlation between three of
the head shape variables and microhabitat.



Beard, Karen (Utah State University);

Founder effects haven't quieted them down: the coqui frog invasion in Hawaii

Introduced populations often exhibit divergence from their source populations as a result from novel
selection pressures, genetic drift caused by founder effects and bottlenecks, or both. The coqui frog,
native to Puerto Rico, invaded Hawaii, and experienced extreme founder effects. We studied variation in
body size and advertisement call parameters across elevational gradients in Puerto Rican and Hawaiian



                                                                                                          47
populations. We used common garden experiments to determine potential sources of variation in these
traits. In both Hawaii and Puerto Rico, body size followed Bergmann's rule, but body size was larger and
sexual dimorphism were greater in Puerto Rico than Hawaii. Calls correlated with elevation in both
Puerto Rico and Hawaii in the following ways: negative for fundamental frequency, positive with the
duration of each call, and negative with call rate, but there was less variation in these traits with elevation
in Hawaii than Puerto Rico. Across all populations in the laboratory, higher maternal temperatures
resulted in larger clutch sizes, smaller egg and offspring sizes, and shorter development periods. Higher
rearing temperatures resulted in smaller offspring size and shorter development periods. Frogs from
higher elevations in Puerto Rico but not Hawaii had faster growth rates and larger clutch sizes. In the
laboratory, we found the negative relationship between elevation and call frequency was best explained
by larger body sizes at higher elevations, and that the positive relationship between elevation and call
duration, and negative relationship between elevation and call rate were best explained by lower
temperatures at higher elevations. Our results suggest that Bergmann‘s clines in Puerto Rico may be
result from genetic differences among populations and plasticity in response to temperature. Alternatively,
in Hawaii, phenotypic plasticity in response to temperature likely explains the relatively small, but
potentially adaptive cline in body size with elevation. Founder effects from biased sampling of native
populations provide a mechanistic explanation for the reduced cline in body size. While individual frogs
are not louder in Hawaii than Puerto Rico, choruses may appear louder because densities can be higher.
Despite founder effects, the coqui is a widespread and highly abundant species in Hawaii and is reducing
invertebrate prey where it invades.



Beasley, Barbara (Association of Wetland Stewards for Clayoquot and Barkley Sounds);

Amphibian rite of passage: designing and testing the effectiveness of culverts for connecting
habitats in coastal British Columbia, Canada.

Western North America has lagged behind Europe, Britain and the eastern U.S. in addressing the threat
of roads to amphibians. We have installed very few mitigation structures, such as tunnels and barrier
fences, and conducted little follow-up monitoring to determine if these structures are effective in
connecting habitats and reducing road mortality. I measured amphibian movements along guiding fences
and through two different culverts at a site where five species of amphibians: Rana aurora , Pseudacris
regilla , Ambystoma gracile , Taricha granulosa and Plethodon vehiculum are frequently killed by
traffic. The culverts were 50 m apart at a peak crossing location along the Pacific Rim Highway, on
Vancouver Island, British Columbia. One culvert was a round corrugated metal (60 cm in diameter)
―drainage culvert‖, positioned to carry storm water under the road. The second culvert was a larger
rectangular concrete ―box culvert‖, half-filled with soil (180 cm x 45 cm final internal opening), and
positioned to provide an unflooded passageway for amphibians. Guiding fences were connected to the
tunnel entranceways and extended up to 60 m into the forest, angled away from the edge of the road.
Roadside barrier fences significantly reduced the number of amphibians, except P. regilla , killed on the
highway. I measured the effectiveness of each culvert as a connective passageway by (i) observing
amphibians inside the tunnel and at tunnel entranceways using time-lapse photography and (ii) counting
the number of marked amphibians recaptured in exit traps and along guiding fences as a proportion of the
number caught along corresponding sets of guiding fences on the opposite side of the road. With photos
and trapping, I detected R. aurora , A. gracile and, occasionally, T. granulosa moving through each
culvert, but not P. regilla and P. vehiculum . Recaptures of all species combined were higher at the ―box
culvert‖ (8% of 402 marked individuals) than the ―drainage culvert‖ (2% of 173) and twice as many
amphibians were photographed using the former (average 0.44 individuals per night). The ―box culvert‖
was better designed and better used as a crossing structure, however at a much lower rate than



                                                                                                            48
expected. Challenges with detectability and the presence of a mink predator are two possible
explanations for the low rate of use.



Beck, Daniel (Dept. of Biological Sciences, Central Washington University); Holcomb, Kerry (Central
Washington University, Ellensburg, WA, United States); Oliván Pliego, Jesús Eduardo (Facultad de
Ciencias Biológicas de la UAEM (Morelos), San Patricio, Jalisco, Mexico); Kiester, Ross (Turtle
Conservancy, New York, NY, United States); García Aguayo, Andrés (Instituto de Biología, U.N.A.M.,
San Patricio, Jalisco, Mexico)

Response of the Mexican beaded lizard (Heloderma horridum) to extreme seasonality in a tropical
dry forest

We investigated how the Mexican Beaded lizard (Heloderma horridum horridum ) manages the intense
seasonality of its tropical deciduous forest habitat. Tropical deciduous forests of western Mexico show
extreme seasonality, with a dry season lasting approximately 8 months (4 months in which virtually no
rain falls), followed by a 4-month wet season when 80% of mean annual precipitation occurs.
Specifically, we documented how the thermal and hydric heterogeneity of the tropical dry forest changes
from dry to wet season, and we explored how H. horridum h . responds to the abrupt changes brought on
by summer precipitation. We used implantable radiotransmitters to spatially track lizards, and
thermocron ibutton TM dataloggers to continuously record body temperatures at 15 minute intervals from
May through August 2011 (n = 6 lizards). We identified patterns of activity and refuge use by comparing
lizard body temperatures with concurrent environmental temperatures, and then tested for differences in
activity patterns and thermal biology between the dry and wet seasons. Variation in temperature and
humidity was much greater during the dry season, both spatially (along a 1000 m elevational gradient)
and temporally (day/night cycles). During the dry season (May and June) Beaded Lizards spent more
time (~90%) in refuges and significantly less time on the surface than during the wet season, yet
occasionally made extended above-ground forays. Beaded lizards showed more diurnal activity during
the dry season, with an interesting late-afternoon activity peak, despite exposure to significantly higher
temperatures and lower ambient humidity. During the wet season (July and August), beaded lizards
spent more time on the surface (42% wet season vs. 10% during the dry season), were active more
frequently (3+ bouts/wk wet season; vs. 1.5 bouts/week dry season), traveled farther, and showed lower
activity temperatures (mean = 27.5 C wet season vs 29.3 dry season) than during the dry season. These
differences represent behavioral and physiological responses to seasonal shifts in water and energy
availability, and may also reflect evolutionary responses to the thermal and hydric heterogeneity of the
tropical dry forest. Knowledge of responses by helodermatid lizards may help us understand the suite of
traits that are coadapted by other vertebrate ectotherms that inhabit highly-seasonal tropical arid
environments.



Bedore, Christine (Florida Atlantic University); Loew, Ellis (Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States);
Kajiura, Stephen (Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL, United States)

Can batoids see in color? Multiple cones types are present in two batoid elasmobranchs

Elasmobranch fishes have adapted to nearly every marine environment, many of which are spectrally
distinct. Whereas the deep sea is light limited and consists of almost exclusively blue wavelengths, coral
reefs are among the most colorful environments on the planet. Elasmobranchs have evolved optimal
visual capabilities for their diverse spectral environments. The cownose ray ( Rhinoptera bonasus ) and




                                                                                                           49
the yellow stingray ( Urobatis jamaicensis ) are two batoid elasmobranchs that inhabit diverse spectral
habitats which likely reflect their potential for color discrimination. The cownose ray inhabits turbid, coastal
waters typically dominated by green wavelengths, whereas the yellow stingray inhabits coral reef
environments that are blue dominated, but spectrally diverse. Therefore, the yellow stingray is more likely
to be capable of color vision than the cownose ray. Additionally, ultraviolet (UV) light is present in both
environments, so it is possible that one or both species possess the ability to see UV wavelengths. The
maximum absorbance of photoreceptors from two individuals of each species was analyzed using
microspectrophotometry (MSP). Both rays possessed rod-dominated retinas with a λ max near 500nm
(green), but differed in the number of photopigments. The yellow stingray had three distinct cone types
with maximal absorbance in blue (475nm), green (533nm), and yellow (562nm) regions of the visible
spectrum whereas the cownose ray had two distinct cone types with maximal absorbance in blue
(470nm) and yellow (551) regions. Neither species showed evidence for UV sensitivity in MSP analysis.
The light filtering effects of the ocular media (cornea and lens) were quantified by measuring transmitted
wavelengths of broad-spectrum white light (400-800nm) and UV rich light (<400nm). Both rays
transmitted visible light through the ocular media, however, most UV light was absorbed by the lens in
both species. Cownose rays blocked transmission of all wavelengths below 400nm, whereas yellow
stingrays transmitted some UV wavelengths, but absorbed all wavelengths below 385nm. Although both
rays possessed multiple cone types, it is likely that the two cone types in the cownose ray enhance
contrast detection, rather than function for color discrimination. Conversely, the trichromatic yellow
stingray likely possesses true color vision.



Beebee, Trevor (amphibian & reptile conservation);

Long-term monitoring and conservation of an amphibian (Bufo calamita) at the national level:
assessing trends and the impact of management

Natterjack toads Bufo calamita were always rare in Britain but declined by over 75% in the first half of the
20th century. Monitoring of the surviving populations began in the 1970s commensurate with
autecological research and proactive conservation management. Genetic studies based on samples from
all British breeding pond clusters were used to define at total of 13 populations and metapopulations. All
these sites have been monitored since about 1990 to record spawn string counts as estimators of
population size and metamorph emergence as an indicator of breeding success. Both aquatic and
terrestrial habitat management were also recorded. Overall there has been no significant change in the
number of natterjacks in Britain over the past 20 years although some regions have seen declines and
others increases. Evidence suggests that increasing the numbers of suitable ponds (shallow, ephemeral)
and keeping terrestrial habitat open by livestock grazing are the most successful management tools.
Even so, conservation management has thus far halted the overall national decline in Bufo calamita but
not yet reversed it.



Belasen, Anat (University of Michigan); Li, Binbin (University of Michigan, Canada); Chremou, Dimitra;
Pafilis, Panayiotis; Valakos, Evstratios (University of Athens, Canada); Foufopoulos, Johannes (University
of Michigan, Canada)

Thermal ecology in island populations of the Aegean wall lizard (Podarcis erhardii)

Global climate change has been impacting natural ecosystems globally, and is expected to lead to
numerous species extinctions. The effects are predicted to be particularly severe for populations that



                                                                                                             50
have been reduced and isolated through anthropogenic habitat fragmentation. Despite the worldwide
occurrence of both phenomena, we have only a poor understanding of how habitat fragmentation (and
the associated loss in genetic diversity) renders species susceptible to climate change. In this study, we
investigate how habitat fragmentation and the concomitant loss in genetic diversity affect the thermal
preferences of different populations of a model ectothermic organism. We take advantage of a well-
characterized, natural fragmentation process, during which land-bridge islands were formed by rising sea
levels in the Aegean Sea (Greece). These islands harbor relict populations of Aegean Wall lizards (
Podarcis erhardii , Lacertidae) which are very poor over-water dispersers and which have lost different
amounts of their original genetic diversity through drift.

We quantified aspects of thermal and physiological ecology in populations from one large, genetically
diverse baseline island, as well as two offshore islets. This allowed us to determine whether
environmental differences (on the large island) or genetic impoverishment (on the small islets) affect the
thermal and physiological ecology of the species. Although populations across the three islands did not
differ in mean or variance of field body temperatures, thermal tolerances, or in selected (―preferred‖)
temperatures, we did find significant differences in water loss rates corresponding to dryness of the
habitat. Our results suggest that loss of genetic diversity does not appear to affect these measures of
thermal ecology, while locally prevailing conditions do.



Bell, Ben D. (Victoria University of Wellington); Moore, Jennifer A. (Michigan State University, East
Lansing, United States)

Staying in place: extreme site fidelity in a threatened New Zealand frog

The threatened Maud Island frog Leiopelma pakeka (Anura: Leiopelmatidae) from New Zealand is
extremely long-lived, population studies on the island revealing longevity for some individuals of 35-40
years. This provided an opportunity to investigate the movements and ranges of individuals over many
years of life. We undertook mark-recapture studies on two 12x12m lowland forest plots (grid 1, grid 2) on
Maud Island, New Zealand, over 1976-2010. Given the time scale (decades) we found that Maud Island
frogs were highly sedentary, occupying a remarkably small individual range area (mean minimum convex
polygon area ± SE = 26.7 ± 2.2 m2, 95% kernel density estimate ± SE = 26.7 ± 1.3 m2). The mean
distances moved between the successive range centroids were also very small – on average the frogs
shifted their ranges only 1.3 m every 10 years, showing an extremely high level of site fidelity over a very
long timescale. The mean nearest neighbour distance was 0.63 m (range = 0 - 3.04 m). The mean ± SE
density from three years analysed was 0.35 ± 0.05 frogs/m2 for grid 1 and 0.88 ± 0.16 frogs/m2 for grid 2.
Mean home range size varied by sex and study plot, which may reflect different physiological
requirements, densities or habitats. Our long-term results represent some of the smallest, most stable
home ranges and most extreme site fidelity known for any vertebrate.



Bell, Katie (University of Victoria);

Does human presence affect stress physiology and defensive behaviour of urban snakes?

As humans exert a greater and greater influence on natural systems, their interactions with wildlife are
growing in importance and in number. Wild animals respond to the challenges of urban life in various
ways: some have characteristics that are readily compatible with human presence; some are stressed,
modify their physiology and behaviour, and adapt; and others do not adapt and suffer from continual



                                                                                                         51
stress, leading to reduced fitness and wellbeing. These varied responses can be both intra- and inter-
specific, and are well documented for birds and mammals. Less is currently known about reptiles. In this
study I will assess the effects of human presence on the stress physiology and defensive behaviour of
urban garter snakes in parks in the Greater Victoria area. I will sample blood from wild garter snakes to
infer baseline stress levels from leukocyte profiles and measure pre-capture flight behaviour of snakes, as
well as their defensive behaviour during handling and upon release. I predict that individuals that are
more stressed will flee sooner and react with more intense and frequent defensive displays. Results of
this study will provide insight into the relationship between the endocrine stress response and wariness in
urban garter snakes and contribute valuable knowledge about the consequences of urbanization for
reptiles.



Belleggia, Mauro (CONICET - UNMdP); Figueroa, Daniel (UNMdP, Canada); Sánchez, Felisa (INIDEP,
Canada); Bremec, Claudia (CONICET, Canada)

The diet of Mustelus schmitti; a comparison across decades

The diet of the narrownose smoothhound shark Mustelus schmitti was studied based on analysis of
stomach contents from two disparate time periods from specimens on the northern Argentinean
continental shelf (34 o S – 41 o S): The first set of specimens was collected from fifteen research cruises
carried out by INIDEP from 1986-1994, total length ranged between 250-1050 mm. The second set of
specimens was collected from eight research cruises from 2008-2011, total length ranged between 250-
1050 mm. Prey items were identified to the lowest possible taxonomic level, counted and weighted. For
comparisons, %IRI and the new %PSIRI were calculated. The hypothesis that the consumption of each
prey group is determined by intrinsic (total length, sex, maturity) and extrinsic factors (region, season,
period) was assessed by fitting generalized linear models (GLMs). Of the 1009 stomachs analyzed during
the older period, 902 (89.39%) contained prey items. On the other hand, of a total of 959 stomachs
sampled during the contemporary period, 944 (98.43%) contained food. Only the stomachs containing
prey were analyzed further. The stomach contents of the narrownose smoothhound M. schmitti indicate
opportunistic foraging behavior. The specimens caught between 1986 and 1994 fed mostly on Brachyura
crustaceans (65.53%), followed by polychaetes (13.42%) and fishes (12.23%). The diet of those animals
caught between 2008 and 2011 was composed mainly of polychaetes (38.12%) and Brachyura
crustaceans (30.64%), followed by fishes (17.82%). Hermit crabs were rare during the older period
(0.08%) but become more frequent during the recent years (7.38%). The trophic level is the position of an
organism within the food web; it ranged between 3.76-3.92 during the older period and between 3.59-3.75
during the contemporary period.



Bello Bruzzi Lion, Ana Herminia (University of Brasília);

Modeling the potential distribution area of the endemic lizard Liolaemus lutzae under two different
climatic scenarios

The lizard Liolaemus lutzae, one of five species endemic to Brazilian Restingas, is considered a
vulnerable (IUCN) and a threatened species (IBAMA). In 1986, Araujo and colleagues introduced 51
individuals of a population from Praia de Barra de Maricá, Rio de Janeiro state, into an area not originally
occupied by this species in Praia das Neves, Espírito Santo state, to found a new colony and test its
viability.




                                                                                                          52
Introduced species are known to influence the structure and function of invaded ecological communities.
However, this specific introduction does not seem to be harmful, because the environments and lizard
communities are similar between Barra de Maricá and Praia das Neves. Despite the similarity between
the two areas, they are separated by the Paraíba do Sul river, a putative geographic barrier that prevents
the dispersal of L. lutzae to the north. We used ecological niche modeling to estimate the potential
geographic distribution of Liolaemus lutzae and investigate the suitability of Praia das Neves for
supporting the species. Distribution data were obtained from the literature, scientific collections and from
surveys. Ecological niche models were developed using Maximum Entropy (Maxent). Potential niches at
the present time were modeled using current conditions, and the potential distribution in 2080 was
modeled assuming a pessimistic outlook of environmental conditions at that time. Bioclimatic data were
obtained from the WorldClim dataset to establish which climate factors are important in determining the
distributional pattern of this species. The resulting map shows that Praia das Neves is a potential area of
occurrence for L. lutzae in the present and in the future analysis. The estimates of relative contributions
of the environmental variables to the Maxent model showed that altitude and temperature seasonality
were responsible for the 61.5% and 17.4% respectively model explanation. Praia das Neves is a potential
area of distribution for this species, which suggests that their introduction did not threaten the established
biological community. In contrast, this introduction can be seen as a conservation management tool. The
variables that contributed significantly for Maxent are in concordance with the spatial requirements of L.
lutzae. As it lives at the coast, areas at an altitude close to zero (sea level) and with a stable temperature
during the year are appropriate for the species. Although the Maxent model adequately captures the
potential distribution of this species, the future analysis would be improved if the bioclimatic data included
sea level variables. Given the species distribution relative to the coast, any sea level fluctuations caused
by global warming would threaten established populations and completely change the potential niche
distribution for Liolaemus lutzae.



Bello Soares, Ana Hermínia (University of Brasilia); Tedeschi, Leonardo (University of Brasilia,
Canada); Moser, Pamela (University of Brasília, Canada)

Tadpole ecomorphology in a region between Amazon forest and Cerrado in western Brazil.

The distribution richness and abundance of amphibians are associated with structural and microclimatic
habitat characteristics. Regarding tadpoles, resource competition, predation and degree of permanence
of water are factors that influence the occurrence of species in specific microhabitats. Here we explored
the relationship between the use of microhabitats and morphology of tadpoles. The study was carried out
at Ribeirão Cascalheira, MT in Brazil. Tadpoles were sampled with hand nets in 23 ponds of different
sizes and variable degrees of permanence. In each pond we recorded the water temperature, water
depth and substrate type. Tadpoles were identified to species level, and morphometric measures were
taken from them. The relationships between tadpole richness and environmental descriptors were
observed in a PCA. We performed a MANOVA to investigate the relationship of species abundance and
richness with environmental characteristics of the ponds. In total, we collected 993 individuals from six
species in four families. The abundance was higher in shallow pools and species richness was greater in
deep ponds. In terms of morphology there was no significant difference between families in relation to
habitat. The first principal component of the PCA explained 69% of the difference between larger and
smaller individuals. The analysis of the relationship between microenvironments showed that permanent
ponds had greater water depth, while temporary ponds showed higher water temperature. The species
richness increased with the mean water depth. However, the most rich ponds did not contain all species.
Therefore, ephemeral ponds are also important, given that we found that some species are exclusive to
such habitats.



                                                                                                           53
Benard, Michael (Case Western Reserve University);

Genetic differences in activity between dispersing and non-dispersing wood frogs affect
ecological interactions.

Studies of ecological interactions often assume that variation among individuals in phenotype and
genotype does not affect the outcome of these interactions. For example, theoretical and empirical
studies of metapopulations and local adaptation often assume that there are no differences between
dispersing and non-dispersing individuals. I investigated this assumption and its consequences using two
experiments on wood frogs (Rana sylvatica). In the first experiment, I compared the offspring of adult
males that had dispersed to new ponds (dispersers) with the offspring of adult males that remained at
their home pond (non-dispersers). The offspring of dispersers were significantly more active compared to
the offspring of non-dispersers. In the second experiment, I tested whether genetic differences in activity
interacted with density to affect competition and resource use. Genetic differences in activity did not
interact with density. However, wood frog tadpoles from high-activity families had a stronger negative
effect on algal growth than tadpoles from low-activity families. These results demonstrate that, in contrast
to a key assumption of many models of metapopulation dynamics and local adaptation, genetic
differences among individuals can be strong enough to affect ecological interactions. This has important
implications for population dynamics and conservation planning.



Benavides, Edgar (Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University); Dornburg, Alex
(Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, Canada); Sites Jr., Jack W. (Dept. of
Integrative Biology and M. L. Beam MUseum. Brigham Young University, Canada)

Disentangling phylogenetic patterns from historical demography - lessons from an atypically
distributed lizard genus

Specific information about the geographic distribution of any taxon at a biome scale is one important
avenue to understand the patterns and sometimes the processes leading to evolutionary divergence.
Seldom a case is presented in which two portions of the same genus is distributed in very distinct
geographic layouts. In Microlophus (Iguanid: Tropidurinae) two monophyletic sister species groups are
arranged in two disparate distributions that include the narrow Peru-Chile Coastal Desert (PCCD) (
peruvianus group) and the Galapagos Archipelago (Western Galapagos Radiation; Benavides et al.
2009). The most notable feature of the Peru-Chile Coastal Desert is landscape and climate continuity.
No major geographical barriers exist that could inform a priori hypotheses in relation to patterns of
species diversification within the peruvianus group. The lack of geographic barriers suggests a past
history signed by episodic gene flow and recurrent isolation. In contrast, Galapagos Islands most notable
feature is geographical isolation and the existence of clear oceanographic barriers among islands, which
should likely promote genetic divergence in a scenario of isolation without migration. In this contribution,
we take advantage of these two geographic layouts to assess their influence on the patterns of genetic
divergence in Microlophus by comparing the effect of genetic divergence mediated by isolation versus
genetic divergence with gene flow. More specifically, we combine the use of a modern coalescent-based
multi-locus genus phylogeny with a dense mtDNA locus population sampling to: (1) establish a time-
scaled outline of cladogenic events; and (2) to contrast alternative modes of lineage divergence within
these two groups.




                                                                                                         54
Bennett, Amanda (Trent University); Murray, Dennis (Trent University, Peterborough, ON, Canada)

Carryover effects of phenotypic plasticity between embryonic and larval response to predation
risk in two species of frog (Lithobates spp.)

 Organisms exhibit phenotypic plasticity in response to predation risk when predator abundance is
variable and defense mechanisms are energetically costly. For species with complex life histories, such
as amphibians, costs of early plasticity may be manifested only by a lack of response to risk in later life
stages. We looked for costs of early plasticity, and predicted that plastic response to larval predators
(dragonfly larvae, Aeshna spp.) during embryonic development will result in a lack of response to similar
risk in the larval environment for Northern leopard ( Lithobates pipiens ) and wood frog ( L. sylvaticus )
tadpoles. Eggs may respond to larval predation risk by delaying hatching and emerging at a larger, more
advanced size, whereas tadpoles may respond by either decreasing activity, increasing relative tail depth
or growth rates, or accelerating time to metamorphosis. Leopard frog eggs exposed to predation risk
increased hatching synchrony and size at hatch, and predator-naïve tadpoles showed a response to
predation risk in the larval environment by lowering activity levels and accelerating growth. Leopard frog
tadpoles conditioned to odonate predators as eggs did not reduce activity and showed no change in
morphology, growth or development rates. Wood frogs eggs also increased hatching synchrony,
however, tadpoles reduced activity and developed deeper tail fins when exposed to predation risk in the
larval environment regardless of embryonic treatment. Both wood and leopard frog tadpoles exposed to
predators as eggs increased activity levels above those of controls when predators were removed,
suggesting a possible mechanism by which the growth/predation risk trade-off can be resolved. We found
a carryover effect of early plastic response in leopard frogs, however, the absence of a commensurate
response by wood frogs despite a similar embryonic response to predation risk may relate to different
selective pressures on life history stages in their natural environment.



Bentley, Andrew (University of Kansas Biodiversity Institute); Beach, Jim (University of Kansas
Biodiversity Institute, Lawrence, KS, United States)

Specify 6: New innovative approaches to collection data entry and data storage.

Specify is a biological database application for museums and herbaria which processes specimen
information for computerizing holdings, manages collection management transactions, and mobilizes
species occurrence data to the web. Specify 6, is a wholly-new implementation coded in Java and
designed to run identically on all three workstation environments--Windows, Mac OS X, and Linux.
Specify versions for each platform (and the source code which is offered under an open source license
agreement) are available at no cost from the Project web site –specifysoftware.org. The Project is
supported by the US NSF and the University of Kansas Biodiversity Institute. Specify 6 incorporates
many significant changes, from its intuitive and highly-usable drag-and-drop user interface to many new
functions and capabilities designed to streamline routine collections data tasks while preparing and
validating data for biodiversity community networks. Specify 6 has numerous enhancements over
previous versions, including support for using record sets as subsets of the complete catalog for various
types of processing, such as: georeferencing, label and report production, and importing and exporting
records. Specify 6‘s data model has been expanded and enriched to provide robust support for multiple
collections within a single database, DNA information, field notebook information, file attachments,
GUIDs, data entry and uploads through the Specify WorkBench and Excel, collecting trip data, repository
agreements, accession logging, conservation treatments, collection object containers, and many more
collections data issues. The Specify 6 form system is highly customizable, and Specify 6 comes with a




                                                                                                        55
robust label and report generator. The most important core advance with Specify 6 however, in addition
to its long list of capability enhancements, is the program‘s modular architecture designed for functionality
plug-ins and co-development collaborations. With the availability of specialized plug-in modules, Specify‘s
research capabilities will be extendedby online web-service links to other biodiversity data research
community servers. Specify‘s soul as an open-source, internet-capable, integration platform will transform
biological collections computing. This presentation will highlight Specify 6 and illustrate some of its
innovative features.



Berger, Lee (James Cook University); Skerratt, Lee; Cashins, Scott; Grogan, Laura; Webb, Rebecca
(James Cook University, Canada); Philips, Annie (DPIPWE, Canada); Murray, Kris; Speare, Rick (James
Cook University, Canada)

Mitigating Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in Australia

The first record of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) in Australia is from a frog collected in 1978 on
the central east coast near Brisbane. This fungus spread slowly north and possibly south over the next 2
decades, and was carried over to the west coast in 1985. In 2006 a national Threat Abatement Plan
(TAP) was published outlining research and actions to 1) decrease the risk of spread, and 2) decrease
the impact on infected populations. A review of the TAP in 2012 revealed that advances have been
achieved in addressing these objectives. Mapping and modeling have shown that Bd has spread to most
areas of suitable climate and habitat, with the exception of the Tasmanian Wilderness World Heritage
Area, which was identified as a key area where naïve species are at risk from Bd incursion. There is
currently no proven means of stopping natural spread but we have shown that disinfectants in use for
other introduced diseases are effective against Bd. However, the efficacy of current biosecurity protocols
remains to be assessed. Diagnostic testing techniques have been optimized and there is improved
understanding of the epidemiology and pathogenesis of chytridiomycosis. Current high priorities include
research into host resistance and in-field management, continued population monitoring, supporting
diagnostic and captive husbandry capacities, communication to targeted community members and
coordination of research and management. Intensive management is needed to prevent extinction of
species threatened by chytridiomycosis including the Australian corroboree frogs. Our current focus is to
improve survival rates through selecting for immunity and controlling host reservoirs, improving
surveillance and biosecurity, production of an emergency response plan, and identification and protection
of populations in suboptimal areas for the disease. The TAP has been a slow but useful framework for
establishing research and management.



Bernard, Andrea (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute); Feldheim, Kevin
(The Field Museum of Natural History, Pritzker Laboratory for Molecular Systematics and Evolution,
Chicago, IL, United States); Nemeth, Richard; Kadison, Elizabeth; Blondeau, Jeremiah (Center for Marine
and Environmental Studies, University of the Virgin Islands, St. Thomas, US Virgin Islands, United
States); Semmens, Brice (USA Reef Environmental Education Foundation, Key Largo, FL, United
States); Shivji, Mahmood (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute, Dania
Beach, FL, United States)

High Genetic Diversity and Connectivity of a Severely Overfished Nassau grouper Spawning
Aggregation in the US Virgin Islands

As a result of high levels of historical commercial and recreational fishing, the Nassau grouper
(Epinephelus striatus) has sustained widespread declines across its geographic distribution. Within US



                                                                                                          56
Virgin Islands waters, recognized spawning aggregations have declined to low levels; however, a
remnant spawning aggregation historically numbering over 1000 individuals at Grammanik Bank, St.
Thomas, has seemingly begun to recover since implementation of protective measures in 2005, and may
now comprise approximately 200 individuals. The genetic consequences of such dramatic aggregation
declines and incipient recovery are unknown. We report a genetic characterization of the St. Thomas
aggregation using 15 microsatellite loci developed specifically for E. striatus, and address the hypothesis
that the remnant population will show low genetic diversity and evidence of a genetic bottleneck. We
genotyped aggregated individuals comprising three successive spawning years (2008, n = 51, 2009, n =
93; and 2010, n = 78) as well as individuals collected from a relatively unfished aggregation inhabiting the
waters off Little Cayman, Cayman Islands (n = 54). Analyses indicate relatively high levels of genetic
diversity across all USVI collections (allelic richness, USVI = 10.50 – 11.47) and no difference was
detected among surveyed aggregation sites (allelic richness, Cayman Islands = 10.57). Genetic analyses
of temporal and spatial samples using the software BOTTLENECK 1.2.02 provided mixed support for a
genetic bottleneck. High levels of genetic connectivity was detected between surveyed spawning
aggregations (FST = -0.0004). As such, it is highly likely that gene flow from neighboring spawning
aggregations may be driving the recovery of the St. Thomas population and ultimately may be essential to
the continued persistence of this species.



Bernard, Andrea (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute); Feldheim, Kevin
(The Field Museum of Natural History, Pritzker Laboratory for Molecular Systematics and Evolution,
Chicago, IL, United States); Heithaus, Michael (Florida International University, North Miami, FL, United
States); Wintner, Sabine (KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board, N/A, South Africa); Wetherbee, Brad (University
of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI, United States); Shivji, Mahmood (Guy Harvey Research Institute & Save
Our Seas Shark Center, Dania Beach, FL, United States)

Population genetic structure and evolutionary history of the tiger shark (Galeocerdo cuvier) on a
global scale

The tiger shark (Galeocerdo cuvier) is a globally distributed, migratory species inhabiting warm-temperate
and tropical waters. With their large size, generalist feeding habits and broad habitat distribution ranging
from coastal to pelagic environments, tiger sharks likely play an important role as apex predators in
marine ecosystems. Recent evidence indicates over-exploitation and population decline of this species in
some regions. We report on the global population structure and evolutionary history of tiger sharks
inferred from a combination of 10 nuclear microsatellite loci (n = 389 animals) and sequences of the
mitochondrial control region (mtCR) (1,068 bp; n = 349) and cytochrome oxidase I gene (642 bp; n =
152). Strong genetic differentiation was detected among western Atlantic and Indo-Pacific tiger sharks
with all three sets of genetic markers, with limited inter-basin mixing. However, some contrasting patterns
of intra-basin structure were detected across mitochondrial and nuclear markers, with mtCR sequences
generally indicating increased genetic partitioning within ocean basins. Tiger sharks from the Indian and
Pacific Ocean coasts of Australia were significantly differentiated based on mtCR but not nuclear
markers. Coalescent based analyses and mtCR sequence diversity estimates were largely congruent and
suggestive of an Indo-Pacific origin for tiger sharks, with subsequent colonization of the Atlantic Ocean
during the mid to upper Pleistocene via dispersal around South Africa. This work supports the
assessment and management of tiger sharks from the western Atlantic and Indo-Pacific separately, and
points to the need for further investigation of smaller-scale population structure within ocean basins.




                                                                                                         57
Bernard, Andrea (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute); Horn, Rebekah
(1Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute, Dania Beach, FL, United States);
Chapman, Demian (School of Marine and Atmospheric Science & Institute for Ocean Conservation
Science, Stony Brook, NY, United States); Feldheim, Kevin (The Field Museum of Natural History,
Pritzker Laboratory for Molecular Systematics and Evolution, Chicago, IL, United States); Brooks, Edd
(Shark Research and Conservation Program, N/A, Bahamas); Gore, Mauvis (Marine Conservation
International, N/A, United Kingdom); Shivji, Mahmood (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey
Research Institute, Dania Beach, FL, United States)

The genetic population structure of the Caribbean reef shark (Carcharhinus perezi)

Ecological and community differences have been noted across coral reef ecosystems with varying levels
of anthropogenic intrusion, with striking declines of apex predator densities documented where human
presence has historically been the highest. Within western Atlantic waters, one of the most common
predators inhabiting coral reef ecosystems is the Caribbean reef shark (Carcharhinus perezi). Given the
vulnerability of this species to fisheries and its potentially important ecological role as an apex predator,
we assessed the overall genetic diversity and connectivity across its tropical western Atlantic distribution
using both nuclear and mitochondrial DNA. Caribbean reef sharks demonstrated extremely low levels of
genetic diversity across all surveyed loci relative to all other shark species analyzed to date, which may
be due to a recent evolutionary origin. Nevertheless, nuclear microsatellite loci revealed population
structure between Brazilian sites and populations from The Bahamas and Caribbean Sea (FST > 0.0182;
P 0.05). In contrast, concatenated mitochondrial and mitochondrial/nuclear sequences revealed low but
significant genetic differentiation across most of the surveyed locations. These patterns may reflect either
historical patterns of dispersal or contrasting patterns of movement between male and female sharks.
Although tagging and tracking data suggest these animals typically exhibit strong site attachment, our
study reveals complex population structure with evidence supporting contemporary long distance mixing,
at least by males, which should be incorporated into management plans for this species.



Bertolatus, David (Metropolitan State College of Denver); Gangloff, Eric (Iowa State University,
Canada); Gagliardi-Seeley, PhD, Jennifer; Reigel, Chris (Metropolitan State College of Denver, Canada)

Sex and thermal conditions influence musking behavior in sympatric garter snakes (Thamnophis
spp.)

 Despite an abundance of studies documenting the antipredator and defensive behaviors of garter snakes
(genus Thamnophis ), only one study (in review) has quantitatively examined musking in free-ranging
snakes. Musking, or cloacal discharge, is a common defensive behavior across many snake taxa that
involves the release of foul-smelling compounds that render the snake unappetizing to potential
predators. Previously, we examined musking behaviors in two species of free-ranging snakes, the
western terrestrial garter snake ( T. elegans ) and the plains garter snake ( T. radix). We found that T.
radix musked significantly more often than T. elegans and that T. elegans increased musking
propensity with increased body condition. However, musking behavior was not correlated with size or
environmental factors. Currently, we are examining whether there is an influence of sex on musking
behavior in both T. radix and T. elegans . We expect females will musk more than males because
previous studies have identified that female musk glands are larger and the musk odor more pungent.
Furthermore, we plan to determine if musking behavior is associated with body temperature. We
hypothesize that warmer snakes musk more readily than cooler snakes, because previous research
shows that motor functions are directly correlated to body temperature in ectotherms. An examination of




                                                                                                          58
these antipredator behaviors in sympatric species will help illuminate the function, proximate causes, and
evolutionary significance of such behaviors.



Berven, Keith (Oakland University);

Density Dependence in the Aquatic Larval Stage of a Pond Breeding Amphibian: Does it exist?
Evidence from a 28-year Field Study

It is generally assumed that anuran larval survival, growth rates and developmental rates are density-
dependent. These assumptions are based on a large number of studies that have manipulated larval
densities in lab aquaria, field enclosures and semi-natural mesocosms. However, there are relatively few
studies of natural populations that validate the conclusions drawn from these lab and semi-natural
studies. Here I present the results of a 28-year study of larval survival and developmental patterns of
Wood Frogs (Rana sylvatica) from a single pond in Michigan. During the period of study (1985-2012)
juvenile frogs were produced in 24 years. Embryonic survival was generally high and varied little among
years. In contrast, initial larval densities in the pond varied by factor of 18. Larval mortality was highest
shortly after hatching (~ 14-21 days) followed by a period of relatively low but consistent decline in
survival (Type III survivorship). Annual larval survival varied dramatically among years, but was not
related to initial larval density. In contrast, metamorphic body size was negatively correlated with initial
larval density, while larval period was positively correlated with initial larval density. Larval period and
size were negatively correlated, and neither trait was related to pond temperature. Partial correlations
indicated larvae with longer development times had lower survival, while metamorphic size was
negatively correlated with larval survival. The patterns of survival and development observed in the field
were informed by a mesocsm study which varied larval density and the presence or absence of a
vertebrate or insect predator. In the absence of predators, tadpole survival, growth and development
were density dependent, however, because predators took a disproportionate number of prey at lower
larval densities, predators reversed the effects of larval density on survival, but not the effects of larval
density on larval body size or developmental time. In addition, larval survivorship curves from the
predator treatments conformed better to field survivorship curves than from mescosms without predators.
Together, these results suggest that the lack of density-dependent survival in the field may result from the
differential effects of predators at different larval densities.



Bevier, Catherine (Colby College);

Physiological correlates of calling behavior in anurans with different calling strategies

The advertisement call of male frogs is a familiar secondary sexual characteristic, and one of the most
energetically expensive behaviors to produce. Different species exhibit extraordinary variation in seasonal
and nightly patterns of calling activity. Males of some species call in choruses over prolonged periods and
persist for weeks or months, while others form choruses more opportunistically, for only a few days or
less. Males of some species may call for many hours over a 24 h period, while other species call only
briefly at night. I will draw on results from my research, and compare with those of colleagues, to show
how these patterns of behavioral variation are influenced by physiological characteristics of the males,
especially of the muscles that contribute to call production. For example, males able to call over longer
periods of time, on either a daily or seasonal basis, have a greater potential to attract and mate with a
female. However, males may be constrained over the calling period by the levels of energy substrates,
such as glycogen and lipid, available to fuel call production. Nightly and seasonal patterns of calling



                                                                                                          59
behavior may also be influenced by levels of corticosterone produced in response to the physiological
stress of this high level of activity. On a more immediate scale, female preference for a male is often
based on the dynamic properties of the male‘s call, such as call rate, and females of many species prefer
males that produce more energetically expensive calls. Call rate, call intensity, and call complexity, for
example, are traits influenced by the aerobic capacity of muscles used in call production, and vary
dramatically both within and among species. Interestingly, many of these correlated patterns transcend
phylogenetic relationships, and these physiological characters serve as a strong selective force on
behavioral capacity.



Bezerra, Karla (Universidade Federal do Piauí-TROPEN); Oliveira, Rômulo (Universidade Federal do
Piauí-Departmento de Biologia-CNN, Canada); Conceição, Esmeralda (Universidade Estadual do
Maranhão-Centro de Estudos Superiores de Caxias (CESC/UEMA), Canada); Lopes, João (Universidade
Federal do Piauí-TROPEN, Canada); Fraga, Elmary; Barros, Maria (Universidade Estadual do Maranhão-
CESC/Genbimol, Canada); Barros, Roseli (Universidade Federal do Piauí-TROPEN, Teresina, Brazil)

Molecular identification of Phyllomedusae (Anura, Hylidae) using COI DNA barcode in an area of
the Cerrado biome, in the state of Maranhão, northeast of Brazil

Hylidae has three subfamilies, among them Phyllomedusinae (Günther, 1858) have been investigated as
to their use as sources of drugs in tradicional folk medicine and modern medical science. Phyllomedusa
is the most diverse genus having a total of 32 species, 23 of these occurs in Brazil. However, there is
much discussion as to its taxonomic character. For the State of Maranhão records are scarce. The
objective of this study is to report the occurrence of two species of the genus by molecular data in a
Conservation Unit in the east of the State, city of Caxias. The Area of Environmental Protection
"Inhamum" (04 0 53' S and 43 0 24' W) has approximately 4,500 ha, in the Cerrado biome. From
March 2011 to March 2012 the specimens were obtained by active search at night in ponds and cerrado
sensu strictu phytophysiognomie between 18 and 23 hours by four collectors in a sampling effortof 180
hours /observers in three of the five breeding sites sampled. DNA was isolated using the protocol of
phenol-chloroform extraction. The amplification of the Cytochrome Oxidase Subunit I were performed by
PCR using specific primers. The products of PCRs were sequenced using the method didesoxiterminal in
3500 Genetic Analyzer (Life Techonologies). Sequences were aligned using Bioedit program and for
identification The Barcode of Life Data Systems (BOLD). A fragment of 600 bp of the COI gene was
obtained in 23 specimens of Phyllomedusa. It was possible to identify distinct species by 5S and COI
genes. Identification through the BOLD systems revealed the status specific of the specimens. According
to Frost ( 2011 ), P. hypochondrialis and P. bicolor occurs in the region. However, Bruschi et al. (2010)
using cytogenetic and molecular data suggests the occurrence of P. azurea in the savanna areas of the
State. Using morphological characters we suggest the classification of P. azurea and P. sp. for the
Conservation Unit. The molecular information obtained allowed the construction of a database, DNA
barcoding, for the species of Phyllomedusa from the area and may be useful for the definition of
taxonomic questions revealing an unambiguous identification of the Phyllomedusa species.




                                                                                                       60
Bickford, David (National University of Singapore);

Forest Fragment and Breeding Habitat Characteristics Explain Frog Diversity and Abundance in
Singapore

Habitat loss and fragmentation can have severe negative and irreversible effects on biodiversity. We
investigated the effects of forest fragmentation on frog diversity in Singapore because of its high rates of
deforestation and the demonstration that frogs are some of the most sensitive species to habitat
degradation. We surveyed frog species in 12 forest fragments varying from 11 to 935 ha. We compared
differences in species richness, abundance, and Shannon‘s index in relation to forest fragment size,
connectivity (distance between fragments), and breeding habitat heterogeneity. A total of 20 species from
12 genera and five families were encountered in 12 fragments. Larger fragments and those closer to
larger fragments had higher species richness. Abundance, however, was not correlated with forest area
or connectivity, but we found fewer individual frogs in the larger fragments. We also found that breeding
habitat heterogeneity best explained frog species diversity and abundance in forest fragments. Fragments
with a high diversity of breeding habitats had more species. We found no evidence to suggest that
abundance and diversity are strongly correlated, particularly in disturbed areas, but that breeding habitat
heterogeneity is an under-appreciated factor that should be considered when prioritizing areas for anuran
conservation. Enriching breeding habitat heterogeneity, creating corridors between fragments, and
reforesting degraded areas are some of the most beneficial strategies for preserving urban frog
biodiversity.



Bickford, David (National University of Singapore);

The ecology and evolution of the lungless frog, Barbourula kalimantanensis

The only lungless frog, Barbourula kalimantanensis, was recently rediscovered in Kalimantan, on
Indonesian Borneo. Here we review aspects of its highly modified morphology and ecology, as well as
some aspects of the evolutionary lineage that gave rise to this strange frog.

The species has strict habitat restrictions, only found in very fast flowing cold water in the lowlands. With
recent severe habitat degradation and loss, the IUCN conservation status of the species was recently
changed from Vulnerable to Endangered, earmarking the species as a conservation flagship for the
region and for Indonesia. The genus is also surprisingly old, currently the oldest estimated cladogenetic
event that produced extant endemic species to Southeast Asia.



Bielby, Jon (Institute of Zoology, ZSL); Bosch, Jaime (Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales, CSIC,
Canada); Fisher, Matthew (Imperial College, Canada); Garner, Trenton (Institute of Zoology, ZSL,
London, United Kingdom)

Stuff the envelope: temperature-associated mortality does not match the expectations of
laboratory estimates of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis physiological requirements

Amphibian host/parasite interactions should be influenced by environmental temperature, and evidence in
support of this has been reported for chytridiomycosis. As a result, the use of climate envelope models to
describe risk of chytridiomycosis has become increasingly common. These models are predominantly
based on laboratory estimates of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) physiological requirements and
therefore assume dynamics causing declines should occur at temperatures where Bd growth is optimal in



                                                                                                           61
the lab. Here we report a combination of field studies of Alytes obstetricans and a lab study of Bufo bufo
that show; 1) temperatures at which mortality occurs are not consistent, even in a single host species; 2)
lethal chytridiomycosis can result at temperatures where Bd is presumed not to grow and reproduce
effectively, and; 3) altering temperature for the host preceding exposure to Bd affects infection dynamics.
Taken together, our results strongly indicate that environmental temperature affects amphibian/Bd
host/parasite interactions in a highly context-dependent manner not fully described by lab estimates of Bd
physiological requirements. Ultimately, the environmental envelope for Bd is the amphibian, not the pond
or forest.



Bienentreu, Joe-Felix (Senckenberg Research Institute Frankfurt);

Taxonomy and phylogeography of the Anolis pachypus complex (Squamata: Iguania: Dactyloidae)

The monophyletic genus Anolis is a highly diverse lizard group, and with 384 described species the
largest vertebrate genus in the world. Intragenerically the species of the A. pachypus complex are
allocated to the Lemurinus group in the Beta-section. The members of the complex are extremely similar
to each other in terms of habitus, general appearance, coloration, habitat, and probably also in behavior
and ecology. They inhabit premontane and montane elevations along both the Caribbean and the Pacific
versants of the Costa Rican and/or Panamanian highlands. Within my thesis I performed a thorough
phylogeographic analysis of the complex. I separated the the male specimens into Operational
Taxonomic Units, according to their dewlap coloration, and in the case of identical dewlap coloration
among geographically widely separated samples also according to geography. Females were assigned
depending on their head scalation, and collection locality relative to nearest assigned male. I gathered
and compared 14 morphometric, and 26 pholidotic characters of 192 specimens (109 ♂, 83 ♀) and
examined the 16S gene of 53 specimens. Integrating these different lines of evidence, my results allow
the most comprehensive view on the taxonomy and phylogeography of the A. pachypus complex so far. I
confirm the validity of the four nominal species A. pachypus Cope 1876, A. tropidolepis Boulenger 1885,
A. magnaphallus Poe & Ibañez 2007, A. pseudopachypus Köhler, Ponce, Sunyer & Batista 2007.
Additionally, the study has lead to the description of A. benedikti Lotzkat, Bienentreu, Hertz & Köhler
2011. I created an updated distribution map, which shows an complex phylogeographic scenario. The
distributional ranges of the species are not arranged in a simple east-west sequence along the
continental divide, but show an irregular pattern and partially contact zones of up to three species of the
complex. In conclusion, within the A. pachypus complex, the male dewlap is the only morphological
character that allows, in combination with geographic data, the reliable assignment of a given male
individual to one of the nominal species. Other morphological characters, for example head scalation,
appear less diagnostic, allowing at most the differentiation between certain pairs of species.



Bigman, Jennifer (Moss Landing Marine Laboratories); Bizzarro, Joseph (Friday Harbor Laboratories,
Friday Harbor, United States); Ebert, David (Moss Landing Marine Labs, Moss Landing, United States)

North Pacific spiny dogfish (Squalus suckleyi) trophic ecology: using integrated gut content and
stable isotope analysis to infer short and long term feeding trends

North Pacific spiny dogfish (Squalus suckleyi) are commercially and ecologically important predators that
are abundantly distributed in North Pacific waters, and therefore may play an important role in regional
marine ecosystems. Most historic research on this species has been focused on dogfish collected within
the inland waters of Washington and British Columbia, but little is known about offshore populations. We



                                                                                                         62
used traditional gut content analysis (GCA) and stable isotope analysis (SIA) to elucidate the trophic
ecology of dogfish from central California, U.S.A. GCA allows for quantification of prey items contained
within the stomach of a single individual and reveals what actual species are consumed on a short-term
basis. SIA uses elements as tracers (specifically carbon and nitrogen) to identify predator-prey
relationships as well as trophic position, allowing for long-term diet information. SIA analysis can be used
to complement gut content data via integrating both short and long term food habits, enhancing
information known about the trophic role of a given species. Based on GCA, the most abundant and
important prey taxa by number, weight, and the prey-specific index of relative importance were
euphausiids, fishes, and cephalopods. Similarly, the most frequently occurring prey taxa were fishes,
euphausiids, and cephalopods. In addition to diet composition, sources of dietary variability with respect
to size, sex, depth, location, season, and year are being investigated for GCA and SIA and will be
presented.



Bigman, Jennifer (Moss Landing Marine Laboratories); Ebert, David (Moss Landing Marine Labs, Moss
Landing, CA, United States); Dewar, Heidi (Southwest Fisheries Science Center, NOAA Fisheries, La
Jolla, CA, United States); Bizzarro, Joseph (Friday Harbor Labs, Friday Harbor, CA, United States);
Kohin, Suzanne (Southwest Fisheries Science Center, NOAA Fisheries, La Jolla, CA, United States);
Vetter, Russ (Southwest Fisheries Science Center, NOAA Fisheries, La Jolla, United States)

Spot a basking shark: how California’s citizen scientists can aid in the recovery of an enigmatic
shark

The basking shark (Cetorhinus maximus) is the second largest shark species, reaching a total length of
up to 10 m. It has been reported globally from high latitude seas, including Arctic waters, to the tropics.
The eastern North Pacific basking shark population was recently designated a ―Species of Concern‖ by
the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) for three main reasons: (1) notable, although largely
anecdotal, population declines; (2) a lack of recovery even after long-term cessation of fishery
exploitation; and (3) a severe lack of biological and fisheries data. Although thousands of basking sharks
were observed off the West Coast of the continental US and Canada in the early 1900‘s, individual
sightings are now uncommon and large aggregations and extremely rare and much reduced compared to
historic records. There have been no directed fisheries for basking sharks in the eastern North Pacific for
more than 50 years, but there does not appear to be any notable increase in population size. It is unclear
if this situation is a result of persistent, undocumented mortality, the naturally low intrinsic population
growth rates of basking sharks, and/or potential changes in contemporary distribution patterns. However,
regardless of the cause, a general lack of recovery following the cessation of fishing is common
worldwide. Without adequate knowledge of basking shark biology (e.g., movement patterns, nursery and
feeding grounds, demography) or fishery exploitation, it has been extremely difficult to develop a recovery
plan for this species in the eastern North Pacific. To address this lack of knowledge, a collaborative
project was initiated in April 2011 between the NMFS and the Pacific Shark Research Center to
investigate spatial aspects (e.g., distribution, abundance, occurrence, movement patterns) and population
status of eastern North Pacific basking sharks. This project has many facets including an outreach
program, tagging, data-mining, and a sightings network that have contributed to its success and will be
addressed in the upcoming oral presentation. The ultimate goal of this project is to provide necessary
baseline information for the formulation of an effective recovery plan for basking sharks in the eastern
North Pacific.




                                                                                                         63
Bishop, Christine (Environment Canada); Ashpole, Sara (University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON,
Canada); Mike, Sarell (Ophiucus Consulting, Oliver, BC, Canada); Owain, McKibbin (Nk'mip Desert
Cultural Centre, Ladner, BC, Canada); Emily, Lomas (Thompson Rivers University, Kamloops, BC,
Canada)

The challenge of reptile and amphibian conservation in Canada's southern latitudes

The pocket desert of       the south Okanagan valley, in the province of           British Columbia, is a rare
ecozone in Canada which is populated by the highest number of Species at Risk (>60 species) and one
of the fastest developing communities in the country. Habitats for wildlife were fragmented within this
rich agricultural landscape in the past 100 years but it is quickly becoming a more urban culture with
condominium and highway expansions that will further compromise the remaining habitat. The quantity of
the habitat has shrunk through the loss of       more than 84% of         wetlands      and 87% of      riparian
habitats. None of this bodes well for the survival of 15 native species of amphibians and reptiles
native to this valley with two species already extirpated and the majority of                the rest listed as
endangered, threatened or special concern in          Canada . The quality of          the remaining habitat is
degreaded by the removal of       water for irrigation, vehicle collisions, pesticide use, and introduction of
invasive species. However, initiatives to create new habitat by building ponds on lands protected through
conservation covenants, exclusion fencing for livestock and restoration of         habitats in federal National
Wildlife have started to show success less than a decade after their inception.



Bishop, Phil (University of Otago/Amphibian Survival Alliance); Germano, Jennifer (Institute for
Conservation Research, Canada)

Does familiarity affect post-release movement in translocations of the endangered Maud Island
frog?

 New Zealand is home to the genus Leiopelma , an ancient group of silent frogs that may rely on
chemical communication for social interactions. One species ( L.pakeka ) occurs naturally on Maud Island
where it has been shown that adults can differentiate between neighbours and non-neighbours based on
chemical cues. These frogs have very small home ranges, which often overlap with other individuals and
frequently multiple frogs will share the retreat space under a single rock, with many of these frog-pairs
being opposite sexes. The importance of neighbours, the presence of territoriality, and the possibility of
long-term mates remain unknown in L. pakeka. However, if any of these are important aspects of their
ecology, then familiarity in the founder group could have possible effects during a re-introduction. A inter-
island translocation of 101 individuals was carried out and the frogs were released in two equal groups;
one group was randomly placed in the new habitat, while the other group was released into the new
habitat in a similar orientation with respect to their neighbours from the source population. Frogs released
in the random pattern travelled significantly farther in their total distances moved than frogs released with
their neighbours although when looking at the straight-line distances moved, there was only a marginal
difference in distance travelled between randomly and non-randomly placed frogs. There was no
significant difference in the bearings taken by randomly placed and non-randomly placed individuals (W =
0.812, P = 0.666). Spatial patterns found at the new site eight months following re-introduction did not
resemble those originally found in the source population. Groups that were relocated with neighbours did
not stay with those individuals. Similarly, those that were released in a random pattern did not search out
or move towards their original neighbours. As the longer term movements made during the eight months
following re-introduction did not differ between the random and non-randomly released individuals,
familiarity with neighbours was not considered a long-lasting effect nor likely to be of importance during a
translocation of these frogs.



                                                                                                             64
Bishop, Phil (University of Otago/Amphibian Survival Alliance); Garcia Moreno M, Jaime (Amphibian
Survival Alliance, Canada)

Implementing amphibian conservation at a global level - The Amphibian Survival Alliance

The planet is currently in a mass extinction episode that is most apparent among the amphibians. The
latest figures from IUCN´s Red List of Threatened Species show that there are nearly as many species of
amphibians categorised as threatened with extinction as those of threatened birds and mammals put
together, and that the proportion of threatened species is higher for amphibians (30.2%) than for birds
(12.5%) or mammals (20.6). Although the 2005 IUCN Amphibian Conservation Summit generated a
global Amphibian Conservation Action Plan (ACAP) outlining steps to understand, halt, and reverse the
crisis, the response has been uneven, disjunct, and generally deficient due to a lack of coordination and
funding. The Amphibian Survival Alliance (ASA), launched in June 2011, is a global partnership for
amphibian conservation. The ASA is a consortium of organisations working together to stem the rapid
losses of amphibian populations and species worldwide by implementing the ACAP. The ASA is
coordinating a united response by actively fundraising and coordinating the development and integration
of four key areas 1) Conservation and restoration of key habitat for amphibians, 2) Ex-situ conservation
efforts, 3) Emergent diseases and pollution, and 4) Assessments and monitoring. The Alliance will bring
focus, coordination, and leadership to address the world‘s most serious extinction crisis. Its goal is the
restoration of all threatened amphibian species to their natural roles and population levels in ecosystems
worldwide. Although it is already working with several partners like ASG, Global Wildlife Conservation,
IUCN Netherlands, AZE, ZSL, it is open to all institutions willing to implement conservation actions and
associated research to address the amphibian conservation crisis at all scales, from global to local. The
ASA‘s progress and strategic plans will be discussed in this presentation.



Blackburn, Daniel (Trinity College); Bonneau, Laurie; Anderson, Kristie (Trinity College, Hartford, CT,
United States); Langkilde, Tracy (Pennsylvania State University, Canada)

Morphology and Development of Fetal Membranes in the Oviparous Lizard Sceloporus undulatus

In oviparous squamates, fetal membranes that line the eggshell sustain embryos from early in
development through the time of hatching. However, function of fetal membranes in oviparous squamates
is poorly understood due to a scarcity of studies of their morphology and development. We are studying
fetal membranes of the lizard Sceloporus undulatus             via histology and electron microscopy. At
oviposition, the egg is largely surrounded by an omphalallantoic membrane, in which an intact isolated
yolk mass separates allantoic vasculature from the eggshell.              The omphalallantois is gradually
converted into chorioallantois through depletion of the isolated yolk mass. These changes reflect growing
embryonic needs for gas exchange. Epithelial cells lining the chorioallantois and omphalallantois show
peculiar surface ridges oriented in hexagonal arrays. These structures increase surface area, possibly to
enhance water uptake and/ or uptake of eggshell calcium. The pattern of fetal membrane morphogenesis
in S. undulatus has not previously been observed in oviparous reptiles, and combines features
associated with gas exchange and absorption. If this pattern is ancestral for the genus, it would explain
previously - observed modifications of fetal membranes for these functions in viviparous Sceloporus.




                                                                                                        65
Blackburn, David (California Academy of Sciences); Wake, David; Bloom, David; Gross, Joyce; Koo,
Michelle; Spencer, Carol; Whittaker, Kellie; Wittsche, Julian; Zhuang, Vicky (University of California,
Berkeley, Canada); Cannatella, David (University of Texas, Austin, Canada); Vredenburg, Vance (San
Francisco State University, Canada)

AmphibiaWeb: 7000 species and counting!

Since 2000, AmphibiaWeb (www.amphibiaweb.org) has served as an online resource for information on
the world‘s amphibian species and their status. AmphibiaWeb will highlight this resource with the
celebration of the description of the 7000th amphibian species in 2012. AmphibiaWeb has become an
increasingly vital resource with accurate and current information for educators, researchers, and
managers. Every species has a webpage and steady progress is being made in producing species
accounts, which are accompanied by photographs, audio recordings, videos, and maps. Browse functions
facilitate taxonomic, photographic, geographic, and other searches. Unique services include a list
(updated daily) of the number of valid amphibian species, mapping of type localities for recently described
species, and ready access to the largest amphibian photo collection (nearly 25,000). Literature on
amphibian declines is summarized monthly. On average, AmphibiaWeb receives 15,000–20,000 unique
queries per day from visitors around the world. The mapping functions of AmphibiaWeb continue to
evolve and currently integrate shape files from IUCN with mapped point locality data from scientific
collections. An iPhone app enables searching and browsing of amphibian data, including locality-specific
searches. A recent overhaul of AmphibiaWeb‘s taxonomy is based on increasingly stable phylogenetic
hypotheses. Taxonomy is monitored by a subcommittee of amphibian specialists from multiple institutions
and is updated as species are described and published revisions are evaluated. AmphibiaWeb is a
community-contributed resource; volunteers produce the vast majority of species accounts and photos.
AmphibiaWeb serves as a useful educational resource and we encourage integration of the website into
herpetology courses.



Blackburn, David (California Academy of Sciences);

Diversification of the Squeaker Frogs across Africa's mountains

The deep-time historical biogeography of Africa's montane faunas remain incompletely known, especially
the relationships between montane regions. I present recent and on-going work on the phylogenetic
relationships within the frog genera Arthroleptis (Squeakers) and Cardioglossa (Long-fingered Frogs),
which are sister taxa. The evolutionary history of these genera sheds light on the relationships between
species in the mountains of the Cameroon Volcanic Line (CVL), the Albertine Rift, and the Eastern Arc.
The phylogenetic relationships within these genera reveal replicated biogeographic patterns, including the
discovery that the Albertine Rift fauna is of mosaic origin, with some montane species part of clades from
the CVL and others from the Eastern Arc.




                                                                                                        66
Blasius, Mary (California State University Long Beach); Mull, Chris (Simon Fraiser University, Canada);
Lyons, Kady (California State University Long Beach, Canada); O'Sullivan, John (Monterey Bay
Aquarium, Canada); Lowe, Chris (California State University Long Beach, Canada)

Bioaccumulation and maternal transfer of organic contaminants and mercury in young of the year
white sharks (Carcharodon carcharias)

Organic contaminants and total mercury were measured in young of the year (YOY) white sharks (
Carcharodon carcharias ) incidentally caught in southern California between 2005 and 2010. DDT and
PCB concentrations were higher in liver (76 ± 87 µg/g ww and 14 ± 10 µg/g, respectively) than in red
(0.05 ± 0.04 µg/g) or white muscle (0.24 ± 0.34 µg/g). Total mercury was higher in white and red muscle
tissue (1.40 ± 1.12 µg/g and 1.90 ± 1.35 µg/g, respectively) than in liver (0.19 ± 0.16 µg/g). These levels
were alarmingly high considering their young age and diet, suggesting these sharks are more likely
acquiring these high levels from their mothers in utero . To examine the YOY‘s potential of maternal
transfer of these persistent organic pollutants, a five-parameter bioaccumulation model was used to
estimate the total loads a newborn shark would accumulate over a one year period from consuming
highly contaminated prey. Contaminant consumption was based on levels representative of fish prey
common in southern California. Based on the model, the maximum potential levels that YOY white
sharks could attain from dietary exposure are 11.17 µg/g ∑DDT, 0.6 µg/g ∑PCBs, and 2.14 µg/g Hg.
Observed organic contaminant levels in YOY sharks were 7 fold higher for PCBs and 23 fold higher for
DDT than the maximum output of our model. Since it is unlikely these YOY sharks are acquiring such
high levels from diet alone (especially for DDT and PCBs), this suggests maternal transfer of
contaminants is a major contributing process to YOY white shark body burdens. Despite signs of
population recovery in the eastern Pacific, anthropogenic impacts via biomagnification and maternal
offloading of environmental contaminants may have future impacts on apex predator populations located
around urbanized areas.



Blouin-Demers, Gabriel (University of Ottawa);

Going beyond descriptive habitat selection studies: making the link with fitness is paramount in a
conservation context

There are hundreds of habitat selection studies published annually. Most of these studies are descriptive
and only compare habitat use to habitat availability. It is often possible, and I will argue it is almost always
desirable, to go beyond simple descriptions of habitat association. It is desirable, especially in a
conservation context, to make the link between habitat selection and fitness. Failing to do so could lead
us to define habitats for conservation that in fact are not suitable for the species. I will plea for the broader
adoption of an approach that attempts to link habitat selection to fitness. I will illustrate how
ecophysiology, for instance, can be used to bridge the gap between habitat selection and fitness. I will
illustrate the ecophysiological approach with our data on several species of reptiles to show that habitat
selection, via its impact on thermoregulation, improves several performances that are related to fitness. I
will also illustrate how information on population fitness in various habitats is a pressing conservation
problem in our efforts to define critical habitat for species at risk.




                                                                                                              67
Boback, Scott (Dickinson College); Davidson, Nicole; Bieber-Ham, Lily; Wood, Kevin; Miller, Matt
(Dickinson College, Carlisle, United States)

Nest site selection in a population of Painted Turtles (Chrysemys picta) in south central
Pennsylvania

In many reptiles the temperature experienced during embryonic development determines the sex of the
offspring. Painted turtles ( Chrysemys picta ) exhibit a strategy known as temperature-dependent sex
determination (TSD) in which warm nest temperatures result in female offspring and cool temperatures
result in male offspring.    Additionally, Painted turtles typically hatch in the late summer but remain
underground and emerge the following spring. As such, the location of Painted turtle nests is of
paramount importance in determining sex and hatchling survival. We have monitored nesting in a
population of Painted turtles in south central Pennsylvania for the past two years. In this population,
females are restricted in potential nesting locations by a Norfolk Southern railroad track 20 meters north
of the pond. Nests are dug in rocky soil heavily influenced by railroad ballast and coal deposits. For all
located nests, we obtained clutch size, egg mass, egg length, nest depth, and nest width. Developmental
and overwintering temperatures in the nests were obtained using temperature and humidity recorders
(iButtons). Results show that some clutches emerged during the fall, some overwintered underground
and others had a mixed strategy. Nest temperatures and relative humidity are presented along with
environmental parameters of the nests.



Bodensteiner, Brooke (Iowa State University); Refsnider, Jeanine; Reneker, Jaymie; Janzen, Fred
(Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States)

Nest depth does not compensate for sex ratio skews caused by climate change in turtles

Female ability to match nest characteristics with environmental conditions can influence offspring survival
and quality, and may provide a mechanism by which organisms can track climate change. In organisms
that construct subterranean nests, including many reptiles with temperature-dependent sex
determination, the depth of the nest may affect incubation temperature and thus offspring sex ratio.
Therefore, female adjustment of nest depth may be a mechanism by which skews in sex ratio caused by
climate change could be prevented. We experimentally manipulated nest depth in 43 painted turtle nests
and quantified the effects on incubation regime, offspring performance, and sex ratio. We found that nest
depth affected the magnitude of daily temperature fluctuation, with deeper nests experiencing less daily
variation, but mean nest temperature was not affected by depth. Within the biologically-relevant range of
nest depths tested here, there was no difference in resultant offspring survival, size, or sex ratio.
However, deeper nests produced hatchlings that were faster at righting themselves and swimming than
hatchlings from shallower nests. We conclude that the adjustment in nest depth that would be required to
affect sex ratio in this species is biologically unfeasible, and therefore female adjustment of nest depth is
unlikely to compensate for climate change.



Boenke, Morgan (Redpath Museum - McGill University);

Fidelity to Daytime Refuge Sites Does Not Lead to Bounded Home Ranges in Fowler's Toads

The use of space by animals is a central ecological theme as it influences the scale at which individuals
interact with their environment. Determining the scale at which organisms operate can illustrates their
spatial requirements. The home range concept provides a framework for evaluating patterns of space



                                                                                                          68
use. Movement models predict the emergence of bounded home ranges when individuals repeatedly
return to central locations. I quantified the home ranges of 70 Fowler‗s Toads, Anaxyrus fowleri ,
monitored over two years using variations of three home range metrics, Minimum Convex Polygons,
Kernel Density Estimators and Localized Convex Hulls. Nearly two orders of magnitude of observed
variation in home range sizes was explained chiefly by search effort. Body size, a driver of inter-specific
home range differences, had little detectable effect. I estimate the minimum home range of Fowler‘s
Toads to be 3517 m2, with the caveat that no stable upper bound may exist. Despite evidence of fidelity
to daytime refuge sites little evidence for bounded home ranges in Fowler‘s Toads was found.



Bolaño Martínez, Nataly (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México); Díaz Jaimes, Píndaro
(Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mèxico, Canada); Uribe Alcocer, Manuel (Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de México, Canada); Galvan Magaña, Felipe (Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas,
Canada)

Philogeography and population genetics of the              hammerhead shark Sphyrna zygaena in the
Oriental Pacific Ocean

Sphyrna zygaena lives in costal a pelagic zones and it is usually found in tropical and subtropical areas
including the Mediterranean Sea (Compagno, 1984; Castro, 1983). In te Oriental Pacific Ocean its
distributed along the occidental coasts of Baja California, Golfo de California, Islas Galápagos, Panama
and Patagonia. It presents a discontinues distribution in the mexican Pacific and Centralamerica. Is the
most important species in fisheries. It is possible that due to its distribution in the Pacific two populations
might be coexisting one in the Nothern Hemisphere and a second in the South. By using molecular
markers we pretend to determine if there is a genetic flux between the two populations. If this flux do exist
might be limited or might not exist. In this case we will be having two discrete populations therefore our
main goals are: 1) to evaluate the genetic structure of S. zygaena          all along the Oriental Pacific; 2) to
determine its genetic variability using both mitochondrial and nuclear markers and 3) to define a
philogeographic pattern. We have obtained 376 biopsys between Baja California Sur, Nayarit, Colima,
and Chiapas in Mexico; from Ecuador and Chile. Until know we have 136 analyzed sequences with D-
loop (Primer SPH_F: ACCGGTTTTTGTACGTCAGT), we have found 7 haplotypes. Of this 7 haplotypes
we found 5 in Chile population in which three of them are exclusive of this population. For the Mexican
population found one exclusive and for the Ecuador population we found 3 haplotypes and 1 exclusive.
Nucleotidic and haplotypic diversity were calculated Hd :0.60 and π:0.001. To determine de genetic flux
between the two apparent populations FST values were calculated (FST: 0.87) this indicates that there
are genetic differences between North and South populations but we have not found yet differences
among groups ( North = Mexico (B.C.S, Coliman and Nayarit) and South = Chile and Ecuador (Manta and
Santa Rosa)).



Bolus, Matthew (Department of Environmental Conservation); Castro-Santos, Theodore (USGS-S.O.
Conte Anadromous Fish Research Center, Canada); Danylchuk, Andy (Department of Environmental
Conservation, Canada)

Spatial ecology of the northern diamondback terrapin (Malaclemys terrapin terrapin), in Wellfleet
Harbor, MA: identifying potential impacts of coastal dredging.

The Northern diamondback terrapin, Malaclemys terrapin terrapin , is at its northern limit of its range
along the shores of Cape Cod, MA and is a state listed threatened species. In spite of this status, little is




                                                                                                              69
known about its spatial ecology in this region, including the distribution of brumation sites. Identifying
brumation sites is particularly important for the conservation of northern diamondback terrapins since this
sedentary seasonal phase could make it particularly vulnerable to coastal dredging activities that
commonly occur during the winter months. We used acoustic telemetry to quantify the movement patterns
of northern diamondback terrapins in Wellfleet Harbor, Wellfleet, MA, and to identify brumation sites. In
March 2011, an array of 20 fixed acoustic telemetry receivers were deployed throughout Wellfleet Harbor
and neighboring creeks, spanning an area of 4.3 km 2 . In May and July, 2011, we captured a total of 75
terrapins (56 females, 19 males) with dip-nets as they emerged from brumation and nesting sites. Turtles
were fitted with external acoustic tags and their movements monitored until December, 2011. Manual
tracking was used late in the fall to locate brumation sites. Movement patterns varied widely among
tagged terrapins with no differences observed between sex or season (mean number of drainages
occupied = 2.4, min = 1, max = 5). Cessation of movement also varied widely: most terrapins began
brumating in late September/early October, but several individuals remained active into December.
Selection of brumation sites was distributed throughout Wellfleet Harbor, with tagged terrapins last
detected in each of the primary tributaries. A total of 22 brumating terrapins were located, of which 12
individuals were found brumating in or near the proposed dredging area. The results from this study not
only provide some of the first information of the spatial ecology of Northern diamondback terrapins near
the northern end of their range, but this information will also be used by federal, state, and local
managers to determine any potential impacts to the terrapin population by proposed dredging.



Bond, Mark (School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, Stony Brook University); Babcock, Elizabeth
(Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, Univerity of Miami, Canada); Pikitch, Ellen;
Chapman, Demian (School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, Stony Brook University, Canada)

Differences in elasmobranch assemblages between marine reserves and fished reefs on the
Mesoamerican Barrier Reef

Our previous research has shown that Caribbean reef sharks (Carcharhinus perezi) are significantly more
abundant inside marine reserves when compared to similar fished reefs on the Mesoamerican Barrier
Reef. We now pose the question: what effect have marine reserves had on the abundance of other
elasmobranchs, such as batoids? Rays, including the southern stingray (Dasyatis americana), spotted
eagle rays (Aetobatus narinari), Caribbean whip-ray (Himuntura schmardae) and yellow stingray (Urobatis
jamaicensis) are not commercially targeted by fisherman in Belize. An appropriate null hypothesis is that
marine reserves have no effect on the relative abundance of these species. Baited Remote Underwater
Video (BRUV) surveys were conducted on the fore-reef at four sites along the Mesoamerican barrier reef
in Belize, at two established marine reserves and two fished reefs (N=50 per site). Of the combined 100
deployments at the two reserve sites 13 batoids were observed compared to 58 observed at the two
fished sites. We constructed a generalized linear model (GLM) to explain the presence of batoids on
BRUVs, which included ―marine reserve‖, ―location nested within marine reserve‖, habitat characteristics
and several environmental variables as potential factors. The GLM found that the factor ―marine reserve‖
had a significant negative effect on the presence of batoids, while none of the habitat or environmental
variables had a significant influence (p>0.002). We discuss ongoing research aimed at explaining this
pattern, including potential mechanisms such as (1) mesopredator release due to reduced predation from
reef sharks, (2) altered batoid behavior due to intimidation by sharks inside reserves and (3) increased
competition for prey inside marine reserves.




                                                                                                        70
Bonfil, Ramon (Bronx High School of Science); O'Brien, Shannon (University of Washington, Canada)

First Adult Female White Shark is Tracked Using Real-Time Satellite Tags in Guadalupe Island,
Mexico

Despite recent advances in our understanding of the spatial behavior of great white sharks, Carcharodon
carcharias, real-time tracks of their movements including oceanic migrations remain rare. Due to the
difficulty and risk of deploying real-time satellite tags on large great white sharks available data is
restricted to juveniles and one single mature male. Here, we report on the first ever adult female great
white shark tracked with a real-time satellite tag. A 5.1 m total length female great white shark was tagged
with a SPOT tag in Guadalupe Island, Baja California, Mexico on October 16, 2006 and tracked
intermittently for a total of 288 days and 7,100 km as she traveled in a large area of the North East Pacific
Ocean. The female great white shark remained in the vicinity of the NE coast of Guadalupe Island moving
between the east and west coasts for the next three and a half months; a preference for the north east
coast was suggested by the data. The shark left Guadalupe Island at the beginning of February on a ca.
3,900 km westward migration. The route followed by the shark showed remarkable directional movement
to a distinct region 790 km north-northeast of the Hawaiian Islands. During the next four months the shark
roamed in this area (ca. 680 km wide) following an irregular search-like pattern. This area is previously
unknown as a point of interest for great white sharks in North East Pacific and different from the
previously reported ‗white shark café‘. Temperature data were intermittently transmitted by the tag and
are also presented. This study shows that real-time satellite tags provide unique and important
information for studying the spatial dynamics of great white sharks and suggests that white sharks have
remarkable navigation abilities and confirms that not all adult great white sharks in the NE Pacific make
use of the 'White Shark Café'.



Boone, Michelle (Miami University of Ohio); Helbing, Caren (University of Victoria, Victoria, BC,
Canada); Youngquist, Melissa (Miami University, Oxford, OH, United States); Veldhoen, Nik (University of
Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada)

Some Times are Better than Others: How Time of Insecticide Exposure Can Influence Anuran
Metamorphosis and Development

The orchestration of metamorphosis is initiated and integrated by thyroid hormones, which change
dynamically during larval development. The impact of pesticides may vary depending on developmental
stage of an amphibian, which may be influenced by physiological changes during development. Previous
studies have found that some anurans reach metamorphosis earlier or are more developed when
exposure to the insecticide carbaryl occurs later in development, suggesting that carbaryl could affect the
thyroid hormone axis as well as alter the food web. We examined the effects of carbaryl exposure from
early to late development in green frogs (Rana clamitans) and northern leopard frogs (Rana pipiens)
tadpoles in the lab and/or the field. We measured effects on survival, time and size at metamorphosis,
feeding and jumping performance of metamorphs, and thryoid response genes in the brain of
metamorphs. We found that carbaryl did not impact survival at metamorphosis, mass at or time to
metamorphosis, or feeding performance for lab reared green frogs, but it did significantly increase the
abundance of some thyroid responsive genes (i.e., TR- ) in brain tissue, suggesting that carbaryl can act
as an endocrine disruptor at some times in anuran development. We have also found that exposure to
carbaryl in the field resulted in greater mass and increased development of green frog tadpoles when
exposure occurred late, suggesting that timing of exposure can also influence traits correlated with
fitness; analyses of brain tissue are currently under way. Timing of exposure also appears to influence
impacts on time at metamorphosis on northern leopards in field studies; analyses of brain tissue and



                                                                                                          71
impacts on overwintering are currently under way for this species. Our studies suggest that physiological
changes associated with metamorphosis may make amphibians more susceptible to effects of an
insecticide at some developmental stages and may have disparate effects on population-level outcomes.



Bosque, Renan (Universidade de Brasília); Colli, Guarino (Universidade de Brasília, Brasília, Brazil)

Distribution and color patterns of mimic coral snakes Oxyrhopus (Serpentes, Colubridae) and the
implications to mimicry

Mimicry is a phenomenon that has instigated scientists for a long time. Still, many aspects concerning the
mimicry dynamics remain unclear. For example, the role that multiple models play in the mimics‘ patterns,
and the necessity of mimics‘ and models‘ geographic distributions to overlap are topics that need further
investigations. The New World coral snakes represent an important example of mimicry among
vertebrates. In this complex, Micrurus species are known as Batesian models for species from Aniliidae
and Colubridae families, including Oxyrhopus genus. In this present work, we asked if there is an
association between the geographic distribution between mimics and models of the Oxyrhopus and
Micrurus species. We asked also what is the influence of the presence of multiple models in the mimic
coloration patterns. Our hypothesis are: (1) the geographic distribution of mimics‘ color patterns is
explained by the presence of the models with the same color pattern; (2) the mimics‘ richness in each
color pattern is explained by the richness of the same model‘s color pattern; (3) the imperfect mimics‘
geographic distribution will be positively correlated with richness of models; (4) the geographic distribution
of perfect mimics will be negatively correlated with richness of models. We classified the color patterns
and obtained from literature the geographic distributions for each species. After that, we constructed a
grid in each distribution polygon. With the grid information we performed generalized linear models using
presence and species richness of the mimics and models. We identified 20 colors patterns, 6 of which
were found both on Oxyrhopus and Micrurus (perfect mimics). Four patterns were found exclusively in
Oxyrhopus (imperfect mimics) and 10 patterns exclusively in Micrurus. The presence of Micrurus
explained the presence of Oxyrhopus (Z=8.40; p< 0.001). Only one model color pattern didn‘t explain the
presence of the mimic. The Micrurus species richness explains the Oxyrhopus species richness (Z=29.0;
p< 0.001). Only in two cases, the model color pattern richness doesn‘t explain the mimic richness. The
presence and richness of mimics was positively correlated with model‘ richness, regardless of the quality
of the mimic. Our work support that Oxyrhopus are indeed mimics of the Micrurus. The Micrurus
diversification apparently is the most important factor for the color pattern diversification, to the detriment
of ecological components.



Boswell, Leigh Ann (Department of Zoology, University of Hawai'i / Hawai'i Institute of Marine Biology);
Tricas, Timothy (Department of Zoology, University of Hawai'i / Hawai'i Institute of Marine Biology,
Honolulu, HI, United States)

Identity and density of olfactory receptor neurons in the nasal epithelium of juvenile hammerhead
sharks, Sphyrna lewini

Aquatic toxicants can damage the fish peripheral olfactory system and cause deficits in fitness-related
behaviors such as feeding, predator avoidance, and mate recognition. However, the response of the
shark olfactory system to toxicants, and for many species the type, density, and total number of olfactory
receptor neurons (ORNs) involved in odorant detection, are still unclear. The olfactory rosette organ was
examined by histology in the juvenile scalloped hammerhead, Sphyrna lewini , to identify and quantify



                                                                                                            72
the ORNs present in their chemosensory epithelium. Microvillar ORNs (mORN) and crypt neurons (CN)
occur in all horizontal sections of the rosette. Cell bodies of mORNs have a circular shape and mean
diameter of 7.2 ± 0.5 µm, highest densities in the mid regions of the sensory epithelium, and an average
density of 23,552 ± 8,198 cells/mm 2 . Cell bodies of CNs have a smaller kidney-shape and mean
diameter of 5.3 ± 0.7 µm, and lower density of 523 ± 944 cells/mm 2 . The primary lamellae epithelial
surface area of both olfactory organs is estimated at 6,010 mm 2 for a 56.1 cm TL juvenile. These
combined estimates indicate that a 56.1 cm TL juvenile S. lewini has a putative total of at least
142,000,000 mORNs and 3,00,000 CNs, and is higher when secondary lamellae and surface area of
adult sharks are considered. The total number of olfactory receptors range from 3-7 million in teleosts, 2.5
million in humans, and 220 million to 2 billion in canines. Thus this first estimate of total olfactory
receptors for S. lewini is in great excess to that reported for other fishes examined so far and is closer to
that of canines. These results provide only the second example of a shark species containing two ORNs
in the olfactory organ and give the first quantitative densities of each ORN type throughout the primary
lamellae of the peripheral olfactory system. This research provides the quantification of ORNs necessary
to determine epithelial degradation after toxicant exposure based on changes in ORN densities.



Bouskila, Amos (Ben-Gurion Univ. of the Negev); Moreno, Elisheva; Shachal, Roni; Wolfman, Anat
(Ben-Gurion Univ. of the Negev, Canada)

Unusual life history of Chamaeleo chamaeleon musae may create unique population
demographics on consecutive years

Some ectotherms cope with desert conditions by adopting an annual life style. The desert subspecies of
the common chameleon (Chamaeleo chamaeleon musae) inhabits arid sandy areas of the Negev Desert
and north Sinai. Practically all individuals perish before they reach their second reproductive season. We
hypothesized that when this character is combined with the 11 months-long incubation period of this
species, separate populations form in odd and even years. Those populations overlap for only a short
period and do not reproduce with each other, because when one reaches maturity, only hatchlings of the
other are present. We predicted that if the hypothesis is correct, the two populations may have separate
and unrelated dynamics. To evaluate this prediction we collected demographic information during two
odd and two even years (2008-2011). We surveyed consistent routes twice a month searching for
sleeping chameleons and the data were analyzed with Robust Design in the program MARK. Each
individual that we found was captured, measured, marked and released at the capture location. For each
month, survival and probability of finding individuals were calculated. For each individual we calculated
an index of body condition in order to look for connections between survival and body condition to
temperature and precipitation on each year.

Odd and even years differed in population size, suggesting that the dynamics of one year is connected to
the population two years earlier, rather than to the population in the previous year. Survival of individuals
that hatched in 2009 was lower than survival of those of 2008 and 2010. Snout-Vent length and
Mean Index of Body Condition for those born in 2009 were larger than the values for those born in 2010.
Our hypothesis may have been confounded with climatic conditions, because the average monthly
precipitation in winter 2009/10 was greater than that of winter 2008/09 and temperatures were
significantly higher too. These conditions may affect growth and survival of lizards, thus the difference we
received may be explained not only by our original hypothesis but also by the climatic conditions on those
specific years. Sorting out the two possible explanations will be possible when we incorporate the results
of the last year and when we complete the genetic analysis we are currently conducting to evaluate the
level of separation between populations in odd and even years.



                                                                                                          73
Bovo, Rafael (Dept. Zoology, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Rio Claro, Brazil); Andrade, Denis
(Dept. Zoology, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Rio Claro, Brazil, Canada)

Altitudinal effects on the thermal physiology and water balance in anurans from the Brazilian
Atlantic Rainforest

Understanding the variation in organismal traits as a function of differences in relevant environmental
parameters, for example along an altitudinal gradient, is a key-factor to comprehend whether the variation
observed reflects an adaptive response or not. For anurans, environmental temperature and water
availability are the most important factors affecting their ecology, physiology, and behavior. In the
Brazilian Atlantic Rainforest, a biodiversity hotspot for anurans, many species exhibit broad geographic
distribution, occurring along the slopes of the Coastal Mountain Range (Serra do Mar), from sea level to
altitudes up to 1000 m. Therefore, in this study, we examined selected physiological parameters related
to thermal physiology (critical thermal minimum [CTMin] and critical thermal maximum [CTMax]) and
water balance (rates of evaporative water loss, skin resistence to water loss, and rehydration rates) of
seven species of five families of anurans found at low and high elevations at the Atlantic Rainforest in
southeastern Brazil. We performed intraspecific comparisons aiming to verify the prediction that the
variation observed in the physiological traits examined could be understood on the basis of differences in
altitude/environmental characteristics. In general, we did not find major intraspecific differences, a pattern
that is in agreement with previous studies on similar taxa but not for others. Environmental effects on
organismal traits are known to be multifactorial (e.g., combined effects of biotic and abiotic factors, past
historical events) and, therefore, we discuss our results considering: (i) climate/altitude, specially for the
gradient along the mountain slope of the Brazilian Atlantic Rainforest (coastal and mainland); (ii)
taxonomic affiliation and; (iii) particular morphological, behavioral and ecological characteristics of the
organisms being examined.

Financial Support by FAPESP, CNPq, and FUNDUNESP



Bower, Deborah (University of Newcastle); Stockwell, Michelle (University of Newcastle, University of
Newcastle, Canada); Garnham, James; Pollard, Carla; Pickett, Evan; Clulow, John; Mahony, Michael
(University of Newcastle, Newcastle, Australia)

Monitoring monitoring: Predicting calling activity to maximize detection in the vulnerable frog
Litoria aurea

Variation in the timing and frequency of calling males can be used to examine male investment of
reproductive effort. Knowledge of the factors that influence reproductive effort is necessary to conserve
threatened frog species. In addition, this information can design monitoring regimes, to maximise
detection. We recorded patterns of calling in the threatened frog, Litoria aurea at Sydney Olympic Park.
Specifically we aimed to i) assess the probability of detecting calling males in the current monitoring
program, and ii) compare the effectiveness of models incorporating differing monitoring regimes. Song
metres were employed to record hourly for five minutes sections between October to March, in two
habitats. Calling occurred over the entire season and diel period. However, frequency of calling peaked
during mid-season and at night. The investment of survey effort necessary to detect Litoria aurea
depends on the time of year in which the pond is surveyed. The period of time invested in monitoring
alters the respective probability of detection and varies according to the approach. The effectiveness of
different monitoring regimes are contrasted and discussed.




                                                                                                           74
Bower, Luke (Southeastern Louisiana Unversity); Piller, Kyle (Southeastern Louisiana Unversity,
Canada)

Niche position and competitive exclusion in stream fish communities: A geometric morphometric
approach

The connection between ecology and morphology has long intrigued ecologists, and investigation of this
relationship has given ecologists insight into the factors that influence assemblage structuring of fish
communities. Stream fish co-occur in similar habitats, but often forage on different prey items or utilize
slightly different microhabitats, thereby allowing them to co-exist. Slight differences in morphology may
optimize stream fish for certain microhabitats. By examining these differences in morphology, it is
possible to predict the niche position of stream fish. Niche-partitioning has presumably allowed for high
species richness in stream fishes communities in the southeastern United States. The purpose of this
study was to take an eco-morphological approach to examine the degree of seasonal niche overlap
among stream fishes of the Tickfaw River (Lake Pontchartrain Basin) in southeastern Louisiana. To
accomplish this, point sample collections were made throughout the year and ecological (habitat and
trophic) and body shape (geometric morphometric) data were collected for each specimen of fish.
Multivariate analyses were performed to examine relationships and differences between stream fish
species body shape and niche position. Results indicate that the niche of several species shifted
seasonally, likely the results of changes in reproductive habitat, food items, or competition with other
congenerics.



Bowie, Rauri (University of California-Berkeley);

Climate cycles, stability, and diversification in an African biodiversity hotspot

That existing models based on contemporary environmental variation fail to predict richness patterns of
many species including the bulk of vertebrates on most continents, is now well-established. To
understand species distribution patterns we need to integrate large-scale macroecology with evolutionary
biology. Of particular interest are mountains where climate interacts with topographic relief to generate
sharp local habitat gradients. This may allow complex communities and species to persist locally,
promoting population isolation and speciation, as well as facilitating the long-term persistence of relictual
lineages so characteristic of tropical biodiversity hotspots. In this talk I explore the hypothesis that
localized habitat persistence through time (stability) promotes lineage diversification and persistence. I
evaluate the importance of habitat stability using a multi-faced approach that includes: (1) the
development of a climate-based model of habitat stability extending to 120,000 BP in order to predict
which sky islands of the Eastern Arc Mountains were likely to have retained forest throughout glacial and
interglacial cycles; (2) I examine how climatic cycles have shaped regional diversification patterns using a
comprehensive molecular dataset from several lineages of birds; and (3) given predictions of which sky
islands had persistent montane habitat I make use of a phylogeographic-scale approach from a
multilocus DNA datasets in order to estimate the extent of genetic structure and diversity among East
African sky island birds, and establish whether peaks of allelic diversity and estimates of population
stability through time correlate with predicted areas of stability.




                                                                                                          75
Bowlin, Noelle (Scripps Institution of Oceanography); Hastings, Philip (Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, Canada); Thompson, Andrew (NOAA Southwest Fisheries Science Center, Canada)

Vertical distribution and abundance of mesopelagic fishes in the Southern California Bight

Mesopelagic fishes have a worldwide distribution from the Artic to the Antarctic with an estimated global
biomass of almost 1 billion tons. They are generally not commercially exploited because of their sparse
dispersion in the expansive mesopelagic zone, and possibly because of their high lipid content, but they
are an important prey source for many commercial fishery species as well as marine mammals and birds.
A large portion of mesopelagic fish research has been concerned with taxonomy and distribution with
much coverage in the North Eastern Pacific, focused in the Southern California Bight (SCB). The majority
of the research in this area is the result of the California Cooperative Fisheries Investigations (CalCOFI)
program which has produced over 60 years of ichthyoplankton data from the SCB. This region is part of a
coastal upwelling system where the southeast flowing California Current merges with the pole-ward
flowing California Countercurrent creating an ecosystem with an oceanographic complexity that supports
a diverse assemblage of marine organisms including many species of mesopelagic fishes. The CalCOFI
ichthyoplankton time series is rich with information and is regularly used in the literature to make
inferences on the adult populations represented by the larvae. Analyses of this dataset have also shown
general group assemblages that include mesopelagic fishes, but they generally lack depth stratification
information because the samples are obtained from integrated oblique tows from the upper 200m of the
water column. During the 1980s, 90s, and early 2000s, discrete depth sampling using a MOCNESS to
depths up to 1200m was carried out in the SCB for a variety of projects focused on commercially
important fish species. I will present a description of the vertical distribution and abundance of
mesopelagic fish larvae in the SCB using the data obtained from these discrete depth samples in
conjunction with the knowledge gained from the CalCOFI dataset to better characterize the role of
mesopelagic fishes in the SCB ecosystem.



Bradford, David (US Environmental Protection Agency); Knapp, Roland (University of California,
Canada); Sparling, Donald (Southern Illinois University, Canada); Nash, Maliha (US Environmental
Protection Agency, Canada); Stanley, Kerri (Oregon State University, Canada); Tallent, Nita (US
Environmental Protection Agency, Canada); McConnell, Laura (US Department of Agriculture, Canada);
Simonich, Staci (Oregon State University, Canada)

Pesticide Distributions and Population Declines of California, USA Alpine Frogs

Airborne pesticides from the intensively cultivated Central Valley of California, USA, have been implicated
as a cause for population declines of several amphibian species, with the strongest evidence for the
Sierra Nevada Yellow-legged Frog ( Rana muscosa ) and Southern Mountain Yellow-legged Frog ( Rana
sierrae ) at high elevations in the Sierra Nevada mountains. Previous studies on these species have
relied on correlations between frog population status and either a metric for amount of upwind pesticide
use or limited measurements of pesticide concentrations in the field. We measured pesticide
concentrations in multiple media at multiple times at up to 28 sites at high elevations in the southern
Sierra Nevada and evaluated the pesticide-decline hypothesis in three ways: (1) we described the
temporal variation in concentrations in lake water and compared these values to established critical
levels; (2) we tested the hypothesis that pesticide concentrations decrease with distance from the Valley,
a pattern that could explain the east-west pattern in population declines; and (3) we tested the hypothesis
that pesticide concentrations are correlated with frog population status (i.e., fraction of suitable sites
occupied within 2 km of a site). Media represented were air, lake water, sediment, and tadpoles of a
surrogate amphibian, the Sierran Treefrog ( Pseudacris sierra ). We also measured total cholinesterase



                                                                                                        76
(ChE) in P. sierra tadpoles; ChE has been used as an indicator for organophosphorus and carbamate
pesticide exposure. Results do not support the hypothesis for a pesticide effect on frog populations. Of
46 pesticide compounds analyzed (41 in water) among the various media, eleven were detected in at
least one medium with ≥ 30% frequency, representing both historically- and currently-used pesticides.
Concentrations were extremely low, on the order of 1 part per trillion in lake water, and well below critical
levels established for aquatic life. Evidence for a distance effect in concentrations among the high-
elevation sites was very limited. No negative association was found between frog population status and
the concentration of any pesticide or tadpole ChE activity level. We discuss the plausibility of factors
other than pesticides that may account for the population declines of these species.



Brandley, Matthew (University of Sydney); Thompson, Michael (University of Sydney, Canada); Wagner,
Gunter (Yale University, Canada)

Gene expression associated with pregnancy in a viviparous skink

Although the morphological and physiological changes involved in pregnancy in live-bearing reptiles are
well studied, the genetic mechanisms that underlie these changes are not known. We used the
viviparous African Ocellated Skink, Chalcides ocellatus , as a model to identify a near complete gene
expression profile associated with pregnancy using RNA-Seq analyses of uterine transcriptomes.
Pregnancy in C.ocellatus is associated with upregulation of uterine genes involved with metabolism, cell
proliferation and death, and cellular transport. Moreover, there are clear parallels between the genetic
processes associated with pregnancy in mammals and Chalcides in expression of genes related to
tissue remodeling, angiogenesis, immune system regulation, and nutrient provisioning to the embryo. In
particular, the pregnant uterine transcriptome is dominated by expression of proteolytic enzymes that we
speculate are involved both with remodeling the chorioallantoic placenta and histotrophy in the
omphaloplacenta. Elements of the maternal innate immune system are downregulated in the pregnant
uterus, indicating a potential mechanism to avoid rejection of the embryo. We found a downregulation of
major histocompatability complex loci and estrogen and progesterone receptors in the pregnant uterus.
This pattern is similar to mammals, but cannot be explained by the mammalian model. The latter finding
provides evidence that pregnancy is controlled by different endocrinological mechanisms in mammals
and reptiles. Finally, 88% of the identified genes are expressed in both the pregnant and non-pregnant
uterus, and thus morphological and physiological changes associated with C. ocellatus pregnancy is
likely a result of regulation of genes continually expressed in the uterus rather than the initiation of
expression of unique genes.



Brandt, Renata (University of Sao Paulo); Camacho, Agustin; Navas, Carlos A.; Kohlsdorf, Tiana
(University of Sao Paulo, Canada)

Is it more difficult to thermoregulate hot or cold? Implications for the evolution of thermal
physiology

In vertebrate ectotherms behavioral buffering of environmental changes may reduce natural selection
favoring physiological evolution. For example, the thermoregulatory behavior exhibited by some lizard
lineages likely favors an evolutionarily conserved thermal physiology. However, as any other
temperature-dependent trait, thermoregulatory behavior may be affected by temperature within the
ecologically relevant thermal range of a species. Under these circumstances, thermal-effects on
thermoregulatory behavior may decrease the quality of thermoregulation and favor exposition to extreme



                                                                                                          77
temperatures, favoring an increase in physiological thermal limits during evolution. Recent studies report
that thermal limits of ectotherms (high and low) decline with increased latitude or altitude but the lower
limit slope is much steeper than the upper limit. If behavioral thermoregulation functions better at
temperatures above the preferred zone than below it, one would expect that environmental changes in
lower temperatures could not be buffered by thermoregulatory behavior and that such change had to be
tracked by physiological limits. Therefore, we tested the hypothesis of thermal impairment of
thermoregulation by assessing voluntary maximum and minimum temperature variation as a proxy for
comparative thermoregulation precision. We measured voluntary thermal extremes of Gymnophthalmidae
and Tropiduridae lizard species in thermal gradients, and also in thermal chambers built to measure it
directly on gymnophthalmids. Voluntary minimum temperatures were significantly more variable on both
treatments and families. Moreover, several species were unable to avoid exposition to extreme low
temperatures. These results suggest increased impairment of behavioral thermoregulation at lower
temperatures and corroborate our hypothesis. Additionally, we found interesting interspecific differences
among the compared species. Further implications of our findings are discussed.



Brasileiro, Cinthia (UNIFESP); Consolmagno, Rafael (UNIFESP, Diadema-SP, Brazil); Toscano, Nayara
(UNESP, Rio Claro-SP, Brazil); Haddad, Celio (UNESP, Rio Claro - SP, Brazil)

Reproduction and diet of island and mainland populations of Thoropa toaphora (Anura :
Cycloramphydae) in Atlantic Forest, Southeastern Brazil

Island and mainland populations of animals may be different in life traits such as diet composition, clutch
size and egg size. Identifying these differences may help us understand the evolution of life history of
animals. Birds, mammals, and reptiles are better represented in the literature, while only a few studies
have focused on amphibians. Generally island populations of different taxa have small clutches and
larger eggs. Island animals also have a different diet composition from those of mainland counterparts,
showing fewer components and more plant items. Herein, we evaluated potential variations in
reproduction traits (clutch and egg size and total reproductive effort) and diet composition of six island
and three mainland populations of the rock frog Thoropa taophora in southeastern Brazil. This species
dwells from rocky seashores to rocky outcrops in the Atlantic rainforest. Eggs are laid on rocks near
dripping water, and tadpoles develop in the same sites after hatching. Males are territorial and display
parental care. We did not find consistent differences in any of the reproductive traits examined between
mainland and island populations. However we found a significant variation among populations of T.
taophora . Despite the insularity effect, densities of adults and availability of territories and oviposition
sites may be very important in the trade-off of reproductive strategies on islands. Ants are the most
important prey item for all T. taophora populations. However, the diet composition of island populations
consisted of fewer items than those of mainland populations. This result was expected due to the
depauperated fauna of potential preys for the rock frog. Our findings are a contribution to the knowledge
of insular shifts in life-history traits of frogs, suggesting the lack of a single pattern. Species with different
feeding habitats and reproductive modes may have different life strategies on islands.



Brattstrom, Bayard H. (American Association of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists);

Social Behavior Of Some Desert Lizards

Studies on the social behavior of lizards have shown them capable of a variety of behavioral postures,
sequences, and sociality, that exceed that found in some birds and mammals. While many lizards are



                                                                                                               78
territorial, others are hierarchial, and some have harems. Fossorial and leaf-litter lizards on the other
hand may just show simple, often size related dominance during chance encounters. Much of lizard
behavior is simple and genetic (displays, courtship), while other aspects of behavior are learned. There
are, however, strong density and resource related determinants of social behavior (food, hiding and egg-
laying placs, and display sistes). With an increase in population numbers (an increase in density),
aggressive interactions increase and behavior may switch from territory to hierarchy. Most lizards in most
situations know their social status by virtue of size, color, odors, sounds, or behavior of dominants.
Subordinates respond by behaviors or postures (escape, submission, waves) to indicate submission,
thereby avoiding energetically expensive or risky social interactions. Behavior observed in the laboratory
or other crowded situations allows the observer to see many if not all possible postures, behaviors, and
social interactions that may be in the behavioral make-up of any given species. It does not mean that the
lizard has to, or does utilize all of them in the wild, only that they are available if it needs them. While
elaborate male-male displays are known for quite a few species of lizards, complete behavioral
inventories (ethograms) are known for only a few species. I report here on postures, positions,
ethograms for nine species of southwestern United States lizards: Coleonyx variegatus, Callisaurus
dracinoides, Uta stansburiana, Sceloporus occidentalis, Phrynosoma coronatum, Heloderma suspectum,
Dipsosaurus dorsalis, Uma scoparia, Cnemidophorus hyperythrus, to species differences and the
complexity of lizard behavior.



Bray, Rebecca (Monash University); Thompson, Michael (University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia);
Chapple, David (Monash University, Melbourne, Australia)

Lizards in paradise: Demography and population dynamics of the Lord Howe Island skink
(Oligosoma lichenigerum)

The Lord Howe Island Group represents the eroded remnants of a large shield volcano that was formed 7
million years ago. The world-heritage listed archipelago is located 700 km northeast of Sydney, and
comprises the main island and numerous smaller outlying islands. The native terrestrial reptile fauna of
LHI consists of two species, the Lord Howe Island skink (Oligosoma lichenigerum) and the Lord Howe
Island gecko (Christinus guentheri). The endemic LHI skink was once widespread across a wide range of
habitats, but experienced severe population declines after the introduction of rats to the main island, and
was thought to have become locally extinct on the main island with populations persisting on small
offshore islands including Ball‘s pyramid. Our research has identified a number of populations of the LHI
skink on the main island, however, our understanding of the distribution, behaviour and ecology of the
species has been minimal to date. Here, we report on our ecological study, a 22 month mark-recapture
study within the grassy dune habitat of North Bay, Lord Howe Island. Consisting of three sites of 20 pitfall
buckets, surveys were conducted at 5 time points throughout the year, with traps open for 7 days/nights
for each survey period, resulting in 8400 trapping days/nights. Over 1000 LHI skinks were marked using
Visible Implant Elastomer (VIE) with a large portion of these recaptured at least once. Our results provide
us with information on seasonal variation in activity time, detailed demography, dispersal and movement,
growth rates and reproductive cycle. They suggest that LHI skinks live in high densities, showing very
high site fidelity both in the short and long-term and are a long-lived species. The data collected in this
study essential for the effective management of the LHI skink.




                                                                                                         79
Braz, Henrique (University of São Paulo); Almeida-Santos, Selma (Butantan Institute, Canada)

Does the cold climate hypothesis explain the evolution of viviparity in Neotropical water snakes
(Hydropsini)?

Viviparity is a derived trait in Squamata. Cold climates (CC) from high latitudes and altitudes are
frequently invoked as the selective pressure leading to viviparity. Such hypothesis predicts that (1) recent
origins of viviparity are associated with high latitudes and altitudes (cold areas); (2) proportion of
viviparous species is larger at higher latitudes and altitudes. Here, we test these predictions within a
phylogenetic context using water snakes of the tribe Hydropsini; a reproductively bimodal taxa widely
distributed in South America. Specifically, we (i) reconstruct the evolution of reproductive modes in a fixed
tree topology obtained by a supertree analysis of all genes present in GenBank for Hydropsini; (ii)
analyze associations between viviparity and high latitudes, altitudes and CC; (iii) compare proportions of
viviparous species across latitudinal and altitudinal distribution. Reconstruction of reproductive modes
suggests that oviparity is plesiomorphic in Hydropsini and viviparity evolved four times independently.
Only one origin may have occurred in cold climates. Viviparity was not correlated with latitude, altitude
and temperatures. Proportion of viviparous species is relatively constant over most of the latitudinal and
altitudinal distribution but is larger only at southern limits of distribution. However, this fact may represent
only differential survival in these areas and not that CC has played some role in the origin of viviparity.
Thus, our results support weakly the CC model and pose the needs to consider other factors as selective
agents for viviparity in Hydropsini. We suggest that viviparity may have evolved in Hydropsini as a
response to egg mortality in nests due to flooding. Hydropsini snakes inhabit rivers and swampy areas
and females lay eggs in crevices in the banks of these environments in the beginning of the rainy season.
At this time, the level of the rivers is low but increases as rainy season proceeds. If these eggs require a
long incubation period nests could be flooded before hatchings. By retaining eggs for longer periods,
females oviposit with embryos at late stages. This would decrease the remaining incubation period and
eggs would hatch before the river levels elevate and flood nests. Alternatively, the maternal manipulation
hypothesis could also be applied to Hydropsini because gravid females could enhance fitness by
maintaining optimal body temperatures for developing embryos than those available in nests.



Brehme, Cheryl (U.S. Geological Survey); Miller, David; Fisher, Robert (U.S. Geological Survey,
Canada)

Nine years of monitoring the endangered Arroyo toad in an occupancy framework: Findings,
program evaluation, and feedback loop to management.

Since 2003, we have monitored the endangered arroyo toad (Anaxyrus californicus) across 87 km of
habitat in three watersheds on Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton (MCBCP), California. The multi-year
species occupancy design originated as part of the Amphibian Research and Monitoring Initiative (ARMI)
within the USGS and incorporates imperfect detection of the species. In this program, we monitor the
presence of arroyo toad breeding populations by documenting the presence of eggs and larvae. Multi-
year occupancy models show that arroyo toad population dynamics differ according to hydrology.
Population dynamics within ephemeral systems are highly variable and driven by stochastic processes
(i.e. amount of rainfall), while those in perennial systems are more stable and likely driven by deterministic
processes (i.e. predation, competition, habitat alteration). In the perennial systems, detection of toad
larvae is consistently negatively associated with the presence of non-native aquatic species, including
bullfrogs, predatory fish, and crayfish. Species interaction models show that after drought years, these
non-natives are temporarily extirpated from ephemeral systems, and are slower than arroyo toads in




                                                                                                             80
recolonizing suitable habitat. However, without drying, the non-native predators have zero probability of
extinction. We currently have a monitoring and management feedback loop with MCBCP, who are
actively working to control non-native aquatics in this system.

In a recent program review, we used simulated data to evaluate the effectiveness of current and alternate
sampling scenarios to detect changes in the distribution of breeding arroyo toads. Using model
comparison techniques, we assessed the power to pick the ―true‖ model vs. competing models of decline
or no decline. All designs had relatively high power to detect a 20% decline in occupancy over a 6-year
period and were able to distinguish between differing patterns of decline simulated for ephemeral and
perennial watersheds.



Breitman, Maria Florencia (CONICET-CENPAT); Avila, Luciano; Parra, Micaela (CONICET-CENPAT,
Canada); Sites, Jack W (Brigham Young University, Canada); Morando, Mariana (CONICET-CENPAT,
Puerto Madryn, Argentina)

How lizards survived blizzards: phylogeography of the Liolaemus lineomaculatus group
(Liolaemini) reveals multiple breaks and refugia in southern Patagonia, and their concordance
with other co-distributed taxa

Patagonia was shaped by a complex geological history, including the Miocene uplift of the Andes,
followed by volcanism, marine introgressions, and extreme climatic oscillations during Pleistocene
glaciation–deglaciation cycles. The distributional patterns and phylogenetic relationships of Patagonian
animals and plants were affected in different ways, and those imprints are reflected in the seven
phylogeographic breaks and eight refugia that have been proposed from phylogeographic studies of
some plant and rodent clades of southern Patagonia. In this study we estimated time-calibrated
phylogenetic/phylogeographic patterns in lizards of the Liolaemus lineomaculatus group, and related
them to historical Miocene-to-Pleistocene events of Patagonia and the previously proposed patterns
summarized from earlier studies. We also found evidence for candidate species, and quantified
phenotypic differences among them. I ndividuals from 51 localities were sequenced for two mitochondrial
(cyt- b and 12S) and one nuclear (KIF24) gene regions. Our analyses revealed strong phylogeographic
structure among lineages and, in most cases, no signal of population changes through time. The
lineomaculatus group is composed of three strongly supported clades ( lineomaculatus, hatcheri and
kolengh+silvanae ), and divergence estimates suggested that their origins may have been associated
with the oldest known Patagonian glaciation (7-5 Ma), while subsequent diversification within the
lineomaculatus clade coincided with the large Pliocene glaciations (~3.5 Ma). The lineomaculatus clade
lineages are strongly structured genetically and geographically and are interpreted (with caveats) as
young candidate species showing various levels of morphological differentiation. Our findings suggest
that some Liolaemus lineages have persisted in situ in multiple refugia through several glaciation-
deglaciation cycles in southern Patagonia without demographic fluctuations. We also provide qualitative
evidence of some shared phylogeographic breaks and refugia among plants, rodents, and lizards.


Briggs, Cherie (Univ. of California, Santa Barbara);

Investigating the mechanisms of Bd-induced extinction versus persistence

 The outcome of infection with the amphibian chytrid fungus (Bd = Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ), can
vary greatly between amphibian species, and in some cases between populations of the same species.
In some amphibians, infection with Bd can lead to the disease chytridiomycosis and death of the



                                                                                                       81
individual, and declines and extirpation at the population level. Other amphibians, however, can become
infected with Bd without experiencing negative effects at either the individual or population level. In
California‘s Sierra Nevada, both of these outcomes of Bd infection are occurring in populations of the
mountain yellow-legged frog species complex ( Rana muscosa and Rana sierrae ). In the Sierra
Nevada, Bd has led to the extirpation of mountain yellow-legged frogs from hundreds of lakes, while
infected populations of the same frog species in other lakes have persisted for many years despite high
Bd prevalence in individuals. Efforts are currently underway, both in the Sierra Nevada and worldwide, to
attempt to control this pathogen and/or limit its impact on amphibian populations.

In this talk, I will investigate the theoretical mechanisms by which a pathogen can lead to population
extinction in some cases, but persistence in others. I will use mathematical models to (a) illustrate the
effects of factors such as amphibian life history attributes, environmental persistence of Bd, and host
immunity, on the outcome of Bd infection, and (b) investigate which of the available control strategies
have the greatest potential to protect amphibian populations from extinctions. Examples of control
strategies include treating individuals with antifungal chemicals to reduce Bd load, bacteria addition to
decrease individual susceptibility, or biological control against Bd zoospores in the environment.
Eradication of Bd is highly unlikely, therefore understanding the mechanisms that allow amphibian
populations to persist with Bd is important for conservation efforts.



Brochu, Christopher (University of Iowa);

Present as palimpsest: the importance of fossils in a phylogenetic context to the recovery of
historical pattern

The rapid growth of genomic data has revolutionized our ability to infer historical patterns for living
organisms, but the degree to which extinction obscures actual patterns in biogeography and past diversity
remains underexplored. Moreover, fossils are the only direct means for accessing the information lost to
extinction, but phylogenetic analyses simultaneously including living and extinct species are
comparatively rare in the literature. Crocodylians have an excellent fossil record and allow us to test
historical scenarios based on molecular analyses of modern species. What appeared to be substantial
conflicts between molecular and morphological data usually proved to be pseudodebates resulting from
different uses of taxon names in the literature, and with a few exceptions, different data sets support very
similar phylogeny estimates and divergence times.Molecular divergence time estimates indicate that most
living crocodylians are the products of Neogene radiations, implying a relatively slow phylogenetic fuse
extending back to the first appearance of the group in the Late Cretaceous, but fossils show that extant
lineages were uniformly more diverse during the Paleogene. Modern species are not only the products of
a radiation, but the survivors of a substantial phylogenetic bottleneck – something overprinted by data
from living species.Biogeographic analyses of living crocodylians produce statistically robust results that
nonetheless can be rejected when fossils are included; some groups, such as the gharials and alligators,
appear to have arisen in regions where crocodylians do not presently occur (e.g. western Europe). Again,
present geographic distibutions sometimes overprint historical occurrences. The inferred morphology of
the ancestral crocodylian is essentially unrecoverable in the absence of fossils, especially outgroups to
Crocodylia. Phylogenetic analyses including the extinct and the extant simultaneously hold the greatest
promise for illuminating both past and present.




                                                                                                         82
Brodman, Robert (Saint Joseph's College);

Short-term amphibian and reptile habitat use and abundance in response to oak savanna
restoration

Habitat restoration improves the diversity of community structure of plants and that can have short-term
and long-term effects on resident animal populations. To investigate the short-term effects of intense
habitat management to restore oak savanna habitat in northwest Indiana on animals, we assessed the
habitat use and abundance of amphibians and reptiles on control plots (closed canopy woodlots),
treatment plots (use of fire and tree thinning to open canopy), and reference plots with a history of oak
savanna management. We collected pre-restoration data on all plots to serve as a base-line in 2009.
Intense habitat management occurred on treatment plots in 2010, and then we collected post-restoration
data on all plots in 2011. In 2009 we found 817 amphibians and reptiles (18 species). There was no
difference in species richness or abundance between control and pre-treatment plots. In 2011 we found
561 amphibians and reptiles (19 species). Five species of amphibians and the total number of
amphibians were significantly less abundant in post-treatment plots than control plots and pre-treatment
plots. One species of amphibians (Fowler‘s Toad) and total reptile abundance were negatively correlated
with canopy cover. These results indicate that there is a negative short-term effect of restoration
management on most amphibians but a positive effect on reptiles and some amphibians. However,
reference plots had significantly more species and abundance than control and treatment plots in both
years. This suggests that the slong-term effect of oak savanna management on the herpetofauna is
positive.



Bronaugh, Whitcomb (Oregon State University); Swartz, Ernst (South African Institute of Aquatic
Biodiversity, Grahamstown, South Africa); Sidlauskas, Brian (Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR,
United States)

Morphological variation in the Cape Kurper, Sandelia capensis (Perciformes, Anabantidae) from
coastal streams of the Cape Region, South Africa

The Cape Kurper, Sandelia capensis (Perciformes, Anabantidae) is a near-endemic primary freshwater
fish of coastal streams of the Cape Floristic Region, South Africa, from the Langvlei River on the west
coast to the Coega River in the east. A previous study of mtDNA revealed two major clades (west coast
and south coast) separated by sequence divergences of 9.8-15.4% for the control region, and 6.7-9.4%
for cytochrome b. Combined, these two clades contain at least 10 distinct genetic lineages with mtDNA
sequence divergences between adjacent drainages of up to 6.7% for control region and 2.7% for
cytochrome b. As part of a larger study on the biogeography and systematics of S. capensis , we here
present preliminary morphological data to compare with the mtDNA lineages. In addition to traditional
morphometrics, meristics (fin-ray counts, scale counts), and comparison of pigmentation patterns, we
performed geometric morphometrics to analyze differences in body shape. We used principal
components analysis to identify the axes associated with the greatest variation, and allometric regression
to correct for allometry. We defined the geographic mtDNA lineages, as a priori groups (putative species)
and used canonical variates analysis and multivariate analysis of variance to test the morphological
diagnosability and distinctiveness of these groups. Variation along the first few principal components,
after correcting for allometry, is primarily in the depth of the body, length of the head, and size and
position of the eye. Preliminary analyses show that mtDNA lineages are clumped into at least four
morphologically diagnosable groups with varying degrees of geographic continuity. Some genetic
lineages within these groups may be morphologically cryptic.




                                                                                                        83
Brooks, Edward (Cape Eleuthera Institute); Brooks, Annabelle; Williams, Sean (Cape Eleuthera Institute,
Rock Sound, Bahamas); Chapman, Demian (Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, United States);
Howey, Lucy; Jordan, Lance (Microwave Telemetry, Columbia, United States); Abercrombie, Debra
(Abercrombie and Fish Consulting, Port Jefferson Station, United States); Grubbs, Dean (Florida State
University, St. Teresa, Canada)

The diversity, distribution and demographic population structure of deep water elasmobranchs in
the northeast Exuma Sound, the Bahamas

There is a fundamental lack of basic taxonomic, biological and ecological information pertaining to the
majority of deep water species, in particular elasmobranchs, largely due to the logistical challenges of
sustained ecological investigation in this remote and hostile ecosystem. The Exuma Sound is a deep
water inlet of the Atlantic Ocean ranging in depth from 500 – 2000 m and characterized by steep walls
along its margin. The sound is in close proximity to land (<3 km), facilitating the sustained investigation of
its deep water elasmobranch fauna over extended periods of time. A total of 69 deep water longline
surveys were conducted from September to December in both 2010 and 2011 (depth: 472.6 – 1024.1 m;
seabed temperature: 15.6 – 5.9 °C), resulting in the capture of 144 sharks of at least eight different
species. This does not include a potentially new species of Centrophorus currently undergoing
morphological and genetic assessment. Elasmobranch species richness declined significantly with
increasing distances from the edge of the Exuma Sound (ρ = -0.295, p = 0.014), increasing depth (ρ = -
0.242, p = 0.045), and increasing seabed water temperatures (ρ = 0.288, p = 0.016). Distance from the
edge of the Exuma Sound was a significant predictor for the presence or absence of Squalus cubensis,
Mustelus canis insularis, Centrophorus spp., Hexanchus nakamurai and Centroscymnus owstoni.
Furthermore, depth and temperature were significant predictors of the presence or absence of S.
cubensis, M. canis insularis and C. owstoni. Depth was also a significant predictor of presence or
absence of H. nakamurai. There were no predictable trends in the abundance of Hexanchus griseus,
Galeus springeri or Pseudotriakis microdon. Significantly skewed sex and/or maturity ratios were
identified for a number of species suggesting that this is a common life history trait in deep water
elasmobranchs. The results of this study indicate that the use of deep water longline surveys in the
Exuma Sound, and similar oceanographic areas, is an efficient and cost effective method for the
sustained investigation of deep water elasmobranchs, and is vital for the effective management of this
especially vulnerable group of species.



Brown, Donald (Texas State University); Swannack, Todd (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Vicksburg,
MS, United States); Forstner, Michael (Texas State University, San Marcos, TX, United States)

A Race Against Extinction: research to inform recovery efforts for the critically endangered
Houston toad

The Houston toad (Bufo [Anaxyrus] houstonensis), a species endemic to east-central Texas, has suffered
range-wide declines and extirpations since being listed as a federally endangered species in 1970. The
34,400 ha Lost Pines ecoregion of Texas has served as the last stronghold for this species since its
listing. Population monitoring results over the last two decades indicate a downward trajectory for the Lost
Pines population, and current exponential human population growth and recent catastrophic wildfires in
the Lost Pines could accelerate the apparent trend towards extinction in the wild. Conservation guidelines
and active management initiatives have been hindered by a lack of knowledge concerning spatial and
temporal habitat use, abiotic and biotic interactions, and population responses to management actions.
Over the past decade we have conducted Houston toad research designed to aid in recovery efforts for
this species. Through extensive breeding activity and movement monitoring, we found that adults were



                                                                                                           84
primarily active from late January to early May, showed strong within-year and among-year breeding site
fidelity, and typically remained with 75 m of breeding ponds during the breeding season. Connectivity
among ponds was maintained through occasional long distance dispersal of both juveniles and adults, but
individuals were not found to move more than 100 m through a grassland patch. Using a presence-
absence modeling approach, we found the strongest abiotic predictors for calling activity were absolute
humidity and wind speed, and the strongest predictor for movement activity was absolute humidity.
Prescribed fire is one of the primary active management tools currently utilized in the Lost Pines. We
investigated the short-term impacts of prescribed fires and high intensity wildfires on herpetofauna and
the invasive red-imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta), a known juvenile Houston toad predator. We found
no indication that low or high intensity fires resulted in significant direct mortality, or impacted fire ant
abundance near ponds. However, we found that low intensity summer fires could potentially benefit
dispersed juvenile amphibians through predator reduction. Direct management implications of these
studies include a better understanding of the distance of terrestrial buffer zones necessary for the
conservation of breeding sites, improved efficiency of call survey monitoring efforts, and validation that
prescribed fire is a beneficial management tool for the Lost Pines ecoregion.



Brown, Jason (Duke University);

Sailing, Swimming and Climbing: recent exploration of the Isthmus of Panama by the Strawberry
Poison Frog (Oophaga pumilio).

A central goal of phylogeography is to identify and characterize the processes underlying divergence. I
describe an approach that combines species distribution models (SDMs), demographic and genetic
models in a spatiotemporally explicit framework. These analyses provide insights into understanding the
genetic consequences of recent climate and sea-level change on Oophaga pumilio . I use the
contemporary geographic structure of genetic variation to elucidate the divergence of populations, but
also their demographic histories. I also address key questions regarding integrative approaches in
population genetics and phylogeography. This includes (i) general issues surrounding the conversion of
time-specific SDMs into dynamic landscapes, (ii) the utility of SDMs to inform demographic models with
deme-specific migration potentials and carrying capacities, as well as (iii) the contribution of the temporal
dynamic of colonization history in shaping genetic patterns of contemporary populations, and (iv) testing
the potential role of specific geographic features on the colonization history. These analyses reveal that
spatiotemporal explicit models of demographic history are a powerful tool and can greatly inform
biogeography studies.



Brown, Mary (USGS); Walls, Susan (USGS-Southeast Ecological Science Center, Gainesville, United
States)

Variation in salinity tolerance of larval amphibians: implications for community composition in
coastal wetlands

Amphibians in freshwater coastal wetlands bordering the Gulf of Mexico periodically experience acute
exposure to salinity from hurricane-related overwash events, as well as chronic exposure associated with
rising sea levels. In a comparative experimental approach, we tested the hypothesis that seven species
of amphibians vary in their tolerance to changes in salinity.   In a laboratory study, we exposed larval
Hyla cinerea (Green Treefrog), H. squirella (Squirrel Treefrog), Lithobates catesbeianus (American
Bullfrog), L. sphenocephalus (Southern Leopard Frog), Anaxyrus terrestris (Southern Toad), and



                                                                                                          85
Gastrophryne carolinensis (Eastern Narrow-mouthed Toad) from an inland population in Gainesville,
Florida and Osteopilus septentrionalis (Cuban Treefrog) tadpoles from Picayune Strand State Forest,
Collier County, Florida, USA to acute salinity for three days. For each species, we exposed tadpoles to
0.2 (control), 5, 10, 12, 14, and 16ppt with 30 replicated trials of each treatment. In all species tested,
tadpoles reared in the control and 5 ppt treatments had 96.7 – 100% survival, yet no individual survived in
the 14 or 16 ppt treatments. Survival varied among species in the intermediate treatments (salinities of 10
and 12 ppt). At 10 ppt, survival in native species ranged from 46.7 to 80%, except for Narrow-mouthed
Toad tadpoles, of which none survived at salinities of > 10 ppt. In contrast, survival was 100% for the
invasive, nonindigenous Cuban Treefrog at this salinity. At 12 ppt, survival in all native species was 0%
except for the Green Treefrog, of which only 3.3% survived.          Survival of Cuban Treefrogs remained
relatively high (75.9%) at this salinity. Our results illustrate that the non-native Cuban Treefrog has a
higher salinity tolerance than do native species, which may contribute to its invasion potential. Moreover,
species commonly associated with coastal freshwater wetlands differ in their salinity tolerances,
suggesting that salt water intrusion due to storm surges and sea level rise may affect the species
composition of these ecosystems.



Brown, Simon (Pacific Shark Research Center/Moss Landing Marine Laboratories); Kim, Sora (Dept. of
Geology & Geophysics, University of Wyoming, Canada); Bizzarro, Joseph (University of Washington,
School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, Canada); Ebert, David (Pacific Shark Research Center, Moss
Landing Marine Laboratories, Canada)

Interspecific and size related patterns of trophic separation in a central California skate
assemblage revealed through stable isotope analysis

Stable isotope analysis is a powerful tool for inferring the trophic position and the niche space of
consumers relative to prey species within an ecological community. Skates are mid-to-upper trophic level
consumers occurring on soft unconsolidated sediments at shelf and slope depths where they feed on a
wide array of invertebrates and teleost fishes. Five skate species ( Bathyraja interrupta, Raja binoculata,
R. inornata, R. rhina, R. stellulata ) and an array of representative prey species from Monterey Bay, CA
U.S.A were analyzed for stable isotope values of d15N and d13C to examine inter- and intraspecific
trophic niche space. Significant relationships of d15N and d13C values with skate size (Total Length)
were detected in the two largest growing species ( R. binoculata and R. rhina ). Statistical comparisons
among the studied skates support niche differentiation among species that reach a similar maximum size,
but not between smaller-sized skates and the smaller size classes of larger skates. Reasons for these
findings are further discussed in relation to habitat and dietary differences.



Brown, Tracey K. (California State Univ., San Marcos); Eifler, Douglas A. (Erell Institute, Lawrence, KS,
United States); Nagy, Ken (Univ. of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States)

Field energetics of horned lizards and the effects of myrmecophagy

Horned lizards (Phrynosoma spp.) are found throughout much of western North America and Mexico, a
distribution closely matching that of harvester ants, their primary prey. The unusual morphology of these
lizards and aspects of their behavior and life history are believed to stem from their dietary specialization
on ants. These traits, along with their largely myrmecophagous diet, have led to the hypothesis that
horned lizards may have unusually low metabolic rates, as have many mammalian myrmecophages. This
hypothesis was evaluated by measuring field metabolic rates (FMR) with doubly labeled water of three



                                                                                                          86
species of horned lizard. The Desert Horned Lizard, P. platyrhinos, was studied in the Mojave Desert, CA
during spring and summer (April to July) of five consecutive years that encompassed highly variable
rainfall; data on growth rate, body condition and behavior were also collected. The Texas Horned Lizard,
P. cornutum, was studied during the monsoon season (July) in desert scrubland near Portal, AZ. And,
Blainville‘s Horned Lizard, P. blainvillii (formerly P. coronatum), was studied during a spring/summer
(June to July) period in coastal sage scrub/chaparral in Riverside Co., CA. The FMRs from these studies
were compared to FMRs predicted for either ambushing , or for wide-foraging lizards of the same body
sizes.

The individual P. platyrhinos observed spent less than 3% of their time abroad moving around their
habitat, similar to the proportion of time spent moving by other species of ambush-foraging lizards. The
mean daily energy expenditure of P. platyrhinos for all years combined was 2.43 kJ/day (N=39, mean
body mass 21.4 g), which is not significantly different from the FMR predicted for an ambush-foraging
lizard of the same mass (2.6 kJ/day). However, between years, the FMRs of P. platyrhinos differed
significantly, and were substantially lower than predicted in years having low rainfall amounts. The
measured FMRs for P. cornutum (5.4 kJ/day; 53.2 g; N=14; dry year) and P. blainvillii (4.1 kJ/day; 42.8 g;
N=12; wet year) are both well below the estimated FMR for same-sized ambush foragers. As has been
found previously for the extremely myrmecophagous Thorny Devil (Moloch horridus), the energy needs of
horned lizards as a group may not be universally depressed when compared to other lizards, but may be
low in certain years and perhaps low routinely in certain species.



Brown-Peterson, Nancy (University of Southern Mississippi); Clardy, Samuel; Peterson, Mark S.
(University of Southern Mississippi, Canada)

Reproduction of Menticirrhus americanus (Sciaenidae) in the Mississippi Sound

Southern kingfish, Menticirrhus americanus , is a commonly occurring sciaenid along the Mississippi Gulf
Coast, but annual harvest has declined over the last decade.      Little is known about the life history of
Southern kingfish in Mississippi,     and thus the objective of this study is to establish the spawning
season, spawning frequency, fecundity, and size at maturity of this species. Specimens were collected
using hook and line in several locations within the Mississippi Sound . A total of 519 southern kingfish
(434 females, 85 males) were captured from April 2008 through May 2009. The size at 100% sexual
maturity for males and females is 141 mm SL and 171 mm SL, respectively, although few immature fish
of either gender were captured. Gonadosomatic index values and overall histological ovarian maturity
phases indicated that fish begin rapid gonadal development in February and March. Actively spawning
females were found from April through September, although some spawning capable fish were still
collected in early October. Southern kingfish are batch spawners and mean relative batch fecundity is
213.10 ± 35.68 eggs/g ovary-free weight. Spawning frequency averaged 6.93 days between spawns from
April through September, with highest spawning frequency occurring in mid-summer (June and July).
The reproductive strategy of M. americanus is similar to that of other sciaenids in the Gulf of Mexico,
although both relative batch fecundity and spawning frequency are lower than most other members of the
family.




                                                                                                         87
Bruce, Richard (Western Carolina University);

Life-history symmetry in the salamander genus Desmognathus (Amphibia: Plethodontidae):
studies in two stable assemblages in the southern Blue Ridge Mountains, USA

Ecology and conservation biology of stream salamanders remain active fields of research at such
institutions as Coweeta Hydrologic Laboratory, Highlands Biological Station, and Mountain Lake
Biological Laboratory in the southern Appalachian Mountains of eastern United States. Key components
of stream salamander assemblages in this region are species of Desmognathus. In this genus the larger
species tend to be more aquatic and the smaller more terrestrial. In a study of life histories in two
assemblages of Desmognathus in the southern Blue Ridge Mountains of North Carolina, USA, I
examined variation in survival, age at first reproduction, fecundity, body size, and propagule size. The first
three are direct fitness traits that enter into the characteristic equation, x=α Σ ∞ l x m x e −rx = 1.0; the
last two are indirect fitness traits. One assemblage, in the Cowee Mountains, comprises three species,
from larger to smaller, D. quadramaculatus, D. monticola , and D. ocoee . The other assemblage, in the
Nantahala Mountains, also includes D. quadramaculatus, D. monticola , and D. ocoee , as well as the
smaller, miniaturized forms, D. aeneus and D.wrighti . The analyses were conducted under the
assumption that populations have been relatively stable over the past 50 years; evidence supporting this
assumption is presented for the Nantahala assemblage. In both assemblages, age at first reproduction,
fecundity, and propagule size are greater in the larger, more aquatic species. Instantaneous mortality rate
is lower in the larger species; however, the latter have lower survival to first reproduction than the smaller
species because developmental time to sexual maturation is greater than in the smaller species. It
appears that tradeoffs exist between fecundity and survival and between fecundity and propagule size.
The tradeoff relationships among life-history traits among species in both the Cowee and Nantahala
assemblages may reflect fitness invariance or symmetry, perhaps stemming from design constraints in
the genus Desmognathus . Thus, tradeoff combinations observed in a particular assemblage are
expected to prescribe equivalent per capita relative fitness on the species. As a consequence, individual
species will exhibit long-term population growth rates of zero. In the context of current understanding of
phylogenetic relationships of Desmognathus , what remains unclear are factors contributing to the
correlation among body size, other morphological traits, and the position of species along the stream-to-
forest habitat gradient.



Bruner, John (University of Alberta);

A phylogenetic analysis of the Percidae using osteology

The present phylogenetic analysis found percids to be divided into five subfamilies based on 49
informative osteological characters, with the subfamily Percinae (genus Perca ) the most primitive form
within the family. The remaining four subfamilies contain the following genera: Acerinae ( Gymnocephalus
), Percarinae ( Percarina ), Luciopercinae ( Stizostedion,           Romanichthys, and      Zingel ), and
Etheostominae ( Ammocrypta, Percina, and Etheostoma ). Luciopercinae is divided into two tribes,
Luciopercini ( Stizostedion ) and Romanichthyini ( Romanichthys, Zingel ). 18 outgroups were used to
polarize the characters for the 28 percid species examined. I compare my results with two recent
publications, Smith and Craig (2007) and Whitlock (2010). Smith and Craig (2007) tried to find the
relationships of the serranid and percid fishes among the Percomorpha using a combination of RNA and
nuclear DNA molecular data sequenced from 180 species. Whitlock (2010) used 73 osteological and 4
integumentary characters to determine phylogenetic relationships of 27 species of percomorph fishes.




                                                                                                           88
Bruschi, Daniel Pacheco (Departamento de Biologia Estrutural e Funcional, Universidade Estadual de
Campinas (Unicamp), Campinas, SP); Busin, Carmen Sílvia (Instituto de Ciências Biológicas (ICB),
Universidade de Passo Fundo, Canada); Lima, Albertina Pimentel (Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da
Amazônia (INPA), Manaus, AM, Canada); Rivera, Mirian; Blasco-Zúñiga, Aílin (Pontifícia Universidad
Católica del Ecuador (PUCE), Quito, Ecuador, Canada); Recco-Pimentel, Shirlei Maria (Departamento de
Biologia Estrutural e Funcional, Universidade Estadual de Campinas (Unicamp), Campinas, SP, Canada)

Cytogenetic studies in Phyllomedusa vaillantii and Phyllomedusa ayeaye with descriptions of
multiple NORs

Chromosomal analyses have been successfully applied to anurans groups as valuable tool to investigate
chromosome evolution. To contribute to the understanding of chromosomal evolution in Phyllomedusa
genus, we described for the first time the karyotype of two species: P. vaillantii , not currently assigned to
any group of species and P. ayeaye of the P. hypochondrialis group. Specimens of P. ayeaye were
collected in Serra da Moeda (Minas Gerais State, Brazil) and specimens of P. vaillantii collected
Jacareacanga, Pará State, Brazil; Porto Velho, Roraima State, Brazil; and in Yasuní, Provincia de
Orellana, Ecuador. Chromosomes were stained with Giemsa and submitted to C-banding and
sequentially stained with two base-specific fluorochromes: DAPI and mytramycin (MM). The nucleolus
organizing region (NOR) was detected using Ag-NOR and fluorescent ― in situ ‖ hybridization (FISH) with
28S rDNA probe isolated from P. hypochondrialis. The karyotypes of both species were
2n=12M+12SM+2ST with chromosome morphology very similar to other karyotyped species of the genus.
In P. ayeaye , the NOR were detected in the pericentromeric region of 9p and in one homolog of pairs 3
and 4 at pericentromeric and interstitial regions, respectively, coincident with secondary constrictions.
These regions were also showed richness in GC nucleotides detected by MM. The C-banding revealed
centromeric heterochromatin in all of the chromosomes and DAPI stained the heterochromatic regions of
pairs 8 (both arms) and of pairs 6q and 10p. In all specimens of P. vaillantii NOR were detected in 7p,
positive to MM and coincident with secondary constriction. Centromeric C-bandings were detected in all
chromosomes and on pericentromeric regions in 11q and 12q, interstitial regions in both arms of pairs 1
and 8, and in 2q, 7q and 9q, and at subtelomeric region in 4q. All bands were DAPI positive. The
karyotype of P. vaillantii differs from those yet described for other species of the genus mostly by
heterochromatic pattern while the karyotype of the P. ayeaye show similar heterochromatin pattern with
other species of the P. hypochondrialis group, as P. hypochondrialis, P. nordestina and P. rohdei,
corroborating it inclusion in this phenetic group. Chromosomal data described herein may represent an
important contribution to cytogenetic studies of the genus Phyllomedusa and it will be useful for future
understanding of the chromosomal evolutionary relationships within the genus.



Buckley, John (Amphibian and Reptile Conservation Trust);

The Pool Frog in the UK - the reintroduction of an extinct native species

The last northern clade pool frog population in Britain became extinct in the 1990s just as it was
recognised as native. Research using four major lines of enquiry, genetic, bioacoustic, zooarchaeological
and archival, demonstrated native status and showed it belonged to the clade of pool frogs also found in
Scandinavia. A reintroduction strategy was written and a 10 ha receptor site with over 40 ponds prepared.

After exhaustive health screening, the first frogs were introduced from Sweden under licence in 2005 and
3 more annual releases followed. Since the last one in 2008 a small population has maintained itself at
about 50 adults. Although seen in a number of ponds it relies on just two nearby ones for breeding.




                                                                                                           89
Individual frogs appear healthy, adult survival is relatively high and breeding behaviour appears to be
normal but the population is not growing as rapidly as hoped. The population remains intrinsically
vulnerable to the threats attendant on all small isolated populations. The reasons for slow population
growth and failure to colonise adjacent habitat are not understood. In an attempt to improve the situation
some ponds were restored in the autumn 2011, head starting of tadpoles is being considered for 2012
and a short list of sites for the next reintroduction is being drawn up.



Buhlmann, Kurt (Savannah River Ecology Laboratory); Koch, Stephanie (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
Canada); Butler, Brian (Oxbow Associates, Inc., Canada); Tuberville, Tracey (Savannah River Ecology
Laboratory, Canada); Palermo, Veronica (Oxbow Associates, Inc., Canada); Bastarache, Brian (Bristol
County Agricultural High School, Canada); Cava, Zachary; Green, Jared; Slocum, Jeff (U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, Canada)

Reintroduction and Head-starting: Tools for Blanding's Turtle Conservation

We designed and implemented a project to reintroduce Blanding‘s Turtles ( Emydoidea blandingii ) to
Assabet River National Wildlife Refuge, Massachusetts, USA. We evaluated the relative benefits and
risks of using various life stages of Blanding‘s Turtles collected from a donor population within the same
watershed, including direct-release hatchlings (released in autumn shortly after hatching), head-started
hatchlings (raised in captivity for 9 mo), juveniles, and adults. We developed a simple population model
to evaluate which of several release strategies was most likely to result in a stable population at the
recipient site while minimizing negative impacts to the donor site.        Model results suggested annual
releases consisting largely of head-started hatchlings were most likely to achieve our goal, given the
assumptions inherent in the model. From 2007-2011, we have released 81 direct-release and 107 head-
started hatchlings at the refuge; approximately 70 more head-starts will be released as of May 2012.
Head-started hatchlings were larger (mean = 62.7 mm carapace length, 46.6 g) compared to direct-
release hatchlings (mean = 36.3 mm carapace length, 8.8 g). Simultaneous radio-tracking of 12
translocated juveniles has provided useful information on habitat preferences that we used to select two
sites within the refuge for future releases. Six head-started hatchlings have also been released with radio
transmitters (one in 2009 and five in 2010), but one was found deceased a year after release. We
continue monitoring efforts to assess survivorship, growth, and site fidelity of all released Blanding's
Turtles and to compare results among the head-started and direct-release hatchlings. We will update our
models and reintroduction efforts based on monitoring data.



Burbrink, Frank (College of Staten Island); Brandley, Matthew (School of Biological Sciences, Sydney,
N, Australia); Myers, Edward (CUNY Graduate Center, Staten Island, NY, United States); Chen, Xin
(CUNY Graduate Center, Staten Island, United States); Pyron, Alex (The George Washington University,
District of Coumbia, NY, United States)

Are processes of diversification in New World squamates deterministic?

Independent colonizations of the New World (NW) from the Old World has occurred among various
squamates groups several times and has yielded spectacular diversity of both species and form.
However, it is unclear if this extreme diversity is the result of single or multiple processes of species
diversification and morphological change over time for these NW colonizers. Here we examine these
processes using new computational techniques for four groups of squamates, which include viperids,
watersnakes, ratsnakes, and Plestiodon skinks. All four groups colonized the New World in the same
region in the early Miocene and thus share a similar source of ecological opportunity. Our results indicate



                                                                                                         90
that the four groups explosively radiated in the mid-Miocene with an eventual reduction in diversification
rates driven by diversity dependence. While processes of species diversification appear to be shared
among the groups, morphological disparity and change in morphology across the tree are both specific to
each taxon. This suggests that rates of morphological change are decoupled from rates of speciation.
Ultimately, these results indicate that processes of species diversification are deterministic in New World
colonizing squamates yet rates of morphological change reflect contingency and are specific to each
group.



Burger, Joanna (Rutgers University); Zappalorti, Robert (Herpetological Associates, Toms River, NJ,
United States); Gochfeld, Michael (UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscatway, NJ, United
States); Devito, Emile (New Jersey Conserve Wildlife, Far Hills, NJ, United States); Schneider, David;
McCort, Matt (Herpetological Associates, Toms River, NJ, United States); Jeitner, Christian (Rutgers
University, Piscatway, NJ, United States)

Long-term Use of Hibernacula by Northern Pine Snakes (Pituophis melanoleucus)

Understanding the specific habitat requirements of reptiles during different life stages or seasons is
critical to conserving viable populations. Northern Pine Snakes (Pituophis melanoleucus) are one of the
few species that spend the winter in underground hibernacula which they excavate themselves. We
report on 26-years (1986-2011) of monitoring Pine Snake use at seven hibernacula in the New Jersey
Pine Barrens. Our goal was to determine the frequency of repeated use, number of snakes present by
year, disruptions of hibernacula, and the relationship between number of snakes present and the
probability of occupancy of each hibernaculum in successive years. The overall goal was to determine
the importance of protecting known hibernation sites regardless of whether they appear occupied in a
given season. These data suggest that if no snakes are observed entering a particular hibernaculum over
a limited time period , it does not mean none are there, or that none will use it in successive years. The
variability in use suggests not only that predation and human disturbance can result in non-occupancy the
following year, but that environmental and temperature-related conditions force snakes to have alternative
hibernacula to reduce risk and insure survival. Pine Snakes are listed as threatened by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection for many reasons, including habitat loss. There is continued
pressure from developers to destroy habitat during development, including critical hibernation sites. The
long-term use of specific hibernacula even with periods of low or no use, suggest that they should be
protected to provide a matrix of available over-wintering sites.



Burgess, George (Florida Program for Shark Research, Florida Museum of Natural History, Univ.
Florida); Coelho, Rui (Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR), Faro, Portugal); Schofield, Pamela
(Southeast Ecological Science Center, US Geological Survey, Gainesville, FL, United States)

Advances in the taxonomic resolution of the Etmopterus lucifer-complex in the Indo-Pacific region

Lantern sharks of the genus Etmopterus (Elasmobranchii: Etmopteridae) are deep-sea sharks
characterized for producing visible light through epidermal photogenic organs (photophores). Within this
group, the Etmopterus lucifer complex forms a species complex characterized for having the dermal
denticles arranged in longitudinal rows. The worldwide distribution of this group and the morphological
and coloration similarities, historically have resulted in difficulties in species identification. Adding to that,
when captured from commercial fisheries this group of sharks is usually discarded due to their low to null
commercial value, making the availability of study material limited. Our review of this complex revealed
the presence of five morphs in the Australian region, including three undescribed species. The two



                                                                                                               91
previously described species, Etmopterus brachyurus (known from Western Australia) and Etmopterus
molleri (New South Wales) are distinguished by their elongate bodies and photophore and pigmentary
patterns. The three additional morphs newly described are provisionally referred to as ―finescale‖, ―dark‖
and ―rough‖. The undescribed ―finescale‖ (NSW and Queensland) is distinguished by its dense curved
denticles, while those of both ―rough‖ (an undescribed Great Australian Bight species) and ―dark‖ (NSW
and Tasmania) are more erect and set in well-spaced rows. ―Rough‖ and ―dark‖ morphs are separated by
a series of morphological and denticle density characters. Ironically, Etmopterus lucifer, by literature
attribution nominally cosmopolitan in distribution, is absent from Australia and seems to be confined to the
NW Pacific, where it was originally described. This study represents and advance in the taxonomic
resolution of this species-complex, that until recently has been poorly-studied. Such increased knowledge
will allow for more detailed (species-specific) data to start being collected, which will contribute for a better
management and conservation of this species group.



Burke, Russell (Hofstra University); Francoeur, Laura (The Port Authority of NY & NJ, Jamaica, NY,
United States); Kanonik, Alexandra (Town of Hempstead Department of Conservation and Waterways,
Point Lookout, NY, United States); Frame, George (National Park Service, Staten Island, NY, United
States)

Why Did Terrapins Cross The Runway? The puzzling turtle invasion of JFK airport

 In the summers of 2009-2011 domestic and international news agencies carried stories about
Diamondback Terrapins ( Malaclemys terrapin ) causing delays on the runways at John F. Kennedy
International Airport in New York, one of the busiest airports in the world. JFK is located within New York
City on the eastern edge of Jamaica Bay, which was once a thriving estaurine ecosystem. Terrapins are
only one of many wildlife problems for the airport. Airport construction was started in 1942, eventually
covering 2000 ha of smooth cord grass salt marsh with solid fill and destroying large amounts of terrapin
habitat. Nevertheless, indirect evidence suggests that a large terrapin population persists, perhaps in
excess of 10 000 individuals. For a variety of reasons most Jamaica Bay marshes are rapidly eroding,
but the marsh near the airport may be the healthiest, perhaps because it is the youngest and highest.
Long term research on terrapins elsewhere in Jamaica Bay shows that they have undergone dramatic
changes in reproductive patterns in the last decade, including reduced clutch frequency, increased egg
size, and increased clutch size. These changes are unexplained but may be associated with changes in
habitat size and quality, in which case the JFK airport subpopulation may have much higher prospects.
Terrapins have been observed on JFK runways since at least 2001, and a small number were killed there
annually until this recent surge in numbers. The increase could be due to recently improved recruitment,
movement of individuals from other parts of Jamaica Bay, changes in nesting behavior, and/or increased
detection by airport personnel. We will discuss changes in airport operations, predator control, and
efforts to better understand the causes of this dramatic increase in terrapin encounters.



Burkholder, Derek (North Miami); Heithaus, Michael; Fourqurean, James (Florida International
University, North Miami, FL, United States); Wirsing, Aaron (University of Washington, Seattle, WA,
United States)

Top-down control in a relatively intact seagrass ecosystem

Coastal marine ecosystems have been degraded dramatically worldwide and continue to be threatened.
Seagrass ecosystems, which provide critical habitat for juveniles of many species, including commercially




                                                                                                              92
important ones, have been particularly hard-hit. Of particular interest is the loss of large herbivores (e.g.
sea turtles and sirenians) and top predators (e.g. sharks), which may have disrupted top-down processes
that were historically important. We used exclusion cages to elucidate the effects of large herbivores
(green sea turtles, Chelonia mydas and dugongs, Dugong dugon) on seagrass community structure,
nutrient dynamics, and ecosystem dynamics in the relatively pristine seagrass ecosystem of Shark Bay,
Western Australia. We also investigated the possible indirect effect of top predators (tiger sharks,
Galeocerdo cuvier) on seagrass beds mediated by spatiotemporal shifts in grazing by green turtles and
dugongs. Excluding large grazers from mixed beds of Halodule uninervis, Cymodocea angustata, and
Halophila ovalis for thirty-two months resulted in a shift in seagrass community composition, increased
shoot lengths in all species and increased total seagrass biomass. However, seagrass responses to
exclusion were species-specific.         There were increases in percent cover and shoot density for
Cymodocea angustata but a decrease in cover and density for both Halodule uninervis and Halophila
ovalis. Overall, our findings suggest that spatiotemporal shifts in foraging habitat use by megagrazers
may mediate indirect effects of tiger sharks on the seagrass communities of Shark Bay and that declines
in these taxa in other parts of their range are likely to result in changes to seagrass communities.



Burraco, Pablo (Doñana Biological Station); Gomez-Mestre, Ivan (Doñana Biological Station, Canada)

Physiological stress responses in spadefoot toad tadpoles to natural and anthropogenic
disturbances

Natural and anthropogenic disturbances cause deep alterations on ecosystems worldwide, contributing to
the decline and extinction of a growing number of species. Within vertebrates, amphibians form the
group with a greater number of threatened species, and it is therefore important to understand how they
respond to anthropogenic disturbances compared to natural threats. To that end we studied physiological
stress responses in spadefoot toad tadpoles ( Pelobates cultripes ) from populations within the protected
area of Doñana National Park (south-western Spain). We tested tadpoles‘ responses to varying levels of
water temperature, salinity, pH, predators (native and invasive) and herbicide (glyphosate). We found
that tadpoles responded physiologically to chronic exposure to these factors (21 days of exposure) by
modifying to different extents their corticosterone levels, standard metabolic rate, oxidative stress enzyme
activity and immune response (leukocyte count). We found that salinity was the factor that more strongly
induced a physiological stress response in tadpoles. We also found that tadpoles responded
physiologically to the presence of native predators ( beetle larvae, Dytiscus larvae ), whereas they
showed no response when facing invasive ones (red swamp crayfish, Procambarus clarkii ), suggesting
that tadpoles were not detecting invasive predators‘ cues. This is likely a consequence of lack of joint
evolutionary history due to the recent introduction of the red swamp crayfish in the area (1970‘s).
Exposure to the herbicide just changed the homeostasis of individuals. When the tadpoles were
subjected to herbicide and native predator simultaneously we observed a response similar to that which
existed in the presence of only native predator. Hence, both natural and anthropogenic disturbances can
profoundly alter the physiology of amphibians and can often occur in combination in natural populations
exposed to human activities. Each of the parameters studied has theoretical and practical advantages
and disadvantages, but we found c orticosterone to be the most sensitive parameter to the experimental
stress levels used in our experiment, as it was the one that more consistently differed among treatments.
In sum, we compared the variation of a series of key physiological parameters involved in the stress
response to common environmental factors.




                                                                                                          93
Burrowes, Patricia (University of Puerto Rico); Longo, Ana V. (Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United
States)

Seasonal modulation of defense mechanisms against Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis may
explain persistence of susceptible amphibians.

Although some species of amphibians have persisted after epidemic outbreaks of the chytrid fungus,
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (=Bd ), they remain vulnerable under enzootic conditions. In Puerto
Rico, susceptibility of direct-developing frogs persisting with Bd is associated to seasonality and
ontogeny, where the highest infection intensities are observed during the cool-dry season and among
juveniles. The aim of this project was to investigate the implications of this seasonal and ontogenetic
variation in vulnerability to chytridiomycosis among Eleutherodactylus coqui. We hypothesized that the
observed differences in infection intensities and prevalence between the dry and wet seasons induced a
seasonal modulation of defense mechanisms against Bd , and a potential for evolutionary trade-offs
between traits that confer resistance (ability to limit a pathogen‘s burden) and tolerance (ability to limit a
pathogen‘s damage) to Bd. We monitored Bd prevalence and infection levels among age classes in the
field throughout seasons for seven years (2005-2012) and compared fitness of infected and uninfected
frogs. Results suggest that that during suboptimal environmental conditions (cool-dry season),
Eleutherodactylus coqui ‘s immune system is suppressed. As a consequence, hosts rely on defense
mechanisms that provide tolerance to Bd characterized by high infection intensities and increased
prevalence in the population.         At the turn of the season to warmer and wetter weather, favorable
environmental conditions promote immunological response to Bd infections increasing resistance to
disease, characterized by low infection intensities and a decrease in prevalence. These results constitute
the basis for our current research seeking for evidence of variation in immune response under controlled
Bd -inoculation trials as well as consideration of alternative defenses such as behavioral thermoregulation
and symbiotic skin microbes. Understanding the trade-offs between hosts defenses against pathogen
threat, may explain the influence of environmental factors, host‘s age and life history strategies in
developing these adaptive mechanisms, and lead to effective mitigation in favor of biodiversity at risk.



Burton, Frederic (Blue Iguana Recovery Programe);

Reintroduction and monitoring techniques for population restoration of the critically endangered
Grand Cayman Blue Iguana, Cyclura lewisi

The Blue Iguana Recovery Programme, on Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands, is working to restore a
population of at least 1,000 Grand Cayman Blue Iguanas ( Cyclura lewisi ) sustaining themselves in the
wild, within protected areas in their former range. From a functionally extinct wild population in 2002, the
programme has released over 600 captive bred and head started sub-adults into three protected areas.
Use of artificial retreats has been successful in inducing these iguanas to establish initial territories at the
location of their release. Maturation and breeding in the wild has now been confirmed in all three areas.

Monitoring iguana population trends in these areas presents difficulties because the natural history and
habitat of this species violate key assumptions for some standard techniques for determining population
demographics, population density and/or population size. Distance sampling of the iguanas themselves,
and mark-recapture techniques can not be validly applied on this species in this setting, even though all
the released iguanas are uniquely marked. Two area sampling techniques and one distance sampling
technique were trialed to determine which was the most cost-effective for ongoing monitoring of
population density in the release areas.




                                                                                                             94
Distance sampling of retreats occupied territorially by individual iguanas, has proved the most cost-
effective technique. The retreats are identified incrementally over 18 survey days of replicated line
transect inspections, by which time discovery of new iguanas resident within detection range of the
transects drops to zero. Non-territorial iguanas observed moving within the survey area are added to the
resident count. In 2010 this technique enabled 81% area coverage throughout the 6-hectare release area
in the Salina Reserve, with a team of eight trained volunteers over three weeks. Although still extremely
effort intensive, this technique yields a sufficiently precise estimate to be suitable for monitoring
population dispersal and demographic change, and so to inform adaptive conservation management.



Bury, Bruce (US Geological Survey);

Effects of forest management practices on the herpetofauna of northwestern USA: Past, present,
future.

There is a legacy of extensive loss (>80%) and fragmentation of forests from past logging in the Pacific
Northwest. More recent management practices aim for smaller block sizes and more protection for
sensitive habitats, such as headwaters. Current and future projections call for operations that reduce fuel
loads yet maintain high timber production levels. The rotation time of harvest has become less over time
(from ca. 80 to 40 yr intervals), so major change is fairly frequent. These practices impact wildlife habitats
with removal of large amounts of forest-floor cover and increased temperatures. Although Woodland
salamanders (Plethodon) are reduced in logged areas, most other terrestrial herpetofauna appear
somewhat resilient to timber harvest. In contrast, stream amphibians in older stands can be >3 times
more numerous than in adjacent clearcuts. Buffer zones occur along streams with fishes but may not be
present along headwaters. Disrupted headwaters reduce presence and numbers of stream amphibians,
especially Tailed frogs (Ascaphus truei) and Torrent salamanders (Rhyacotriton) that may not fully
recover >4 decades post-harvest. Giant salamanders (Dicamptodon) are more common and appear to
recover more rapidly than the other forms. Laboratory experiments show that these stream amphibians
are among the most sensitive of any amphibian to elevated water temperatures (Critical Thermal Maxima
of 27-29° C). Siltation also appears to reduce populations. Despite inherent variance in populations based
on habitat preferences, timber harvest remains the primary threat to persistence of stream amphibians in
the Pacific Northwest. This issue will only be exacerbated with projected effects from global climate
change and more fragmentation of habitat. Thus, we need (1) interagency teams dedicated to
understanding how timber harvest, fuels reductions and climate change will affect biota, and (2) efforts
that will ensure connectivity of suitable habitats across western forests into the future.



Bury, Gwendolynn W (Oregon State University);

Southern Torrent Salamanders suitable range, response to climate

In this study, I project the climactic envelope for a sensitive headwater stream indicator species for the
2050s and 2080s for six climate scenarios. Headwater ecosystems in the Pacific Northwest are already
challenged by human alterations and these changes are likely to be exacerbated by climate change.
Southern Torrent Salamanders (Rhyacotriton variegates) are highly sensitive indicators of stream
disturbance. These small, endemic salamanders require cold waters. Further, they do not tolerate water
loss, which restricts their dispersal in response to rapidly changing climate. I modeled the habitat
suitability (envelope) for R. variegatus in northern California for 6 climate scenarios, for the decades of
the 2050s and 2080s. I employed a range of climate variables to summarize the habitat requirements of



                                                                                                           95
R. variegatus, including seasonality, summer maximum temperature, and annual temperature variation. I
used the program MaxEnt and a GIS to quantify the loss and movement of suitable habitat for R.
variegatus. I investigated the percentage of habitat classed as best, moderately suitable, moderately
unsuitable, and unsuitable. I also quantified the classification of habitat at the 371 sites used to construct
the model. The 6 scenarios modeled reveal a variety in amount of habitat loss, though all tested had more
than 50% of suitable habitat lost by the 2080s. The most extreme future climate scenario indicated that
none of the area studied would be suitable for R. variegatus by the 2080s. At the known sites for R.
variegatus, 97% of sites are classed as best in the current analysis, while most mild future projection
shows only 21% of sites remaining classed as best by the 2080s. This modeling exercise shows that the
suitable habitat for a headwater stream indicator is projected to decline rapidly in the next century. These
results indicate that the health of headwaters in Northern California should be a concern.



Buser, Thaddaeus (University of Alaska Fairbanks); Campbell, Matthew; Nichols, Courtney; Lopez,
Andres (University of Alaska Fairbanks, Canada)

Comparisons of variability in rate and type of change between genes and lineages within
Euteleosti

We examined patterns of molecular evolution from the partial sequences of four protein-coding nuclear
genes, VCPIP (850bp), SVEP1 (950bp), TBR1 (750bp), and ptchd1 (780bp), across a broad range of
euteleost fishes. Our goals were to quantify variability in the rates of change and type (i.e. synonymous
vs. non-synonymous) of change between genes and between fish lineages within Euteleosti. Genomic
DNA from preserved tissue samples was extracted and target loci were amplified using Polymerase
Chain Reaction (PCR). Amplicons were then sequenced to create a sequence library for each of the four
genes. Phylogenetic hypotheses were generated from the combined dataset and were used to examine
the mode and rate of evolution for each gene and subsets of the data (i.e., silent sites, different codon
positions, etc.). In addition, by comparing the gene trees supported by different loci and the various
inferred mutations observed in the gene sequences, we were able to identify changes in the rate and
mode of molecular evolution between the target genes and different groups of euteleost fishes. The
results of this study will add to our growing knowledge of molecular evolution in fishes and provide
excellent starting points for future studies of evolution of function in the genes examined and of the extent
of phenotypic and genetic diversity in vertebrates.



Buser, Thaddaeus (University of Alaska Fairbanks);

Physiological color change and cyrpsis in marine sculpins

The use of crypsis in sculpins (Pisces; Cottidae) is well documented. They, like many benthic, lie-in-wait
predators, exhibit a variety of physiological (i.e. disruptive coloration, matching coloration, dorsally-
compressed bodies, elaborate cirri, etc.) and behavioral (i.e. quiescence) traits that presumably aid in
crypsis. The ability to actively change color through the movement of pigment granules within a
chromatophore (physiological color change) has been described and quantified in the freshwater species,
the coastrange sculpin (Cottus aleauticus) and slimy sculpin (C. cognatus), however, despite substantial
anecdotal evidence suggesting their ability to do so, there has been virtually no description of the ability of
marine sculpins to exhibit physiological color change. To investigate the use of physiological color
change in marine sculpins, members of the genera, Artedius, Oligocottus, Clinocottus, Enophrys, and
Myoxocephalus were collected from wild populations in Kachemak Bay, Alaska and exposed to a variety



                                                                                                            96
of experimentally manipulated background colors. The degree of color change was measured using
Photoshop CS3 (Adobe Systems Inc., San Jose, CA, USA) from digital images taken throughout the
trials. The results of this pilot study will inform the development of further investigations into the coloration
abilities of marine sculpins.



Butler, Margi (University of Otago); Berger, Lee (James Cook University, Townsville, Canada); Poulter,
Russell (University of Otago, Canada)

Genetics and genomics of Australasian isolates of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis, a fungal
pathogen of amphibians

Many amphibian species are threatened with extinction. Together with habitat depletion, amphibians are
susceptible to an infectious disease caused by the pathogenic fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis .
This recently emerged pathogen has driven frog species to extinction in North, Central and South
America and Australia. We have isolated this chytrid from two frog species in New Zealand.

The origin of the pandemic is unclear. The complete sequences of strains JEL423 (Panama) and JAM081
(California) are publicly available. The assembled data show that the fungus is diploid; a large number of
heterozygous sites can be detected by analysis of the trace data from these sequence projects. The
major difference between strains is the loss of heterozygosity caused by mitotic recombination.
Preliminary analysis of selected regions of the New Zealand strains and other isolates demonstrates that
this recombination is occurring at a high frequency. Recombination gives rise to patterns of homozygosity
that vary among strains and these patterns can be used in epidemiological studies. The most effective
way of detecting these recombination events is high-throughput genome sequencing, We have performed
such analysis on a number of strains from New Zealand and Australia. Using this sequence data, we
have designed PCR protocols to detect phylogenetic signals in the recombination patterns.

Using this system we have begun the analysis of the phylogeny and epidemiology of the chytrid outbreak
in Australasia. We have established that the New Zealand strains are a clade and that the New Zealand
epidemic was initiated from Australia, probably Queensland. We have been able to trace the relationships
of chytrids from the eastern states of Australia. We can draw some conclusions as to the source of the
Australian epidemic.



Cain, Patrick (Indiana State University); Gardner, Brittani (Indiana State University, Canada); Thaker,
Maria (Indian Institute of Science, Canada); Hews, Diana (Indiana State University, Canada)

Fluctuating asymmetry in visual signals of male Sceloporus undulatus lizards

 Fluctuating asymmetries (FA) are small perturbations from perfect bilateral symmetry in morphological
traits and result from suboptimal conditions for development. The degree of FA may reflect the resistance
of a geneotype to developmental perturbation, and hence may be used by receivers as a measure of
―quality‖. Other measures, such as body mass residuals, also may be used in opponent assessment. We
asked whether FA in male-typical color patches differed between adults from a disturbed and a non-
disturbed site. We also asked whether body mass residuals, potentially a more ―short-term‖ measure of
quality, differed between sites. We calculated FA in the area of three color-signaling patches (abdominal
blue, abdominal black, throat blue) in male Sceloporus undulatus from a logged (n = 12 males) and an
unlogged (n = 30) site. The patch area of the left and right sides for each trait was calculated from digital
images using ImageJ software. Following methods of Palmer & Strobeck (2003), we found significant FA



                                                                                                              97
for all three traits. Trait FA did not differ significantly between the two sites, for any trait. Body mass
residuals did differ significantly, with more negative residuals on the logged site (mean = - 0.269)
compared to the unlogged site (mean = 0.108). We also asked if residual patch size (residuals from
regression of average patch size onto snout-vent length) could convey information about relative body
mass. Residual patch size was significantly and positively correlated with residual body mass, for
abdominal blue patches only; larger males had relatively larger blue patches. Although FA did not differ
between the two sites, stress effects in the disturbed site may be delayed and individuals could exhibit
higher FA in future generations. Further, the exact timing of the disturbance is unknown, as were the ages
of the adults measured. Body mass residuals differed between logged and unlogged sites, consistent with
stress affecting trait expression at the disturbed site. Because no site effect was detected for the ―longer-
term‖ quality measure (FA) but was for the ―shorter-term‖ quality measure (body mass residuals), the
disturbance may have been relatively recent. We detected significant FA in the three traits, hence future
work should determine if conspecific receivers assess FA in patch size. Similarly, whether conspecifics
use body mass-residuals when assessing opponents should be determined.



Cairns, Nicholas (University of Ottawa/Carleton University); Stoot, Lauren (University of Ottawa/Carleton
University, Ottawa, ON, Canada); Cooke, Steven (Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada); Blouin-
Demers, Gabriel (University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada)

Reduction of turtle bycatch by means of gear modification in a small-scale inland commercial
fishery

Nicholas A. Cairns1,2*, Lauren J. Stoot1,2, Steven J. Cooke1 and Gabriel Blouin-Demers2 1Fish Ecology
and Conservation Physiology Laboratory, Department of Biology, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON
2Herpetology Laboratory, Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON While targeting
commercially important species using imperfectly selective gear, fishers may capture a number of bycatch
species whose ecologies overlap. Modification of fishing gear to improve selectivity is a common method
used to mitigate the capture of bycatch. Bycatch reduction devices (BRDs) rely on differences in form
(e.g., size or shape) or behaviour between target and bycatch species to avoid trapping non-target
animals. In eastern Ontario there is a small-scale fyke-net fishery, which operates in lakes and large
rivers. This fishery primarily targets sunfish (Lepomis spp.) and bullheads (Ameiurus spp.). These fyke-
nets lack selectivity and along with target species, capture a variety of bycatch species including
gamefish, mammals, and turtles. Turtles are vulnerable to drowning if denied access to atmospheric
oxygen. At the population level, the loss of adults is particularly damaging as their life history features
naturally high adult survivorship and delayed sexual maturity. Of those turtles that have ecologies that put
them at regular risk of capture by fyke-nets, 3 of the 4 have some level of risk status assigned by the
Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. Improving gear selectivity by BRD
modifications is a possible method of reducing turtle bycatch in freshwater fisheries. The primary objective
of this presentation is to describe a series of studies where we design, refine and test the potential of
broadly effective BRDs added to commercially used fyke-nets. This project takes into account the variety
in local turtle and fish communities as well as water conditions potentially encountered by commercial
fishers in eastern Ontario. The final design focuses on maintaining the trap‘s effectiveness in collecting
target fish species and the overall ease of use for fishers.




                                                                                                          98
Calatayud, Natalie (Mississippi State University); Bullock, Lindsay (Mississippi State University, MSU,
Canada); Langhorne, Cecilia (Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS, United States);
Rowlison, Trish (Mississippi State University, MSU, Canada); Kouba, Andy; Carrie, Vance (Memphis Zoo,
Memphis, TN, United States); Scott, Willard (Mississippi State University, MSU, United States)

Egg jelly removal with cysteine does not inhibit tadpole development in the Fowler Toad (Bufo
fowleri)

The major impediments to the cryopreservation of amphibian eggs are size, yolk content, the presence of
a thick highly viscous coat (egg jelly), and the susceptibility to toxic shock brought on by exposure to
cryoprotectants. Egg jelly can be removed by incubation in varying percentages of cysteine. However,
there is limited information on the long term effects of jelly removal on embryo development and survival
prior to cryostorage. In this study, we examined the effects of jelly removal using three different
treatments of 1, 2 or 3% cysteine on whole embryo development and metamorphosis. Ovulated eggs (n=
11,584; females n=3) were collected following hormone stimulation with 500 IU human chorionic
gonadotropin and 15 μg of luteinizing hormone and subsequently fertilized in vitro with freshly collected
spermic urine. Fertilized eggs were allowed to develop to the two and four cell stage before initial
observation. Embryos were then subjected to three different cysteine concentrations, rinsed thoroughly in
de-chlorinated tap water (controls retained jelly) and embryonic development monitored. Results indicate
that there was no significant difference between 1, 2 or 3% on the percentage embryo development at 5
distinct stages: 2-4 cell (p>0.405), mid-gastrula (p>0.405), muscular response (p>0.632), heartbeat
(p>0.613) and operculum development (p>0.391) and throughout tadpole development (p>0.9084)
compared to controls. These results indicate that de-jellying embryos with cysteine will not adversely
affect their development thereby moving closer to a cryopreservation protocol by removing the first barrier
to penetration of cryoprotectant into the intra-cellular space of the blastomeres. Furthermore, the effects
of incubating three different cryoprotectant combinations were tested (DMSO + glycerol, DMSO +
ethylene glycol and ethylene glycol + glycerol; each treatment at 0.5 molar concentration) for 5, 10 and 20
minutes on control versus cysteine treated de-jellied embryos. Results to date indicate that the presence
of egg jelly does not provide extra protection to the embryo during exposure to cryoprotectant at room
temperature; however, more studies are required to evaluate which cryoprotectant provides de-jellied
embryos with the best protection against intracellular ice damage during freezing with the least toxicity.
This study is a vital first step in the creation of an amphibian embryo cryobank for the conservation of
critically endangered anuran species.



Caldwell, Michael (University of Alberta); Palci, Alessandro (University of Alberta, Canada); Nydam,
Randall (Midwestern University, Canada)

The key role of fossils (1869-2012) to our understanding of snake origins and evolution

The origin of snakes from within squamate reptiles is an excellent example of a major evolutionary
transition.   Investigating the origins of a major lineage, such as snakes, is problematic for the simple
reason that the processes of macrevolutionary change produce major morphological differences between
the studied lineage and its closest relative or sister clade. Snakes possess a number of squamate
synapomorphies that strongly support their inclusion, and thus origin, within Squamata. However, snakes
are also anatomically very distinct from lizards, and within their own lineage have evolved a number of
specialized/ autapomorphic anatomies; this degree of distinctiveness and specialization makes it difficult
to interpret characters and hypothesize character states for use in subsequent phylogenetic analysis. In
the absence of robust phylogenetic hypotheses the induction of origins scenarios is even more
problematic. Despite the inherent difficulties of studying the evolutionary transitions leading to the origins



                                                                                                           99
of a major vertebrate lineage, there has been a resurgence of interest on the problem of snake phylogeny
and origins driven almost completely by the discovery and description of new fossil snakes with
hindlimbs, and recharacterization of previously known fossil snake taxa. Anatomical features present in a
variety of fossil snakes and lizards have invigorated the debate and are reviewed here alongside new
data obtained from the analysis of the anatomy and molecules of extant snakes and lizards. Recent
hypotheses of snake ingroup and sistergroup relationships, and the origins scenarios they implicitly or
explicitly support, are reviewed and contrasted. A first-level problem concerns the sistergroup relationship
of scolecophidian snakes. Are they a distinct clade of basal snakes, or are they derived snakes nested
within a clade of higher snakes? All other sister-group relationships and origins hypotheses for snakes
are dependent on the answer to this problem.



Calich, Hannah (Dalhousie University); Campana, Steven (Bedford Institute of Oceanography,
Dartmouth, NS, Canada)

Mating scars reveal mate size in blue sharks (Prionace glauca)

Blue sharks ( Prionace glauca ) are the most abundant large shark species in the Atlantic Ocean yet little
is known about their reproductive habits. Male blue sharks engage in precopulatory biting, which
produces mating scars on females. These scars are often observed on sexually immature females. The
objective of this study was to determine the size and maturity status of male sharks attempting to mate
with immature females. Using data collected from sharks caught at annual Nova Scotia shark fishing
tournaments between 1993 and 2011, I found a significant curvilinear relationship between male shark
fork length and jaw gape. By using the mating scar diameter as the independent variable, I was able to
estimate the fork length and infer the sexual maturity of the male sharks that produced the mating scars.
Results indicate that mature males with a mean fork length of 218 cm ± 24 cm were attempting to mate
with sexually immature females However, there was no significant relationship between the estimated
size of the male and that of the female with which it was trying to mate, indicating that male blue sharks
do not have a size preference for mating. Based on the female fork lengths I suggest that the females
should be classified as subadult instead of immature, making it possible that these females were capable
of sperm storage and possibly self-fertilization.



Caligari, Patricia (Department of Biology - University of Puerto Rico - Rio Piedras Campus); Burrowes,
Patricia (Department of Biology - University of Puerto Rico - Rio Piedras Campus, Canada)

Wet season geographic assessment of the response of three different endemic Puerto Rican
anurans to the pathogenic fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd)

Chytridiomycosis is a lethal infectious disease caused by the pathogenic chytrid fungus
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), which is responsible for the extinction of many amphibians
worldwide. In Puerto Rico three species of Eleutherodactylus disappeared potentially due to this
pathogen, and many others are at risk. A synergistic effect between Bd and climate was shown for two
species at El Yunque, but this relationship has not been tested in other species or forests. The purpose of
this study is to evaluate the status of Bd in three endemic species, Eleutherodactylus wightmanae,
Eleutherodactylus coqui, and Leptodactylus albilabris , which differ in conservation status, ecology and
life history, in three highland forests across the island. We collected 248 tissue samples from adults and
juveniles during the 2011 wet-season (August-November). Total DNA was extracted from frog skin and
Bd was detected by a dedicated qPCR assay. We compared Bd infection prevalence and intensity



                                                                                                        100
among forests, species and developmental age. There was little variation in prevalence of infection and it
was not associated with forest or specie. However, we found patterns of Bd infection intensity across
forests that may be explained by geographic variation in climatic conditions like rainfall and temperature.
Results revealed the presence of very high loads of Bd (>10,000 zoospores) in some individuals in all
species, but especially in Eleutherodactylus wightmanae which is a threatened species. With respect to
ontogeny, we found that adults of Leptodactylus albilabris, has higher levels of infection compared to
tadpoles only at El Yunque. Results from this study will enhance our understanding of the mechanisms of
Bd under enzootic conditions.



Camacho, Agustín (University of São Paulo); Grizante, Mariana (University of São Paulo, Campus
Riberão Preto, Canada); Tiemi, Adriana (University of São Paulo, Canada); Pavão, Rodrigo (Federal
University of Natal, Canada); F/Fonseca Pinto, Ana Carol; Recoder, Renato; Navas, Carlos; Rodrigues,
Miguel (University of São Paulo, Canada); Kohlsdorf, Tiana (University of São Paulo, Campus Riberão
Preto, Canada)

Why have Snake-like lizards evolved so multiple times? Comparative data from Gymnopthalmid
lizards point to an answer

The multiplicity of acquisitions of Snake-like body forms among lizards is a mong the most striking
evolutive phenomena in vertebrates. These transformations include changes in important functional
morphological traits, like body elongation and a dramatic reduction in the number of digits. Although these
transformations have received much attention, the lack of functional comparative analyses precludes a
better understanding of why this suite of traits has evolved so many times. Therefore, here we present
comparative data for 10 closely related species of Gymnopthalmid lizards, including syntopic, lacertoid
and fossorial Snake-like forms from the Brazilian Caatingas. For five-to-twelve specimens of each
species, we measured 1) sprint speed and its dependence of a fluid substrate (e.g. with and without
sand) during horizontal and vertical escape, 2) digging depth during an experimental heat shock, 3) ability
to feed on and under the ground, 4) thermal tolerance and preference. We also estimated the relative
abundance of lacertoid and snake-like taxa at 227 sampling plots along 4 study areas at northeastern
Brazil. At these sites, we also measured the daily distribution and dynamics of micro-environmental
temperatures (13420 measures along 27 days), and the distribution of prey availability on and under the
ground in 128 samplings. Snake-like lizards were slower than lacertoid ones during horizontal escape,
even more without sand. However, they were faster during vertical escape (digging). Snake-like lizards
were able to dig deeper in the sand and feed more on buried prey. Contrasting these results with the
empirical models of microhabitat temperature and prey availability in their occurrence areas, these results
indicate that Snake-like lizards are able to access milder climatic conditions and more resources in a
sandy and hot environment. These results were congruent with the lower critical thermal maxima
apparent in some of the fossorial species and the higher population density of fossorial lizards found by
us. However, without a loose substrate like sand, locomotion of fossorial Snake-like lizards got impaired
and their advantages cannot be applied anymore. Therefore, our results suggest that fossorial Snake-like
forms might be adaptive in the presence of hot and sandy environments but unadaptive at others when
they are not present. Environments with these properties have been independently generated at different
continents and thus might have favored the evolution of snake-like body forms in several independent
lineages of lizards.




                                                                                                       101
Camacho, Neftali (Natural History Museum of Los Angeles, County); Pauly, Gregory (Natural History
Museum of Los Angeles County, Canada)

Contributions of a once orphaned museum collection towards understanding changes in reptile
and amphibian diversity in heavily urbanized southern California

The Herpetology Section at the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County, in addition to its
extensive holdings of preserved specimens and skeletons (ca. 181,000), recently acquired 1,732
preserved specimens of reptiles and amphibians previously housed at the University of California, Irvine.
These specimens were largely unavailable to the research community because their records had not
been digitized and made available in an easily searchable database. Most of these specimens were
collected between 1953 and 1961 from southern California, in particular the Greater Los Angeles Area.
The human population in this area has grown from approximately 6 million during the period of collection
to nearly 18 million today, making the Greater Los Angeles Area the second largest core-based statistical
area in the United States following the New York Metropolitan Area. Thus, by georeferencing and
digitizing these records, this material now provides an important snapshot of the changing biodiversity of
this heavily urbanized region. These historical records can now be compared to more recent records
such as those obtained through the museum's citizen science project the Lost Lizards of Los Angeles
(LLOLA) which documents lizard observations throughout the area. Other collection highlights include
records for species of current conservation concern such as Thamnophis hammondii and Phrynosoma
blainvillii , and a previously uncatalogued paratype of the San Lorenzo Island Rattlesnake Crotalus ruber
lorenzoensis .



Camak, David (Southeastern Louisiana University); Piller, Kyle (Southeastern Louisiana University,
Hammond, United States)

Assessing the impact of low head dams and life-history on fine scale genetic structure of
Etheostomatine darters

Anthropogenic modifications to aquatic habitats, such as dams, can fragment lotic systems, disrupt fluvial
continuity and modify flow patterns.       Such structures could negatively impact riverine ecology and
potentially act as barriers to gene flow. Although previous studies have examined potential negative
effects of aquatic barriers on population structure and gene flow, most have focused on large species of
fish that are highly vagile and have low habitat specificity. In addition, past studies have shown there is
often a correlation between life history characteristics and gene flow in fish.This study will test the
influence of dams and life-history variation on fine-scale genetic structure of Etheostomatine darters (
Ammocrypta beanii, Etheostoma swainii , and Percina nigrofasciata ) in the Pearl River basin. Individuals
of all three species also were analyzed from three control sites (no dams) in the neighboring Lake
Pontchartrain basin (Tangipahoa River system). A minimum of thirty specimens were sampled from a
total of twelve sites across both basins. Our data suggests that the dams impacted the spatial genetic
structure of each species differently. There was no genetic differentiation among populations of the
Ammocrypta beanii, a main channel, highly vigil species , above and below the two low head dams,
whereas E. swainii and P. nigrofasciata displayed large and moderate amounts of genetic structure,
respectively, across this same area. The data suggests that life-history may play a greater role than the
dams in shaping fine-scale genetic structure for these species. The implications of these results and a
comprehensive summary of this data will be presented.




                                                                                                       102
Camargo, Arley (Department of Biology & Monte L. Bean Museum); Sites, Jr., Jack W. (Brigham Young
University, Provo, UT, United States); Morando, Mariana; Avila, Luciano (CONICET-CENPAT, Puerto
Madryn, Argentina)

Species delimitation with ABC and other coalescent-based methods: a test of accuracy with
simulations and an empirical example with lizards of the Liolaemus darwinii complex (Squamata:
Liolaemidae).

Species delimitation is a major research focus in evolutionary biology because well-supported hypotheses
of species boundaries are a prerequisite for the study of speciation. New species delimitation methods
(SDMs) can accommodate non-monophyletic species and gene tree discordance as a result of
incomplete lineage sorting via the coalescent model, but do not explicitly accommodate gene flow after
divergence. Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) can incorporate gene flow and estimate other
relevant parameters of the speciation process while testing alternative species delimitation hypotheses.
We evaluated the accuracy of BPP, SpeDeSTEM, and ABC for delimiting species using simulated data
and applied these methods to empirical data from lizards of the Liolaemus darwinii complex. Overall,
BPP was the most accurate, ABC showed an intermediate accuracy, and SpeDeSTEM was the least
accurate under most simulated conditions. All three SDMs showed lower accuracy when speciation
occurred despite gene flow, as found in previous studies, but ABC was the method with the smallest
decrease in accuracy. All three SDMs consistently supported the distinctness of southern and northern
lineages within L. darwinii . These SDMs based on genetic data should be complemented with novel
SDMs based on morphological and ecological data to achieve truly integrative and statistically robust
approaches to species discovery.



Camp, Ariel (Brown University); Brainerd, Elizabeth (Brown University, Canada)

Powering suction expansion: Axial muscle strain and pectoral girdle rotation in largemouth bass,
Micropterus salmoides

Suction-feeding fishes rely on an explosive expansion of the mouth cavity to accelerate fluid and prey into
the mouth. Suction expansion can involve over 20 moving bones, but is driven by dorsal expansion, via
neurocranial elevation, and ventral expansion via depression of the lower jaw and hyoid apparatus.
Suction expansion must be fast enough to capture elusive prey and forceful enough to accelerate water
into the mouth, therefore it should require considerable power. The cranial muscles are relatively small
and may not be able to generate sufficient power, but the large axial body muscles, the epaxials (EP) and
hypaxials (HYP), also attach to the feeding apparatus and may generate power for suction expansion.
The rostral EP is already known to power dorsal expansion. Ventral expansion may be powered by the
sternohyoid, which is hypothesized to depress the hyoid apparatus while the HYP stabilizes the pectoral
girdle. Alternatively, the HYP could power ventral expansion by retracting the cleithrum of the pectoral
girdle, which is linked to the hyoid apparatus and lower jaw. We determined the rostrocaudal distribution
of strain in the axial muscles, and the role of the HYP in powering ventral expansion. We measured the
kinematics of the neurocranium and cleithrum during suction feeding in largemouth bass ( Micropterus
salmoides ) using X-ray Reconstruction of Moving Morphology (XROMM). XROMM combines bi-planar x-
ray videography with 3D bone models to reconstruct in vivo , 3D skeletal kinematics. We simultaneously
measured strain in the EP, HYP, and sternohyoid muscles using fluoromicrometry. For this technique,
radio-opaque markers were implanted intramuscularly and tracked using bi-planar x-ray video to measure
changes in muscle length. Strain and kinematics were measured in 3 fish for a total of 25 strikes. HYP
strain magnitudes (mean of 6.3%) were similar to those of the EP. The total distance shortened by the
HYP was statistically significantly greater than that of the sternohyoid muscle (mean of 6.2 mm vs. 0.66



                                                                                                       103
mm, p<0.01). The cleithrum was mobile, and rotated caudoventrally a mean of 9.4°. Both skeletal
kinematics and muscle strain support the role of the HYP in powering ventral expansion. Additionally,
both the EP and HYP showed strain more than halfway down the body, suggesting that these muscles
may generate substantial power during suction feeding.



Campana, Steven (Fisheries and Oceans Canada); Fisk, Aaron (Univ. of Windsor, Windsor, ON,
Canada); Klimley, Peter (University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, United States)

Greenland sharks and their long distance migrations to nowhere

Archival satellite popup tags (n=16) were deployed on Greenland sharks (Somniosus microcephalus) up
to 4.5 m in length, both in the Canadian Arctic and off the eastern coast of Canada. Despite their large
size, most of the sharks were immature at the time of tagging. Tags remained on the sharks for an
average of 6 months before popping off. All tagged sharks travelled a minimum of 150 km, and some as
much as 1500 km, at depths of up to 1200 m. Migration pathways which took the sharks off the
continental shelf, and well off the bottom, beg the question: what the heck are these sharks doing?



Campbell, Earl (USFWS - Pacific Islands Fish and Wildlife Office);

Brown Treesnake Control and Research: Programmatic Lessons Learned Over Twenty Years

Since the mid-1980‘s significant attention has been focused on the introduced brown treesnake ( Boiga
irregularis ) and the negative biodiversity, economic and human health impacts that this species had to
the island of Guam. The potential introduction and establishment of this snake to other sites within and
beyond the Pacific Region is an on-going concern. Current efforts for brown treesnake control on Guam
are relatively labor intensive, utilizing a combination of trapping, toxicants, hand-capture, and detector
dogs to reduce snake abundance locally.          The budget for all brown treesnake control and research
efforts has averaged around $8 million (US) annually in recent years. A critical success is the reduction
of brown tree snakes detected in the State of Hawaii in association with the movement of civilian and
military vehicles or cargo from Guam. This success is directly linked to the implementation of a dedicated
snake interdiction program on Guam operated by United States Department of Agriculture - Wildlife
Services (USDA - WS) in 1994. This program currently employs over 60 individuals and 12 dogs.
Unfortunately, stability of funding for this program has varied over time. Despite uncertainty, program
implementation has been consistent due, in part, to the dedication of specific individuals. The stability of
brown treesnake quarantine programs in the Commonwealth of the Mariana Islands and the State of
Hawaii, both high risk recipient sites, is less consistent. The development of a rapid response program
lead by the United States Geological Survey (USGS) for brown treesnake sightings off Guam is a
success.      Research by the USGS and the USDA - WS - National Wildlife Research Center has led to
the trapping and toxicant techniques currently used.        Development of broader-scale tools that could
lead to broader-scale control or eradication of brown treensnakes has been hampered by a lack of
dedicated, consistent funding for specific research directions. Department of Interior – Office of Insular
Affairs funding for USGS research has been an exception to this pattern and is a factor contributing
research successes by this group. It is important to note that the spatial scale that brown treesnake
control can be conducted is limited, labor intensive and relatively costly. The costs of implementing
control at this scale successfully in quarantine situations are minimal compared to the ecological and
economic impacts that the introduction of this species could have in another site.




                                                                                                        104
Campos, João R C (UNICAMP); Benevides, Saulo S N; Lourenço, Luciana B (UNICAMP, Canada)

Chromosome painting on B chromosome of Physalaemus feioi and cytogenetic study of its
related species

Based on morphological and acoustic parameters, the former species-complex of Physalaemus olfersii
was recently submitted to an extensive taxonomic review resulting in the revalidation of Physalaemus
lateristriga and in the description of Physalaemus feioi and Physalaemus orophilus . Despite the
morphological similarity of these four species, interspecific variation in the occurrence of the nucleolus
organiser regions (NORs) was already reported for P. olfersii and P. feioi . In addition, a supernumerary
chromosome was found in the later. Herein, we described the chromosomes of P . lateristriga and
extended the study of the B chromosome of P. feioi , increasing their sample and using chromosome
painting. The chromosomes of P. lateristriga showed a high level of similarity to those of P. feioi and
P. olfersii . The karyotype of P. lateristriga presented 2n=22, with two large metacentric pairs (1 st and
2 nd ), five medium-sized metacentric (5th and 6th ) and submetacentric pairs (3 rd , 4 th , and 7 th ), and
four small metacentric/submetacentric pair (8th to11th ). Moreover, an Ag-NOR site, coincident with a
conspicuous secondary constriction, was visualised proximally at the long arm of chromosome pair 3 and
in one of the homologues 4. Regarding to P. feioi , we observed an additional Ag-NOR labelling in the
telocentric B of two specimens. A probe generated from 12 entire microdissected B chromosomes only
detected the heterochromatic long arm of this chromosome in mitotic metaphases, suggesting a peculiar
molecular composition of the B chromosomes. Another interesting finding regarding this B chromosome is
the frequency it occurred. In the description of the karyotype of P. feioi , done in 2010, two out of the
three specimens collected from Viçosa, State of Minas Gerais, Brazil, presented B chromosome, while in
our sample, obtained from the same locality during the two following years, only two out of 80 specimens
carried B elements. Moreover, three specimens of P . feioi obtained from a different Brazilian locality
(Simonésia, also State of Minas Gerais) had no supernumerary. Therefore, the presence of B
chromosome seems to be an exclusive characteristic of specimens from Viçosa population and further
studies are still necessary to elucidate about the evolutionary origin of this extra chromosome.

Financial support: Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo – FAPESP (process No.
2010/12600-4)



Canessa, Stefano (ARC Centre of Excellence for Environmental Decisions, School of Botany, University
of Melbourne, Australia); Converse, Sarah J. (Patuxent Wildlife Research Centre, USGS, Canada);
McCarthy, Michael A. (ARC Centre of Excellence for Environmental Decisions, School of Botany,
University of Melbourne, Australia, Canada)

Can life history traits predict captive performance of endangered amphibians? A meta-analysis to
inform decision making in ex-situ conservation programs

Ex-situ conservation is often advocated as the last resort for amphibian species that face high risks of
extinction or threats that cannot be easily resolved by in-situ conservation alone (such as
chytridiomycosis). Captive breeding programs can be complex, as they need to account for demographic
and genetic dynamics, management of captive and wild populations, quarantine and captive husbandry
requirements as well as the eventual release strategy and the establishment of self-sustaining wild
populations. This range of challenges implies several key decision nodes which need to be resolved,
mostly before a program can even start.




                                                                                                        105
Structured decision making, which allows definition of problems and evaluation of alternative actions and
trade-offs, can help in addressing such complexity. When selecting a species for ex-situ conservation,
uncertainty may regard the suitability of the species for captive breeding (for example its survival and
productivity in captivity), as well as the time and costs needed to build sufficient expertise and to achieve
the desired target. If these aspects can be at least in part predicted by available information, for example
life history traits of species, it is possible to use this knowledge to develop quantitative models that aim to
predict possible consequences of given courses of action. In our presentation, we describe a meta-
analysis of several captive breeding programs for amphibians worldwide: using hierarchical modelling, we
assess how life history traits (generation time, longevity, and fecundity) can be used to predict various
measures of performance in captivity (population growth rate, recruitment and survival). This information
can then be used to evaluate how captive breeding programs can assist conservation of the target
species.



Canessa, Stefano (ARC Centre of Excellence for Environmental Decisions, School of Botany, University
of Melbourne, Australia); Martel, An; Pasmans, Frank (Department of Pathology, Bacteriology and Avian
Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Belgium, Canada)

Clarifying the role of chytrid in the decline of the Apennine yellow-bellied toad: designing effective
monitoring programs that account for pathogen detection

Chytridiomycosis is among the hypothesized causes of the decline of the endangered Apennine yellow-
bellied toad Bombina variegata pachypus, an Anuran endemic of peninsular Italy. However, since the first
reports of mortality for the species in 2004, no systematic screening for the disease was undertaken in
any part of its range. In 2011, we tested 86 individuals at eight sites in the northern Italian region of
Liguria to assess prevalence of the pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. We estimated capture
probabilities from mark-recapture data collected between 2010 and 2011, then calculated population size
for five different populations and estimated the probability of not having detected infections of varying
prevalence given the number of individuals tested. The most parsimonious model assumed constant
survival and sex-, time-dependent recapture probabilities. Estimates suggested small population sizes
and variable recapture rates, highlighting the need for accurate monitoring. All chytrid tests returned
negative: we estimated that infections of more than five to ten individuals per population were unlikely to
have been missed.

Using model estimates of recapture rates, we found that collecting samples over multiple surveys
increased the probability of detecting the disease if present, particularly for screening programs outside
the peak period of breeding activity. We used the information obtained in this study to design an
optimized chytrid screening plan for several populations during the 2012 season, also taking into account
possible seasonal variations in pathogen prevalence. Incorporating estimates of individual capture
probabilities in the program design stage ensured we could reach the desired threshold of confidence
about chytrid prevalence, while optimally allocating effort.



Cantwell, Lisa (University of Tennessee Knoxville);

Response of Anolis sagrei to Acoustic Calls from Predatory and Non-predatory Birds

Predation is one of many selective forces driving the evolution of behavioral strategies in prey organisms.
Studies indicate that various vertebrates and invertebrates use sensory cues to detect the presence of




                                                                                                           106
predators and evaluate predation risk. Lizards and birds frequently occupy the same habitats;
consequently, avian predation on lizards has been implicated as an important selective pressure on lizard
behavior. Anoles, most of which are non-vocal species, have highly developed auditory systems with
enhanced directionality and a hearing range that overlaps with the frequency range used by birds to
communicate. However, few studies have been conducted on how lizards respond to auditory cues. The
response of adult male brown anoles to predatory and non-predatory vocalizations and control stimuli
was studied to determine whether they use auditory cues as an indicator of predation risk from birds.
Anole responses (no reaction, eye movement, head tilt, and flight) to treatment stimuli were significantly
different. Less than half of the anoles responded to playbacks of non-predatory (sparrow, cardinal and
finch) stimuli, white noise or silence, whereas three fourths of the anoles responded to playbacks of
kestrel calls and two thirds of the anoles responded to playbacks of hawk calls. In contrast, responses to
predatory thrasher calls were intermediate and not significantly different from responses to non-predator
and control stimuli. This may be because the lizards tested in this study did not develop within the
geographic range of thrashers and therefore may not perceive their calls as threatening. Head tilt was the
most frequent response exhibited to predatory stimuli compared to non-predatory and control stimuli,
suggesting increased vigilance from perceived predation risk. Responses to acoustic cues suggest that
male brown anoles are able to discriminate predatory from non-predatory bird calls. The use of auditory
perception in assessing predation risk in anoles may be as important as visual and chemical cues in
detecting and recognizing predators. Anoles, and lizards in general, may therefore use a multimodal
system to obtain accurate information regarding predation risk to make optimal behavioral decisions
under risky conditions. This study demonstrates that brown anoles, a non-vocal species, are able to
obtain information about predation risk through the use of acoustic cues and that the role of hearing in
these lizards has been underappreciated.



Carazo, Pau (University of Valencia); Noble, Dan; Chandrasoma, Dani; Whiting, Martin (Macquarie
University, Canada)

Smart personalities: sexual differences in spatial learning ability and in associated personality
traits in the water skink (Eulamprus quoyii)

Cognitive mechanisms are indispensable tools for survival, and the proximal scaffold of adaptive
behaviour. Not surprisingly, one of the most salient aspects of cognition is the extraordinary individual
variability in cognitive performance that can be observed in almost every animal species studied to date.
And yet, we currently struggle to understand how and why these intraspecific individual differences arise
and are maintained by natural and sexual selection. In this study, we use the water skink ( Eulamprus
quoyii ) as a model to examine sex and personality as factors potentially underlying the evolution of
individual variability in spatial learning, a key dimension of lizard cognition. In most lizards (including the
water skink) males appear to face greater spatial cognitive demands than females in their evolutionary
struggle for reproductive success (e.g. due to sexual differences in territorial behaviour). However, the
study of sexual differences in cognitive performance has been neglected in reptiles. Our first aim in this
study was hence to examine whether males performed better than females in a functional spatial learning
task. We show that male lizards were significantly better learners than females, suggesting that sexual
selection is likely to play an important role in the evolution of spatial cognition in this lizard species. Our
second aim was to explore the possibility that individual cognitive differences may be associated with
particular personality traits. We show that spatial learning is indeed associated with personality traits,
such as exploratory behaviour in a novel environment and boldness after an anti-predatory attack, which
strongly suggests the existence of ‗cognition-personality syndromes‘ in lizards. More importantly, we show
that such syndromes take a different form in males and females. We discuss these findings in the



                                                                                                           107
reproductive context of E. quoyii , and examine the potential role of sexual selection and behavioural
syndromes in the evolution of spatial cognition in this species, and in reptiles at large.



Cardwell, Mike (California State University Sacramento);

The effect of radio-telemetry on the growth of Northern Mohave Rattlesnakes (Crotalus s.
scutulatus)

Radio transmitters were surgically implanted in the peritoneal cavities of Northern Mohave rattlesnakes,
Crotalus s. scutulatus , during a forty-month field study in southern California. Transmitter mass was < 5%
of body mass and transmitters were replaced annually. Precise snout-vent length (SVL) measurements
under general anesthesia were made annually. Corresponding SVL measurements were made upon
chance encounters with non-telemetered conspecifics during the study. This analysis compares the rate
of growth between the telemetered group ( n = 13) and the non-telemetered group ( n = 16), during
mean growth periods measuring 744 d (± 65.8 SE) and 403 d (± 60.3 SE), respectively. The non-
telemetered group grew at a greater mean rate (0.0639 mm/d ± 0.020 SE) than the telemetered group
(0.0212 mm/d ± 0.006 SE), however, analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) indicates that the largest effect
was produced by the difference in mean initial SVLs ( F 1,25 = 20.836, p < 0.001, partial eta 2 =
0.455), while the effect of transmitter status was small and insignificant ( F 1,25 = 0.929, p = 0.344,
partial eta 2 =0.036). Evidence that the telemetered snakes may have become acclimated to the
frequent presence of a human investigator will also be discussed. While limited by a small sample size,
these data suggest that intraperitoneal implantation of small transmitters and resulting frequent presence
of a human may not significantly impede the growth of wild rattlesnakes. Especially if substantiated by
additional data, this finding supports the hypothesis that behavior observed during similar radiotelemetry
studies is indicative of the behavior of the larger non-telemetered population.



Carfagno, Gerardo (Gettysburg College); Fong, Peter (Gettysburg College, Canada)

Growth inhibition of tadpoles exposed to sertraline in a competitive environment

Sertraline is a widely prescribed pharmaceutical sometimes marketed as the drug, Zoloft. This drug
belongs to the class of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) suspected of causing
developmental abnormalities in some organisms at environmentally low concentrations. These drugs
have been increasingly detected in surface water, but the risks associated with environmental exposure
to pharmaceuticals have not been well documented. Our study addresses the need for a better
understanding of the effects of pharmaceutical pollutants on tadpoles, an ideal model and indicator
species. Specifically, we test the effects of sertraline exposure on the behavior and development of Wood
Frog (Rana sylvatica) larvae. Tadpoles hatched from wild-collected egg masses were exposed through
metamorphosis to concentrations of 0, 0.1, 1.0 or 10.0 µg/L of sertraline. We tracked tadpole
development using image analysis to estimate mass, and we also recorded actual froglet mass at the
conclusion of the study. Time to metamorphosis did not differ between treatments. Also, no obvious
changes were observed in the behavior of tadpoles exposed to the drug. We did find evidence for slower
growth in tadpoles exposed to the drug and raised among conspecifics. However, this effect was not
detected when the study was replicated with tadpoles raised individually. This may indicate that the drug
works synergistically with competitive interactions. Although we see some potentially harmful effects from
low levels of these drugs, more study is needed to determine the true impacts on natural communities.




                                                                                                       108
Carlisle, Aaron (Stanford University); Goldman, Kenneth (Alaska Department of Fish and Game,
Canada); Bigman, Jennifer (Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, Canada); Madigan, Daniel; Litvin, Steven
(Stanford University, Canada); Kline, Thomas (Prince William Sound Science Center, Canada); Block,
Barbara (Stanford University, Canada)

Investigating Ontogenetic Changes in Habitat Use in Salmon Sharks Using Stable Isotope
Analysis

Salmon sharks ( Lamna ditropis ) are wide-ranging apex predators in the North Pacific. As upper trophic
level predators, they likely play an important role in structuring North Pacific marine foodwebs, yet virtually
nothing is known about trophic ecology and habitat use of young salmon sharks or ontogenetic shifts in
their diet and habitat use. We used stable isotope analysis (SIA) of salmon shark vertebrae to elucidate
ontogenetic changes in habitat use and trophic ecology. The tissue in each annulus of a salmon shark‘s
vertebra provides an isotopic record that reflects an integrated record of their movements and foraging
over a year of their life. By serially sampling vertebral annuli for stable isotope ratios of carbon ( 13 C/ 12
C) and nitrogen ( 15 N/ 14 N) we reconstructed the general migratory history of individual sharks. We
utilize an isoscape of the major biogeographic provinces of the eastern North Pacific in conjunction with a
Bayesian mixing model to estimate annual patterns of use among ecoregions. There was a clear
ontogenetic shift in habitat where sharks primarily used offshore habitats during their juvenile years, with
increasing use of productive neritic habitats with age. Electronic tagging data was used to inform SIA
results by characterizing annual patterns of ecoregion residence of larger sharks. Integrating electronic
tag and stable isotope data provides a unique and powerful way to study the ecology and life history of
these important and difficult to study predators.



Carlson, Amy (University of New England); Sulikowski, James (University of New England, Canada)

Horizontal and Vertical Movement Patterns of Archival Satellite Tagged Spiny Dogfish (Squalus
acanthias) in the Northwestern Atlantic

Spiny dogfish (Squalus acanthias) are assumed to be a highly migratory species, making habitual north-
south migrations throughout their Northwestern Atlantic U.S range. Because spiny dogfish are also
assumed to be a benthic species, their stock structure is estimated through bottom trawl surveys. Recent
anomalies in population trends, including a recent four-fold increase in spawning stock biomass, suggest
alternative movement behaviors may exist for this species. To obtain a better understanding of the
horizontal and vertical movement dynamics of this species, Microwave Telemetry Pop-off Satellite
Archival X-Tags have been attached to spiny dogfish at the northern extent of their U.S. geographic
range. Ten adult male and thirteen adult female spiny dogfish fixed with these satellite tags were
deployed in the Gulf of Maine, off the coast of Portland, Maine throughout 2007-2010. Twenty-two of the
twenty-three tags have released and transmitted data. Of these twenty-three tags, three have been
physically recovered, twenty-two have been filtered and modeled, and one failed to transmit. Approximate
geolocations and vertical movements within the water column were derived from archival light level,
pressure, and temperature records and has been filtered and fitted with bathymetric data using
derivations of the kftrack modeling package in R and Matlab. Reconstructed tracks ranging in lengths
from 2 to 12 months suggest that the seasonal migration patterns appear to be more regional (between
the Gulf of Maine and New Jersey) and local (between the Gulf of Maine and Cape Cod) in nature.
Kernel utilization distribution models also suggest strong core home ranges for these tagged individuals.
In addition, vertical movements show distinct diel patterns with deepest recorded depths ranging from 70



                                                                                                           109
to over 600 meters. Vertical preferences also suggest this species may not utilize the benthos as much as
implied. Additionally, correlations to abiotic factors and overall sample-wide patterns suggest differences
in movement patterns from older published migration paradigms. Based on this preliminary data, it
appears that spiny dogfish populations estimated from NEFSC bottom trawl surveys may not be as
indicative as once thought due to these new movement findings.



Carlson, John (NOAA NMFS Panama City Laboratory); Smith, Kelcee (National Marine Fisheries
Service, Panama City, United States); Norton, Shelley (National Marine Fisheries Service, Saint
Petersburg, United States); Simpfendorfer, Colin (James Cook University, Townsville, Q, Australia)

Extinction risk and viability of sawfish populations

Sawfish (Family Pristidae) populations have been declining worldwide and currently are among the most
endangered marine fishes. Data from multiple sources indicates many populations have undergone
significant population declines and severe fragmentation. As such, the International Union for the
Conservation of Nature (IUCN) lists all species of sawfish as ―Critically Endangered‖ on the IUCN Red
List and the United States lists the US distinct population of smalltooth sawfish and globally the largetooth
sawfish as Endangered under the Endangered Species Act. Despite these listings, there is little
investigation on the existing populations in terms of their current risk of extinction, and potential viability
and recovery. Given the lack of data for many populations, we determined the probability that local scale
extinction have occurred using a time series of incidental observations, such as surveys, museum
collections and records from the public. For existing populations, we applied a sensitivity analyses to
suggest minimum probability levels for declaring a species to be in danger of local extinction. For all
species examined, the highest probability of localized extinction occurred in West Africa and Central
America with the lowest probability determined for Australia and the United States. Recognizing the
model does not take into account important biological information (e.g. population increase rates), we
determined quasi-extinction risks in a population viability model and found all populations had the
potential to increase given fishing mortalities below 20%.



Carranza, Salvador (Institute of Evolutionary Biology (CSIC-UPF));

Biogeography and evolution of North African reptiles and amphibians: dating the origin of the
Sahara Desert

Deserts carry an aura of antiquity, but reconstruction of their past histories is not easy. This is largely
because there may be little direct evidence of their previous presence. Erosion is generally dominant, with
few sites favoring the orderly accumulation of stratified deposits, so that the essential evidence tends to
be scanty, scattered and difficult to date and correlate. Because of this paucity of evidence, relatively
recent dates are often given for the onset of really dry conditions, even though the deserts concerned
have distinctive endemic plants and animals that suggest at least parts of them are really quite old. The
Sahara, the main arid region in North Africa, is by far the biggest desert in the world, covering some nine
million square kilometers, and extending 5500 km across North Africa from the Atlantic Ocean to the Red
Sea. The Sahara has often been thought to have been originated after the Pliocene, at least in its present
very arid form. Various large-scale phenomena in the late Tertiary and Pleistocene, such as the uplift of
the Tibetan plateau, increase of ice caps and cooling of the oceans, are likely to have caused desiccation
of the areas concerned; so it was thought probable that a really high level of aridity only became
established in North Africa 2-3 My ago. Recently, fossil sand dunes around 7 my old have been found in



                                                                                                           110
northern Chad, suggesting that the Sahara Desert may be much older than was previously thought.
However, this hypothesis has been heavily criticized and a younger origin for the Sahara Desert has been
suggested. In spite of the harsh environment, several reptile groups have colonized the Sahara Desert
and some of them show morphological and physiological adaptations that allow them to survive under
arid and hyper-arid conditions. On the other hand, the Sahara Desert has acted as a vicariant agent for
some other groups. In this talk, I will use robust phylogenies for some of these North African reptile and
amphibian groups in order to understand how the Sahara Desert has acquired its endemic faunas and to
try to infer the age of the largest desert in the world. The molecular phylogenies recovered will also be
used to infer the biogeography and evolution of the main groups concerned.



Carranza, Salvador (Institute of Evolutionary Biology (CSIC-UPF));

Origin and diversification of the geckos of the Socotra Archipelago

Continental islands are very important hotspots of biodiversity and provide premier settings for studying
the evolutionary and ecological processes that have resulted in such unique biotas. The Socotra
Archipelago, in the western Indian Ocean, is a case example of an ancient continental fragment, a block
of Precambrian Gondwanaland with a long biogeographic history. The Archipelago comprises four
islands: Socotra, Darsa, Samha and Abd Al Kuri and is located in the Arabian Sea, situated 380 km
southeast from the coast of Yemen and about 100 km east from the Horn of Africa (Somalia). Often
referred to as the ―Galapagos of the Indian Ocean‖, it was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Natural
site in 2008 as a result of its high level of endemicity at both specific and generic levels. From an
evolutionary point of view, the archipelago is of particular significance because of its ecological diversity
and long biogeographic history and thus represents a unique model to unravel the origin and speciation
process in ancient continental fragments and to understand how different biogeographic, evolutionary and
ecological factors have interplayed in the assemblage of Socotra‘s unique biota. The integration of
phylogenetic and phylogeographic analyses at multiple loci and at various evolutionary time scales
allowed us to reconstruct the evolutionary history of the 18 species of endemic geckos of the Socotra
Archipelago of the genera Hemidactylus, Pristurus and Haemodracon, giving an approximate time frame
to the origin and in situ diversification in these three groups. The study revealed the existence of complex
patterns of within-island diversification and high levels of intra-species genetic divergence suggesting that
the interplay of both historical and ecological factors seems to have a role in the speciation process.
Interestingly, the case of Hemidactylus forbesi and Hemidactuylus oxyrhinus, which inhabit the island of
Abd al Kuri with an area of 133 km2, may represent one of the most extreme cases of intra-island
speciation in reptiles ever reported.




                                                                                                         111
Carretero, Miguel A. (CIBIO, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos,
Universidade do Porto); García-Muñoz, Enrique; Kaliontzopoulou, Antigoni (CIBIO, Centro de
Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, Universidade do Porto, Vairão, Portugal);
Gomes, Verónica (CIBIO, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos,
Universidade do Porto, Vairão, Canada); Carneiro, Diana; Zagar, Anamarija (CIBIO, Centro de
Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, Universidade do Porto, Vairão, Portugal); Sillero,
Neftalí (Centro de Investigação em Ciências Geo-Espaciais (CICGE), Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal)

Evolutionary ecophysiology of lacertid lizards. Do preferred temperatures and water loss rates
trade-off in Podarcis?

Studies on thermal ecology undoubtedly dominate the research on lizard ecophysiology. This is
especially true for the Old World family Lacertidae. Within this group, preferred body temperatures (Tp)
are well known to correlate with several physiological optima but also to carry substantial phylogenetic
inertia. In contrast, much less is known on their water ecology traits, although some studies in other
families suggest that body temperature and evaporative water loss (Wl) may trade-off. Both aspects,
together with their evolutionary trajectories, needed to be investigated to wholly understand the
phenotypic evolution and biogeography of these lizards. By integrating thermal and water ecology data,
mechanistic models of potential distribution could be elaborated for current species and their ancestors.
Here, we analyse both ecophysiological traits in the lacertids of the genus Podarcis, a taxonomically
complex group whose phylogenetic relations and divergence times have been recently assessed. For a
total of 15 lineages + 3 outgroups, mostly from Iberian Peninsula and North Africa, two laboratory tests
were performed: 1) the classic Tp experiment using a photothermal gradient during 10 time intervals; and
2) the determination of Wl rates in sealed chambers during 12 hours. Significant interspecific differences
in mean values and temporal patterns were detected either for thermal or for hydric parameters even
between sympatric species. Uncorrected results for thermal and hydric traits were inversely related
suggesting a trade-off between Tp and Wl. However, phylogenetically distant groups deviated from the
common trend advising for phylogenetic correction. In a phylogenetic context, predominant
ecophysiological shifts dated back to the Miocene-Pliocene rather than more recent geological times. The
importance of these results in terms of current and past ecological modelling and future conservation is
discussed.



Cartamil, Daniel (Scripps Institution of Oceanography); Kohin, Suzanne (Southwest Fisheries Science
Center, Canada); Sosa-Nishizaki, Oscar; Santana, Omar; Olvera, Miguel (CICESE, Canada); Graham,
Jeffrey (Scripps Institution of Oceanography, Canada)

Satellite tagging of juvenile thresher sharks (Alopias vulpinus) in the Southern California Bight

The common thresher shark is a large, wide-ranging coastalpelagic species. In the eastern Pacific, it
ranges from Baja California, Mexic oto British Columbia, Canada.Throughout its range it is harvested
commercially, and it constitutes the largest shark fishery in California waters. Nevertheless, many aspects
of its biology are poorly known, particularly as regards early life history. In the present study, juvenile
thresher sharks (i.e., fork length < 120 cm) were tagged with pop-up satellite archival tags (Microwave
Telemetry X-tags) to investigate their long-term movement patterns, habitat preferences, and geographic
range. All sharks were tagged in southern California waters. Tag deployments ranged from three to six
months, and tags archived light level, depth and temperature information. In total, data were successfully
acquired from 23 juvenile threshers; eight tags were physically retrieved and produced high resolution
archival data sets. 89% of pop-off locations were over the continental shelf. The furthest southward
movement was to Bahia Sebastian Vizcaino, Baja California, Mexico, and the furthest northward



                                                                                                       112
movement offshore of Morro Bay California. Juvenile thresher sharks primarily inhabited the upper 60 m
of the water column, and showed a strong diel depth distribution, with significantly greater depths by day.
Results indicate that the nursery area of the common thresher in the eastern Pacific consists mainly of
continental shelf waters from central Baja California, Mexico to central California, USA. In Mexican
waters, juvenile threshers are harvested by the inshore artisanal gillnet fishery.



Carter, Cynthia (Odum School of Ecology, University of Georgia); Maerz, John (Daniel B. Warnell School
of Forestry and Natural Resources, The University of Georgia, Canada); Mendelson, Joseph (Zoo Atlanta
& School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Canada)

A prospective study on the relationship between reproductive ecology and road mortality in Gila
Monsters (Heloderma suspectum).

The relationship between roads and herpetofanua has been studied in a number of taxa with a focus on
vehicular mortality and habitat fragmentation. Heloderma suspectum likely faces increasing threats of
mortality due to urbanization and road construction, however there is little empirical evidence to support
this claim.

We propose to conduct a descriptive study examining the reproductive status, resource ecology, and
spatial dynamics of road-killed Gila monsters throughout their range in the United States. We have
identified approximately 395 specimens from 18 museum collections using the HerpNet database. We will
examine specimens that were collected on roads and also include information on the site and date of
collection. Necropsies will be performed on each specimen to determine sexual stage based on gonadal
activity. The snoutvent length will be measured and gut contents will be analyzed to identify prey items.
Average monthly temperature and rainfall will be determined for each specimen using the NOAA climate
database. The habitat of each collection site will be characterized using historical aerial photographs, as
they are available, and remote-sensing landscape databases. We will analyze the data to determine
whether there are seasonal patterns to road mortality, a bias for particular reproductive stages, and if the
collected individuals are disproportionally male or female. Collection site information and morphological
data will be compared to elucidate the relationship between the reproductive ecology of H. suspectum
and habitat characteristics. Ultimately this study will provide insight into how the urbanization of desert
habitats affects the reproduction and population dynamics of H. suspectum .



Carter, Evin (Indiana - Purdue University Fort Wayne); Kingsbury, Bruce (Indiana - Purdue University
Fort Wayne, Canada)

Impacts of Invasive Plants on Resource Selection and Thermoregulation by a North American Pit-
Viper (Agkistrodon contortrix mokasen)

Invasive plants have been identified as a potential factor in the decline of many forms of wildlife.
Nevertheless, there is a paucity of clear evidence regarding causative mechanisms. We therefore
investigated the effects of nonnative invasive plants on resource selection and thermoregulation by 22
radio-tagged Northern Copperheads (Agkistrodon contortrix mokasen) in southern Indiana. Copperheads
exhibited clear avoidance of most invasive plant species at multiple spatial scales, with exotic shrubs
having the greatest influence on copperhead habitat selection. Avoidance appears to be at least partially
attributable to limited thermoregulatory opportunities within exotic plant-dominated habitats relative to
native habitats, with exotic shrub habitats providing the lowest thermal quality as a group. Additional




                                                                                                        113
mechanisms underlying avoidance may include lack of suitable cover and/or decreased foraging success,
but their significance is currently unclear. Habitat restoration should be effective in mitigating the effects
of most exotic plant species, but careful planning and implementation of restoration are essential to
maximize success and minimize negative outcomes for snakes and other wildlife.



Carter, Evin (Indiana - Purdue University Fort Wayne); Kingsbury, Bruce (Indiana - Purdue University
Fort Wayne, Canada)

Managed Areas as Ecological Traps for Snakes in an Exotic Plant-Invaded Landscape

Areas such as wildlife refuges or parks offer important opportunities for the protection of imperiled wildlife.
Unfortunately, conflicting practices and objectives with respect to natural resource management and
general property management can potentially lead to negative outcomes such as the decline or
extirpation local flora or fauna. Here, we provide direct evidence of the impacts of property management
and restoration activities on a population of Northern Copperheads ( Agkistrodon contortrix mokasen ) in
southern Indiana, showing that several managed habitats can and do attract Northern Copperheads and
simultaneously place them at greater risk of injury and/or mortality. At the same time, however,
management activities create or maintain forest gaps, providing thermoregulatory opportunities in an
otherwise low quality, exotic plant-invaded, landscape. We discuss our results in terms of the ecological
trap concept and provide management recommendations that should be applicable to multiple forms of
wildlife beyond Northern Copperheads.



Carter, Evin (Indiana - Purdue University Fort Wayne); Attum, Omar (Indiana University Southeast,
Canada); Kingsbury, Bruce (Indiana - Purdue University Fort Wayne, Canada)

Reducing the Potential for Human-Snake Encounters in a Recreational Park

Parks often struggle to balance outdoor recreation with the protection of wildlife. Additional complications
can arise for park managers when recreation occurs in areas shared with wildlife perceived by humans to
be dangerous. Despite these potential issues, many parks may inadvertently increase the potential for
human-wildlife encounters through the creation of artificial forest gaps used for recreational purposes.
We utilized radiotelemetry and ArcGIS to determine the potential for human encounters with Northern
Copperheads ( Agkistrodon contortrix mokasen ) at a recreational park in southern Indiana before and
after several simulated closures of artificial (recreational) forest gaps. Our results demonstrate that by
restricting human access to artificial forest gaps, encounters with Northern Copperheads could be
reduced by 1.5 – 10 x the expected potential. We discuss our results in terms of management
implications and provide suggestions for land managers facing related concerns of human-wildlife
encounters.




                                                                                                           114
Caruso, Nick (University of Maryland); Lips, Karen (University of Maryland, College Park, MD, United
States); Adams, Dean (Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States); McDiarmid, Roy
(USGA/Smithsonian Inst., Washington DC, DC, United States); Fleischer, Rob (National Zoological Park,
Washington DC, DC, United States)

Through the looking glass: Widespread declines in body size in Appalachian Plethodontid
salamanders

Climate change models project widespread range contractions for Appalachian salamanders within the
next 10 yrs, with greatest effects predicted for species in the southern Appalachians. Climate change can
impact amphibians in various ways, including shifts in species distribution, lowered body condition, and
reduced growth. These changes may be detected in the field by quantifying changes in occupancy,
population abundance, individual body size and reproductive effort. Highton (2005) documented
widespread declines in population abundance of 28 species of Plethodon in the eastern US by the
1980‘s. Between June–October 2011, we resurveyed 67 of Highton‘s historic collecting sites, which
included 192 populations of 14 species of Plethodon. At each site we sampled 3, 50 x 3m plots in which
we captured all salamanders found under cover objects. We identified each capture to species, sex, and
age class; swabbed each animal for Bd; and measured snout-vent-length (SVL), mass and body
temperature. We found a total of 1,870 animals (μ = 8.6/site; range = 0–75) of 14 species. Using these
animals and ~8,000 specimens collected from those same sites between1957–1996, we compared
average SVL for each population between pre-decline (1957–79) and post-decline (1980–2011) periods.
Using linear mixed models, we found that SVL was significantly smaller post-decline for the full dataset of
~8,000 animals (p = 0.0001), and for the cinereus (p = 0.0001) and jordani (p = 0.0026) groups. For
individual species, we only had power to detect a decrease in SVL for Plethodon cinereus (p < 0.0001).
The rate of evolutionary change in SVL (measured in Haldanes) differed among species groups (F 4, 80 =
21.978; p < 0.0001) and was greatest within the jordani group and lowest for the glutinosus group.
Populations that showed the greatest rate of decline were those found at lower latitudes (F 1, 81 = 9.045; p
= 0.0035) and higher elevations (F1, 81 = 9.9994; p = 0.0022) with a strong interaction effect (F 1, 81 = 8.29;
p = 0.0051). Our results show reduced body size in Plethodon across sites within a 767 km region of the
Appalachians, with the fastest rates of change in the southern latitudes. Our results support predictions of
species loss from the southern Appalachians (Milanovich et al. 2009) and we hypothesize that these
changes are driven by regional climate change patterns.



Casas, André (Universidade de São Paulo); Intelizano, Wagner (Universidade Metropolitana de Santos,
Canada); Carvalho, Marcelo (Universidade de São Paulo, Canada)

Anatomical variation in the extrinsic eye muscles of the Odontaspidade (Chondrichthyes:
Lamniformes).

 The family Odontaspididae is represented by the genera Carcharias and Odontaspis and has been
considered to be paraphyletic in morphological and molecular studies. These results suggest that
odontaspidid morphology should be revised. The present study examined seven specimens of this family
(six Carcharias taurus, one Odontaspis noronhai) and two specimens of Rhizoprionodonsp.
(Carcharhiniformes), with the objective to describe and understand morphological variation in their
extrinsic eye muscles. Carcharias taurus and Odontaspis noronhai present six extrinsic eyes muscles
(rectus dorsalis, rectus lateralis, rectus ventralis, rectus medialis, obliquus dorsalis, and obliquus
ventralis), therefore resembling the elasmobranch general pattern. To precisely determine the
morphology of the obliquus dorsalis muscle in the examined species the trochlear nerve (IV) was followed
from its origin to its distal innervation. This procedure revealed variations in the origin of the obliquus



                                                                                                           115
dorsalis when compared to the general pattern described for other elasmobranchs. Two distinct
conditions for its origin were found: state (0), origin on nasal capsule dorsal to the origin of the obliquus
ventralis (present in Odontaspis noronhai, Alopidae, Lamnidae and in the great majority of
elasmobranchs described in the literature); and state (1), origin on nasal capsule ventral to the origin of
the obliquus ventralis (present in Carcharias taurus and Rhizoprionodon sp.). This preliminary result
suggests that state (1) is independently derived in Carcharias taurus and Rhizoprionodon sp. For a
greater comprehension of the phylogenetic meaning of the variation in the obliquus dorsalis in Carcharias
taurus, additional lamniform and other elasmobranch taxa must be examined.



Casas, André (Universidade de São Paulo); Toledo-Piza, Mônica (Universidade de São Paulo, Canada)

The dorsal gill arch musculature of the Characiformes (Teleostei: Ostariophysi): morphological
diversity and phylogenetic significance.

In the present study we carried out a detailed anatomical study of the dorsal gill arch musculature of
representatives of the Characiformes, one of the most diverse orders of freshwater fishes. In the most
recent and encompassing study of this morphological complex, Springer e Johnson (2004) examined the
musculature of the dorsal branchial arches from representatives of all main taxa of bony fishes, focusing
on actinopterygians, and showed that there is morphological variation that was not documented before.
The study of those authors included only three species of Characiformes, an order that includes
approximately 1700 species grouped in 270 genera and 18 families. In the present study we examined 61
species representing all the Characiformes families, except the Citharinidae, and observed that there is
variation in this anatomical complex. These are related to differences in the origin and insertion of the
levator muscles, size and form and presence or absence of the oblique muscles and adductors muscles.
Examples include: Levator internus has a single insertion on pharyngobranchial in the majority of the
examined species while in all examined representatives of the Erythrinoidea, Acestrorhynchus,
Curimatopsis and Thoracocharax, levator internus has two sites of insertion on pharyngobranchial 2.
Obliquus dorsalis 4‘ absent in the majority of the examined species and present in the examined African
species representing the Distichodontidae and in some Neotropical species of the Characidae. Adductor
4 present in the majority of the examined species, is absent in examined species of the Ctenoluciidae and
reduced in all examined Alestidae. Those differences will be evaluated later in a phylogenetic context.



Cashner, Mollie (Southeastern Louisiana University); Piller, Kyle (Southeastern Louisiana University,
Canada)

Pandora's Box: Is Notropis lutipinnis phenotypically plastic or a species complex?

Recently, the range of Notropis lutipinnis (Yellowfin Shiner) has been restricted to include only
populations in the Savannah River drainage westward to the Altamaha River drainage and Flint River
and northward to the upper portions of the Chattahoochee River system in Georgia. Although
morphological variation in fin coloration has been documented, no studies to date have been able to
characterize distinct populations of N. lutipinnis based on morphology. Preliminary geometric
morphometric analysis revealed that populations from three river systems (Savannah, Oconee, and
Ocmulgee Rivers) are highly distinct in morphospace. Additionally, mtDNA sequence data revealed
multiple divergent lineages which cross current river system boundaries. We have expanded our
morphological and molecular data set to include more populations throughout the range of N. lutipinnis




                                                                                                         116
in order to determine whether morphological variation is congruent with the observed patterns in genetic
divergence among these populations.



Casper, Gary (UWM Field Station); Hecnar, Stephen (Lakehead University, Thunder Bay, ON, Canada)

Tales of Scales: Herpetofaunal Inventory and Monitoring at Differing Geographic Scales in the
Western Great Lakes

Development of effective inventory and monitoring programs is of fundamental importance in determining
species status and documenting changes in their abundance and geographic distribution, especially in
response to changing climate or human land use. Many challenges exist for collecting and vetting recent
and historical distribution data to build species inventories, especially at large scales. Equally challenging
obstacles exist to developing effective and meaningful monitoring programs. We addressed these
challenges at several geographic scales for various stakeholders: a) six National Parks spanning 750 km
from southern Lake Michigan to northern Lake Superior, b) the Lake Superior watershed encompassing
approximately 21,062,148 ha in portions of Michigan, Minnesota, Wisconsin and Ontario; c) the Ottawa
National Forest (approximately 404,680 ha) just south of Lake Superior, d) the Milwaukee (228,532 ha)
and Sheboygan River (67,396 ha) basins, and e) individual land trust properties in east-central Wisconsin
(2-77 ha). Recent glacial history throughout this region has allowed only a few thousand years for
herpetofaunal communities to develop. We evaluated well over 14,000 occurrence records for the study
areas and ranked records by voucher status and source type, identifying knowledge gaps. We performed
surveys through various partnerships and tested monitoring methods to develop detection probability
statistics, standardize methodology, and develop sampling recommendations which account for false
absences. We identified overlaps in sampling methods for achieving best return on effort for monitoring
programs, and determined the minimum sampling effort required to achieve 95% confidence in detection.
Many species are readily detected (many by several methods), but detection probabilities vary among
species, methods, habitats and sampling periods. We discuss challenges in collecting and vetting data,
and in achieving effective herpetofaunal monitoring across differing geographic scales.



Caspers, Barbara (University of Bielefeld);

The importance of mate choice for speciation in amphibians

Assortative mating – preferred mating with the own type - is a major pre-zygotic isolation mechanism that
is supposed to play a central role in ecological and adaptive speciation. First, this talk will provide an
overview in how far assortative mating has been found to be important for differentiation processes in
amphibian species. Second, we are going to present our research results centred on the importance of
assortative mating in an adaptively diverging salamander population. Recent studies on a population of
the terrestrial fire salamander ( Salamandra salamandra ) in Germany (the Kottenforst near Bonn)
suggest that the adaptation to different reproduction habitats within the small forest initiated a process of
adaptive divergence under sympatric conditions. We analysed whether assortative mating might explain
the maintenance of the two different genetic clusters in this system using a three steps approach. i) we
investigated the degree of assortative mating under natural conditions. Therefore we reconstructed the
paternal genotype by analysing more than 1150 larvae deposited by 46 wild caught females, which
deposited there larvae in our lab. The results clearly indicate that female fire salamanders mate
assortatively according to their own habitat type. ii) we used mating experiments under semi-natural
conditions in order to document existing pre-zygotic isolation mechanisms. Therefore, we kept females



                                                                                                          117
with two other males, one of each habitat type, in a enclosure for two subsequent days and recorded all
matings. iii) we investigated the use of chemical cues in habitat dependent assortative mating, as odour
cues are widely used by salamanders for intraspecific communication and sexual recognition. The results
of these experiments indicate that female fire salamanders are actually able to distinguish between males
of the two habitat types. Here, we present the full data set of three years of experiments, showing the
importance of assortative mating for adaptive speciation in the fire salamander.



Castañeda, Maria del Rosario (Harvard University);

Anolis lizards in the Encyclopedia of Life

The Encyclopedia of Life (EOL) aims to gather detailed and accurate information on all life forms on earth
(i.e., animals, plants, fungi, protist, and bacteria), concentrate it in one place and make it widely available.
The content is produced and compiled by scientists in different areas to ensure high quality of the
resulting product. With nearly 400 species currently recognized, Anolis Daudin 1802 (Squamata:
Iguanidae) is one of the most diverse groups of vertebrates traditionally ranked as a genus. These lizards,
commonly known as anoles, are distributed from southeastern North America to central South America,
including the West Indies, and are characterized by the presence of adhesive toe-pads and, in most
species, brightly colored throat fans, called dewlaps. Anolis species have been a research tool for many
areas of biology including behavior, ecology, evolution, functional morphology and genomics, just to
name a few. In addition to being an important research group, Anolis species are highly appreciated in
the pet world. For these reasons, as well as their abundance and visibility where they occur, anoles are a
clade of great interest to both scientists and the public in general. Here I present progress on the creation
of new content and the revision of previous entries of EOL Anolis pages. In addition, I provide
information on how to navigate the EOL pages, details on the many resources available through the EOL,
and contacts to participate in the EOL Anolis community and other EOL initiatives.



Castañeda, Maria del Rosario (Harvard University); de Queiroz, Kevin (Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, DC, United States)

Multivariate analysis of the morphological component of ecomorphology in mainland Anolis
lizards (Dactyloa clade).

Based on Greater Antillean communities of Anolis lizards, the term ecomorph has been used to describe
the association between ecological and morphological features. Species in each ecomorph class have
similar morphologies (e.g., relative body, tail, hind and forelimb lengths) and similar ecological
characteristics, including foraging behavior and perch height and diameter. When analyzed with
multivariate statistics, species form identifiable clusters in morphological and ecological space, each
representing a different ecomorph class. In the Greater Antilles, species of the same ecomorph class from
different islands are not each other‘s closest relatives; instead, each island has assemblages of closely
related species representing different ecomorphs. Here we focused on the morphological aspect of
ecomorphology in mainland Anolis species of the Dactyloa clade. We analyzed six morphological
characters associated with habitat use to answer the following questions: 1) Are there recognizable
clusters of Dactyloa species in multivariate morphospace? 2) Are species in the same morphological
cluster also phylogenetically close? And 3) is the distribution of Dactyloa species in morphospace similar
to that seen in Caribbean species? We found seven clusters composed of morphologically similar
species. These clusters do not correspond to monophyletic groups, though the species composition of



                                                                                                            118
some clusters is not completely independent of phylogeny. Finally, some of the Dactyloa species were
classified as members of the trunk-crown, trunk-ground and twig ecomorph classes. Other species (and
complete clusters) occupied regions in multivariate space that were not occupied by Caribbean species
(i.e., they exhibited distinct combinations of morphological traits). In conclusion, we found that Dactyloa
species exhibit both similarities to and differences from the Caribbean Anolis radiation in the association
of morphological characters in multivariate space.



Castoe, Todd (U of Colorado School of Medicine); de Koning, AP Jason (U Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO, United States); Ray, David (Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS, United
States); Bronikowski, Anne (Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States); Secor, Stephen (University
of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, United States); Feschotte, Cedric (University of Texas at Arlington,
Arlington, TX, United States); Warren, Wesley (Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO,
United States); Pollock, David (U Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States)

Comparative genomics and transcriptomics of snake - what makes snakes soo cool?

Studying organisms with extreme phenotypes can provide unique insight into the structure and function of
biological systems, and advances in sequencing technologies provide new unparalleled access for
investigating such non-traditional model systems. Here we share new insight from 3 complete snake
genomes that showcase the unique genomic attributes of snakes, and discuss how these relate to
evolution of extreme phenotypes. We provide highlights from new transcriptomic analyses of extreme
physiological remodeling in snakes that demonstrates the power of snakes as a model, and of taking a
system-wide approach to studying such extreme adaptive remodeling. We discuss how these changes
we observe in snake genomes and transcriptomes may be collectively related to the evolution of extreme
phenotypes and, indeed, why snakes are soo cool.



Cates, Corey (The University of Texas at Tyler); Ford, David; Pettingill, Kaitlyn; Ford, Neil (The University
of Texas at Tyler, Tyler, TX, United States)

Nutritional stress early in life can be compensated for with increased feeding after subsequent
improvement in prey availability. That hyperphagy may require behaviors that would increase
susceptibility to predators. This investigation set out to discover what and how those behaviors are
altered during compensatory growth after dietary restriction in a snake species.         Twenty-four corn
snakes ( Pantherophis guttata ) were each raised on either high (50% body mass/week) or low
(15%/week) diets of dead mice for 174 days. The average body mass between the two groups differed by
~50% at that time. Three behavioral trials were started; aggression, hiding versus exploration, and time to
feeding. Aggressive behavior in the High Diet Group (HDG) was found to be statistically lower than in the
Low Diet Group (LDG). The HDG was also found to spend less time in exploration behavior within their
cage than the LDG. The LDG was faster to find and consume the food. These behaviors all appear to be
related to the compensatory growth response as seen in the drive to find additional food. At day 175, the
two groups were placed on the same diet of 50% body mass/week (HDG diet). At this time the food
availability was made on a selection basis, with the food being offered in multiple small amounts (two
mice/feeding) rather than in one large offering (one mouse/feeding) as in the first 174 days.
Compensatory growth occurred in the LDG due to the increase in food availability. Food availability
fluctuations seem to elicit a slowed growth rate when food sources are low but a catch up growth
response when food availability increases.




                                                                                                         119
Caviedes Solis, Itzue Wendolin (Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México);
Nieto Montes de Oca, Adrián (Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,
Canada)

Molecular Phylogeny of the Plectrohyla bistincta Group (Anura: Hylidae)

The hylid genus Plectrohyla includes 42 species, which represent 42.85% of the total number of hylid
frog species in México. In a recent phylogenetic analysis of Plectrohyla , the genus was composed of two
main clades separated geographically from each other by the Isthmus of Tehuantepec: the P.
guatemalensis group, which includes 18 species distributed eastward from the Isthmus, Mexico, to El
Salvador and Honduras in Central America, and the P. bistincta group, which is endemic to Mexico and
includes 24 species distributed westward from the Isthmus to Durango. Most of these species are
microendemic, and because they have been only occasionally recorded or not recorded at all during the
last 20 years, they are considered endangered species.

The relationships among the species in each of the above groups are still poorly known: only eight
species of the P. bistincta group and four species of the P. guatemalensis group have been incuded in
the most recent phylogenetic analyses of the genus. Evidently, these hypotheses cannot be regarded as
a final assessment of the phylogenetic relationships within the P. bistincta or P. guatemalensis groups,
and the inclusion of additional species in the analysis may change the relationships in the phylogeny.

The main goal of this project is to investigate the monophyly of the P. bistincta group and the
phylogenetic relationships within the group. We present a phylogenetic analysis of 17 species of the
group using data from two mitochondrial genes (ND1, 960 bp and 12S, 943 bp) and three nuclear genes
(Rag-1, 420 bb, Rhod, 361 bp, and POMc, 508 bp). To evaluate the monophyly of the group, we included
representatives of the       P. guatemalensis      group and the genera         Exerodonta, Ecnomiohyla,
Duellmanohyla, Bromelioyla , and Ptychohyla . Data analysis was performed using Bayesian methods;
the best fitting models for each gen were identified using the Akaike information criterion in MrModelTest,
version 2.0, and Bayesian analyses of the concatenated data were performed using MrBayes, version
3.1.2.



Cayot, Linda J. (Galapagos Conservancy); Gibbs, James P. (State University of New York College of
Environmental Science and Forestry, Syracuse, United States); Tapia, Washington (Galapagos National
Park Service, Puerto Ayora, Galapagos, Canada)

Restoring Tortoise Populations in the Galapagos: Contrasting case studies from Española and
Pinta Islands

At the time of the establishment of the Galapagos National Park in 1959, giant tortoises were rare on the
southern island of Española and considered extinct on the northern island of Pinta. Eventually 14
tortoises were discovered on Española but only a single tortoise, ―Lonesome George,‖ was recovered
from Pinta. Goats, the only introduced mammal on either island, destroyed much of the habitat on both,
causing long-term impacts that endure after eradication. The recovery of the tortoise population on
Española began in the late 1960s with the initiation of a captive breeding program and the eradication of
goats. Young tortoises were repatriated to Española starting in 1975, with a total of 1750 released by
January 2012. Annual survival rates of >95% of adults and 90-95% of juveniles have resulted in
approximately 50% overall mortality of all repatriates over the 35-year release program. In situ
reproduction was first observed about 15 years after reintroduction began and has now generated a
sizable component of native-hatched tortoises in the population (approximately 20%). The success of the




                                                                                                       120
Española project has been aided by targeted research in the breeding and rearing program, regular
surveys of the growing population, and genetic studies. An ecological assessment completed on
Española in June 2010 has provided new information regarding the long-term impact of the now
eradicated goat population and the relationship between tortoises and cactus, and resulted in
recommendations for experimental habitat manipulation to restore the island ecosystem to a more
pristine, pre-goat condition. On Pinta, tortoise restoration followed a very different trajectory. Lack of
breeding stock to re-establish the original population and failure to find additional Pinta tortoises either in
Galapagos or in zoos around the world led to competing strategies: (1) to release an analog subspecies
of tortoise to preserve the island‘s ecosystem in its natural state (―rewilding‖), versus (2) not releasing any
tortoises thus preserving the evolutionary integrity of the Galapagos biota. The final eradication of goats
in 2003 followed by rapid incursion of woody vegetation catalyzed an interim decision to release 39 non-
reproductive tortoises to restore ecological services of tortoises to Pinta. Genetic analyses of a large
sample of tortoises from Wolf Volcano on northern Isabela Island continue to provide slight hope for the
potential recovery of a genetically original Pinta tortoise. With genetic analyses still pending, no final
decision on the source of a breeding population for Pinta has been determined. These two case studies
provide stark and contrasting examples of the interplay between conservation policy, practicality, and
scientific research in restoring giant tortoise populations and their island ecosystems in the Galapagos
Archipelago.



Cecala, Kristen (Warnell School of Forestry and Natural Resources); Maerz, John (Warnell School of
Forestry and Natural Resources, Athens, GA, United States)

The Role of Behavior in Influencing Headwater Salamander Responses to Anthropogenic
Disturbance

Changes in behavior can alter movement patterns of animals, which can impact patterns of occupancy
among habitats and fragment populations. Evolutionary theory predicts that animals have evolved to
move in response to a suite of cues that maximize animal survival and growth and minimize risk of injury
or mortality. Behavioral plasticity allows these animals to adjust their behavior to appropriately respond to
variable cues. When humans modify environments, new conditions can suddenly yield maladaptive
responses to cues that were adaptive in the undisturbed environment. Headwater streams generally have
dense over- and mid-story canopies that limit direct light penetration and moderate values and ranges of
light intensity, temperature, and humidity known to affect salamander behavior. We tested whether
canopy gaps in otherwise natural systems could 1) alter salamander responses to light cues, and 2)
fragment previously contiguous populations. Controlled laboratory tests indicated that salamander larvae
exhibit strong, negative phototaxis that can be mediated by different stream substrates. Secondly,
reciprocal transfers across a canopy gap and within forested areas demonstrated that salamanders were
approximately 50% less likely to home to their capture location if a gap was present. This study
demonstrates that behavioral plasticity allowed salamanders to adapt to high light environments, but the
interactive effects of substrate were important to consider. Field experiments indicated that despite this
plasticity, small canopy gaps (< 15 m) were capable of inhibiting homing behavior. Canopy gaps are a
ubiquitous consequence of anthropogenic activity, precede more intensive development, and may yield
unforeseen consequences for stream populations.




                                                                                                           121
Centeno, Fernanda (Universidade Estadual Paulista "Júlio de Mesquita Filho"); Andrade, Denis
(Universidade Estadual "Júlio de Mesquita Filho", Canada)

Skin color change in a basking treefrog: does it affect predation risk?

Skin color is an important organismal trait known to influence the risk of an animal being detected by
visually oriented predators. Therefore, the resemblance of skin color with the background is commonly
acknowledged as camouflage and largely accepted as an important antipredator mechanism. However,
skin color integrates many different functions and its role in predation avoidance might involve the
complex interaction with other functions and with the physical environment. Bokermannohyla alvarengai
is a treefrog found in altitude areas in southeastern Brazil, known for spending long periods basking in the
sun, completely exposed sitting on rock boulders. As skin temperature is raised during basking, skin color
also changes markedly from a grayish mottled pattern to a white chalk. Although, this physiological
change in skin coloration has been suggested to be important to modulated heat exchange during
basking, its potential influence on camouflage remains unknown. Thus, to test the influence of skin color
on the potential risk of predation in B. alvarengai , we distributed 225 plasticine-made frog models of
three different colors (white, black, and mottled gray) in the habitats where this frog is found basking.
Replicas were distributed randomly in the field covering an area of approximately 420 m 2 , observing a
minimum distance of at least 2 m between models. Models were placed in the field early in the morning,
just before sunrise, and collected in the same day just before dawn (~12 hours). The risk of predation was
then assessed by the presence of scars identified in the models upon their recovery. The rocks used for
basking by B. alvarengai usually bear abundant lichens on their surface, which provides a composite
background coloration intermingling a general grayish/brownish mineral coloration with spots varying from
dark-gray to chalk white. Thus, B. alvarengai appears to be, at least to the human eye, equally well
camouflaged for its entire range of skin color. However, and contrary to what we have anticipated, white
models suffered significantly more predatory attacks than black and grayish ones ( x 2 =10.1; df=2;
p=0.006). We conclude, therefore, that the whitening in skin color elicited by the increase in body
temperature during basking may compromise camouflage increasing the risk of predation.
Thermoregulatory benefits afforded by the basking behavior and associated changes in skin coloration,
however, are likely to compensate for such drawback.



Chabarria, Ryan (Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi); Pezold, Frank (Texas A&M University-Corpus
Christi, Canada)

Molecular phylogeny of Sicydium (Gobiidae: Sicydiinae)

Gobies of the subfamily Sicydiinae are common inhabitants of tropical and subtropical island streams and
tropical continental rivers with limited or no coastal plains. The genus Sicydium is restricted to such
streams in the tropical eastern Pacific and Atlantic basins. Like other members of the subfamily, they are
amphidromous, having adults that live and breed in freshwater and a planktonic marine larval stage. With
22 nominal species and no comprehensive systematic review, there is considerable taxonomic confusion
within Sicydium. Variable coloration in life and preservation, overlapping morphological characters, and
parochial taxonomic studies have all contributed to this confusion. In this study we present a phylogeny
of the genus using both nuclear and mitochondrial DNA data. Preliminary data suggest that the actual
number of species is less than what has been described.




                                                                                                        122
Chakrabarty, Prosanta (LSU Museum of Natural Science);

SpeciesMap: a web-based application for determining the effects of the 2010 Gulf of Mexico oil
spill on wildlife, with a preliminary list of fishes put at risk

The 2010 Gulf of Mexico Oil Spill was the largest in history outside of warfare and because the spill
occurred in the deep sea, its impact on the biota will be difficult to assess. To help address this problem
we have created SpeciesMap (http:// speciesmap.org), a web-based application (web app) that allows a
user to synthesize data on the oil spill with distributional records and other information on marine species.
We have combined satellite image data collected over the course of the oil spill with locality data from
historical collection records of fish species in a geographic information system (GIS). In doing so, we have
created maps to assess which species were potentially in the region of the spill and to what degree their
range was exposed to pollution. To evaluate the impact of the spill, we examined and categorized various
levels of overlap between the observed surface range of the 2010 spill with collections records for 124
fish species including all 77 endemic to the Gulf of Mexico. More than half of all species examined
(including more than half of all endemics) were found to have population records in the region of the spill.
SpeciesMap contains interaction maps for all the species examined and t hese data can be used to target
post-spill collections, to evaluate changes in habitat and to discover extirpations or extinctions in
response to environmental disturbances.



Chan, Eng Heng (Turtle Conservation Society of Malaysia); Chen, Pelf Nyok (Turtle Conservation
Society of Malaysia, Canada)

Performance of Head-started Southern River Terrapins, Batagur affinis edwardmolli in the Wild

Growth data on head-started southern river terrapins that had hatched in 2004 and 2005, and released
into the Setiu River in Terengganu, Malaysia between 2005 and 2009 and recaptured between 2009 and
2011 is presented. Recaptures were obtained from fishermen using gillnets and hooks. The terrapins
were alive and released back into the river after they had been scanned for microchips, measured and
weighed. 222 terrapins hatched in 2004 and 131 in 2005 were released at ages ranging from 1 to 4 years.
A total of 61 recaptures were made, giving a recapture rate of 17.2%. Growth data for both groups were
combined to provide average weight and straight carapace length (SCL) gains for varying durations spent
in the wild after release. Terrapins that had been in the wild from 10 to 15 months gained an average of
990 g and 2.78 cm in SCL. Those recaptured after 30 to 35 months gained 2535 g in weight and 5.98 cm
in SCL. For recaptures made 50 to 55 months cafter release, the gains were3131.3 g in weight and12.75
cm in SCL. The longest duration in the wild (65 to 70 months) exhibited the highest weight gains of 7258
g and SCL gains of 22.03 cm. Size at age data was also computed. Two individuals aged 7 years
weighed an average of 7874 g with a SCL of 38.45 cm. At 6 years of age, they weigh 4092 g and
measure 28.11 cm in SCL. 5 year old terrapins weigh 3570 g with a SCL of 28.11 cm. The youngest
obtained, the 4 year-olds, had weights of 2675 g and SCL of 25.5 cm. Our data demonstrates that head-
started river terrapins are able to grow significantly after release into the wild.




                                                                                                         123
Chan, Hon Ki (The University of Hong Kong); Karraker, Nancy E. (University of Rhode Island, Kingston,
RI, United States); Thomas, Daniel C. (The University of Hong Kong, Pofulam, Hong Kong, Hong Kong);
Kusrini, Mirza (Bogor Agricultural University, West Java, Indonesia)

Are we losing common and widespread species? Implications from the phylogeography of the
floating frog (Occidozyga lima)

Conservation efforts generally focus on species that are rare and restricted in distribution, while those
considered common and widespread are often overlooked. However, it is becoming apparent that
commonness does not protect a species from extinction in this age of rapid environmental change.
Moreover, the phenomenon of cryptic diversity raises the question of whether any truly widespread
species exist at all. A cryptic species complex appearing to be widespread and unthreatened may
obscure declines or extinctions of some species within the complex. The floating frog (Occidozyga lima) is
a common lowland frog with a vast distributional range across tropical East Asia, but populations in South
China have been undergoing declines recently due to extensive habitat loss. In order to determine
whether these populations were distinct and potentially in need of conservation, we evaluated the genetic
variation of O. lima based on 4000bp of DNA data (12S, 16S, 28S, ND1, tyrosinase and histone H3
genes) from 140 individuals representing multiple populations ranging from South China to Indonesia.
Analyses were conducted using maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference. We
discovered at least four distinct, well-supported lineages (South China, Myanmar, Indochina, Indonesia)
across the species‘ range, and the phylogenetic pattern matches the geographical pattern of mountain
ranges. Our results suggest that O. lima is a cryptic species complex. Despite documented population
declines in South China, O. lima is not regarded as threatened, because populations of its counterparts in
other area of tropical East Asia are considered stable, and there is currently no regulatory protection for
the species. The findings of this study provide an example of how a threatened species may be masked
within a cryptic species complex and raise the specter of a loss of evolutionarily significant units before
they are fully understood. These results have significant conservation implications for rapidly declining
amphibian populations in tropical East Asia, where many species are still poorly known.



Chan, Lauren (Duke University); Hibbits, Toby (Texas Cooperative Wildlife Collective, Canada); Hill,
Mike; Leavitt, Dan (Texas A&M University, Canada); Painter, Charlie (New Mexico Game & Fish,
Canada); Fitzgerald, Lee (Texas A&M University, Canada)

Conservation genetics of the endangered Dunes Sagebrush lizard: uniting landscape and
population genetic perspectives to understand current and historical connectivity

 The Dunes Sagebrush lizard, Sceloporus arenicolus , is a habitat specialist endemic to the Mescalero-
Monahans shinnery sands ecosystem, a naturally dynamic and spatially complex landscape that is
fragmented and degraded by human activities and construction associated with oil and gas development.
Identifying the habitat features, both natural and anthropogenic, that affect Dunes Sagebrush Lizard
population persistence and connectivity at multiple spatial and temporal scales is critical to the
development of effective management and conservation plans. We combine approaches from population
genetics, phylogeography, and landscape ecology to understand the current and historical contexts of
population isolation and connectivity, and identify the set of landscape features important to both local
and range-wide persistence. With thorough sampling across the entire range and a multilocus sequence
dataset, we characterize phylogeographic differentiation and estimate the historical demographic context
of population divergence. We find support for substantial differentiation across seemingly contiguous
areas, with small effective population sizes in some regions. In addition, we present preliminary data on




                                                                                                       124
population genetic diversity and differentiation at fine-scales with respect to natural and human-altered
landscape features.



Channing, Alan (University of the Western Cape); Hillers, Annika (Museum für Naturkunde, Berlin,
Canada); Loetters, Stefan (Trier University, Canada); Roedel, Mark-Oliver (Museum für Naturkunde,
Berlin, Canada); Schick, Susanne (Trier University, Canada); Conradie, Werner (Port Elizabeth Museum,
Canada); Roedder, Dennis (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Canada); Mercurio,
Vincenzo (Museum für Naturkunde, Berlin, Canada); Wagner, Philipp (Villanova University, Canada);
Dehling, Maximillian (Universität Koblenz-Landau, Canada); Du Preez, Louis (North-West University,
Canada); Kielgast, Jos (University of Copenhagen, Canada); Burger, Marius (University of the Western
Cape, Canada)

Taxonomy of the super-cryptic Hyperolius nasutus group of long reed frogs of Africa (Anura:
Hyperoliidae), with descriptions of six new species

Specimens from across the range of the Hyperolius nasutus species group were sequenced for two
mitochondrial genes and one nuclear gene. Advertisement calls were recorded from the same specimens
where possible, and morphological characters were compared. Bayesian inference and maximum
likelihood produced a well-supported tree indicating 15 clades that were assigned to existing or new
species. Hyperolius lamottei is confirmed to be outside the H. nasutus group clade. On the basis of
molecular, vocalisation and morphological data we recognise            H. acuticeps, H. adspersus, H.
benguellensis, H. dartevellei, H. igbettensis, H. nasutus, H. poweri, H. viridis and describe six new
species. Hyperolius granulatus, H. nasicus, H. oxyrhynchus, H. punctulatus and H. sagitta are assigned
as junior synonyms. As our results are based on a small number of specimens, these hypotheses await
testing with larger sample sizes and more characters. A species distribution model suggests where outlier
populations might be found.



Chapple, David (Monash University); Simmonds, Sarah; Wong, Bob (Monash University, Melbourne,
Australia)

Know when to run, know when to hide: can behavioural differences explain the divergent invasion
success of two sympatric lizards?

Invasive species represent a select subset of organisms that have successfully transitioned through each
stage of the introduction process (transportation, establishment, and spread). Although there is a growing
realisation that behaviour plays a critical role in invasion success, few studies have focused on the initial
stages of introduction. We examined whether differences in the grouping tendencies and exploratory
behaviour of two sympatric lizard species could contribute to their divergent invasion success. While the
non-directed activity of the two species did not differ, the invasive delicate skink (Lampropholis delicata)
was found to be more exploratory than the congeneric non-invasive garden skink (L. guichenoti), which
enabled it to more effectively locate novel environments and basking site resources. The delicate skink
also exhibited a greater tendency to hide, which may act to enhance its probability of ensnarement in
freight and cargo and decrease its likelihood of detection during transit. The grouping tendencies of the
two species did not differ. Together, our results suggest that while the two species have an equivalent
‗opportunity‘ for unintentional human-assisted transportation, several pre-existing behavioural traits may
enhance the success of the delicate skink in negotiating the initial stages of the introduction process, and
subsequent post-establishment spread.




                                                                                                         125
Charvet, Patricia (SENAI / PR); Viana, Anderson (Projeto Trygon, Canada)

Embryonic Stages of Development of Neotropical Freshwater Stingrays (Potamotrygonidae)

Neotropical freshwater stingrays are highly valued as ornamental fish and the trade is concentrated on
neonate and juvenile specimens due to size issues. Despite having these after birth life stages well
known, little information is available on the embryonic development of potamotrygonids. In the present
study over 500 embryos of potamotrygonid species (mainly Plesiotrygon iwamae, Paratrygon aiereba,
Heliotrygon rosai, Potamotrygon leopoldi, P. scobina, P. motoro, P. orbignyi and P. signata ) were
macroscopically analyzed, weighted and measured. Five main stages of development were noted, each
with specific morphological characteristics such as disc and pectoral fins formation, gills development,
pigmentation, disc width size, weight and yolk sac proportion. The results were consistent for all species
studies until now and a specific embryonic development scale is presented for this group. Some of the
main features for each stage are presented as follows. At the first stage gills are external, pectoral fins not
fused, there is no sign of pigmentation and the yolk sac weight corresponds to approximately 90% of the
embryo weight. The second stage has similar features, however, pectoral fins are fused and yolk sac
decreases to around 60% of the embryo weight. At the third stage gills become internal and the yolk sac
corresponds to less than 50% of the embryo weight. The most significant changes at stage four comprise
beginning of the pigmentation process and a significant reduction on the yolk sac proportion,
corresponding now to around 15% of the embryo weight. The fifth and last stage of development is widely
known as near term embryonic development, when pectoral fins are fully developed, gills are internal,
pigmentation patterns are well defined and the yolk sac proportion drops down to less than 5% of the
embryo weight. In some regions of the Amazon basin where ornamental captures are carried out illegally,
some fishermen capture pregnant females, cause abortions and try to commercialize embryos at stages
of development four or five. This condemned practice leads to embryo mortality in most cases, since only
occasionally embryos at stage five might survive if aborted. The existence of an embryo development
scale for this group of stingrays contributes to determine pregnancy development and provides data for
law enforcement agents to detect when illegally aborted embryos are tentatively being commercialized.



Chen, Pelf-Nyok (Turtle Conservation Society of Malaysia);

Community Participation in a River Terrapin Conservation Project                in Kemaman, Terengganu,
Malaysia

A statewide survey carried out in Terengganu in 2010 has resulted in the discovery of two new localities
where the critically-endangered River Terrapins (Batagur affinis) were present. One of these localities is
the Kemaman River.

In 2011, we initiated a pilot river terrapin conservation project in the Kemaman River with the cooperation
from the Department of Wildlife and National Parks and three local communities, i.e. Tok Kapor, Pasir
Gajah and Dadong Villages.A total of 649 B. affinis eggs were procured and incubated, and of these 233
hatchlings were produced, with an average hatching success of 36%.In Tok Kapor, 219 eggs were
incubated and 27 hatchlings were produced. The hatching success was recorded at 12%. The eggs were
initially incubated by the Pinang River bank but a bout of heavy rain and subsequent floods inundated the
eggs undergoing incubation. While the nests survived the movement and relocation to higher grounds
during the floods, most eggs were depredated by ants. In Pasir Gajah, 420 eggs were incubated and 198
hatchlings were produced. The hatching success was recorded at 47%. Finally, in Dadong, ten eggs were
incubated and eight hatchlings were produced, with a hatching success of 80%.All hatchlings were
weighed, measured and marked by way of scute mutilation before they were released into the Kemaman



                                                                                                           126
River. We would like to commend the local communities for their enthusiasm, support and action in the
conservation project. Their participation is crucial in ensuring the survival of the critically-endangered river
terrapins.



Chen, Pelf-Nyok (Turtle Conservation Society of Malaysia);

Population Structure and Growth of the Critically Endangered Painted Terrapin (Batagur
borneoensis) in the Setiu River, Terengganu, Malaysia

The Setiu River is home to two critically-endangered but poorly-studied freshwater turtles, the Painted
Terrapins (Batagur borneoensis) and River Terrapins (Batagur affinis). In 2009, a mark-and-recapture
study was initiated to study the population structure and growth of these freshwater turtles. Between 2009
and 2011, we encountered 510 individuals, of which 286 were B. borneoensis (56%) and 224 were B.
affinis (44%). Of the 286 B. borneoensis individuals, 34 were males, 60 were females and 180 were
undetermined. Size classes suggested that 58 individuals were hatchlings less than 20 cm SCL, 169
were juveniles between 20 and 40 cm SCL and 59 were adults between 40 and 60 cm SCL. Of the 274
wild-caught individuals, 248 individuals were captured once over three years, 18 were recaptured twice
between 11 and 905 days, seven were recaptured thrice between 29 and 785 days, and one individual
was recaptured four times over 187 days. Terrapins that were recaptured twice and thrice recorded an
average growth of 1.15 g/day and 1.36 g/day, respectively, where as the only individual that was
recaptured four times gained 2.67 g/day. The 12 remaining individuals were head-started, of which 11
individuals were recaptured once between 4 and 489 days, and one individual was recaptured twice in
139 days. The low recapture rates indicate that the population may be suffering from the negative effects
of fishery-related activities and habitat destruction in the river. Effective conservation measures are
urgently required to ensure the viability of the critically-endangered freshwater turtles in the wild.



Chen, Xin (The City University of New York, The Graduate Center and College of Staten Island);
Burbrink, Frank (The City University of New York, The Graduate Center and College of Staten Island,
Canada)

How does ecological niche change through time in serially diversifying globally distributed
ratsnakes?

Understanding how ecological traits change through time is critical for investing the mechanisms of
adaptive radiation via ecological opportunity. During adaptive radiations, rates of diversification are
expected to be highest during the early history of the group and decline through time as available niches
are filled. Along with this pattern of species diversification, ecological disparification should be low,
indicating that niche variation is highest among subclades rather than within subclades. Moreover, the
evolution of ecological traits should fit an early burst pattern suggesting that most change in ecology
happens during the earliest phases of diversification. Global ratsnakes represent a species-rich
assemblage in Colubrinae, currently including 74 recognized species distributed across both the Old
World (OW) Eurasia and the New World (NW). Originating in the tropical Asian, this group has rapidly
radiated in both the OW and NW temperate regions and holds the highest diversity in these two areas. In
this study, we use phylogenies of worldwide ratsnakes as our model system to test the early burst pattern
of ecological niche disparity, examine the best-fitting evolutionary models of niche divergence (Brownian
motion, OU, early burst, late burst, white noise), reconstruct the ancestral state of niches and quantify the
niche similarity among different taxa. We first estimated the phylogenetic history of ratsnakes with a



                                                                                                            127
concatenated gene matrix representing one mitochondrial gene and four nuclear loci. Second, we
obtained ratsnake niche information using world climate data sampled from 5576 georeferenced localities
from 70 taxa. The pattern of ecological disparity was determined by implementing variations of the
disparity-through-time estimates and the best evolutionary model of niche disparity was decided using
AIC weights and simulations. We then estimated the ancestral state of ratsnake niches and compare the
niche overlap using environmental niche models and comparative phylogenetic methods. Our results
provide information to better understand the evolution of ecological traits in snakes and determine if
general rules govern the change of these traits in serially radiating groups.



Chernoff, Barry (Wesleyan University); Miller, Kate; Heinemann, Ross; Tipton, Michelle (Wesleyan
University, Canada); Welchel, Adam (The Nature Conservancy, Canada)

The Effects of Dam Removal on the East Branch of the Eightmile River, CT

The hydrography of the East Branch of the Eightmile River has been modified since the 1720‘s when a
dam was constructed on the Zemko property. While the dam has occasionally fallen into disrepair, the
dam has largely been intact for more than the last hundred years. In 2006, the water in the impoundment
behind the dam was drawn down and the dam was removed by fall 2007; a 10 m rocky connector was
constructed between the portion above and below the former dam. The former impoundment above the
dam has changed to form a meandering, shallow stream channel. We have surveyed fishes, benthic
macroinvertebrates (BMI), water chemistry and physical parameters from 2004 through 2010 at the
former dam sites and at control sites five river miles downstream.The biological communities have
changed dramatically since drawdown and dam removal. The inter-annual variation of the communities in
the vicinity of the dam site is significantly higher than at control sites. The data from both fish and benthic
macroinvertebrates indicate that the patterns of change or ―recovery‖ differ in the sections of river above
and below the dam. Our data suggest that there is insufficient knowledge to predict the duration and
manner of ―recovery‖ following dam removal. If the hydrographic system has been modified for almost
300 years, have the biological communities adapted to an impeded hydrographic regime? If so, does dam
removal itself constitute a major disturbance to the functioning of biological communities? While these are
unsettling questions because of implications for aquatic conservation and management, our data suggest
that achievement of goals from the modification of streams and rivers may not be easily predictable.



Chestnut, Tara (US Geological Survey); Anderson, Chauncey W (US Geological Survey, Canada);
Popa, Radu (Portland State University, Canada); Olson, Deanna H (US Forest Service, PNW Research
Station, Canada); Kirshtein, Julie D (US Geological Survey, Canada)

Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in the boreal environment

Amphibians are among the most vulnerable taxa due to synergistic effects of habitat loss, disease, and
climate change. The amphibian chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), causes an
infectious disease, chytridiomycosis, that is associated with mass mortalities of many amphibian species
and local extinctions in disturbed and pristine landscapes in both temperate and tropical regions. The
‗boreal‘ is the largest ecoregion on the planet, yet largely because of its remoteness, it is one of the least
sampled for Bd. Our research investigates the distribution of Bd in the boreal environment and the
relationship between water quality, Bd detection, and Bd density in both amphibians and their aquatic
habitats. In spring/summer 2009–2011, we examined Bd occurrence in water samples from 29 amphibian
breeding sites in Alaska (USA) across a latitudinal range from approximately 60 to 67 degrees north.



                                                                                                           128
These latitudes were chosen to represent the northern-most latitude of Bd that had been reported in the
literature up until 2009 (60 degrees) and the known northern-most extent of the wood frog ( Lithobates
sylvatic us) in Alaska (67 degrees). In 2009 and 2011 we collected skin swabs from amphibians to assess
Bd occurrences on animals at these sites. Water quality parameters measured were water temperature,
pH, specific conductance, and turbidity. We used qPCR for Bd quantification, and analyzed the results
using an occupancy approach with the program PRESENCE 4.1, with AIC as a measure of parsimony for
model selection. We found Bd at 38% of sites and as far north as 67 degrees latitude, at very low
densities (max. = 8.96 zoospore equivalents per liter of water filtered). All detections except for one
occurred in spring. Climate change scenarios are expected to interact with both the wood frog and Bd
distributions in Alaska. Our inventories are hoped to provide baseline data for boreal Bd monitoring and a
baseline for testing the Red Queen Hypothesis, which explains the evolutionary arms race between host
and pathogen, using Bd and wood frogs as a model case study .



Chestnut, Tara (US Geological Survey); Anderson, Chanucey W (US Geological Survey, Canada);
Voytek, Mary A (National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Canada); Kirshtein, Julie D (US
Geoligical Survey, Canada)

Spatial and temporal patterns of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis occupancy in amphibian
habitats

The chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) is an aquatic pathogen to amphibians
implicated as one of the causal agents for global amphibian declines across a spectrum of habitats
ranging from heavily degraded to intact wilderness. Bd was first described in 1999, and has been
detected in museum specimens dating back to at least 1902. Bd research has focused primarily on the
ecology of the pathogen in infected amphibians. Our research seeks to describe Bd ecology in the
aquatic environment outside of the amphibian host, evaluate spatial and temporal patterns of detection
and density, and investigate the relationship between Bd occupancy and potential covariates including
water quality. In spring/summer 2007–10, we collected Bd samples by filtering water from amphibian
breeding sites at 36 sites in the United States and measured temperature, pH, and specific conductance
at a subset (19 sites). We also intensively monitored one site in Oregon, collecting monthly Bd samples
and water quality measurements from 2007 to 2011. DNA was extracted from filters and Bd was
quantified using qPCR following established methods. Occupancy modeling was performed using the
program PRESENCE, we used AIC as a measure of parsimony for model selection.

Bd was detected at 47% of sites sampled (17 of 36 total sites, and 9 of 19 subset with water quality
measurements); however, individual site estimates of occupancy ranged from 0.07 to 0.83. Bd
occupancy was conditional on pH and detection was conditional on pH and volume filtered. At the
intensively monitored site, Bd was detected at least once in every month over 4 years of monitoring.
Density reached a peak in spring of every year and a second smaller peak was observed in December in
two of the four years. Our findings contribute to the understanding of the ecology of Bd in the aquatic
environment, which will be critical for amphibian conservation. The patterns observed at these sites have
informed hypotheses we will test across a broader landscape in the next year.




                                                                                                       129
Chettri, Basundhara (Sikkim Government College, Tadong);

Elevational distribution pattern, their underlying causes, and conservation of Herpetofauna along
an Eastern Himalayan elevation gradient, India

Eastern Himalayan Region is considered as one of the important wildlife corridors and a global
biodiversity hotspot. With its unique biogeographical locations and high variation in elevation (300-8000
m), Eastern Himalaya harbors diverse habitats resulting in variety of life forms and high endemicity.
Here, I examine elevational distribution pattern of herpetofauna and their underlying causes along
elevation gradient (300-4800 m) in Sikkim, Eastern Himalaya, India. Understanding elevational pattern
of species helps to identify high diverse areas and, therefore, aids in conservation. I also evaluate threats
to herpetofauna and suggest measures for conservation. Based on elevation, study area was
categorized into seven zones (at 500 m interval). I used Visual Encounter and Night Stream Survey
methods for data on population, and field surveys, home visits and informal interviews for data on threats.
In total, 1552 individuals of reptiles belonging to 42 species (14 lizards and 28 snakes) were observed
during the study. Combined data of VES (1236 man-hours) and night stream survey (27 km) resulted in
23 species and 1346 individuals of amphibians. Along the elevation gradient, both reptiles and amphibian
species followed quadratic relation with elevation. However, the decline was abrupt towards higher
elevation with no reptilian species beyond 3000 m although amphibians were seen up to 4800 m
elevation. Mid-Domain Effect (MDE) Null model deviated from the empirical richness pattern showing
minimal effect of geometric constraints on elevational pattern indicating the role of other abiotic and biotic
factors in governing the pattern. Range profile of herpetofauna showed that most of the species are
restricted to narrow elevational range. Among the evaluated threats, rampant killing of reptiles, especially
snakes, and mass extractions of amphibians for consumption by ethnic communities were the major
ones. Such activity has caused decline in herpetofaunal diversity and their population in Eastern
Himalaya . As conservation measures, we extensively raised awareness at various levels on the role of
herpetofauna in ecosystems and their conservation need. The study strongly recommends that
herpetofauna must be taken into consideration for any conservation planning. The river valleys all along
the elevation, more importantly mid-elevation, are crucial for herpetofauna conservation in the eastern
Himalaya and needs immediate conservation attention.



Childers, Jackie (University of California Museum of Vertebrate Zoology); Eifler, Douglas; Eifler, Maria
(Erell Institute, Canada)

Age dependent behavioral variation in the lizard Meroles cuneirostris

The Wedge-snouted Lizard ( Meroles cuneirostris ) is a lacertid endemic to the Namib Desert of coastal
Namibia where they're diurnally active and restricted to sparsely vegetated sand dunes. To date, little
research has been done on the behavioral ecology of M. cuneirostris; we examined how demographic
classes vary behaviorally and in habitat use. We characterized and quantified behavioral differences
between adults (mean SVL: 53mm) and juveniles (mean SVL: 33 mm), and between adult males and
females. Behavioral variation was also analyzed relative to microhabitat.

During Dec. 2011-Jan. 2012, 49 juveniles and 95 adult individuals were captured and marked. Twenty-
minute focal observations were conducted on 33 juvenile (21 male; 12 female) and 50 adult (25 male; 25
female) individuals to gather behavioral data as well as to obtain information on microhabitat preference.
Behavioral variation was characterized by recording sitting and walking events/h and head turns/h.
Microhabitat preference was quantified by measuring the amount of time spent in and near vegetation, as
well as in open areas. Juveniles were more active than adults; they moved almost twice as frequently as



                                                                                                          130
adults (median moves/h: 21 (0-81) vs 12 (0-63)) and more frequently scanned their surroundings (median
head turns/h: 45 (0-99) vs 24 (0-99)) while there appeared to be no such variation among adult males and
females. Individuals spend most of their time sitting. The posture assumed during these periods was
separated into two categories: erect and splayed. Erect sitting was characterized by the animal having
either partially or fully extended forelimbs, while splayed sitting was characterized by the animal being
completely prostrate. Juveniles sat in a splayed configuration more often than adults; there was no
difference in how often individual adults and juveniles sat erect. There were two primary habitat types in
the study area: the vegetated base of the sand dune and the gravel plain lying just beyond the base of the
dune. We recognized four microhabitat categories: 1) in or 2) near dune vegetation, 3) in the open dune
sand or 4) in the gravel plain. Microhabitat use was not related to lizard age, but did seem to influence
behavior. On the dunes, head turn rates and the frequency of splayed sitting depended on proximity to
vegetation. The behavioral variation exhibited by M. cuneirostris provides an example of how the
environment can differentially influence animals of varying age or size.



Chinnasamy, Ramesh (Salim Ali Centre for Ornithology and Natural History); Subramanian, Bhupathy
(Salim Ali Centre for Ornithology and Natural History, Coimbatore, TN, India)

Application of natural marking in ecological studies on Indian pythons

Natural marks on dorsal anterior part of pythons are unique and useful for individual identification. Since
handling snakes and use of radio-telemetry is prohibited in Keoladeo National Park (KNP), Bharatpur,
India, we used dorsal marks to estimate the population and home range of Python molurus molurus. Low
temperature during winter (November-February) prompting the pythons to bask outside their ground
burrows which helped us sighting of each individual. From October 2007 to April 2010, about 50 ground
burrows were used by pythons. These burrows were monitored every fortnight, photographs of dorsal
body marks of pythons were taken to identify individuals. A total number of 124 individuals were identified
in 29 sq km of study area. In KNP, juveniles and sub adults were often unavailable for sampling. Hence
the identified adult pythons (Total Length >210 cm) in each winter considered as sample population.
During 2007-08 and 2008-09 a total of 47 and 75 (18 recaptures) pythons were identified respectively,
and the Lincoln Index used for population estimation was 183.3. During 2009-10, 37 pythons were
identified including 24 recaptures of 2008-09 marked individuals (75) and the estimated population was
115.63. Variation in the estimated population (183-116) could be due to differential emergence of
pythons during the time. Sighting and re-sighting locations were marked by GPS; maximum distance
between two points computed to know the linear distance. The home-range of pythons, evaluated by the
GE Path 1.4.4a (software) area/perimeter polygon protocol used for estimate showed it as 12.89+20.94
ha (n=20). Pythons moved to an average of 770.38+ 880.73m (range 0-3727.09m, n=47) of which 44.5%
were operating within 500m and 25.5% were found between 500 and 1000m from the burrow. Further
studies using radio-telemetry may provide precise data on the home range of this species.



Chiquillo, Kelcie (San Francisco State University); Crow, Karen; Bravo, Nerieda (San Francisco State
University, Canada); Ebert, David (Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, Canada)

The secret of the Mermaid's Purse: A novel reproductive strategy in two skates of the genus Raja

 Skates ( Rajiformes ) are considered to be the most diverse group of cartilaginous fishes and occur
throughout the world, in benthic, sandy habitats. Skates are classified as elasmobranchs, along with 350
other species of cartilaginous fishes. The systematics of the Rajiformes remains contentious, with



                                                                                                       131
multiple topologies inferred from various sources of data. Several studies have called for a reorganization
of the genus and therefore a reliable phylogeny of the genus has not been proposed. The goal of this
research is to evaluate the phylogenetic affinities of skates within the genus Raja based on molecular
data from multiple mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) loci-- 12S, 16S, and COI. Previous studies focused on
determining several Raja species, none have addressed monophyly of the genus. Furthermore, none of
these studies have included the two species that exhibit the unique trait of having multiple embryos per
egg capsule- Raja Binoculata and Raja Pulchra . We propose a phylogenetic hypothesis to infer the
evolutionary history of multiple embryos per egg capsule within this genus. We found that R. pulchra
and R. binoculata are sister taxa, and therefore we infer that the character of multiple embryos per egg
capsule has arisen once in evolution. We are currently investigating fitness tradeoffs, such as differential
survivorship and multiple paternity in collaboration of the Aquarium of Bay in San Francisco, to determine
whether this reproductive strategy has a fitness advantage and whether it effects conservation projects.



Chodkowski, Nicole (Hofstra University); Burke, Russell (Hofstra University, Hempstead, United States)

An Evolutionary and Behavioral Study of the Prevalence of Parasitic Trematodes (Pleurogonius
malaclemys) in Diamondback Terrapins (Malaclemys terrapin)

The diamondback terrapin (Malaclemys terrapin) is found in brackish waters of the eastern and southern
coasts of the United States. Hunter (1961, 1967) described a parasitic trematode (Pleurogonius
malaclemys), whose definitive final host is the diamondback terrapin. She showed that the eastern mud
snail (Ilyanassa obsoleta), an abundant terrapin prey species is an intermediate host for P. malaclemys.
Byers et al. (2011) further showed that the frequency of P. malaclemys cysts on mud snails was an
accurate measure of terrapin abundance. Our studies censusing P. malaclemys cysts on mud snails in
Jamaica Bay, NY and Great South Bay, NY have confirmed that the trematode occurs further north than
previously reported, that the trematode cysts infect snails year round but that snail infection frequencies
vary dramatically by season. We also found that juvenile terrapins can be infected by P. malaclemys
under laboratory conditions, but the number of cysts consumed is not equivalent to the number of adult
trematodes present in the gut. We plan additional studies to measure the prevalence and intensity of P.
malaclemys infection in wild adult terrapin populations, and field and laboratory studies will investigate the
effects of P. malaclemys infection on terrapin behavior and growth. We predict that terrapins infected with
P. malaclemys will thermoregulate to stay warmer which may have implications for social behavior and
predation risk.



Christie, Nicole (Sonoma State University); Geist, Nick; St. John, Wendy (Sonoma State University,
Canada)

Effects of Nest Temperature Variation on Viability and Sex Determination of Western Pond Turtles

The western pond turtle, E. marmorata, is the only native freshwater turtle along the Pacific Slope of the
United States and is experiencing population declines in much of its historical range. In response to
these declines, this species is now listed by the respective state Departments of Fish and Game as
Endangered in Washington, Threatened in Oregon and a Species of Special Concern in California. Along
with anthropogenic factors correlated with these losses, there is broad consensus among scientists that
rapidly changing climates are becoming an increasingly serious threat to a range of organisms on a
global scale, with taxa such as turtles with temperature dependent sex determination (TSD) among the
most vulnerable. In laboratory experiments, this population of E. marmorata has been shown to exhibit



                                                                                                          132
TSD, with a pivotal temperature (m/f 1:1) of 29°C. We are examining how natural incubation temperature
regimes affect sex determination, hatching success, and incubation duration. Gravid female E.
marmorata were tracked to nesting sites in the month of June for four consecutive years at a Northern
California nesting ground. After nest construction, nests were carefully excavated and egg position and
dimensions were recorded. I-Button temperature sensors were then placed at various levels within the
nest chambers to record temperatures for each row of eggs at 1-hour intervals. Eggs and sensors were
recovered at ~70 days (past sex determining period) and placed in an incubator until hatched. Incubation
duration and hatch success were recorded and sex was determined by endoscopy at ~7 months. Nest
locations and egg position within the nest affected mean temperature and degree of temperature
fluctuation experienced by each egg. Daily temperature fluctuation within most nests commonly
exceeded 20°C. Most nests experienced temperatures that exceeded 40°C for several hours each day,
conditions that our previous studies indicate are well above the lethal threshold at constant temperature
incubation. We also found hatchling sex ratios to be biased toward females in the majority of the nests.
Our results indicate that alterations to nesting grounds can disrupt natural temperature patterns, sex
ratios, and reproductive success with potentially serious consequences for E. marmorata populations.



Churchill, Diana (Florida International University); Heithaus, Michael R. (Florida International University,
North Miami, FL, United States); Grubbs, Dean (Florida State University, St. Teresa, FL, United States);
Vaudo, Jeremy (Florida International University, North Miami, FL, United States)

Effects of the Deepwater Horizon Spill on the trophic interactions of deep-sea sharks and
associated species of the Gulf of Mexico.

The Deepwater Horizon oil spill (DwH) was significant not only in the amount of oil, but also the depth of
the release and the unprecedented subsurface use of dispersants. Therefore, the benthic contaminants
from the spill may have had significant impacts on the poorly characterized deep-sea communities of the
northern slope of the Gulf of Mexico (NGS). We explored the potential impacts of the DwH on deep sea
food webs by comparing trophic interactions of upper level predators (sharks, teleosts) and benthic
scavengers (crabs, giant isopods, hagfish) from sites located in close proximity to the spill site (NGS) and
sites at similar depths located 400 km from the spill along the west Florida slope (WFS). We also took
advantage of samples from the WFS sites collected prior to the spill to investigate temporal variation in
trophic interactions of representative species. We assessed trophic interactions using a combination of
stomach contents and stable isotope (δ13C and δ15N) analysis. Stomach contents analysis revealed the
diet of Cuban dogfish (Squalus cubensis), the numerically dominant elasmobranch, to be composed of
shrimp, cephalopods and mesopelagic fishes, with slight variation in their relative contributions to diets in
the NGS and WFS sites. Cuban dogfish δ13C isotope values varied slightly between the NGS and WFS
sites. In general across all species, there was little interspecific variation in isotopic values within and
between sites. These results, however, are based on the first of a series of sampling events after DwH
and because of likely slow isotopic turnover rates in deep-sea organisms may not yet reflect potential
changes in trophic structure after the spill.




                                                                                                         133
Cicia, Angela (University of New England); Frederich, Markus (University of New England, Canada);
Mandelman, John (New England Aquarium, Canada); Sulikowski, James (University of New England,
Canada)

Utilizing a combination of physiological and cellular stress markers to assess the impacts of trawl
capture in

 In elasmobranchs, studies assessing the impacts of trawl capture have primarily focused on discard
mortality and the extracellular alterations it produces. No studies have utilized intracellular markers, to
better define this response. To provide a more complete understating of trawl stress, alterations in both
extra and intracellular parameters were assessed in two skate species typically captured by this gear
type. In the field, blood and tissue (heart, liver, and muscle) samples were obtained from little ( Leucroraja
erinacea ) and thorny ( Amyblyraja radiata ) skates subjected to the same three trawl durations
(control;30min; 90, 180min). Results indicate that blood acid-base status (decrease in pH; increases in p
CO 2 and lactate) became progressively more disturbed with longer tow durations in both skate species;
however the magnitude of this response was more pronounced in thorny skates. On a cellular level, only
minor increases (2-3 fold) in HSP70 mRNA levels were observed in little skate heart, liver and muscle
tissue following the longest tow duration. In contrast, tow durations of 180min only elicited an elevation in
HSP70 mRNA (12-fold) in thorny skate heart tissue. Lastly, tow duration produced virtually no alterations
in AMPK activity or mRNA levels, with the exception of a 4-fold increase in AMPK mRNA in thorny skate
heart tissue after 180min tow. In conclusion, despite profound alterations in acid-base status, changes in
the measured cellular markers were minimal. Furthermore, the absence of a response in AMPK, suggests
energy availability is not a limiting factor in coping with trawl capture.



Clardy, Todd (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Hilton, Eric J. (Virginia Institute of Marine Science,
Gloucester Point, VA, United States)

A preliminary look at the systematic relationships of the prickleback family Stichaeidae
(Cottiformes: Zoarcoidei) based on morphological data

The prickleback family Stichaeidae is a diverse group of small blenny- or eel-like marine fishes that are
distributed within the intertidal and subtidal continental slope waters of the northern hemisphere. The
family is one of nine in the Cottiformes suborder Zoarcoidei and currently includes six subfamilies, 37
genera, and about 75 species. Although a systematic framework is necessary for addressing aspects of
their biology, such as the evolution of life history patterns and biogeography, the systematics of
Stichaeidae and their relatives remain unresolved due in part to a lack of fundamental morphological
data. In this presentation, we will present the preliminary results of a morphological analysis of
Stichaeidae and their relatives. This analysis includes representatives from at least 21 genera of
Stichaeidae, all other zoarcoid families, and several outgroup taxa from within Cottiformes. At least 65
characters from the external and skeletal anatomy were included in the analysis. Preliminary analyses
indicate a lack of resolution among the genera of Stichaeidae. Subfamily groups, as recognized in the
current taxonomy, are not recovered as monophyletic units, and the family does not appear to be
monophyletic, with many non-stichaeid zoarcoid taxa interspersed throughout the resulting cladograms.
Additional work needs to be conducted, including adding stichaeid genera and incorporating additional
characters, to determine the relationships among the Stichaeidae.




                                                                                                          134
Clark, Rulon (Herpetologists League); Barbour, Matthew (University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada)

Consequences of ground squirrel signaling at multiple stages of rattlesnake foraging

Many species approach, inspect, and signal towards their predators. These behaviors are often
interpreted as pursuit-deterrent signals—honest signals that indicate to predators that the prey animal is
aware of its presence and is likely to escape if pursued. However, empirical evidence for pursuit-deterrent
signals is scant. Not only do we have few studies that have quantified predator responses to these
signals, but also the mechanisms maintaining these responses are often assumed, and unexplored. We
examined the effects of a putative pursuit-deterrent signal, the tail-fag display, given by California ground
squirrels (Spermophilus beecheyi) toward northern Pacific rattlesnakes (Crotalus oreganus oreganus).
Our study was conducted in the field, using manned and unmanned video cameras to record behaviors of
radio-tagged, free-ranging rattlesnakes foraging in ground squirrel colonies. We found that squirrel tail-
flags deter snake predation on two different time scales. At the time of the interaction, snakes were more
likely to attempt to strike squirrels that did not tail flag than those that did. This may be because tail
flagging is reliably associated with squirrel vigilance and their readiness to dodge a snake strike. Tail
flagging also influenced subsequent behaviors of rattlesnakes. Tail-flagging by adult squirrels increased
the probability that snakes would abandon their ambush site, but rattlesnakes did not abandon after
receiving signals from squirrel pups. Furthermore, the probability of of a snake successfully striking a
squirrel at that site increased after tail-flagging interactions with pups. These differences are likely shaped
by the differential effects of pup and adult signaling on nearby squirrels, as well as pups being associated
with high prey density areas. By focusing on the receiver‘s perspective in this signaling interaction, our
results highlight how the context in which predators encounter prey has an important influence on their
responses to prey signaling.



Clark, William (Western Wyoming Community College); Weaver, Robert (Department of Biological
Sciences, Central Washington University, Ellensburg, WA, United States)

Recent Observations of the California Mountain Kingsnake (Lampropeltis zonata) in Washington
State

The California Mountain Kingsnake is found from Baja California, Mexico north into California and
southwestern Oregon. It reaches its northern most distribution within the Columbia River Gorge National
Scenic Area of Skamania and Klickitat Counties, Washington State. In Washington State it is closely
associated with Oregon White Oak ( Quercus garryana ) Savannah, and open Douglas-fir ( Pseudotsuga
menziesii ) and Ponderosa pine ( Pinus ponderosa ) forest. While it may be locally abundant in California,
the secretive nature of L . zonata has resulted in few observations in Washington State, and this
species is considered critically imperiled and vulnerable to extinction. While surveying for other species of
snakes in the Columbia River Gorge individuals of L . zonata were occasionally encountered. For most
observations I recorded the time of day (or night), air and substrate temperatures, and GPS position of
snakes. Live snakes were not disturbed or handled (except to remove off the road). However, dead-on-
road (DOR) snakes were collected and analyzed for both stomach content and reproductive condition.
Since 2006, nearly 30 individuals of L . zonata have been observed, or reported to me. While all
observations have been recorded within the known range of L . zonata, this increase in the number of
observations leads me to believe this species is far more abundant than previously thought. Additionally,
the relative ease of finding individuals while road-cruising may allow for the first ecological study of L.
zonata in Washington State, and such data will aid in management decisions and the conservation of this
species.



                                                                                                           135
Clarke, Tayler (University of Costa Rica); Espinoza Mendiola, Mario (James Cook University, Canada);
Villalobos, Fresia; Wehrtmann, Ingo (Unidad de Investigación Pesquera y Acuicultura, Universidad de
Costa Rica, Canada)

Reproductive ecology of four elasmobranch species in the Pacific coast of Costa Rica, Central
America

Sharks and rays are a common component of the bycatch in many tropical demersal trawling fisheries.
The elasmobranch bycatch of the commercial shrimp trawling fishery operating along the Pacific coast of
Costa Rica is comprised by a total of 24 species. In data deficient fisheries such as this one, life history
may be used as a valuable tool to identify vulnerable species and apply precautionary measures that
could ensure their long-term conservation. Therefore, we studied the reproductive ecology of Raja velezi,
Mustelus henlei, Zapteryx xyster and Torpedo peruana associated to the commercial deepwater shrimp
fishery along the Pacific coast of Costa Rica. This information was used to identify essential habitats and
recommend management measures for elasmobranchs in Costa Rica. A total of 217 tows were carried
out at 25-350 m from March 2010 to September 2011. During this period, a total of 751 individuals of R.
velezi , 569 M. henlei , 394 Z. xyster and 157 T. peruana were obtained. The size at sexual maturity
was estimated as: 52-56 cm TL for R. velezi , 39-43 cm TL for M. henlei , 45-47 cm LT for Z. xyster and
54-65 cm LT for T. peruana . Fecundity increased with female length. M. henlei presented between 1
and 12 embryos, and Z. xyster carried between 1 and 9 embryos. Segregation by size and sex was
detected in all species, mainly related to depth. Most gravid females were found at depths >50 m along
the Pacific coast. However, some areas such as the Golfo de Nicoya, the Quepos-Manuel Antonio
wetlands and the Humedal Nacional Térraba-Sierpe (HNTS) presented large aggregations of gravid
females and immature individuals. We recommend the protection of these critical habitats and the
creation of discrete fishing closures at depths 50 m along the Pacific coast of Costa Rica.



Clay, Timothy (University of Arkansas at Little Rock); Gifford, Matthew (University of Arkansas at Little
Rock, Canada)

Repeatability and correlations among morphology, physiology, and behavior in a lungless
salamander

Consistent individual differences in behavior are often observed. However, the mechanisms promoting
such consistency are unclear. It has been suggested that the integration of morphological and
physiological traits might promote consistent individual differences in behavior. Specifically, individuals
with higher resting metabolic rates are expected to have larger internal organs, which require increased
energy intake to fuel them.      Therefore, the integration of these morphological and physiological traits
should allow higher rates of activity. We test this hypothesis in the Ouachita dusky salamander,
Desmognathus brimleyorum . First, we tested whether physiological and behavioral traits are consistently
different among individual salamanders.         We then tested whether individuals with higher standard
metabolic rates have higher rates of activity and foraging behavior than those with lower standard
metabolic rates. Finally, we tested these traits are correlated with the size of metabolically expensive
internal organs (i.e., the ―metabolic engine‖) among individuals.




                                                                                                        136
Clay, Timothy (University of Arkansas at Little Rock); Gifford, Matthew (University of Arkansas at Little
Rock, Little Rock, AR, United States)

Thermal dependence of aggression in plethodontid salamanders

Within Plethodon, there are numerous examples of elevational replacement between montane endemics
and lowland conspecifics. Recent evidence suggests that interspecific aggression limits the range of the
lowland conspecific. Plethodon cylindraceus and P. montanus occur in the southern Appalachians and
have elevational replacement, with P. montanus occurring at higher elevations. Interspecific trials were
conducted with sixteen males of each species as both an intruder and a resident. Trials were conducted
in the dark at both 15 and 23 C and were videotaped with infrared cameras. P. cylindraceus delivered
more bites and displayed more aggression than did P. montanus at both temperatures. This is the first
documented case of the lowland congener being more aggressive than the montane endemic. Both
species were less aggressive at 23 than they were at 15 C. This suggests that 23 C is a thermally
stressful environment for both species.



Cline, Brittany B. (University of Maine); Popescu, Viorel D. (University of California, Berkeley; Simon-
Fraser University; Smith Fellowship Program, Burnaby, BC, Canada); Hunter, Jr., Malcolm L.
(Department of Wildlife Ecology, University of Maine, Orono, ME, United States)

Amphibians in complex landscapes: Effects of forestry and urbanization on juvenile movements

The persistence of forest amphibians depends on conserving permeable migration corridors in
increasingly human-shaped landscapes, where forestry practices, suburban structures, and agriculture
coincide. For many pond-breeding amphibians, successful dispersal of the juvenile stage is essential for
population connectivity. We examined the effects of various forestry practices and land cover types on the
emigration success of juvenile wood frogs (Lithobates sylvaticus) in three experiments in Maine, USA.
First, to examine the effect of short-term vegetative regrowth post-harvesting, we sampled amphibians in
four treatments (partial harvest, clearcut with coarse woody debris [CWD] removed and retained, uncut
control) over 6 years. There was no difference between the partial harvest and controls; we found a
modest increase in use of clearcuts by juveniles following harvest (from an 8-fold difference between
forest and clearcut in yr-1 post-clearcutting to a 3-fold difference during yrs 3 – 5). Second, we conducted
a habitat permeability experiment by releasing juveniles in 50 x 2.5 m enclosures located perpendicular to
a forest edge and extending into the following treatments: (1) chronosequence of stands (recent clearcut,
11-yr, 20-yr-old stand, mature forest), and (2) open-canopy cover types (cornfield, hayfield, lawn). We
found that the mature forest was 3.1 and 3.7 times more permeable than the 11-yr-old stand and clearcut,
respectively. There were no differences between the mature forest and 20-yr-old stand. We observed a
differential response among open-canopy types: (1) cornfield and 45%-cover lawns had highest
permeability, (2) 0%-cover lawn and hayfield had lowest permeability, and (3) clearcuts were intermediate
between (1) and (2). Third, we expanded our studies of dispersal (in clearcuts, light gap cuts, lawns,
hayfields, row crops) to include what has become the dominant form of harvest in the Acadian forest:
heavy partial harvests undertaken in strips with mechanical harvesters. We experimentally tested the
initial dispersal orientation of juveniles along silvicultural edges. Using release-trials (10-m dm arenas),
we found slight (but statistically insignificant) evidence of preference for contiguous forest (relative to
partial-harvests). Results suggest that canopy cover may not serve as sole metric for assessing
microhabitat quality outside of forestry contexts. While the effect of even-aged silviculture may be long-
lasting, the conversion of natural habitats to human-dominated cover may have more severe
consequences for dispersal by inducing dramatic structural and compositional vegetation change. Future
research should focus on direct-tracking methods to assess fate and behavior of individually-marked



                                                                                                        137
juvenile amphibians – metrics that are traditionally difficult to measure, but critical for identifying the
drivers of population persistence.



Closel, Melissa (Universidade de São Paulo - USP); Kohlsdorf, Tiana (Universidade de São Paulo -
USP, Canada)

Evolution of Fossorial and Nocturnal Gymnophthalmidae Lizards: Did the Metabolism Change?

Evolution of either fossoriality or nocturnality is observed among several Squamate lineages. Both
transitions likely involve shifts in ecological traits such as diet, field temperatures during rest and activity,
competition and exposition to predators, among others. In that sense, physiological traits also seem to
change when a diurnal epigeal lineage becomes either fossorial or nocturnal. But what happens with
physiology if in the same clade both transitions occurred subsequently? The Gymnophthalminii
(Gymnophthalmidae) lizard clade is a good example of the postulated scenario: first the fossorial habit
evolved, which was followed by an origin of a new lineage of nocturnal species, inside the fossorial clade.
The present study investigates evolutionary changes in metabolic physiology likely associated to the
origin of fossoriality or to the subsequent evolution of nocturnality in the gymnophtalmid lineage. We focus
on the standard metabolic rate (SMR), because in ectotherms it represents the energy demand required
to maintain vital functions. It is relevant to point that SMR is affected by several parameters including
temperature. Thus, thermal environments during rest and activity are probably different for nocturnal and
fossorial species, in comparison with diurnal lizards that move closer to the surface. We measured SMR
in seven species (two epigeal diurnal, two fossorial diurnal and three fossorial nocturnal), using Stop-Flow
Respirometry. Tests were performed at three temperatures (24, 30 and 36°C), chosen based on field
operative temperatures obtained with copper models during field trips. Data were analyzed using
phylogenetic regressions. We found that metabolism did not change with the adoption of the fossorial
habitat in Gymnophthalminii. However, SMR and nocturnality were significantly associated (p<0,05)
whereas nocturnal species presented lower SMRs. Thermal sensitivity of SMR (given by Q12) did not
change with these evolutionary transitions. Then, the major shift observed in SMR of Gymnophthalminii
seems to have occurred with the adoption of a nocturnal habit after the previous colonization of
subterranean environments. Among many possible explanations, the lower SMR observed in nocturnal-
fossorial species might be interpreted as a response to evolution under less severe thermal conditions,
when compared to those experienced by diurnal species living closer to the surface in the hot sand dunes
of Brazil.



Closel, Melissa (Universidade de São Paulo - USP); Kohlsdorf, Tiana (Universidade de São Paulo -
USP, Ribeirão Preto SP, Brazil)

Evolution of Surface-to-Volume Ratio in Gymnophthalmidae Lizards: A New Approach Using
Stereology

Body size affects many aspects of organismal physiology, performance and fitness. Variation in body size
likely implies differences in thermal exchange between an animal and its environment, with important
consequences for thermoregulation. Body size and shape might increase or decrease heat flow by
changes in surface to volume ratio (SVR), so that smaller and elongated forms are expected to have
increased SVR (and consequently higher heat flow) because their surface areas are proportionally larger
than their volumes. Despite the intimate relationship between body temperature and physiological
processes in vertebrate ectotherms, evolutionary patterns of SVR in these animals remain obscure,



                                                                                                             138
especially due to the lack of statistical tools for assessing SVR. The present study developed a
methodology for estimating SVR based on Stereology principles, and used gymnophthalmid lizards to
investigate evolutionary patterns of SVR under a phylogenetic approach. Stereology is based on
geometry and probability statistics, and is useful to estimate surface area and volume of three-
dimensional objects from its two-dimensional images obtained by sections. Data acquisition is based on a
test-system composed by a frame with points and lines that are superimposed to a section. The lines and
points that overlap the image are accounted and added to a formula that calculates an object surface
area and volume. We used specimens from zoological collections (which could not be sectioned), and
applied CT Scans to obtain sections without any damage to them. Five to ten specimens were used for
each species, in a total of 31 species. Gymnophthalmidae lizards present both epigean and fossorial
species, which have different degrees of body elongation. Our results suggest that evolution of fossorial
elongated forms have occurred in association with an increase in SVR. Increments in SVR likely involve
changes in heating and cooling dynamics, with consequences for thermoregulation and habitat selection.
Operative Temperatures measured where gymnophthalmids are collected (surface and subterranean)
suggest that fossorial species experience a more homogeneous environment regarding temperature
variation, which may have acted as a compensatory mechanism for the increment in SVR in fossorial
species.



Cloud, Tiffany (Penn State University); Heinicke, Matthew (Villanova University, Canada); Hedges, Blair
(Penn State University, Canada)

Hidden Diversity in the Jamaican Croaking Gecko

The sphaerodactylid gecko genus Aristelliger currently contains eight described species, all found on
Caribbean islands. Although their confamilial relatives are mostly small in size, species of Aristelliger are
moderate-to-large lizards (50–135 mm, maximum snout-vent length). Two species are endemic to the
Bahamas bank ( A. barbouri and A. hechti ), two to Hispaniola ( A. expectatus and A. lar ), one to
Navassa Island ( A. cochranae ), one to Cuba ( A. reyesi ), one to Jamaica, the Cayman Islands, and
Swan Islands ( A. praesignis ), and one to the Yucatan Peninsula (Mexico and Belize) and islands off the
eastern coast of Middle America ( A. georgeensis ). Species in this genus vocalize loudly and have fragile
skin that is usually mottled with shades of browns and tans and includes scapular ocelli. Our molecular
phylogeny of the genus is inconsistent with the current species-level taxonomy, especially concerning A.
praesignis . There are multiple clades showing deep divergences, and the Middle American species A.
georgeensis is nested within one of them. There are several clades on the island of Jamaica, where only
a single subspecies has been recognized in the past. Most are allopatric but there is at least one zone of
sympatry on Jamaica. To distinguish these species morphologically, we have used some unconventional
morphological characters. These findings are significant because it reveals that the genus Aristelliger is
considerably more diverse than was previously thought. Because the newly defined species have much
smaller distributions, these results also have a bearing on their conservation status.




                                                                                                         139
Clulow, Simon (University of Newcastle); Harris, Merrilee; Mahony, Michael (University of Newcastle,
Callaghan, N, Australia)

Measuring amphibian immunocompetence: validation of the Delayed-Type Hypersensitivity (DTH)
assay in multiple Australian frogs

The need to assess and compare immunocompetence in vertebrate organisms is obvious: a decrease in
immunocompetence impacts survival and fitness. Immune system maintenance comes at a cost, and
trade-offs occur between an organism‘s level of energy investment in immune system function and other
costly physiological processes. Knowledge of immunoecology is advancing rapidly in the endotherms;
however ectothermic groups including amphibians are less studied, largely due to a lack of available tools
for assessing immunocompetence. We investigated the effectiveness of using DTH assays to assess
amphibian immunocompetence, trialing various lectins injected subcutaneously into the lower leg of
several species of taxonomically unrelated Australian frogs. The lectins trialed elicited swelling in all
species compared to the control injection; however, there were significant differences in the magnitude of
swelling response between higher taxon groupings, and between lectins used. We found the traditional
method of validating swelling response to be inadequate, and developed a novel methodology for more
accurately determining peak-response. Finally, we tested the validity of our DTH assay experimentally,
comparing intentionally stressed and non-stressed individuals of a single species. We conclude that the
DTH assay provides a valid, inexpensive, and rapid quantitative measure of amphibian
immunocompetence, but warn against its use without validation in new species.



Coelho, Rui (Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR)); Erzini, Karim (Centro de Ciências do Mar (CCMAR),
Faro, Portugal)

Demographic analysis of the velvet belly lantern shark, Etmopterus spinax, caught and discarded
by trawl fisheries in southern Portugal (NE Atlantic)

The velvet belly lantern shark, Etmopterus spinax, is a deep-sea shark usually caught as by-catch and
discarded in deep water commercial fisheries in southern Portugal, particularly deep water trawls and
longlines. The objective of this study was to determine demographic parameters for this species, in order
to determine how the current levels of fishing mortality are affecting this population. Mortality and
survivorship parameters were estimated both by indirect empirical methods from life history parameters,
and from the trawl fisheries catch curves. An age-structured demographic model was created, and
analyzed with Leslie matrices, considering scenarios with and without taking into account fishing
mortality. The analysis was carried out using both deterministic scenarios (considering the point
estimates), and with scenarios taking into account the uncertainty in the parameter estimation (using
random errors according to specific distributions). The stochastic scenarios were simulated by Monte
Carlo simulation, with each input parameter randomly generated based on the previously assumed
distributions. In general, when only natural mortality was considered, the population rate of increase was
usually higher than 1. In the scenarios considering total mortality from the trawl fisheries catch curves, the
population rates of increase were usually lower than 1, meaning that the population in those cases is
declining. Matrix elasticities were calculated. For the survivorship parameters, the elasticities were higher
for the younger age classes and tended to decrease for the older ages, which is typical of the slower
growing elasmobranch species. The results presented in this paper provide insights on how commercial
fisheries, particularly trawls, are affecting this deep water shark species, and how uncertainty in the life
history parameters can affect the demographic models estimations.




                                                                                                          140
Coelho, Rui (Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR)); Fernandez-Carvalho, Joana (Instituto Nacional de
Recursos Biológicos (INRB, I.P./ IPIMAR), Olhão, Portugal); Santos, Miguel (Instituto Nacional de
Recursos Biológicos I.P. (INRB, I.P./IPIMAR), Olhão, Portugal)

Hooking mortality of elasmobranchs caught in a swordfish pelagic longline fishery in the Atlantic
Ocean.

Hooking (at-haulback) fishing mortality of elasmobranchs captured by Portuguese longliners targeting
swordfish in the Atlantic Ocean was analyzed. Information was collected by on-board fishery observers
that monitored 834 longline fishing sets between August 2008 and December 2011, and recorded
information on 36,067 elasmobranch specimens from 21 taxa. The hooking mortality proportions are
species-specific, with some species having relatively high percentages of alive specimens at-haulback
(e.g. blue shark, crocodile shark, pelagic stingray, manta, devil and eagle rays), while others have higher
percentages of dead specimens (e.g smooth hammerhead, silky shark, bigeye thresher). Specimen size
is a significant covariate for calculating the odds-ratios of hooking mortality for the blue, the crocodile
shark and the shortfin mako, with larger specimens having lower odds of being dead at-haulback. For the
blue shark, a multivariate Generalized Linear Model was calculated, and the factors affecting at-haulback
mortality were specimen size, geographical coordinates (latitude and longitude), year, quarter of the year,
vessel, and branch line material. To assess possible dependency in the binomial response variable (dead
or alive at-haulback), a Generalized Estimation Equation model was calculated using each longline set as
the grouping variable. The correlation parameter in the GEE model was low, and the parameters
estimated with the GEE were similar to the GLM. The results presented in this paper provide new
information on the hooking mortality of elasmobranchs captured as by-catch in this pelagic longline
fishery, and can be integrated in future ecological risk assessment analysis for pelagic elasmobranchs.
Additionally, these results also provide new information on the efficiency of the recent recommendations
for the mandatory discards of some vulnerable elasmobranch species mandated by ICCAT.



Coles, Robert (University of Salford); Reading, Christopher J (Centre of Ecology and Hydrology, Oxford,
United Kingdom); Jehle, Robert (University of Salford, Salford, United Kingdom)

Tracing genealogical relationships in a common toad ( Bufo bufo ) population

Over the last decades, long-term studies on pond-breeding amphibians have revealed vital insights into
the dynamics of populations, contributing to natural history knowledge as well as producing a wealth of
conservation-relevant information. However, in contrast to birds and mammals, for example, amphibian
population studies only rarely capture information based on genealogical relationships among individuals.
As a consequence, we only have very limited knowledge about individual fitness measures such as
lifetime reproductive success and th consequences of such variation on the linkage between generations
of amphibians in the wild. Here, we make use of an existing long-term study on the common toad ( Bufo
bufo ) in southern England (Dorset), and employ genetic markers to identify parent-offspring relationships
among individuals sampled in years that represent two successive generations (2004/2005/2006 and
2008/2009).      To generate the cross-generational genealogies, about 1000 individual toads were
genotyped using PCR amplification of eight microsatellite loci. Parentage assignments were achieved
using the software Colony, and parental pairs, identified through genetic information, were compared with
field observations of amplexed pairs. Preliminary results reveal that at least one parent could be assigned
to approximately 40% of offspring, and that about half of the parent pairs identified with genetic markers
matched with amplexed pairs identified in the field. Apart from shedding light on the genetic mating
system, the obtained pedigree information will also be invaluable in the identification of a possible
hereditary basis for an observed decrease in female body condition and fecundity correlated to increased



                                                                                                       141
environmental temperatures. Further DNA samples collected in 1983 will also enable a comparison of
effective numbers of breeders and the effective population size before and after the observed decline in
female fitness.



Collette, Bruce (National Marine Fisheries Service Systematics Laboratory); Carpenter, Kent (Old
Dominion University, Canada)

Red Listing Marine Species

The IUCN (International Union for the Conservation of Nature) Red List Categories and Criteria are
intended to be an easily and widely understood system for classifying species at high risk of global
extinction. The aim of the system is to provide an explicit, objective framework for classification of a broad
range of species according to their extinction risk. There are 9 Red List Categories including three
threatened categories: Vulnerable (VU) when a taxon faces a high risk of global extinction; Endangered
(EN) a very high risk of extinction; and Critically Endangered (CR) an extremely high risk of extinction.
Since their adoption 1994, the Red List Categories have become widely recognized internationally and
they are now used in a range of publications and listings by IUCN as well as by various governmental
and non-governmental organizations. Until recently, Red Listings have been mostly of terrestrial and
freshwater taxa but there are efforts underway to expand the Red Listing procedures to add 20,000
marine taxa to the Red List by the Global Marine Species Assessment (GMSA). Red Listing workshops
have been held both regionally (Mediterranean, Eastern Tropical Pacific), by taxon, or regionally by
taxon. About 10,000 marine species have been assessed since 2006. Habitat building primary producers
such as mangroves, seagrasses, and corals have high levels of species in threat categories relative to
other marine species, largely because of human impacts in the coastal zone. All species of sea turtles
and a large proportion of marine mammals, sharks and rays, and groupers fall into one of the three
threatened categories. Global assessments have been completed for groupers, butterfly fishes,
angelfishes, Sciaenidae, hagfishes, surgeonfishes, triple fins, and damselfishes. Reef fishes such as
butterflyfishes, angelfishes, wrasses and parrotfishes all have 5% or less of species in threatened
categories despite the fact that they typically inhabit coastal areas partly because most of these colorful
reef species are not heavily exploited for food. Groupers rely on degraded coastal habitats but a major
threat is also heavy fishing pressure. Consequently, at 12% in threatened categories, groupers have
much higher levels of threatened species compared to other reef-related fishes. Two thirds of the highly
valuable and heavily fished species of tunas and billfishes are Least Concern and only 17% are in one of
the three threatened categories. Heavy exploitation of tunas and billfishes is the primary threat to these
species.



Collins, James P. (Arizona State University); Minteer, Ben A. (Arizona State University, Canada)

Ecological ethics and invasive species in a time of global change

We are in a period of extensive global change reflected in such things as rapidly shifting temperatures
and increasing ocean acidification. Climate change will join with habitat destruction, landscape
fragmentation, and invasive organisms to threaten the survival of many species in this century. There is
also a rapid increase in species movement due to human intervention and dispersal unaided by humans
in response to changing environments. This has fueled a debate about the best way to conserve species
on a rapidly changing planet: some argue for moving organisms outside a historical range to save the
species (―managed relocation‖) while others see such actions as risky and argue for relying on traditional



                                                                                                          142
in situ approaches. Although there is a strong policy consensus in the conservation community to save
species threatened with extinction by human actions, global climate change (GCC) is challenging
traditional conservation strategies for achieving this goal. GCC is forcing the conservation community to
confront novel and difficult ethical questions concerning the relative value of climate-sensitive species and
ecological integrity under conditions in which moving species might be encouraged or actively facilitated
and ecosystems disrupted by intensive conservation interventions. Rapid global change is and will
continue to challenge traditional preservationist norms governing in-situ conservation. It is increasingly
clear that we will need to embrace a more anticipatory and interventionist model of conservation action in
cases where traditional preservationist strategies are expected to prove insufficient. Moreover, GCC is
challenging the presumptive historical environmental baselines supporting the preservationist model. This
emerging philosophical and policy orientation marks a retreat from the generally accepted understanding
of wilderness, nativeness, and idealized, ―pristine‖ systems free from human control and management. It
is a debate about the values and ethical responsibilities of conservationists as much as it is about the
scientific and technical demands of protecting species. We will discuss several cases that highlight the
issues and challenges surrounding development of an ―ecological ethics‖ able to identify and articulate
the values, duties, and obligations of conservationists in a time of rapid environmental change.



Collins, Sara (Carleton University);

Toxicity of Deicing Salt Components to Early Amphibian Life Stages

Chemical contamination is a primary factor contributing to worldwide amphibian declines. Toxic chemicals
in road runoff water are known to negatively affect amphibians inhabiting roadside wetlands. Road salt
(NaCl) is recognized as major pollutant in northern latitudes due to its extensive use as a deicing agent.
Application has resulted in elevated chloride concentrations in many freshwater systems and excessive
chloride is known to damage ecosystem structure and function. Additionally, ferrocyanide anti-caking
agents are released from road salt and effects on the environment are poorly understood. Amphibians
are particularly vulnerable due to their permeable skin and eggs, and low tolerance to salt. The purpose
of this research was to investigate the effects of environmentally significant acute and chronic NaCl
exposures on early developmental stages of amphibians, and to determine the acute toxicity of cyanide to
larval amphibians. Acute toxicity tests to NaCl and cyanide were performed on the larvae of five
amphibian species native to Nova Scotia, Canada. Chronic toxicity tests at environmentally significant salt
concentrations were performed on eggs and larvae of three species to assess effects on growth,
development, survivorship, and behaviour. Test species included: spotted salamanders ( Ambystoma
maculatum), American toads ( Anaxyrus americanus ), spring peepers ( Pseudacris crucifer ), green frogs
( Lithobates clamitans ), and wood frogs ( Lithobates sylvaticus ). Median lethal concentration values
were calculated from NaCl and cyanide acute toxicity experiments. Chronic NaCl exposure reduced
hatching, increased mortality, and induced developmental and behavioural anomalies. These effects have
the potential to inflict devastating consequences to populations in nature. Differential responses among
species indicate that chloride is an important stressor influencing amphibian community structure in
roadside wetlands.




                                                                                                         143
Coloma, Luis A. (Centro Jambatu de Investigación y Conservación de Anfibios);

The future for the frogless Andes

The Andes has the greatest amphibian diversity in the world, containing more than twice the diversity
(~800 species) of rich amphibian regions such as the Amazonia-Guiana (~350 species) or the Atlantic
Forest domain (~350 species). However, the current diversity of the Andes has collapsed given the
catastrophic extinctions that have occurred, mostly attributed to pathogens and climate change.
Extrapolation of scattered presence, absence, and census data indicates that about 30–50% of such
diversity might be extinct or suffering severe declines. Predictive modeling of pathogen spread and
occurrence, and/or climate changes indicates growing future losses.

Global and local efforts of moving from theory to action have been in place since the catastrophic event
was reported in 1991. Nonetheless, responses and actions in the fields of science, conservation, and
policy have been slow and largely insufficient, and have generally failed. Priority actions and conservation
measures remained in the realm of rhetoric. Extinctions of Atelopus, Telmatobius, and other anurans,
have been beyond control and are increasingly exacerbated by global warming, pathogens, and a cocktail
of other factors. The scenario is further worsened by the perennial lack of funds in Andean countries, the
largely unfilled gap between theory and practice in conservation biology, the poor institutional and
government commitments to amphibian‘s research and conservation, and the insignificant number of
researchers involved. Under this past scenario, a current and future rethinking of integrative theory and
actions is urgently needed. Among multiple new or renewed conceptual and practical approaches, a
summary of them (with examples and results) are presented, and the future for the frogs in the Andes is
discussed.

A growing interest by governments on genetic resources, bio-knowledge, and sustainable development
require new and updated legislation, and adequate allocation of funds, which should strongly promote
research and conservation in the Andean region. Aggressive bio-restoration programs of Andean
ecosystems are required. Private enterprises deeply committed to fund research and conservation could
be strong actors in the revolution needed. Democratization of information needs impulses. Bioinformatics
provide an open opportunity for education and is a powerful tool for development of Citizen Science,
which might take a critical role in helping to accelerate inventories, monitoring of species, among an
increased body of applications. Ex situ management programs should be strongly developed to secure
species that cannot currently be safeguarded in nature.

Finally, it is argued that an army of global researchers and citizen scientists are urgently needed to
change the current slow trend, which in turn could rapidly change the ethics, actions and policies needed
if the remaining amphibian Andean diversity is to be preserved.



Conkey, Nancy (University of Texas at El Paso); Greenbaum, Eli (University of Texas at El Paso, El
Paso, TX, United States); Pramuk, Jennifer (Bronx Zoo/Wildlife Conservation Society, Bronx, NY, United
States); Carr, John (University of Louisiana at Monroe, Monroe, LA, United States); Oliver Rödel, Mark
(Leibnitz Institute for Research on Evolution and Biodiversity at the Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany)

Phylogenetics of African Toads (Anura: Bufonidae: Amietophrynus)

African "true" toads (frog genus Amietophrynus) include forty morphologically conserved species that live
in an array of habitats from the fringes of the Sahara to the mountains of South Africa. We examined the
evolutionary relationships of these African bufonids by sequencing approximately 4 kb of combined




                                                                                                        144
mitochondrial (12S–16S) and nuclear (CXCR4, POMC, and RAG1) sequence data from sixty-two
divergent samples of the genus Amietophrynus, and several bufonid outgroups. DNA sequences were
analyzed with maximum parsimony, maximum-likelihood and Bayesian inference with the programs
PAUP, RAxML and MrBayes v.3.1, respectively, after appropriate models of nucleotide substitution were
identified in the program jModelTest. Our phylogeny agrees in most respects with the results of the most
comprehensive, previously published hypothesis investigating the relationships of African bufonids (e.g.,
the monophyly of African Amietophrynus is well supported). However, our phylogeny supports several
novel relationships, clarifies chromosome evolution in the group, demonstrates the importance of the
Congo Basin as a center of endemism, and notes widespread cryptic speciation, suggesting that current
diversity of Amietophrynus is vastly underestimated.



Conway, Kevin (TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY); White, Macaulay (TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY, College
Station, TX, United States); Baldwin, Carole (Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C., United States)

Cryptic clingfish diversity in the western Atlantic: molecular and morphological evidence for a
new species of Acyrtus (Teleostei: Gobiesocidae)

Members of the clingfish genus Acyrtus are small, benthic and cryptic inhabitants of shallow coastal
areas throughout the western Atlantic, from the Bahamas to the northern coast of South America, and
along the North East coast of Brazil. Three species are currently recognized, including Acyrtus artius
Briggs, Acyrtus pauciradiatus        Sampaio, de Anchieta, Nunes & Mendes, and Acyrtus rubiginosus
(Poey), though there is some debate in the literature abou the validity of Acyrtus artius (which has been
suggested to represent juveniles of Arcos macrophthalmus (Günther)). Parsimony and Maximum
Likelihood analysis of cytochrome oxidase 1 (CO1) sequences obtained from samples of Acyrtus and
Arcos from throughout the Western Central Atlantic indicate that Acyrtus artius is distinct from Arcos
macrophthalmus       .    Additionally, Acyrtus artius is composed of two distinct and highly divergent
genetic lineages. Individuals from each of these lineages exhibit consistent diagnostic morphological
characters (including differences in adhesive disk papillae pattern, adhesive disk shape, and head shape)
and occupy different habitats, being segregated by depth (0-10m vs. 25-70m). Based on molecular,
morphological and ecological differences we conclude that Acyrtus artius (as currently recognized)
comprises two species, one of which is new and requires formal description.



Conway, Kevin (TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY); Rüber, Lukas (Naturhistorisches Museum Bern, Bern,
Switzerland); Summers, Adam (University of Washington, Friday Harbor, WA, United States); Hastings,
Philip (Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, CA, United States)

Phylogenetic revamp of phenetic clingfish classification

Members of the family Gobiesocidae (clingfishes) are small and cryptic inhabitants of the intertidal zone,
characterized by a unique ventral adhesive disk. The roughly 150 species and 45 genera of clingfishes
are currently divided between nine subfamilies in a ―phenetic‖ classification scheme proposed over 50
years ago. Though heavily criticized, this classification is still widely utilized, reflecting the paucity of
phylogenetic studies conducted on these small and cryptic marine fishes. Using a combination of
mitochondrial (CO1) and nuclear (RAG1) sequence data we investigated the phylogenetic relationships of
37 clingfishes, representing 17 genera and 7 subfamilies of the Gobiesocidae. Preliminary topologies
derived from Parsimony and Maximum Likelihood analyses of individual and concatenated data matrices
depict relationships that are largely congruent with current clingfish subfamilial groupings (including a



                                                                                                         145
monophyletic Gobiesocinae and Diademichthyinae) but are not entirely free of conflict (e.g.,
Lepadogastrinae and Aspasminae as currently recognized are paraphyletic). Our preliminary findings also
support the placement of the Australian shore eels (genus Alabes ) within the Gobiesocidae, supporting
previous hypotheses based on morphological synapomorphies. Comparison of topologies derived from
molecular and morphological data highlight areas of conflict between the two. We tentatively propose
changes to the current clingfish classification to recognize only monophyletic groups recovered in both
molecular and morphological phylogenetic analyses.



Cook, Simon (University of Ballarat); Fox, Eleanor; Gell, Peter; Westbrooke, Martin; Florentine,
Singarayer (University of Ballarat, Canada)

Demonstrating the impacts of artificial water-point closure on reptile communities in semi-arid
Australia

The provision of artificial water through bores, dams and ground tanks has negative environmental effects
in terms of increased grazing pressure, prevention of native species regeneration and promotion of exotic
plant and animal species. Though some species may benefit from increased provision of water, watering
points are a major factor in the decline of native species. In the arid zone of Australia, as in arid
environments worldwide, reptiles are a major component of the vertebrate community. Reptile species
may be drastically affected by the disturbance that occurs in proximity to artificial water points. Past
studies addressing these issues have been limited in terms of lack of experimental manipulation at the
landscape scale and failure to adequately replicate experimental treatments. We carried out a four year
replicated study in semi-arid Australia investigating the impacts of four alternative water point closure
treatments on the native reptile community. The treatments in the experiment were: 1) fencing to exclude
mammalian grazers; 2) partial tank closure by blocking of inlets to reduce catchment of runoff; 3)
complete tank closure through backfilling; 4) untreated to act as a control. Each of these treatments was
replicated three times, and pitfall trapping sites were established at varying distances from each replicate;
20, 500 and 1500 meters and in dune and swale habitats. In addition to reptiles, plant structure and
floristics and soil characteristics were monitored at each site to assess their potential effect on reptiles.
Results indicate changes in reptile community structure in relation to distance from water and treatment
type which may have implications for management of water points in the arid zone.



Corey-Rivas, Sarah (New Mexico Highlands University);

Threatened amphibian species in Venezuela's socioecological landscape: people, parks and
indigenous lands

Current conservation practices rely heavily on the need for protected areas. This is especially true
regarding the amphibian extinction crisis. However, parks and people are inextricably linked in this global
crisis and broader scale geographic and anthropogenic interactions must be accounted for. The aim of
this study is to investigate spatial patterns in amphibian species vulnerability in megadiverse Venezuela
and identify successful scenarios for amphibians in terms of people, parks and environment. I evaluate
the use of spatially explicit measures of general and indigenous human population density, park
presence, human footprint, net primary productivity, and elevation to predict threatened amphibian
species distributions. These factors are assessed using an information theoretic approach (AIC) and a
simultaneous autoregressive model (SAR), which also account for spatialdependence. I then test
assumptions that parks and their underlying protectionist paradigm work to protect amphibian species.



                                                                                                         146
Finally, I search for local spatial autocorrelation (LISA) in species richness, endemics, threatened and
data deficient species, and identify geographic hotspots of species at risk. Results of this study
demonstrate that traditional measures of human impact (density and footprint) effectively predict higher
numbers of threatened amphibian species. However, indigenous peoples population density does not
predict abundance of threatened species. Accounting for spatial dependence in the landscape reveals
that cultural stewardship, i.e., parks on indigenous versus non-indigenous land, cannot predict
threatened species distributions, failing to validate typical conservation concerns over indigenous
population impacts to parks and biodiversity.      The LISA analysis reveals that the northwest region of
Venezuela is a hotspot of threatened, endemic, and unknown amphibian species. Overall, this study
demonstrates that a landscape approach to understanding threats can help to empirically identify socially
and ecologically successful or risky scenarios for amphibians and move away from a priori expectations
embodied in traditional notions of the impacts of parks and people.



Corke, Jarrett (WWF-Canada); Wimmer, Tonya (WWF-Canada, Halifax, NS, Canada)

Fishers' Knowledge for Elasmobranch Conservation

Bycatch and unaccountable discard mortality in fishing operations are the primary threat to
elasmobranchs in Atlantic Canada. Pelagic and groundfish longline, mid-water and bottom trawl fisheries
account for the largest proportion of shark bycatch. Enhanced data collection is needed to accurately
estimate bycatch mortality, but additional important information on non-target species catches in
commercial fisheries can be accessed by direct communication with fishermen. To gather this knowledge
for WWF-Canada, qualitative interviews were conducted with pelagic and groundfish longline captains.
The objectives were to: 1) through a mapping exercise, determine spatial and temporal distributions of
elasmobranchs and identify potential bycatch hotspots; 2) identify modifications to fishing practices
employed by fishers in response to elasmobranch interactions; 3) identify methods to reduce and/or avoid
bycatch; and 4) describe fishers‘ attitudes and perceptions towards elasmobranchs and the bycatch of
these species.

This study will be completed by the summer of 2012. Results thus far indicate that fishermen have a
considerable knowledge of elasmobranchs. Blue sharks (Prionace glauca) were the elasmobranch
species most commonly caught in both pelagic and groundfish longline fisheries. Fishermen reported a
significant change in both the size and age blue sharks they caught over the past decade, potentially
indicating shifts in overall population structure of this species in the NW Atlantic. A mapping exercise has
also revealed the spatial and temporal distributions of areas where certain bycaught species are
consistently encountered (e.g. Portuguese dogfish, Centroscymnus coelolepis).

Significant conservation benefits can be obtained from fishers‘ knowledge, which can provide a real-time
perspective of the current circumstances on the water. Through integration of scientific literature with the
study results, a more comprehensive perspective may emerge on the elasmobranch bycatch problem in
Atlantic Canada. Furthermore, results may inform the future direction of management objectives to further
elasmobranch conservation in Atlantic Canada.




                                                                                                        147
Corn, Stephen (US Geological Survey); Muths, Erin (US Geologica Survey, Fort Collins, CO, United
States); Patla, Debra (Northern Rockies Conservation Cooperative, Jackson, WY, United States);
Hossack, Blake (US Geological Survey, Missoula, MT, United States); Gould, William (New Mexico State
University, Las Cruces, NM, United States); Peterson, Charles (Idaho State University, Pocatello, ID,
United States)

Trends in amphibian populations in U.S. national parks on the continental divide

The U.S. Geological Survey‘s Amphibian Research and Monitoring Initiative (ARMI) conducts long-term
monitoring of amphibian populations in a hierarchical manner with varying levels of effort and spatial
coverage. At the middle level of this hierarchy, study areas are often national parks or national wildlife
refuges with a defined area of inference, and samples are selected using a probabilistic design.
Occupancy and associated vital rates are used to evaluate status and trends. ARMI‘s Rocky Mountain
Region and the National Park Service‘s Greater Yellowstone Inventory and Monitoring Network conduct
monitoring at this scale along a transect composed of the national parks in 3 regions on the Continental
Divide, including Glacier National Park in the north, Yellowstone and Grand Teton national parks in the
middle, and Rocky Mountain National Park in the south. The transect covers 8° of latitude and the parks
differ in size, climate, vegetation, and amounts of human influence. Beginning in 2005, we selected
random samples of small drainages (catchments) in each park. . We hypothesized that catchments, which
contained an average of 8 wetlands with suitable breeding habitat for amphibians, better represent
functional populations and may be less influenced by stochastic variation. Each wetland in a catchment
was surveyed at least twice each year for presence of breeding populations, and presence/non-detection
of each species was aggregated among the wetlands in each catchment. We found strong differences in
occupancy among species and between regions. Occupancy was lowest in Rocky Mountain National
Park and highest in Glacier National Park, and of the species broadly distributed in each park, the boreal
toad was least abundant in all regions. Initial analyses will evaluate the evidence for declines of each
species in each region. These data constitute a good baseline for evaluating future changes to amphibian
populations in the Rocky Mountains. Given existing and potential threats from the amphibian chytrid
fungus and potential threats to amphibian habitat from climate change, continued monitoring of amphibian
populations will provide park managers with information needed to fulfill statutory mandates to maintain
biological diversity.



Cosandey-Godin, Aurelie (Dalhousie University); Worm, Boris (Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada)

Analysing Elasmobranch Bycatch Patterns in Arctic Canadian Waters

The Arctic is one of the last ocean wilderness areas in the world. However, with sea ice coverage
decreasing, previously inaccessible areas are increasingly being exploited by commercial fisheries. In
Baffin Bay, fisheries targeting Greenland halibut (Reinhardtius hippoglossoides) and northern shrimp
(Pandalus borealis) have been expending since mid-1990s. There is a clear commitment from the
Canadian federal government to further increase fishing operation in the western and eastern Arctic
areas. Fisheries bycatch is a main cause of population declines in several species of sharksand skates
around the world. To date, no research has investigated elasmobranch bycatch patterns in the Arctic
region. At-sea observer data from fisheries operating offshore the Nunavut Territory ( Northwest Atlantic
Fisheries Organization (NAFO) subarea 0) from 1995-2011 have been combined for all elasmobranch
species. We used spatial point pattern methods, a novel way to analyse bycatch hotspot to enhance our
understanding of the factor driving these catch patterns. Data were split into different seasons and
species groups to investigate variations at these different scales. Otter trawl, twin trawl, and gillnet
targeting Greenland halibut are contributing to the largest catch of elasmobranch. In term of weight (kg),



                                                                                                       148
the most common species encountered are Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus), Arctic skate
(Amblyraja hyperborea), thorny skate (Amblyraja radiata), and the shorttail or Jensen's skate (Amblyraja
jenseni). This study provides the first complete perspective of fisheries bycatch for elasmobranch in
Eastern Arctic waters and highlights specific region–fleet combinations that require scientific scrutiny and
conservation measures.



Cosandey-Godin, Aurelie (Dalhousie University); Wimmer, Tonya (WWF-Canada, Halifax, NS,
Canada); John H., Wang (NOAA-Kewalo Research Facility, Honolulu, HI, United States); Worm, Boris
(Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada)

No Effect from Rare-Earth Metal Deterrent on Shark Bycatch in a Commercial Pelagic Longline
Trial

The indiscriminate capture of non-target organisms (bycatch) in commercial fisheries is an issue of critical
concern to the sustainable development and conservation of marine resources. In the Northwest Atlantic,
blue sharks ( Prionace glauca ) comprise a significant proportion of unwanted bycatch in the Canadian
pelagic longline fleet targeting swordfish and occasionally tuna. Minimizing the capture of these species is
of interest to the industry as well as conservation organizations. Several shark species have been shown
to be repulsed by the magnetic field generated by rare-earth magnets. For this reason, magnetic
deterrents have become a promising bycatch solution on pelagic longlines, but controlled trials under
commercial fishing conditions are still lacking. In collaboration with the longline industry, a total of 7 sets
(6300 hooks) with three hook treatments: standard hooks, hooks equipped with rare-earth alloys (Nd/Pr),
and hooks with lead weights were deployed in 2011 on the outer scotia Shelf, Nova Scotia. Results
suggest that rare-earth metals do not have any significant deterrent effect on the most common shark
bycatch species (blue, mako, and porbeagle) and as such are not a practical bycatch mitigation option in
the Canadian fishery. The inclusion of all stakeholders in this study has proven valuable in improving the
methodology by operating under realistic commercial-scale conditions; we believe that this is an effective
way to conduct bycatch research at a regional level.



Costello, Jennifer (CUNY Graduate Center); Department of Biology, CUNY College of Staten Island,
2800 Victory Blvd, Staten Island NY 10314

Frogs as Biological Indicators: Does Habitat Degradation Impact Prey Capture Efficiency?

 Anthropogenic disturbances to freshwater ecosystems are intensifying with the continued growth and
expansion of the human population. Rapid identification of species or habitats most vulnerable to
disturbance is therefore important for conservation. Biological indicators are species whose condition
correlates with that of other taxa in the same location. This allows for observation of proxy organisms to
reflect or even predict the condition of others sharing the same habitat. Common pollutants in these
degraded habitats are organics, heavy metals, and insecticides. Heavy metals, particularly, are of great
concern due to their persistence in the environment. By monitoring a species recognized as a biological
indicator, early detection of adverse responses to these hazardous conditions may be possible. Recently,
frogs have been proposed as biological indicators due to the unique nature of the amphibian life cycle.
Identification of sub-lethal effects of habitat degradation through monitoring several levels of biological
organization in a species recognized as a biological indicator may allow for early detection of threats.
Numerous studies attribute responses at single biological levels to environmental pollutants; however few
studies have established links between these biological levels. The results of this research will establish



                                                                                                           149
1) which levels of biological organization are influenced by habitat degradation and 2) if a link exists
between lower levels of biological organization, such as cellular abnormalities and metal accumulation,
and upper levels of biological organization, such as feeding behavior and population composition. This
study not only provides an understanding of the impact of degraded habitats on Green frog, Lithobates
clamitans populations and identifies the processes by which these changes are occurring, but also
forecasts changes in other organisms that share the same habitat.



Cotten, Taylor (Arizona Game and Fish Department); Grandmaison, David (Arizona Game and Fish
Department, Canada)

Distribution and Habitat Use of the Lowland Leopard Frog in the Greater Lower Colorado River
Ecosystem

The Lower Colorado River Multi-Species Conservation Program (LCR MSCP) was implemented by the
US Bureau of Reclamation (USBR) in 2005. This multi-stakeholder program satisfies a US Fish and
Wildlife Service Biological Opinion that necessitated the conservation of 31 species of fish and wildlife in
order for river operations to continue along the Colorado River from Lake Mead south to the        Mexico
border. The list includes the lowland leopard frog ( Lithobates yavapaiensis ). The lowland leopard frog
has not been documented along the Colorado River south of the Grand Canyon in over 20 years. The
Arizona Game and Fish Department through a cooperative agreement with USBR began conducting
surveys to determine the distribution of the species along the LCR in January 2011. Methods used to
detect amphibians included visual encounter and auditory surveys as well as larval funnel traps and dip
net surveys. Within three days of sampling, we characterized the habitat within a 10m radius of all sites
where lowland leopard frogs were encountered and randomly sub-sampled locations within the same
local riparian system where the target species was not found. In addition we sampled randomly selected
sites from the entire study area (the length of the LCR). Habitat characteristics measured included
vegetation and substrate type, water temperature, water depth, turbidity, pH, and stream discharge.
Preliminary results will be provided.



Cotton, Charles (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Grubbs, Dean (Florida State University, Canada)

Biology of Deep-water Chondrichthyans: Introduction

Approximately half of the known chondrichthyans, nearly 600 species, live in the deep ocean (below 200
m), yet little is known of the biology or life history of most of these fishes. The limited information about
deep-water chondrichthyans is often confounded by uncertainty in the taxonomy and systematics of these
taxa and new species are frequently described. Research is also hindered because many species are
known from few specimens of only the type material. The need for more research and dissemination of
information about deep-water chondrichthyans has become more urgent as fisheries worldwide expand
deeper. Until recently, much of the fishing effort on deep-water chondrichthyans was localized and often
artisanal. However, contemporary fishing effort for deep-water sharks has been increasing worldwide, in
spite of considerable data indicating that deep-water fishes have among the slowest of vertebrate life
histories (slower growth, delayed maturity, lower fecundity). K -selected life histories render these deep-
water species susceptible to overexploitation and localized depletion, yet most exploitation occurs in the
absence of the species-specific life history or biological information needed to develop management
plans.      This symposium will provide a forum for the dissemination of the extensive volume of new
information available on this unique group of fishes, including data that may inform management plans



                                                                                                         150
and conservation efforts. It will also facilitate the formation of networks of deep-water chondrichthyan
researchers working within the sub-disciplines of taxonomy, telemetry, feeding and trophic dynamics, age
and growth, biogeography, physiology, reproductive biology, and population genetics.



Cotton, Charles (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Grubbs, Dean (Florida State University Coastal
and Marine Laboratory, St. Teresa, FL, United States); Musick, John (Virginia Institute of Marine Science,
Gloucester Point, VA, United States)

Reproduction and embryonic development in two species of North Atlantic squaliform sharks,
Centrophorus cf. niaukang and Etmopterus princeps: evidence of matrotrophy?

Chondrichthyans ovulate much larger eggs and undergo a more protracted embryonic development than
bony fishes.      As a result, some organic matter originally present in the chondrichthyan egg yolk is
depleted via metabolic excretion over the course of embryogenesis. Previous studies have suggested
that the energetic toll of embryogenesis in lecithotrophic species depletes organic matter in the egg by
more than 20% during embryonic development. Conversely, organic matter in developing embryos of
matrotrophic species is augmented by various forms of maternal nourishment, resulting in organic matter
depletion of less than 20% during embryogenesis. We compared the mass of organic material in freshly
fertilized eggs to that of near-term embryos to investigate the maternal-embryonic nutritional relationships
of Centrophorus cf. niaukang and Etmopterus princeps collected from the North Atlantic.
Measurements of ash-free dry weights of a series of embryos revealed that some form of maternal
nutrient contribution, likely mucoid histotrophy, occurs in at least one species. Centrophorus cf. niaukang
embryos undergo a reduction of 19.5% in organic matter, while E. princeps embryos undergo a
reduction of 7.8% in organic matter over the course of embryonic development. Uterine villi were present
in both species and became larger and increasingly vascularized over the course of gestation. Though
previous studies have suggested a strictly respiratory and ionic exchange function in similar species, the
aggregate role of these uterine villi is not fully understood and they likely produce mucoid histotroph in the
species we examined.          Embryos of C . cf. niaukang were also dissected in order to track the
partitioning of water, organic matter, and inorganic matter to the liver, external yolk sac, internal yolk sac,
digestive tract, and eviscerated body, throughout development. Observed fecundity and maturity ogives
are also presented along with comments on the apparent aseasonality of mating and the ovarian cycle of
each species. Likewise, we present the observed patterns of segregation by sex and reproductive stage
for each species. Our results are compared with previous studies of reproductive biology and maternal-
embryonic nutritional relationships of other chondrichthyans.



Craig, Michael (Murdoch University and University of Western Australia); Hardy, Giles (Murdoch
University, Canada); Grigg, Andrew (Alcoa of Australia, Canada); Hobbs, Richard (University of Western
Australia, Canada)

Improving habitat quality of restored forests for reptiles: Lessons from an Australian eucalypt
forest

Restoration, through its potential to reduce the negative effects of habitat fragmentation, is becoming
increasingly important in saving global biodiversity. However, evidence is increasing that passive faunal
recolonization of restored areas may take centuries for some species, subsequently reducing, or
negating, any restoration benefits for those species. Reptiles have been identified as typically the slowest
vertebrate group to recolonize restored areas due to their low vagility and, often, specific thermal and




                                                                                                           151
microhabitat requirements, but relatively few studies have examined their recolonization of restored
areas. We examined reptile recolonization patterns in pits restored after bauxite mining in eucalypt forests
in south-western Australia to identify filters that slow, or prevent, reptile return and identify practices that
reduce the effect of these filters. Three species, the skinks Cryptoblepharus buchananii and Egernia
napoleonis and the gecko Christinus marmoratus were slow, or failed, to recolonize restored mine-pits. All
rely on slow developing microhabitats (e.g. coarse woody debris and tree hollows) for shelter so the
absence, or scarcity, of these microhabitats in restored forest is likely the unidirectional filter slowing their
recolonization. Our work on E. napoleonis suggest that coarse woody debris densities need to be much
                      -1                                                        -1
higher ( ~ 50 logs ha ) than current restoration prescriptions (1 log pile ha ) to accelerate recolonization
by that species. Another skink, Morethia obscura, was common in unmined forest and rapidly recolonized
restored areas but disappeared as restored areas matured. Thinning and burning was an effective
management strategy to facilitate recolonization by this species but its effects were short-term (<7 years),
indicating that overdense vegetation structure is a dynamic filter that influences recolonization by this
species, probably due to thermal requirements. Our study shows active management of restored areas to
facilitate and accelerate faunal recolonization is required for some species, to maximise biodiversity
benefits from restoration. Provision of coarse woody debris and planting species at densities that will
approximate the structure of reference communities are two strategies likely to facilitate faunal
recolonization in many forested ecosystems. Techniques to accelerate the formation of slow-developing
microhabitats are poorly developed and are an important area for future research.



Crawford, Andrew J. (Universidad de los Andes); Ibáñez, Roberto (Smithsonian Tropical Research
Institute, Canada); Lips, Karen R. (Universidad de Maryland, Canada); Paz, Andrea (Universidad de los
Andes, Canada); Driskell, Amy (Smithsonian Institution, Canada)

Cryptic diversity and diversification in the amphibian fauna of Panama

The Lissamphibia is a diverse and still poorly known group of vertebrates in which the annual number
(and possibly the rate) of new species descriptions is still increasing. Their poorly characterized diversity
and increasing conservation concern, combined with their typically large interspecific genetic divergences
make amphibians an excellent focal group for a high-throughput molecular inventory. Here we present a
survey of intra- and interspecific mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequence variation involving 113 named
species of amphibians representing 45 genera and 14 families within the Republic of Panama. We
sequenced a portion of the 16S gene along with the Folmer fragment of COI for 1,500 Panamanian
samples, and applied a variety of DNA barcoding algorithms to these data to estimate numbers of
unconfirmed candidate species. No cryptic diversity was observed in families such as Bufonidae,
Centrolenidae or Microhylidae. Candidate species were uncovered in families such as Ranidae and
Dendrobatidae, with particularly high cryptic diversity in Terrarana. Among the 113 species surveyed
here, the mtDNA data may support an estimated 170 primary species hypotheses, or a 51% increase in
amphibian species diversity for Panama. We also compared inferences based one versus two genes,
compared methods to estimate numbers of undescribed species, and discuss implications for ex situ
management and other efforts towards the conservation of tropical amphibian diversity.




                                                                                                             152
Crawford, Andrew J. (Universidad de los Andes); Muñoz, Astrid (Universidad de los Andes, Canada);
Guarnizo, Carlos (Universidad de la Salle, Canada); Paz, Andrea; Flechas, Sandra V. (Universidad de los
Andes, Canada)

DNA barcoding survey of amphibians across the Eastern Cordillera of Colombia

Colombia hosts the second highest amphibian species diversity, yet this fauna remains little studied,
especially using molecular genetic techniques. We present the results of the first DNA barcoding survey
of amphibians of Colombia, focusing on a single transect across the Eastern Andes. We surveyed 8 sites
between the Magdalena river valley to the west and the Llanos to the east. We sequenced a portion of
the 16S and COI genes for each of >200 samples from 53 named species and applied a variety DNA
barcoding algorithms to estimate levels of cryptic diversity. Levels of intra-specific diversity were highest
in the lowland genera, Scinax and Leptodactylus , particularly along the eastern foothills of the eastern
Andes, suggesting that this region requires further exploration and its fauna more systematic work. In
total we found six potential candidate species. This number is lower than expected, perhaps due to the
limited geographic coverage within Colombia, or the limited amount of geographic sampling within
species. In the future we hope to expand this work nationally, as well as combine this information with
similar DNA barcode data from neighboring countries to obtain a regional perspective on the levels and
distribution of cryptic amphibian diversity.



Crawford, Nicholas (Boston University); Losos, Jonathan; Hoekstra, Hopi (Harvard University, Canada);
Schneider, Christopher (Boston University, Canada)

The genetics of colorful pigmentation in Anolis lizards

Colorful pigmentation, the production of greens, blues, reds, and oranges, is important in social signaling,
sexual selection and speciation. Despite its evolutionary importance little is known about its genetic basis.
An ideal system in which to study colorful pigments would have extensive intra and interspecific variation
in colorful traits, a well-resolved phylogeny, and genomic resources. Anolis lizards are such a system.
Anoles have a colorful signaling organ, an extensible gular fold called a dewlap, which they use in intra
and interspecific displays. Anoles are the most specious terrestrial vertebrate with over 400 described
species. In addition, anoles have both a sequenced genome and a well-resolved phylogeny. Our research
uses both whole transcriptome shotgun sequencing (RNA-seq) along with genome wide association
methods to investigate the genes and genomic regions involved in producing colorful pigmentation. We
have sequenced 24 RNA-seq libraries from the green anole ( Anolis carolinensis ), which we are using to
disentangle the genetic pathways involved in producing pink and 'green' pigments. We have also
sequenced the complete genomes from two phenotypically divergent populations of the leopard anole (
Anolis marmoratus ). Leopard anoles are unusual among anoles because they display a substantial
amount of variation in coloration despite a high level of geneflow between populations. Thus these
genomic sequences have allowed us to identify regions that are segregating based on phenotype in the
two populations. Together these studies lay the groundwork for a detailed analysis of the genetics of
pigmentation involved in the adaptive radiation of anolis lizards. Furthermore this work will lead to a
greater understanding of colorful pigmentation because our preliminary analyses have implicated genetic
pathways that are likely responsible for the production and evolution of colorful pigmentation in many
vertebrates.




                                                                                                         153
Cree, Alison (University of Otago); Besson, Anne (University of Otago, Canada); Baillie, Chris (Orokonui
Ecosanctuary, Canada); Dolia, Jigu (University of Otago, Canada)

Reintroduction of tuatara to a South Island eco-sanctuary in New Zealand: biological and cultural
considerations

Translocations of organisms for conservation purposes often involve species limited to relict distributions.
However, such proposals raise questions about the ability of individuals from source populations to
acclimatize and breed once shifted to distant locations. Several conservation-based translocations of
tuatara ( Sphenodon punctatus ) have occurred since 1995 with positive indicators of success, but all are
within the current (northern) geographic range, representing less than 50% of the former latitudinal
distribution. For the past six years, we have been exploring the potential translocation of tuatara to
Orokonui Ecosanctuary. This fenced 307-hectare eco-sanctuary in the southern South Island is close to
sites of former occupation by tuatara but over 600 km south of the likely source population. Our approach
has employed eco-physiological studies with lab-housed or outdoor, captive-housed animals to assess
probable effects of cooler temperatures on behaviour, growth and survival, as well as field studies of the
effects of available soil temperatures on egg incubation success and sex ratios. Results from this
exploratory approach have helped in obtaining support from conservation authorities and from Maori
tribes (iwi), who represent guardians (kaitiaki) of the source population and those with tribal land authority
(mana whenua) for the destination. Planned translocations to Orokonui from 2011 will help meet the
restoration, advocacy and iwi-engagement goals of the Tuatara Recovery Plan, and also offer some
insurance from future climate change in a warming world.



Creemers, Raymond (RAVON);

Mobilising your volunteers: reliability of collected data and key sucess factors in citizen science

Collecting data with the help of volunteers has a long historical tradition. Reliability of these data has
proven to be very high and validation procedures improve both with increasing numbers of data and with
education of volunteers. Motivating volunteers end stimulating data collection by volunteers is carried out
through a variety of different projects, for experienced volunteers but also for the genaral public. These
projects include online recording and monitoring schemes, mapping projects, a portal for toad patrols and
large-scale chytrid swabbing or early warning systems for exotic species and diseases. The key succes
factors for these citizen science projects are identified and the benefits of working with volunteers for
conservation are discussed.



Crespi, Erica J. (Washington State University, School of Biological Sciences); Denver, Robert (University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States)

Developmental plasticity and long term phenotypic consequences of early life stress in
amphibians: Implications for breeding programs

Developmental plasticity is the property of a given genotype to produce different phenotypes in response
to environmental conditions experienced during development. Amphibian larvae have immense capacity
for developmental plasticity. Environmental conditions experienced during the larval stage affect larval
behavior, morphology, the timing of metamorphosis, and can lead to variation in adult phenotypic
expression. The timing of metamorphosis is controlled by the neuropeptide corticotropin-releasing factor
(CRF), which induces the secretion of corticosteroids, stress hormones associated with the hypothalamo-



                                                                                                          154
pituitary-interrenal (HPI) axis, and the secretion of thyroid hormone, the primary morphogen controlling
metamorphosis. While production of stress hormones may favor survival in a deteriorating larval habitat,
costs may be incurred such as reduced tadpole growth and size at metamorphosis. Elevated stress
hormones during the larval stage can lead to long term effects on physiology and behavior of the juvenile
adult, effects mediated by corticosteroids acting to ‗program‘ gene expression. Exposure to stressful
environmental conditions or experimental elevation of plasma corticosterone (CORT) slows tadpole
growth. However, after metamorphosis stressed or CORT-treated animals show catch-up growth,
reaching similar body size to controls as juvenile frogs, related to altered function of the HPI axis. This is
in part due to hyperphagia, and perhaps also to altered metabolism in CORT-treated animals, and is
associated with altered CRF expression in the brain. However, post-metamorphic effects of stressful
environmental conditions during the tadpole phase are condition-dependent. Such effects of the early
environment, mediated by altered CRF expression and CORT levels, may have important consequences
for survival and reproduction of captive amphibians.

(Supported by NSF grants IBN 0235401 and IOS 0922583.)



Crnobrnja-Isailovic, Jelka (Faculty of Sciences and Mathematics University of Ni¿); Paunovic, Momir
(Institute for biological research "sinisa Stankovic" University of Beograd, Beograd, Serbia)

Amphibians in transition: a case study from Southeastern Europe

In most of Palearctic countries ranked as rich in amphibian diversity the global threats to amphibian
populations are prominent. The foremost factors are loss, degradation and fragmentation of habitat,
followed by pollution, competition from invasive non-native species (Sommerwerk et al. 2009), increased
predatory pressure from domestic animals, and emerging infectious diseases. In combination with
economic and political transition, these effects could lead to local extirpation of important fragments of
European amphibian diversity. Regarding amphibian species richness, Republic of Serbia is one of top
20 countries in Palearctic region. However, with t he country moving toward market economy, a new
problem arose – responsibility for environment protection within the context of a process of privatization.
Lack of wastewater management plan, uncontrolled long-term population of watercourses with
allochtonous invasive fish species, roadkill and illegal collection for commercial purposes influenced
negatively on local amphibian populations. Additional and perhaps specific threat for local amphibian
assemblages is disappearance of small and moderate water bodies, primarily in the highlands, either
through backfilling or turning into fish ponds. Most of efforts concerning aquatic habitat conservation in
the country are focused on bird and fish species (ICPDR National Report 2005) and the protection of
specific habitats important for the conservation of amphibians are not adequately addressed. Although
the general protection of inland water habitats and wetlands contributes to the conservation of
amphibians, the specific small-sized habitats of particular importance for amphibians should be identified
and protected. Analysis of surveys related to identification, mapping and classification of amphibian
important habitats showed apparent degree of their fragility and thus further work in this matter should be
carried out in order to propose and implement adequate conservation measures. The monitoring of
amphibians is not widespread in the area and must be intensified, together with proper and frequent
education about the importance of amphibian conservation, not just through ordinary educational
programmes but among citizens in general. Recent history and current problems with political transitions
make biodiversity conservation even more difficult than before, and present economic pressures mean
that, without direct economic incentive, the people of the area will not be motivated to preserve
amphibians‘ breeding sites.




                                                                                                          155
Crosby, Jonquil (University of Waterloo); Ashpole, Sara; Murphy, Stephen (University of Waterloo,
Canada); Persello, Brent (British Columbia Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure, Canada)

Investigating road permeability strategies and amphibian movement within British Columbia’s
South Okanagan: a landscape level approach

Increased traffic and road expansion likely exacerbates barriers to amphibian migration and dispersal.
Within British Columbia‘s south Okanagan valley there is particular concern that the COSEWIC-listed
blotched tiger salamander ( Ambystoma mavortium melanostictum ) and Great Basin spadefoot ( Spea
intermontana ) are vulnerable to road effects in their annual movements from upland overwintering habitat
to lowland breeding areas. Our study utilizes a landscape level approach to assess amphibian movement
and population threats across this highway-bisected landscape.

During spring and summer 2010 and 2011, fifty kilometers of roadways (including 33 km of highway) were
repeatedly surveyed within the south Okanagan valley. Surveys were carried out utilising vehicles,
bicycles, and on foot. Sections of the survey area were classified into primary and secondary survey
routes whereby the primary survey route is a three kilometer highway passing lane located adjacent to a
floodplain. In 2011, the four-lane highway was constructed parallel to the original two-lane highway
creating a six lane obstacle for migration and dispersal. Survey effort was greater throughout the primary
route compared to the secondary route to ensure rigorous data collection for use in roadkill mitigation
strategies.

Amphibian road occurrence data and landscape variables from our 2010 field season represent pre-
highway expansion road activity (232 survey hours recorded 1385 mortalities from 2022 amphibian road
occurrences). Four species of amphibians were found on the roads surveyed: Pacific chorus frog (
Pseudacris regilla ), Western toad ( Anaxyrus boreas ) plus the aforementioned blotched tiger
salamander and Great Basin spadefoot.

In 2011, road mortality mitigation plans were incorporated through strategic culvert placement and interior
substrate enhancement, combined with polymer drift fencing to guide herpetiles beneath the roadway.
Continued research on post-construction roadway effects on amphibians, monitored use of culverts
through camera traps, priority wetland surveys, and species movement data commenced in 2011 with the
passing lanes in use. Mark-recapture using visual implant elastomer was performed on Great Basin
spadefoot observed within the primary area. The species data collected in 2011 represents post-road
construction activity. Seven hundred and eight mortalities were recorded from 1592 amphibian road
occurrences in 2011 over 264 road survey hours.

Mitigation structure usage was observed through combined infrared and time lapse photography within
three culverts, in addition to roadway occurrence surveys. Three species of amphibian were shown to use
the culverts with the camera traps: tiger salamander, Great Basin spadefoot, Pacific chorus frog; in
addition, one snake species, four mammal species, three bird species and a variety of invertebrates
occurred within the photos. Camera traps were in operation from early May to mid July, 2012.

This study maintains a greater landscape level approach with the inclusion of opportunistic road data
collection from multiple sources over the years, as well as long-term breeding pond monitoring throughout
the study areas. Habitat assessment throughout the adjacent landscapes has given a greater knowledge
of the migrational corridors and substrate types that the amphibians are travelling through.

Studies will be replicated through spring and summer 2012 for a final post construction field season.
Mitigation structures and modifications were incomplete during the beginning of the 2011 spring adult




                                                                                                       156
migration, and will need to be investigated in 2012 to capture the mitigation effectiveness with a full
season migration.



Crother, Brian (Southeastern Louisiana University); White, Mary (Southeastern Louisiana University,
Hammond, United States); Johnson, Andrew (University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom)

Primordial Germ Cell Development in Amphibians and Reptiles: Mechanisms and Evolution

Primordial germ cells (PGCs) are the precursor cells of the eventual germ cells, eggs and sperm. Two
distinct mechanisms are known for most of life and amphibians and reptiles exhibit both. The
predetermined mechanism is so called because the cells that develop in the presence of particular
molecules (often called germ plasm) automatically develop into PGCs. Frogs and snakes are thought to
share this mechanism. The other mechanism is called induced and in this process the PGCs are formed
much later in development in response to a cascade of inducing signals. Salamanders, turtles, and at
least some lizards are considered to exhibit this mode of PGC determination. Across life and across
amniotes, the predetermined mechanism is hypothesized to be convergently derived in several lineages
whereas the induced mechanism is plesiomorphic. Details of the evolutionary process will be discussed.



Crow, Karen (San Francisco State University);

Molecular evolution of Hox genes after whole genome duplication in a basal ray-finned fish, and
surprising patterns of Hox expression in various body plan features at later stages of
development

Vertebrates have experienced several rounds of whole genome duplication in the stem lineages of deep
nodes within the group, and a subsequent event in the stem lineage of the teleosts-a diverse group of
ray-finned fishes. Based on the first full Hox gene sequences for any member of the Acipenseriformes,
the American paddlefish, we confirm that an independent whole genome duplication occurred in the
paddlefish lineage approximately 42 million years ago. We obtained sequences spanning the entire HoxA
cluster and six genes on the HoxD gene cluster. These clusters are located on different chromosomes,
and maintain conserved synteny relative to bichir, zebrafish, stickleback and pufferfish, as well as human,
mouse, and chick. We also provide a gene genealogy for the duplicated fzd8 gene in paddlefish. Taken
together, we clarify that the American paddlefish has a duplicated genome and highlight implications on
comparative analyses in the study of the ―fin-limb transition‖, as well as gene and genome duplication in
bony fishes. There were interesting trends in the molecular evolution of the alpha and beta paralog
clusters for both the HoxA and HoxD genes. The posterior Hox genes, or 5‘ genes that share homology
with the Drosophila Abd-B gene, are expressed during pectoral fin and limb development. And we found
interesting patterns of expression for these same genes in various body plan features at later stages of
development, that have not been previously described.



Crozier, Lisa (NOAA Fisheries);

Projecting plastic and evolutionary responses to climate change in salmon migration timing

Persistence of the anadromous, semelparous life history characteristic of most Pacific salmon depends
crucially on high adult survival during the spawning migration. Decades of overfishing and competing



                                                                                                       157
anthropogenic water and land uses have lowered salmon survival and reproduction dramatically, to the
point where many populations are now on the verge of extinction. Climate change presents an
accelerating pressure capable of lowering adult migrant survival in regions where water temperatures
already approach stressful levels. However, over the 20th century salmon have responded to rising water
temperatures by shifting their migration timing. I present a model that estimates the evolutionary and
plastic (non-genetic) processes that best explain the historical timing shift observed in Columbia River
sockeye salmon. I then run the model prospectively under climate change scenarios to explore potential
limits to this adaptive response.



Cullimore, Peterson (University of Michigan--Flint);

Comparative phylogenetics of an isolated population of Desmognathus fuscus in Murphy Lake
State Game Area (Millington, Michigan)

Plethodontidae is the largest family of salamanders, exhibiting great diversity of natural history, and
reaching maximum species richness in the Eastern United States throughout the Southern Appalachian
Mountains region. There is much confusion and debate regarding the status of species placed within
genus Desmognathus , a common issue among plethodontid genera. Their widespread distribution and
altitudinal separation have resulted in several populations that exhibit increased genetic variation. In
2008, researchers discovered an isolated population of Desmognathus salamanders at Murphy Lake
State Game Area in Southeastern Michigan. As the nearest population is reported in north central Ohio,
approximately 500 km away, the origin of this population is in question. We amplified a 648-bp fragment
of the cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (CO1) gene obtained from individuals collected from the Michigan
population and compared it with CO1 gene sequences from individuals collected across the species‘
distribution and from published data. Sequence data will help us to determine if the Michigan population‘s
origin was due to a recent human introduction, if it was the result of a dispersal event, or if it is a relict
population left over from Pleistocene glaciations when the range of D. fuscus was divided by glacial
advances.



Cummings, Molly (University of Texas);

Sexual selection and color polymorphisms in poison frogs: the male and female perspective

It is commonly assumed that natural selection imposed by predators is the dominant force driving the
evolution and maintenance of aposematic traits.            In the polymorphic Panamanian Bocas del Toro
populations of Dendrobates pumilio (the strawberry dart frog), analyses of dorsal conspicuousness and
toxicity reveal the strongest predictive relationship for a specific predator viewer (birds) over a conspecific
viewer. However, behavioral examinations within these populations reveal that both female and male
viewers respond non-randomly to males of differing brightness and color. Both males and females of
the Solarte population show stronger behavioral responses toward brighter males in manipulation studies
in the lab. Furthermore, our spectral reflectance measurements identifying sexual dimorphism in dorsal
brightness in this population suggests that inter- and intra-sexual selection may be playing a significant
role in the evolution of this aposematic signal.        Taken together, our studies suggest that a triad of
viewers (predators, rivals and potential mates) contribute to the evolutionary trajectory of aposematic
color evolution.




                                                                                                           158
Cunningham, Michael (South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity); Bloomer, Paulette (University of
Pretoria, Hatfield, South Africa)

Comparative Phylogeography of the Cape Fold and Maluti-Drakensberg Herpetofauna, Southern
Africa

Two complementary montane hotspots of endemism occur at the southern end of Africa. In the south and
south-west the Cape Fold Mountains form parallel series of craggy sandstone ranges along the coast,
dissected by rivers running from inland. The Maluti-Drakensberg highlands, in the south-east interior, is
an extensive basalt plateau, deeply incised by rivers flowing east and west of the continental watershed.
Each region hosts a suite of endemic frog and lizard species, many with sister lineages in the alternate
region. Contrasting opportunities for dispersal have resulted in distinct patterns of species diversity and
local endemism in each of these regions. Here we present a comparative phylogeographic analysis of
diversity and divergence within endemic montane species of Hadromophryne, Heleophryne,
Strongylopus, Vandijkophrynus, Tropidosaura, Hemicordylus and Pseudocordylus. Species in the Cape
Fold Mountains show concordant patterns of Plio-Pleistocene vicariance into 4-5 subregional lineages.
Species in the Maluti-Drakensberg show less concordance, with fewer subregional splits, but where they
exist, older divergences between northern and southern lineages. We explore the likely consequences of
climate change for phylogeographic diversity in each region using spatial modelling of lineage
distributions.



Cupp, Paul (Eastern Kentucky University);

Evidence of social monogamy in green salamanders, Aneides aeneus

Social monogamy is indicated where males remain near females before and after egg deposition thus
reducing chances for multiple paternity. During a study of brooding behavior in female green
salamanders, Aneides aeneus , some evidence of social monogamy was noted. Some males (n=7) were
found in rock crevices adjacent to crevices where females were brooding eggs. The same males were in
these crevices in subsequent visits, suggesting the possibility of being the paternal males. Outside the
brooding period, these males were sometimes found in breeding crevices. Males were usually found near
just one nest site. However, in one rock crevice subdivided into smaller crevices, a male occupied a
crevice just behind and between two narrow crevices where two females brooded eggs. Over seven
years, this male was often present and apparently in position to aid in defense of both nest sites. Young
were usually produced successfully in both nest sites each year. In another instance, a male identified by
the pattern of spots on the head was found in a crevice adjacent to a brooding female. Over a 10-year
period, this same male was found in either an adjacent crevice or the breeding crevice. During this time,
females successfully brooded eggs in the breeding crevice each year. Also, in three instances, new
hatchlings were observed in the same crevices with apparent paternal males over several days. One or
two hatchlings were observed on the tail of a male or behind his body. Although only females brood eggs
in many crevices, these observations suggest that male A . aeneus may have a role in defense of some
nest sites. Because male A. aeneus arrive at breeding crevices in late spring prior to females and are
aggressive in maintaining territories where pairing and mating may occur, they have a considerable
investment to protect. This is the first evidence of male A. aeneus associated with and possibly
protecting nest sites, and suggests social monogamy may occur in this species.




                                                                                                       159
da Silva, Jessica (South African National Biodiversity Institute); Tolley, Krystal (South African National
Biodiversity Institute, Cape Town, South Africa)

Phenotypic divergence and recent radiation in dwarf chameleons: Adaptation to habitat or
widespread speciation?

Dwarf chameleons (Bradypodion) are thought to have adaptively radiated into different habitats, but the
mode of these radiations is not well understood. In the present study, we examined the correspondence
between genetic and morphological variation in a clade of Bradypodion from KwaZulu-Natal Province,
South Africa. The clade is comprised of two species - B. thamnobates and B. melanocephalum; however,
overall appearance (e.g. colour, size, shape) is extremely variable across the range, leading to
speculation that there are multiple ecomorphs. We used a combination of genetic (n=279, 10
microsatellite loci & one mitochondrial marker) and morphometric data (n=392, 24 measurements) to
examine the hypothesis that recent radiation into novel habitats is accompanied by morphological
changes for ecologically relevant characters. Because the radiation is recent (i.e. Pleistocene), we
expected a lack of genetic divergence at the species level.

A hierarchical clustering analysis revealed the presence of three morphological clusters (Bootstrap – AU:
95-100%; BP: 82-98%) corresponding to 1) B. melanocephalum, 2) B. thamnobates, and 3) a cluster off
which B. thamnobates branches. A multivariate analysis of the three clusters (PCA & MANOVA) using
size corrected residuals showed that B. melanocephalum has significantly smaller hands and feet, yet
generally longer limbs compared to the other two clusters, as well as a significantly smaller casque
compared to B. thamnobates and cluster 3 males. These morphological patterns correspond with those in
other Bradypodion clades, reflecting macro-habitat differences – B. melanocephalum occurs in
grasslands; whereas B. thamnobates and cluster 3 occur in forest fragments.

Bayesian clustering on the microsatellite data identified five populations (FCT = 0.371; p < 0.001) – B.
melanocephalum, a population corresponding to morphological cluster 3 (both matching the
morphological analysis), and three populations within B. thamnobates. Shared mitochondrial haplotypes
between most populations indicate a lack of divergence typically expected at the species level, and this
incomplete lineage sorting suggests that populations were formerly connected. The population genetic
structure within B. thamnobates could be representative of the dynamic environmental changes during
the Pleistocene that resulted in the regression of forests, creating isolated patches preventing gene flow
between populations. The genetic divergence was not accompanied by morphological divergence, as
these chameleons inhabit similar micro (perch size) and macro (forest) habitats, suggesting that
adaptations to the environment are retained despite suspension of gene flow. The strong morphological
divergence present in this group of chameleons does not reflect widespread speciation, but indicates that
chameleon morphology is highly labile and coupled to habitat.



Daley, Ross (CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric);

Home range and movement of Centrophorus zeehaani on the continental slope off South Australia
determined by acoustic telemetry

Expanding resource use has resulted in major population declines in at least ten species of deep-sea
dogsharks in the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans. Spatial management, including closures, has been
implemented to support recovery of two species off Australia. Transmitters with depth and pressure
sensors were fitted to Centrophorus zeehaani (n=70) to test key a key assumption underpinning closure
design: a proportion of individuals remain resident within the closure. Sharks were tracked using an array



                                                                                                       160
of 22 acoustic receivers moored on the seafloor of the upper continental slope (200–700 m). Most sharks
(n=52) survived to be detected more than 20 times by at least two receivers. A minority of sharks (n=18)
were never detected on the seafloor of the study area and two sharks died on the seafloor more than
three months after release. A clear diurnal pattern was evident with movements into shallow water at
night and returning to deeper water at dawn. Sharks ascended earlier in the day and descended later
during winter compared to summer. Observed temperature range was mainly restricted to 10–13ºC and
most likely translates into a narrow latitudinal range. Individual ranges along the slope (across longitude)
were contained within the closure but diurnal movements across the slope regularly took many sharks
outside the bathymetric range of the closure . The narrow temperature and bathymetric range make this
species vulnerable to localised impacts. We conclude that effective spatial management measures can
be designed for deep-sea shark species when movement patterns have been studied in detail and
management arrangements can adapt to new data. However, remoteness and isolation make design and
monitoring costs high and cumulative, depending on the number of species affected. Therefore we
recommend that development and management of deep-sea shark fisheries proceed more cautiously
than for the continental shelf.



Davidson, Carlos (San Francisco State University);

Evaluating the pesticide hypothesis for amphibian population declines: Evidence from landscapes
to laboratories

Pesticides exposure has long been proposed as a possible cause for global amphibian population
declines. While disease as emerged as the leading cause of declines, it is still unclear if environmental
factors such as contaminants may be cofactors contributing to increased amphibian susceptibility to
disease. Drawing on my published and in progress research as well as other published research, I
evaluate the evidence from field and laboratory studies that pesticides are playing a role in amphibian
population declines.



Davidson, Lindsay (Simon Fraser University); Dulvy, Nicholas (Simon Fraser University, Canada);
Fordham, Sonja (Shark Advocates International, Canada)

How much of the world's shark fishing is sustainable?

Unregulated catches of sharks and rays (hereafter ―sharks‖) for their fins and meat are driving population
declines and elevating extinction risk. Demand for shark products has increased sharply since the 1980s
and remains strong, not only for shark fin, but also meat from previously undesirable species such as blue
shark. Implementation of        management measures to control this rapidly rising mortality have been
sluggish and existing restrictions lack consistency across species‘ ranges. Here we ask what proportion
of the world‘s chondrichthyan catch is likely to be sustainable. We make the pragmatic and to-be-tested
assumption that countries with adequate shark plans are fishing sustainably. In order to identify hotspots
of conservation action and requirement, we describe the nation-by-nation spatial distribution of
chondrichthyan biodiversity patterns, catch levels, shark fin exports, and strength of shark plan. We found
that less than half of the top 20 sharks fishing nations with the greatest reported catch have yet to
implement a shark plan, and a quarter have yet to implement some form of shark finning ban.
Moreover, hotspots of shark biodiversity occur in national waters with high fishing mortality of sharks and
low levels of shark fisheries management.




                                                                                                        161
Davies, Sarah J. (Centre for Invasion Biology, Dept. Botany & Zoology, Stellenbosch University);
Clusella-Trullas, Susana (Centre for Invasion biology, Dept. Botany & Zoology, Stellenbosch Unviersity,
Canada); McGeoch, Melodie A. (Centre for Invasion Biology, Department of Botany & Zoology and Cape
Research Centre, South African National Parks, Canada)

Painted into a corner: Physiological tolerance limits spread in a sub-tropical amphibian
Hyperolius marmoratus

The painted reed frog ( Hyperolius marmoratus Rapp), previously restricted to the summer rainfall
regions of southern Africa, has established multiple breeding populations across the south-western winter
rainfall region of South Africa. This range expansion occurred over a period of only twelve years following
their introduction in 1997/8. Painted reed frogs have colonised the Western Cape by virtue of the
presence of perennial farm dams, and appear to fill the role of ‗urban exploiters‘. Occupancy is limited by
summer aridity, low winter temperatures and the absence of fringing vegetation around water bodies. This
study, as well as evidence from mitochondrial DNA analyses, indicate that the distribution in the novel
range has considerable spatial structuring. We investigated the spatial pattern of spread and the
responses of thermal tolerance and resting metabolic rate to temperature acclimation in frogs from the
novel range. Critical thermal limits responded to acclimation to temperatures within the range of ambient
temperatures commonly encountered in the study area. However, frogs from sites with different invasion
histories showed distinct physiological responses to acclimation, suggesting that phenotypic plasticity or
adaptation have enabled this species to expand its range extra-limitally. The results are examined in
relation to the invasion history and known genetic and biogeographic structuring of these populations.



Davis, Brendal (Dalhousie University); Worm, Boris (Dalhousie University, Canada)

The International Plan of Action for Sharks: How does Canada¿s national plan measure up?

Various species of sharks, skates, and rays continue to decline, demonstrating a greater need for
effective conservation measures. In 1999 the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) developed
comprehensive guidelines in its International Plan of Action (IPOA- sharks ), which was followed by
corresponding national plans in some nations.        Here we examine progress under Canada‘s National
Plan of Action for Sharks (NPOA- sharks ), against its stated goals, against Australia‘s NPOA, and
against the original FAO guidelines. For comprehensiveness, we also evaluate additional management
and conservation measures for sharks, as well as stakeholder input from the first Atlantic Shark Forum.
Although Canada is recognized as a leader in shark management, it has largely failed to effectively adopt
the FAOs principles and guidelines. The plan notably lacks set timelines, priorities, or action plans to
mitigate threats to sharks, and contains no performance indicators. Additionally, the plan neglects to
identify priority species, or engage stakeholders, and cannot be linked directly to management measures.
To advance the revision of this plan (as well as other NPOAs), we recommend a stepwise process that
includes (i) stakeholder engagement and development of a shark assessment report (SAR) (ii)
addressing of all IPOA objectives, while prioritizing issues arising from the SAR (iii) implementations of
actions, targets, and timelines that are reviewed every four years. We also suggest key policy items to
advance Canada‘s role in shark conservation and management at the national and regional level. These
include actions to improve data collection and research, management, education, as well as coordination
with stakeholders. If Canada aims to improve shark management and conservation, major changes are
needed to the existing NPOA. Likewise, the abovementioned measures may help guide more proactive
plans in nations that have not yet established an NPOA.




                                                                                                        162
Davis, Mark (Illinois Natural History Survey); Collyer, Michael (Western Kentucky University, Bowling
Green, KY, United States); Douglas, Marlis; Douglas, Michael (Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, United States)

Morphometrics, Molecules, and Ecology Define the Evolutionary History of the Western
Rattlesnake (Crotalus viridis) Complex

The biodiversity crisis has emphasized the necessity for an accurate delineation of biodiversity, which (in
turn) distills down to defining species. Concept-based approaches have long been contentious, and
remain so today. Additionally, rigid, deterministic species-concepts work against the fluidity of speciation
itself. Bridging this gap is thus an imperative if indeed biodiversity is to be measured. The Western
Rattlesnake (Crotalus viridis) Complex provides a unique opportunity to explore these issues through a
comprehensive assessment of its historically enigmatic evolution. Three disparate datasets (molecular,
geometric morphometric, and ecological) were compiled and analyzed in an effort to disentangle
relationships. Bayesian analysis of concatenated mtDNA revealed a single, well supported phylogenetic
hypothesis for the Western Rattlesnake complex composed of two well-established lineages and well-
supported relationships among subspecies. Assessment of head shape revealed that while subspecies
differ significantly in shape, inferential resolution regarding the evolutionary relationships are clouded by
confounding factors. Finally, subspecies exhibit differential ecological proclivities, suggesting possible
ecological speciation and shedding light on the influence of ecology on morphological differentiation.
Finally, these three datasets were coalesced using supertree methodology to derive a unified hypothesis
of Western Rattlesnake intrarelationships. Results supported two distinct lineages within the Western
Rattlesnake complex, yet subspecific relationships remain, in part, obscured.



Davis, Matthew (The Field Museum); Smith, Wm. Leo (The Field Museum, Canada)

The Evolution of Bioluminescence and its Impact on Diversification in Deep-Sea Lineages

Deep-sea fishes are subject to similar selective pressures due to extreme environmental conditions (e.g.,
darkness, high atmospheric pressure); thus, convergent adaptations are extremely common. Additionally,
while nearly one third of marine fishes are known to exist at depths below 200m, little is known about the
macroevolutionary patterns and processes associated with diversification in the deep sea.

In this study, we focus on the evolution of bioluminescence across non-percomorph teleost lineages (e.g.,
dragonfishes, lanternfishes, lizardfishes), and explore whether the evolution of bioluminescence has
impacted diversification in the deep sea. Few studies have investigated the evolution of bioluminescence
within a phylogenetic context, and we examine the character evolution of differing bioluminescent
morphologies (e.g., photophores, lures/barbels) and strategies (e.g., camouflage, predation) across deep-
sea lineages.



Davy, Christina (University of Toronto); Murphy, Robert (University of Toronto/Royal Ontario Museum,
Canada)

Genotypes and ghosts - comparative landscape genetics of a northern turtle community

Conservation and landscape genetics analyses of reptiles often assume that species will have similar
responses to factors that can influence their genetic structure (for example, population fragmentation).
There are many conservation genetics studies of individual snake, lizard and turtle species, but data from



                                                                                                         163
multiple species are not often integrated. We use conservation and landscape genetics analyses to
investigate variation in genetic population structure among three turtle species with differing behaviours,
life history strategies and degrees of endangerment and population fragmentation. We analze three sets
of microsatellite genotype data, one from the Spotted Turtle ( Clemmys guttata ), another from the
Blanding‘s Turtle ( Emydoidea blandingii ) and the third from the Snapping Turtle ( Chelydra serpentina ),
from populations sampled across southern Ontario, Canada. Using these data we test hypotheses about
the genetic effects of population fragmentation on these three species. We also use standard landscape
genetic analyses to test hypotheses about the relative influence that major landscape features in southern
Ontario have had on the population structure of each species and discuss important similarities and
differences between them.



Daza, Juan D. (Villanova University); Bauer, Aaron M. (Villanova University, Villanova, PA, United
States); Snively, Eric D. (Ohio University, Athens, OH, United States)

New data from old geckos: paleontological contributions to the understanding of gekkotan
evolution

Gekkota (‗geckos‘ and pygopodids) is a highly diverse group of lizards that today is represented by
almost 1500 species. These typically small lizards have a lightly-built and fragile skeleton and are
generally characterized by decelerated terminal fusion of bones (paedomorphosis). This makes
gekkotans particularly susceptible to disarticulation and consequently the group is poorly represented in
the fossil record. Most molecular dating analyses have inferred that gekkotans had differentiated from
their closest relatives by the Early Cretaceous, but some credibility intervals push gecko origins into the
Early Jurassic. Gekkota has been classified as a subordinated group within Gekkonomorpha, which also
includes the genus Parviraptor and an unnamed but well studied lizard from the Gobi (AMNH FR21444).
The re-examination of critical fossil specimens combined with the application of High-resolution X-ray
computed tomography, as well as insights from comparative embryological and neontological material,
allow us to refine our understanding of early gecko evolution. Morphological results indicate that Gekkota
and Gekonomorpha are redundant, and that of the various Mesozoic taxa referred to Gekkota in the past,
only Gobekko cretacicus and Hoburogekko suchanovi (and possibly Cretaceogekko burmae) are actually
part of this clade. These Cretaceous geckos present combinations of characters (including partially fused
frontal and dentary bones) not present in any of the extant gekkotan subgroups and may represent two
different stages in the consolidation of the Gekkotan skull. The Tertiary fossil record indicates that
geckos, perhaps representing more than one of the living families, were well represented in Europe
between the Paleocene and the Miocene. Some of these fossil forms had highly ornamented dermal
bones that are unusual for the living genera. Miocene lizards in amber from Hispaniola are
unambiguously assignable to the extant genus of dwarf geckos, Sphaerodactylus, but specimens studied
so far represent new species, some of which exhibit character states unknown in the living taxa. Amber
fossils suggest that diverse communities of dwarf geckos represented by different ecomorphs have been
present in the Greater Antilles for at least 15–20 MY.




                                                                                                       164
de Carvalho, José Eduardo (Department of Biological Science ¿ Federal University of São Paulo);
Milsom, William (Univ. British Columbia, Canada); Andrade, Denis (State Univ. Sao Paulo, Canada)

Effects of Feeding on Ventilation in Anurans

The ingestion of large meals in some ectothermic is followed by remarkable changes in the metabolic
rate. The evidences obtained with several species of amphibians that feed infrequently suggest that the
increased energetic demand during the postprandial period is related to morphological and physiological
adjustments in order to up-regulate the capacities of digestion and nutrient absorption. In species that
feed large meals, the intense acid secretion into the stomach leads to the alkalization of blood, which
seems to be partly compensated by a respiratory acidosis. However, given the effects of hypercapnia on
the control of breathing in vertebrates, it is possible that the sensitivity to CO2 can be modulated during
the post-prandial period in order to prevent the stimulatory effects on the ventilatory responses that follow
meal intake. In this talk I will present the results obtained for the bullfrogs Lithobates catesbeianus
combining the effects of progressive hypercarbia and the ingestion of large meals. We performed
measurements of respiratory and circulatory variables in cannulated bullfrogs kept in fasting and 48 hours
after meal ingestion. Ventilation was stimulated by progressive exposure to different levels of CO2 in
inhaled air. In general, heart rate, O2 total content, Hct and PaCO2 were increased during the post-
prandial period with minor effects of CO2. Total ventilation tends to decrease in fasted bullfrogs in
comparison to fed animals during the progressive hypercarbia, given by the decrease in breathing
frequency instead tidal volume. In the post-hypercarbia period, unfed animals exhibited an increase in
total ventilation as a consequence of the increase in breathing frequency and tidal volume. Tidal volume
did not increase in fed bullfrogs during the post-hypercarbia period influencing total ventilation. Our
results indicate a possible constraining between meal ingestion and ventilation capacity in bullfrogs.
Financial support: FAPESP/CNPq



de Paula, Almir (Universidade de Brasilia); Colli, Guarino Rinaldi (Universidade de Brasilia, Brasília,
Distrito Federal, Brazil)

Structure of a community of anurans in the Cerrado of Brazil Central

Communities are influenced by several ecological factors such as trophic, spatial and temporal niches, as
well as historical factors. The Cerrado is the second largest biome in Brazil and the world's most diverse
savanna consisting of a mosaic of vegetation physiognomies ranging from flooded grasslands to gallery
forests that contains approximately 204 anuran species. These organisms are strongly associated to
environmental variables due to their physical and physiological traits. We placed four transects in each of
the following Cerrado physiognomies: grassland, cerrado (s.s.) and gallery forest. Transects were
sampled weekly for a year using active search. We recorded species distributions along physiognomies
as well as microhabitats. We collected data on the physiognomies structural features and weather
information. In addition, we constructed a supertree from available phylogenies found in the literature. To
test if factors were influencing community structure, we performed a species co-occurrence analysis by
vegetation physiognomy, microhabitat, point sampling and month. A multiple regression was used to test
the association between environmental variables and species diversity. To test if historical factors were
influencing community structure, we performed a correlation analysis between species co-occurrence and
their phylogenetic distances. We captured 708 anurans belonging to 5 families and consisting of 19
species. This study demonstrates that the sampled anuran community was not structured by
physiognomy (P = 1) or point sampling (P> 0.05), but was structured by microhabitat (P = 0,01) and
month (P <0.01). Rainfall was positively correlated with abundance (F = 52.99, df = 10, r ² = 0.85, P <<
0.01) and richness (F = 17.49; df = 10, r ² = 0.64, P <0.01). The correlation analysis between species co-



                                                                                                         165
occurrence and their phylogenetic distances revealed that the community is phylogenetically structured
by microhabitat (P << 0.01). Therefore, the Estação Ecológica de Águas Emendadas anuran community
structure is influenced by historical factors in their use and selection of microhabitats. Nevertheless,
anurans are dependent on humidity causing rainfall, an ecological factor, to be influencing species time of
activity. This community‘s structure is more influenced by the availability of microhabitats than
physiognomy.



de Sá, Fábio Perin (Cornell University); Haddad, Célio F. B. (UNESP-Rio Claro, Rio Claro/SP, Brazil);
Zamudio, Kelly R. (Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States)

Parental relationship between guardian males of Thoropa taophora (Anura, Cycloramphidae) and
their saxicolous offspring

The reproductive success of individuals in a population of one species is strongly associated with
individual traits as well as the social and ecological contexts in wich breeding activities occur. Individual
factors that influence fitness can be identified, however how variation in social and ecological conditions
alters the patterns of reproductive success within populations is still poorly understood. We characterize
the reproductive success of adult Thoropa taophora males and determine how it changes among and
within different breeding sites. Thoropa taophora is a neotropical anuran species that occupies saxicolous
environments in coastal regions of Atlantic Coastal Forest in the state of São Paulo state, Brazil. This
anuran places its terrestrial eggs in wet seeps on rock outcroppings near seashores that maintain a film
of water that flows on the rock surface, where their semiterrestrial tadpoles develop. Males compete for
the limited number of breeding territories (water seeps) and actively guard territories and egg masses.
These behavioral mating system characteristics are likely directly associated with the reproductive
success of each adult individual. We sampled tadpoles in eight different rock seeps and, using molecular
techniques for estimation of relatedness and paternity, we propose to characterize the behavioral mating
system and the consequent fitness of the adults of T. taophora. We will test the hypotheses that: (1) the
defense of reproductive territories increases the reproductive success of the males by the exclusion of
competitors or (2) males obtain more than one female for amplexus, resulting in a single male guarding
eggs from distinct females, and (3) if there is sharing of the same reproductive territory by more than one
male, the relatedness among them will be higher than any other male of the population, with kin selection
operating. Combined, these data will allow an unusually fine-scale analysis of the factors contributing to
individual reproductive success in territorial amphibians.



de Witt, Derek (Florida Gulf Coast University); Agyekumhene, Andrews (Ghana Wildlife Division,
Forestry Commision, Winneba, Ghana, United States); Allman, Phil (Florida Gulf Coast University, Fort
Myers, FL, United States)

Using Local Knowledge to Test Patterns of Nesting Sea Turtles in Ada Foah, Ghana

Environmental cues that trigger beach emergences by female sea turtles are still not fully understood. In
addition, certain aspects of nest site selection require further investigation. It is important to understand
these because such behaviors influence nest success and hatchling phenotypes. Understanding such
survival differences could aid in future sea turtle conservation efforts. Previously, researchers have relied
on local knowledge to aid their understanding of sea turtle biology. In this paper, we use four years of
nesting data in Ghana to assess the accuracy of local knowledge regarding patterns of sea turtle nesting
emergences. Ada Foah, Ghana (and the surrounding area) contains approximately 9 km of beach used



                                                                                                         166
by nesting leatherback ( Dermochelys coriacea) and olive ridley (Lepidochelys olivacea) sea turtles.
Previous conversations with area residents indicate a commonly held view that sea turtles emerge to lay
eggs when the moon is closer to full and is positioned in the western sky. Residents also indicated sea
turtles require a high tide to emerge onto the beach. To determine the accuracy of their assertions,
nesting surveys were conducted from August 2006 through 2010 to determine the tide, moon phase, and
the moon‘s positions during each sea turtle emergence. In 2010, sand surface temperatures were also
recorded to determine if female nest site selection is influenced by sand temperature. Of the 1507
emergences recorded in Ada Foah, 752 occurred while the moon was not visible. For those that nested
under moonlight, a chi-squared analysis indicated a significant preference for emerging near a full moon
for both olive ridley (n = 461, p < .0001) and leatherback turtles (n =294, p < .0001).

However, an analysis using all emergences indicated a significant preference for nesting during a new
moon period (olive ridley n = 929, p < .0001; leatherback n = 578, p < .0001). The moon location analysis
indicates a significant difference from random (p < .0001 for both species), with approximately 25% of
emergences occurring with the moon to the west and east. Neither species showed a significant
preference for emerging during a particular tidal period (olive ridley p = .4505; leatherback p = .2441).
While the local predictions did indicate a preference for emergence near a full moon, it is possible that
residents are more likely to see nesting sea turtles when there is more light available. Because of this, it
is uncertain whether or not the residents of Ada Foah have made an accurate prediction.



Deary, Alison (VIMS); Hilton, Eric (VIMS, Gloucester Point, United States)

Development of the Pharyngeal jaws in the drums (Sciaenidae) of the Chesapeake Bay with
comparisons to other members of the family

The goal of ecomorphology is to identify the aspects of morphology that influence an organism‘s
ecological role, although little information is available for the early development of many functional
complexes in most fishes. As such, it is difficult to identify the morphological features that influence the
ecological position of early life history stage fishes. As adults and juveniles, members of the family
Sciaenidae possess varying mouth structures and exploit a plethora of foraging habitats and prey types.
To evaluate the development of the pharyngeal jaws in early life history stage sciaenids, the pharyngeal
jaw elements from cleared and double stained specimens were prepared, dissected, and measured using
a Zeiss SteREO DiscoveryV20 microscope. Gill raker shape, gill filament length, and the area of the
upper and lower toothplates were recorded in nine of the 14 sciaenid species that use nursery habitats in
the Chesapeake Bay. Sciaenid species were grouped based on their primary habitat as adults (benthic
vs. pelagic). Stomach contents were identified to the lowest possible taxonomic level and group the prey
by primary habitat (i.e. benthic crustacean, pelagic crustacean, etc.) and relative hardness (e.g., fishes
relatively soft, molluscs relatively hard). In an examination of the oral jaws, significant differences were
found in the length of the ascending process, lower jaw, and upper jaw between benthic and pelagic
foraging sciaenid species. In a preliminary dietary analysis, non-significant dietary differences were
observed between benthic and pelagic foraging sciaenid species. Approximately 33% of the diet of
Leiostomus xanthurus, a benthic foraging sciaenid, consists of benthic prey items whereas less than 5%
of the diet of Bairdiella chrysoura, a pelagic foraging sciaenid, consists of benthic prey items. It is
expected that unlike the oral jaw elements, which are matched to prey capture (i.e. evasive vs. non-
evasive), pharyngeal jaw elements will be matched to the degree of prey hardness since these structures
are used to process prey before swallowing. Species that prey on relatively harder-bodied organisms
(Aplodinotus grunniens, Micropogonias undulatus, L. xanthurus, Menticirrhus spp.) are expected to have




                                                                                                        167
greater pharyngeal toothplate areas than species that prey on relatively softer-bodied organisms (B.
chrysoura, Cynoscion nebulosus, C. regalis, Sciaenops ocellatus, Larimus fasciatus).




Degani, Gad (Tel Hai Academic College);

Various DNA Sequence analysis of amphibian larval in the semi-arid zone

The molecular DNA variation among S. infraimmaculata and T. vittatus larvae populations, representing
diverse breeding sites in Israel, was analyzed by cytochrome b fragment, control region, DNA polymerase
chain reaction (RAPD PCR) and amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) methods. Although the
molecular polymorphisms in both mitochondrial and nuclear DNA are small, they reflect a sharp
ecological separation between DNA variation of seasonal breeding sites and permanent water sources.
These are presumably adaptive changes caused by natural selection. Low genetic (cyt b and 12S, and
RAPD PCR) variation, was revealed by sequences from specimens of H. savignyi, B. viridis, R. bedriagae
and P. syriacus populations, respectively, at each location, analyzed by Arlequin software. We found that
both H. savignyi, and B. viridis are adapted to more unpredictable breeding places than R. bedriagae and
P. syriacus.



DeGregorio, Brett (University of Illinois); Weatherhead, Patrick (University of Illinois, Champaign, United
States); Sperry, Jinelle (University of Illinois, Urbana, United States)

Linking snake activity and habitat selection to songbird nest predation

Nest predators can adversely affect the viability of songbird populations. Despite substantial research on
this predator-prey interaction, almost all of the focus has been on the birds rather than their nest
predators. Our understanding of the factors that bring predators and nests into contact is lacking in nearly
all ecosystems and for most inter-specific interactions. In many ecosystems, snakes have been identified
as the primary predators of bird nests. We used radiotelemetry during the spring and summers of 2011 –
2012 to document the activity and habitat selection of three snake species (rat snakes, Elaphe obsoleta;
black racers, Coluber constrictor; corn snake, Elaphe guttata) known to prey on songbird nests at our
study site in South Carolina. Our focus was on quantifying the seasonal and diel activity patterns of the
three snake species. We simultaneously monitored over 250 avian nests to test the hypothesis that
predation risk should increase for nests during periods when snakes are more active and in habitats
preferred by the snake species. Additionally, we monitored over 100 bird nests with miniature video
cameras to document predator identity, the timing of predation events, and the outcomes of each
predation attempt. Here we present the seasonal and diel activity patterns of the three snake species and
describe the link between their behavior and the daily survival of monitored avian nests.




                                                                                                        168
Dehling, J.M. (University of Koblenz-Landau); Sinsch, Ulrich (University of Koblenz-Landau, Department
of Biology. Koblenz, Germany, Koblenz, Germany)

Advertisement call differentiation mimic phylogenetic relationship among Rwandan reed frogs
(Hyperoliidae: Hyperolius)

Since 2009 we have been analysing the diversity of hyperoliid frogs of Rwanda by recording their
advertisement calls and collecting specimens for morphological and molecular identification using 16s
rRNA barcoding. So far, we identified four described Hyperolius species ( castaneus, discodactylus,
kivuensis, lateralis ), and another five not assignable to any described species which is currently
considered valid (sp. 1: nasutus -group; sp. 2 and 3: viridiflavus -group, sp. 4: cinnamomeoventris -
group; sp. 5: castaneus -group). Afrixalus quadrivittatus were included as a related non-Hyperolius
taxon. According to maximum likelihood and maximum parsimony phylogenetic analyses,                     A.
quadrivitattus is an outgroup to all Hyperolius, and H. sp. 1 ( nasutus -group) is basal to the other
Hyperolius , whereas H. castaneus , H. discodactylus , H. lateralis and H. sp. 5 are closely related and
form a well-supported clade. A separate clade is formed by the species of the viridiflavus -group. This
pattern is supported by advertisement call structure. The castaneus -clade gives short calls consisting of
a single pulse group including equidistantly spaced 7 – 20 pulses. The viridiflavus -clade has very short
and tonal advertisement calls.

The basal nasutus -group taxon produces a complex call including a castaneus –like long first pulse
group followed by up to three single well spaced pulses. A. quadrivittatus has the most complex
advertisement call including a long first pulse group followed by up to 50 short pulse groups with 2-3
pulses.



Dehling, J.M. (University of Koblenz-Landau); Sinsch, Ulrich (University of Koblenz-Landau, Department
of Biology. Koblenz, Germany, Koblenz, Germany)

Diversity of Ridged Frogs (Ptychadena) in montane wetlands of eastern Rwanda: Bioacoustic,
morphological and molecular evidence

We investigated the diversity of Ridged Frogs in cultivated as well as natural montane wetlands in eastern
Rwanda. At thirteen locations we detected between one and three syntopic species of Ptychadena on
visual and acoustic encounter surveys. We identified the three species tentatively as P. anchieta, P.
porosissim, and P . cf. mascareniensis. Comparison of a partial sequence of the mitochondrial 16S
rRNA gene of the collected specimens showed an uncorrected pairwise distance of 10.5-14.2 % between
the three species. From each individual collected, we recorded 30 mensual and meristic characters.
Principal component analysis identified several mensural characters on the basis of which the species
can be distinguished unequivocally. We further provide a number of qualitative morphological characters
that allow easy species identification in the field. Prior to collection, we recorded the advertisement call of
the male specimens.       A discriminant analysis showed that the three species can be distinguished
unequivocally based on the parameters of their advertisement calls.




                                                                                                           169
Deitloff, Jennifer (Auburn University); Graham, Sean (Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
PA, United States)

Courtship and Mate Guarding Behavior in Eurycea aquatica and Eurycea cirrigera.

The Eurycea bislineata complex represents an excellent model for investigating the functional
significance of sexual dimorphism in head shape in salamanders due to the range of male morphologies
found in this group. Species within the E. bislineata complex exhibits a continuum of male morphologies,
ranging from slender, cirri-possessing morphs to robust-headed, cirri-lacking morphs. Some species only
exhibit one morphology or the other, while populations of E. wilderae possess males of both morphs. In
previous studies, we have compared the morphology of males and females of E. aquatica and E.
cirrigera . We found Eurycea aquatica exhibit sexual dimorphism in head shape with males having
robust head morphology compared to females of the species. In addition, populations of E. cirrigera that
we examined contain males with the slender, cirri-possessing morphology and these populations do not
exhibit sexual dimorphism in head shape. Further, the larger head in males of E. aquatica is due to
larger musculature around the jaw. Therefore, we hypothesized that males of E. aquatica use these
enlarged muscles for biting rival males during courtship of a female. Because E. cirrigera lacks the
enlarged musculature, males of this species would not bite rival males during similar encounters. To test
this hypothesis, we placed a male and female of the same species together and observed their behavior
for 20 minutes, then placed an additional male in the container and observed interactions between the
males for an additional 20 minutes. During these trials, males and females of E. aquatica engaged in
courtship behavior during most trials; in addition, males were aggressive and bit intruding males. Males
and females of E. cirrigera did not engage in courtship often. During the few trials in which courtship did
occur, males of E. cirrigera chased intruding males but rarely bit them. From these results we conclude
that males of E. aquatica are more aggressive in guarding potential mates than are males of E.
cirrigera. Thus, the adaptive significance of larger heads and more extensive jaw musculature in E.
aquatica appears to be for male-male combat and mate defense.



Delaney, David (Eastern Illinois University); Mullin, Stephen (Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, IL,
United States)

Life-history characteristics of a population of Ring-necked Snakes (Colubridae: <i>Diadophis</i>)
occupying anthropogenic habitat

Anthropogenic activity can alter the environment in ways that benefit some species. For herpetofauna,
such alteration can occur in the form of trash heaps, log piles, rip-rap or other objects that provide retreat
or hibernation sites. During emergence and the early portion of the activity season, in 2010 - 2012, we
sampled a population of Ring-necked Snakes ( Diadophis punctatus ) inhabiting a 1200-m levee sited
between a river and a reservoir. Constructed using rip-rap boulders, the levee provides abundant cover
objects, under which we caught all subjects.      We encountered individuals representing all life-history
stages; the density at our study site was among the highest reported for this species.           Inter-annual
recapture rates ranged between 0 and 5 %. Subject mass was strongly correlated with snout-vent length;
among adults, males tended to be longer and heavier than females. We contend that the rip-rap habitat
along the levee provides multiple benefits for these fossorial snakes in the form of microhabitats that
satisfy thermoregulatory, dietary, and hibernation requirements.                 Features available within
anthropogenic habitat might not only be tolerated by Ring-necked Snakes, but also allow this species to
attain higher population densities than would occur in natural settings.




                                                                                                          170
Delia, Jesse (Boston University); Warkentin, Karen (Boston University, Boston, MA, United States)

Parental care and hatching plasticity in two glassfrogs (Centrolenidae): Interspecific and
geographic comparisons

The history and diversity of parental care among frogs has provided key insights into the adaptive
evolution of life histories. Although there are examples of more complex parental care strategies, in many
species care appears to serve one or two functions, namely protection from predators and from egg
dehydration. In glassfrogs, parents hydrate and protect arboreal eggs, but the quality of care varies. Our
initial experimental removals of paternal Hyalinobatrachium fleischmanni males revealed that embryos
respond to parental care quality; they can accelerate hatching by up to 56% to escape abandoned,
unprotected, drying eggs, but embryos in safer, cared for clutches extend embryonic development
substantially beyond hatching competence . Here, we conducted male-removal experiments with this
species at different embryonic stages at two sites (Mexico and Panama) to examine how local conditions
may influence the adaptive value of care and the embryo hatching response to risk. We also conducted
parallel experiments with a congener with more intense parental attendance, H. colymbiphyllum , that co-
occurs at our site in Panama. Male care significantly increased embryo survivorship and embryos
responded to parental abandonment and associated risks (i.e., dehydration and predator attacks) by
hatching earlier in both species. Despite very different frequencies of parental attendance between
species, the improvement in offspring survival was not greater with more intense care. However, we
found dramatically divergent primary functions of care between species (hydration vs. antipredator
defense), despite their similar reproductive mode and exposure to the same predators and abiotic
conditions. Across sites predation, mainly by spiders that build webs over clutches, was much higher in
Panama. These results demonstrate how differences in local risks can affect the overall value of parental
care, how alternative parental strategies function in response to different risks among closely related,
ecologically similar species, and how the nature and quality of parental care can affect adaptive embryo
behaviors.



Delia, Jesse (Boston University); Summers, Kyle (East Carolina University, Greenville, NC, United
States)

The interaction of parental care and hatching plasticity: An example from a Neotropical glassfrog
(Anura: Centrolenidae)

The evolution of parental care has long been a topic of central interest in evolutionary ecology. More
recently, hatching plasticity in response to environmental variation has become a focus of intense
scientific interest, indicating that embryos are capable of defensive strategies that improve fitness.
Theoretically, parental care is likely to have strong interactions with hatching plasticity, but this has rarely
been tested. Here we investigate the interaction of parental care and hatching plasticity in the Neotropical
glassfrog Hyalinobatrachium fleischmanni from southern Mexico. This frog has both male parental care
and hatching plasticity, making it particularly suitable for this type of investigation. Males provide care to
arboreal egg masses via nocturnal egg brooding, which functions to prevent embryonic desiccation. We
specifically focus on the question of whether or not embryos in this species respond adaptively to a lack
of paternal care by hatching earlier. We also analyzed the effect of environmental moisture on paternal
care and hatching plasticity, to control for this critical parameter. Experiments revealed that the intensity
of egg brooding is strongly affected by temporal variation in environmental moisture, which affects the
rate of egg dehydration. Males compensate for variation in weather and climate to maintain egg hydration
by adjusting the frequency of brooding. However, care intensity also varies as a result of a tradeoff males




                                                                                                            171
face between caring for eggs versus capitalizing on mating opportunities. Poor care can reduce survival
to hatching and result in a truncated embryonic period. A male removal experiment revealed that parental
care had a significant effect on the length of the embryonic period, with removal clutches concluding
hatching earlier than control clutches. Moreover rainfall affected the embryonic period of removal clutches
significantly more than that of controls. This suggests that in the safety of male care embryos exhibit more
consistent timing of hatching, regardless of weather conditions, whereas embryos directly exposed to the
abiotic environment rely on hatching plasticity to hatch early and avoid desiccation when necessary.



Della Togna, Gina (Center for Species Survival Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute); Comizzoli,
Pierre; Gratwicke, Brian (Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute, Washington, DC, United States);
Trudeau, Vance (University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada)

Structural and Functional Characterization of the Panamanian Golden Frog (Atelopus zeteki)
Spermatozoa - Impact of Medium Osmolality on the Motility Activation and Cell Viability

The Panamanian Golden Frog, Atelopus zeteki (Anura: Bufonidae), is an iconic and endemic species
from Panama, already believed to be extinct in the wild. Therefore, captive reproduction programs are the
only hope for the species to survive the actual global amphibian extinction crisis and be a source for
reintroduction. There is very limited information available on the reproductive biology of A. zeteki or
amphibian species in general; in fact, there currently is no basic information available on the structure,
physiology, collection or preservation of sperm from living golden frogs. This lack of knowledge turns into
a great obstacle when trying to implement assisted reproduction in captivity.

 The overall goal of this study is to characterize critical structural and functional properties of Atelopus
zeteki‘s spermatozoa. The specific goal of our research is to characterize the impact of the hormonal
stimulation and osmolality specifically on: 1. The sperm morphology and DNA integrity; 2. The motility,
mitochondrial function and viability, and 3. Sperm activation signaling pathway. Sperm samples will be
collected from 29 males with the use of hormonal stimulation (hCG, GnRH and Amphiplex) and assessed
for basic parameters such as morphology, concentration, osmolality, motility, forward progressive
movement and pH. The impact of osmolality in the structure and functionality of the cells will be
assessed by evaluating the response of the cells to osmotic changes through the analysis of DNA
integrity, mitochondrial vesicle integrity and the sperm-activation signaling pathway under different
osmotic conditions

Preliminary results indicate that the hormones hCG, GnRH, and the cocktail Amphiplex efficiently
stimulate the production of sperm in A. zeteki. Evaluating the efficacy of the hormones is important to
determine which one provides the best concentration of spermatozoa given that the obtained volumes of
spermic urine are usually very small (<150 μl) and large concentrations are needed for assessing and
preserving sperm cells. Average concentrations of spermatozoa for each of the treatments are: GnRH
(0.1 μg/μl): 1.35x106 cells/ml, GnRH (0.2 μg/μl): 1.47x106 cells/ml, hCG (0.5 IU/μl): 4.75x104 cells/ml,
hCG (1 IU/μl): 9.99 x105 cells/ml, and Amphiplex (a combination of 4 μg of GnRH-A + 10 μg per gram
bodyweight of Metoclopramide): 1.21x106 cells/ml. Basic parameters have been determined as averages:
volume: 73.3 μl, pH: 7.28, percentage of Motility: 79.5%, percentage of forward progressive movement
(FPM): 57.7%, and osmolality: 85.13 mOsmol/kg. Samples are currently being analyzed for morphology
followed by the determination of DNA integrity.

This study will assess for the first time the structural and functional traits of Atelopus zeteki spermatozoa
and evaluate the effect of osmotic changes on the viability of the cells for the future implementation of
accurate protocols for A. zeteki sperm cryopreservation. The use of innovative techniques such as NIR



                                                                                                         172
spectroscopy, Flow Cytometry, Comet Assay and Tunnel Assay will help us evaluate several parameters
required to understand A. zeteki sperm structure and functionality. Taken into consideration that there is
no available information on Atelopus sperm, knowledge gained from our observations can be applied for
the conservation and captive reproduction of other endangered Atelopus species.



Dell'Apa, Andrea (East Carolina University); Cudney-Burch, Jennifer; Rulifson, Roger (East Carolina
University, Greenville, NC, United States)

Male:Female Ratio Changes In Spiny Dogfish (Squalus acanthias) Fishery-Dependent Surveys In
Cape Cod, MA: Fishery Management Aspects

The international exploitation of the sexually dimorphic spiny dogfish (Squalus acanthias) is driven by the
European market, which demands for large females. This sex-selective fishery led to over-exploitation of
the US Atlantic stock, forcing the adoption of a Fishery Management Plan (FMP) to rebuild it. The species
biological characteristics (long gestation period, slow growth rate), and the targeting of adult females,
raise concern on the conservation status of dogfish worldwide, leading to the discussion for inserting the
species in the CITES‘s list for regulating the trade. In case of listing, a fishery must provide for its
sustainability in order for the stock to be commercialized. The sustainability of the US Atlantic dogfish
stock is measured based on the biomass of adult females. Given the decrease in adult females reported
for this stock over the last decade, alternative management strategies to enhance the fishery
sustainability are needed. One possibility currently unexplored would be the development of a male-only
directed fishery. The aim of this research is to test for significance in the male:female ratio changes in
commercial surveys conducted in the Cape Cod, MA area, where local fishers observe higher abundance
of males early in the day and higher presence of females as the day progresses. Results suggest the
possibility for a male-only directed longline fishery within 10 miles off the coast of the Cape Cod
Peninsula, where higher presence of schools of males occur in shallower water early in the day and at
different fishing seasons. These results also support the employment of standardized research effort in
the study area to monitor fine-scale behavior patterns of males through day and season in order to
characterize male dogfish movements and to assess whether a male-only directed fishery in the area is
viable



Delpiani, Gabriela (UNMdP, CONICET); Spath, Cecilia (UNMdP, CONICET, Mar del Plata, Argentina);
Figueroa, Daniel (UNMdP, Mar del Plata, Canada)

Quantitative analysis of the denture of Amblyraja doellojuradoi

Teeth morphology is an important tool widely used in taxonomic, biological and fossil teeth studies of
cartilaginous fishes. Furthermore, the aim of the present study is the quantitative analysis of Amblyraja
doellojuradoi‘s dentition. This species inhabits the Southwest Atlantic from 35º-56º S, between 51-642 m.

The number of rows of teeth in the upper and lower jaw of individuals of both sexes was counted. In both
jaws, the width and length of each tooth belonging to the row selected from each area (commissural
teeth, commissural region teeth, symphysis region teeth, symphysis teeth) was measured.

The total number of teeth rows in the upper jaw ranged from 25-37, while in the lower jaw ranged from
24-35. In the upper jaws both males and females showed significant differences in the number of rows of
teeth, as also in the lower (p= 0.005; p= 0.001 respectively). However, the number of rows in the upper
and lower jaw for both sexes was not significantly different (p= 0.154; p= 0.661 respectively). Regarding



                                                                                                       173
the measurement of teeth, it was observed that the width of the teeth for both sexes and both jaws is
maintained constant along the rows and in all areas. Variations were observed in regard to tooth length.
In the upper jaw of the female, the length of the teeth of the left commissural row is constant. While in the
remaining rows, the teeth are increasing its length from the outside towards the inside of the jaw. In the
lower jaw, the teeth of the commissural rows (left and right) have a constant length, unlike the rest of the
rows that have progressively increased the length of teeth from the outside, as mentioned above. In the
upper jaw of the males was observed that the length of the teeth is not constant, increasing its length
from the external to internal teeth. In the lower jaw of the males was found the same pattern of variation
of the length of the teeth seen in the lower jaw of females.

The importance of this work is to highlight the sexual heterodoncy and the deterioration suffered by teeth.
In the case of sexual heterodoncy, is known to be a feature associated with the reduction of intraspecific
competition for food and with the bite during reproduction. Finally, in the second case emphasized the
importance of the replacement of older and damaged teeth in elasmobranchs.



Dennison, Siobhan (Macquarie University); McAlpin, Steve; Whiting, Martin; Stow, Adam (Macquarie
University, Sydney, NSW, Australia)

Dispersal, group composition and mating system of a social, burrowing lizard

The Great Desert Skink, Liopholis kintorei , is a large scincid lizard inhabiting sandy arid regions of
Central Australia. It belongs to a group of Australian lizards containing several species that have recently
been used to investigate the early evolution and maintenance of vertebrate sociality. Most social lizards
utilize pre-existing shelter sites such as rock crevices, but L. kintorei is unique in that individuals
cooperatively construct and maintain extensive burrow systems that house close kin. Groups contain
adult males and females with multiple cohorts of offspring that often include full-siblings. We use genetic
techniques to estimate dispersal and gene flow among L. kintorei burrow systems, and to characterize
the mating system and group structure of these extraordinary lizards. Sociality is often associated with a
largely monogamous mating system, as this raises the average within-group relatedness, and thus
increases inclusive fitness benefits. Due to the long-term stability of L. kintorei groups, we predict that
there is mate fidelity over multiple years. If individuals exhibit a long-term investment in a single partner,
we would expect them to be selective in their choice of breeding partners to maximize the fitness of their
offspring. These data will contribute towards further investigation of the costs and benefits of group living.
Furthermore, there are implications of these social behaviors to the conservation of the species, listed as
vulnerable in Australia.



Denoel, Mathieu (University of Liege);

Video-tracking locomotor behavior of amphibian tadpoles in response to endosulfan and
predation risk

To understand the complex role of pesticides on organisms, such as amphibians, it is of primary
importance to take into account sublethal effects. In this perspective, behavioral ecotoxicology is an
emerging field that makes benefits from new technologies. Particularly, video-tracking analyses now give
detailed quantitative data from movement patterns, but have almost not been yet applied in amphibians.
We aimed at using such techniques to determine the potential effects of environmental concentrations of
an organochlorine pesticide (endosulfan) on the locomotor behavior of amphibian tadpoles (Rana



                                                                                                          174
temporaria). In addition, we determined individual responses to the simulation of a predatory attack. All
experiments were carried out in laboratory replicated controlled conditions. Video-tracks were built out of
more than one million spatial data that were then converted into various behaviors. Endosulfan affected
all analyzed patterns: contaminated tadpoles moved less, at a slower speed, and in a different portion of
their habitat than control tadpoles. The response of contaminated tadpoles to a predatory attack was less
effective than that one of control individuals. These results indicate that (1) video-tracking is a powerful
technique to quantify amphibian behavioral patterns; and (2) endosulfan affects amphibians at
environmental concentrations in a complex way, i.e. in altering different behavioral traits. In a natural
environment, involving predators, the ineffective response of contaminated tadpoles could be particularly
detrimental.



Denton, Robert (The Ohio State University); Kenyon, Laura (The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH,
United States); Greenwald, Katherine (Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, MI, United States); Gibbs,
Lisle (The Ohio State University, Columbus, United States)

Using multilocus coalescent-based methods to test for hybridization between two Ambystoma
salamander species in Ohio, USA

Gene tree-based multilocus models for detecting hybridization offer a new analytical approach to
investigating this evolutionary process in amphibians. Ambystoma texanum (smallmouth salamander)
and A. barbouri (streamside salamander) are sister species with distributions that are potentially
adjacent to each other in Central Ohio. Using a mtDNA-defined barcode, we recently identified multiple
individuals from North-Central Ohio as A. barbouri , well outside their currently accepted range. We used
additional nDNA markers to explore several hypotheses to explain the distribution of these ―misidentified‖
individuals: 1) These are A. barbouri individuals and represent a significant range extension; 2) The
mtDNA barcode does not correctly distinguish between these two species in these populations; or 3)
Hybridization is occurring between these species in Central Ohio. We tested these hypotheses using
STEM-hy, a program that uses multilocus gene trees under the coalescent model to evaluate different
hypotheses about hybridization using model selection. Using ten nuclear markers, we generated gene
trees from reference A. texanum individuals (Northeast Ohio), reference A. barbouri individuals
(Southwest Ohio), and the putative hybrids that were identified as A. barbouri using the mtDNA barcode.
Our results suggest that the ―misidentified‖ (putative hybrid) individuals are, in fact, A. barbouri , indicating
no hybridization and a range extension for this species. STEM-hy could provide a useful tool for assigning
cryptic, unknown individuals to a reference group using sequence data in addition to providing estimates
of hybridization.



DeVore, Jayna L. (University of Georgia); Maerz, John C. (University of Georgia, Canada)

Metamorphic Strategy Predicts Susceptibility to Alterations in Top-Down and Bottom-Up
Influences Initiated by Plant Invasion

Metamorphosis is a common process during which an irreversible ontogenetic transition leads to a shift in
challenges. Certain trade-offs are inherent in metamorphosis; for example, species that metamorphose
early and small have frequently minimized mortality in the first environment, but face increased risk in the
second. Species have developed a number of strategies to optimize this transition and, to ensure that
they reach reproductive size, their post-metamorphic behavior is often compensatory to its timing. The
reciprocal nature of this transition raises the possibility that vulnerability to secondary habitat quality may



                                                                                                             175
vary by strategy. In order to explore the interplay between metamorphic strategy and environmental
change we monitored the response of three amphibian species to habitat alterations driven by Japanese
stilt-grass (Microstegium vimineum) invasion. We stocked metamorphic American toads (Anaxyrus [Bufo]
americanus), southern leopard frogs (Lithobates [Rana] sphenocephalus), and eastern newts
(Notophthalmus viridescens) into 58m2 pens spanning 8 invasion fronts. Using robust capture periods we
tracked the survival and growth of these 2,600 marked individuals for 10 months. We found that the initial
6-week survival of toads was lower in invaded habitats, likely due to increased predation pressure from
lycosid spiders, but that this effect diminished as they grew. Leopard frog survival was not affected by
invasion status; however, growth rates were lower in invaded habitats, likely due to reduced prey
availability. Neither the high survival nor slow growth rates of efts were influenced by invasion status.
These results show species-specific responses to invasion-driven habitat changes. We hypothesize that
species that metamorphose early and forage actively to support rapid post-metamorphic growth are more
susceptible to increased predation pressure, whereas species that metamorphosed at a larger size and
are more cryptic, ambush foragers are more affected by altered prey availability. In contrast, species with
flexible time horizons to reproduction may prioritize survival over growth by aestivating during adverse
conditions, minimizing trophic effects. These results demonstrate that metamorphic strategy can influence
the nature and strength of the responses of related species to environmental change, and support
theoretical models that predict the prioritization of either growth or survival as a function of the timing of
metamorphosis.



Diaz de la Vega, Anibal (Instituto de Biologia UNAM); Mendez, Fausto (Instituto de Biologia UNAM,
Canada)

Are clonal lineages identical?

Closer relatives species could present similar physiological requirements even though they inhabit
different environments. The environmental temperature is an important resource for ectotherms and
determines physiological traits. Parthenogenetic lizards of the cozumela complex were generated by two
independent hybridization events between the same gonochoristic species (mother species: Aspidoscelis
angusticeps and father species: A. deppii ). Therefore this complex it is an ideal model to determine if
the physiological requirements of the parthenogenetic lineages, originated by the same parental species,
are alike between them or among parental species. We determined the thermal efficiency index and
thermal preferences of the cozumela complex lizards ( A. cozumela, A. maslini, and A. rodecki ) and the
parental species in the Yucatan peninsula of Mexico . Thermal efficiency indexes of all species were
determined by the thermal quality of the habitat and the precision of organisms to thermoregulate.
Thermal preferences of A. cozumela and A. maslini were similar to A. deppii ; however, thermal
preferences of A. rodecki were similar to the mother species. These results suggest that clones with
similar origin present different physiological traits between lineages and even among populations of the
same clone. However, the thermal preferences are phylogenetically conservative, at least with one of the
parental species, supporting the ―frozen niche variation‖ hypothesis.



Dickman, Christopher (University of Sydney);

Effects of habitat fragmentation on lizards of the Simpson Desert, central Australia

Spinifex grasslands predominate in the arid regions of central Australia, and provide habitat for some of
the world‘s richest assemblages of lizards. Although they are remote and generally subject to limited



                                                                                                          176
disturbance from people, the grasslands are subject to wildfires at intervals of 10 – 25 years that may
burn swathes of country exceeding a million hectares. Here, I describe the effects of a wildfire in the
Simpson Desert of central Australia that burnt for five months in 2001 – 2002 and fragmented the
grassland into patches ranging in area from a few square metres to >10 000 ha.

Post-fire surveys showed that the abundances, richness and composition of lizard assemblages were
largely unaffected in the immediate aftermath of the fire, but also that lizards declined after 1 – 2 years in
burnt compared with unburnt sites. Observations and experiments identified three causes of lizard loss in
burnt areas. The fire: 1) increased the susceptibility of lizards to free-ranging predators such raptors, lace
monitors and feral cats, 2) removed key habitat resources needed for shelter and thermoregulation, and
3) depleted invertebrate food resources. Initial declines in surface-active invertebrates were linked to
decreases or local losses of generalist lizards such as several species of Ctenotus , whereas longer-term
declines in termites appeared to drive reductions in numbers of specialist lizards such as Lerista labialis
and Rhynchoedura ornata . Some declines in lizard abundance and diversity were detected also in
unburnt sites; in accordance with predictions of island biogeographic theory, rates of loss were higher in
small patches of unburnt spinifex than in larger ones. Heavy rainfall in 2007 and again in 2010 – 2011 has
driven the recovery of spinifex in burnt areas, but current sampling shows that neither the abundances
nor diversity of lizards have reached pre-fire levels.

Climate projections indicate that central Australia will become hotter in future, but also that there will be
an intensification of ‗boom‘ and ‗bust‘ cycles that are driven by flood rains. These conditions will likely lead
to more frequent and extensive wildfires, in turn exacerbating the fragmentation of lizard populations and
assemblages. I discuss management options that should mitigate these effects.



Dillman, Casey (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Hilton, Eric (Virginia Institute of Marine Science,
Canada)

Development of the Pectoral Fin Spine in Acipenseridae (Actinopterygii: Acipenseriformes)


 Recent comprehensive studies on the anatomy and development of Acipenser brevirostrum and
Scaphirhynchus platorynchus have provided a wealth of information for comparative anatomical and
phylogenetic studies. These studies have also provoked numerous questions. One such question
involves the development of pectoral girdle and the formation of the pectoral fin spine, a proposed
synapomorphy for Acipenseridae. In this study we document the ontogeny of these regions and their
constituent components via developmental series for four species: A . fulvescens (30 – 170 mm TL), A.
medirostris (18-70 mm TL), A . transmontanus (19-131 mm TL), and S . albus 18-79 mm TL). Timing,
morphology, and pattern of development for the dermal bones, and pectoral fin spine among these
species are discussed and compared with other Acipenseriformes (e.g., a developmental series of
Polyodon spathula [15-120 mm TL] as well as other members of the family Acipenseridae). Additionally,
the ratio of fin spine length to total length is investigated to determine if ontogenetic changes occur in the
species examined. This study contributes to the ongoing character exploration for our studies of
phylogenetic relationships among acipenserids.




                                                                                                            177
Dillman, Casey (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Laumann, Katie; Hilton, Eric (Virginia Institute of
Marine Science, Canada)

Nuclear DNA perspectives and problems in estimating relationships among sturgeons
(Acipenseriformes: Acipenseridae)

Genome duplication is a prominent feature in the evolutionary history of fishes generally, and subsequent
lineage-specific genome duplications have also occurred (e.g., within Catostomidae and Salmonidae), as
well as proposed reductions in genome size (e.g., Tetraodontiformes). Rarely, however, are polymorphic
polyploidy levels seen across a natural assemblage of species. As exemplars of this phenomenon
sturgeons (Acipenseridae) provide a model clade for investigation. In this study we examined this
polymorphic polyploidy phenomenon utilizing DNA sequence data from – normally – single-copy nuclear
loci from half of the recognized species in the clade; our taxon sampling encompasses all documented
levels of polyploidy within this family (i.e., 2n to 16n). These data are examined with reference to patterns
seen from multi-copy nuclear loci, or the repeated regions of the nuclear genome that have been used
previously (i.e., the Internal Transcribed Spacer and nuclear ribosomal DNA regions). The utility of these
loci in reconstruction of hypotheses of relationships among taxa is explored.



Dixon-MacCallum, Graham (University of Victoria);

Habitat preferences of snakes and lizards in urban parks in Victoria, British Columbia.

Urban parks are of value, not only to the people who visit them for recreation, but to wildlife that rely on
parks to survive. In Victoria, British Columbia, urban parks support three species of snake, genus
Thamnophis, and two lizards, Elgaria coerulea and Podarcis muralis, but the specific habitat preferences
of these species are poorly understood. The habitat available at medium- and small-scale in four parks
will be quantified, as will the diversity and abundance of reptiles in those parks. Medium-scale habitat
composition will be quantified using GIS software to determine the ratios of landcover types (e.g. forest,
field, wetland, or shrub), and the length of habitat edges. Surveys will be performed along randomly
chosen transects and all snakes and lizards encountered will be captured by hand. Small-scale plot-
based vegetation surveys will be performed at each capture location, and at a location 50 m away along a
randomly selected compass bearing. Comparison of habitat characteristics at capture points and paired
random points will allow inferences about habitat preferences of snakes and lizards. I expect that habitat
edge will be the greatest predictor of reptile abundance in urban parks in Victoria. Therefore, parks that
are more heterogeneous at medium- and small-scale will have higher diversity and abundance. This
study will help inform park managers for the creation and maintenance of urban parks where populations
of wildlife, including snakes and lizards, can persist and thrive.



Doan, Tiffany (Oicos Habitare);

Squamate Diversity Patterns in Peru and Bolivia

The South American countries of Peru and Bolivia are home to 5.7% of the world‘s squamates species.
As part of the Global Assessment of Reptile Distributions, I mapped the species distributions of all lizards
and snakes that occur in Peru and Bolivia. Peru contains 393 squamate species belonging to 19 families,
whereas Bolivia is home to 287 squamate species of 17 families. Endemicity was particularly high in
Peru, with 119 endemic species (30.3%); the number of endemic squamates from Bolivia was much lower
(28 species), representing just 9.8% of species. In Peru, lizards had a much higher rate of endemism



                                                                                                         178
than snakes or amphisbaenians, whereas in Bolivia, the rate was similar for lizards and snakes.
Coefficients of Biogeographic Resemblance demonstrated that Peru and Bolivia share the most similar
squamate fauna of South American countries, with 159 species in common. Peru was next most similar
to Ecuador, whereas Bolivia was second most similar to Paraguay. Species accumulation curves that
compared year of description with time demonstrate that for both countries there is no plateau, indicating
that novel species await description in both nations. Hotspots in Peru occur in Iquitos (122 species),
Puerto Maldonado (100 species), and the Urubamba Valley (95 species). Bolivian hotspots include Santa
Cruz de la Sierra (104 species) and Riberalta (59 species). After completion of snake and lizard species
maps, 59 species in Peru and 66 species in Bolivia were only documented in a single one-degree cell.
Eighteen one-degree grid cells in Peru and 21 cells in Bolivia did not contain any records of snakes or
lizards, which indicates that additional widespread sampling is necessary to fully describe the squamate
faunas of these countries.



Donaldson, Terry (University of Guam Marine Laboratory);

Species Diversity and Characteristics of a Parrotfish Spawning Aggregation Site

A number of species of parrotfishes (Labridae: Scarinae) form spawning aggregations that have
predictable spatial and temporal patterns. Spawning aggregations formed by these fishes are either
resident or transient in nature. Mating systems and behaviors utilized by these fishes range from lek-like
behavior of terminal-phase males with paired spawning, group spawning by immature-phase males and
females, sneaking by immature phase males during pair spawning of terminal phase males with individual
females, and group spawning by relatively large aggregations of individuals. At Guam, Mariana Islands,
parrotfish spawning aggregations may be found on reef terraces near promontories or reef drop-offs. The
species diversity of parrotfishes utilizing the same spawning aggregation sites varies but may include as
many as five species on a daily basis related to both tidal state and time period, with another species
participating during a specific lunar phase. Of spawning aggregation sites assessed thus far, 2-3
resident spawning aggregation species are usually most abundant with other species less so.



Donnelly, Maureen (Florida International University); Shoo, Luke (Centre for Tropical Biodiversity &
Climate Change, Queensland, Australia); Olson, Deanna (US Forest Service, Corvallis, United States);
McMenamin, Sarah (University of Washington, Seattle, United States); Murray, Kris (University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia); Van Sluys, Monique (Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil); Msuya, Charles (University of Dar es Salaam, Dar Es Salaam, United States);
Stratford, Daniel (Griffith University, Canada); Terhivuo, Juhani (Finnish Museum of Natural History,
Canada); Merino-Viteri, Andres (James Cook University of North Queeensland, Canada); Herbert, Sarah
(EcoGecko Consultants, Canada); Bishop, Phillip (University of Otago, Canada); Corn, P. Steven (US
Geological Survey, Canada); Dovey, Liz (Dept. of Climate Change, Canada); Griffiths, Richard (The
Durrell Institute of Conservation & Ecology, Canada); Lowe, Katrin (Griffith University, Canada);
Mahoney, Michael (The University of Newcastle, Canada); McCallum, Hamish; Shuker, Jonathan;
Simpkins, Clay (Griffith University, Canada); Skerratt, Lee (James Cook University, Canada); Williams,
Stephen (James Cook University of North Queeensland, Canada); Linhoff, Luke (Florida International
University, Canada); Hero, Jean-Marc (Griffith University, Canada)

Engineering a Future for Amphibians under Climate Change

Following the 2009 INTECOL meeting in Brisbane Australia, a workshop was convened to discuss
potential efforts that might mitigate some climate change effects on amphibians. A survey of the
literature revealed three types of interventions that could help amphibians threatened with



                                                                                                      179
extirpation/extinction:   installations of microclimatic and microhabitat refugia, enhancement and
restoration of breeding sites, and manipulation of hydroperiod. In this presentation we review the findings
of Shoo et al. (2011) and focus on the international efforts to re-establish the Kihansi Spray Toad in
Tanzania. We use the Kihansi Spray toad as a case study because it involves efforts across all three
types of interventions described by Shoo et al. (2011). The assurance population exported to the United
States crashed to very low numbers until new husbandry efforts at the Toledo Zoo improved captive
reproduction success. The United States now has six zoological gardens involved in captive rearing and
Tanzania has established a biosecure site to hold captive animals for release into the re-engineered
wildlands of the Kihansi Gorge.



Donnelly, Maureen (Florida International University); Geerdes, Erica; Whitfield, Steven (University of
South Dakota, Vermillion, United States); Alvarado, Gilbert (Unversidad Nacional, Heredia, Costa Rica);
Kerby, Jacob (University of South Dakota, Vermillion, United States)

Ranavirus infection in native amphibians at La Selva Biological Station, Costa Rica: The first
report of ranavirus in Central America

Ranaviruses are globally widespread group of iridoviruses capable of causing mass mortality events in
amphibian populations, and are acknowledged to be a significant threat to amphibian populations in many
parts of the world. Central America hosts a diverse, unique, and highly threatened amphibian fauna, yet
there has been little effort to describe presence, systematics, host range, or impacts to hosts or
populations of Ranaviruses. In this study, we examined toe clips from 104 individuals of twelve different
species of amphibians collected at La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica. Utilizing quantitative PCR
methodology, we detected the presence of ranavirus in four of these samples all from a single direct
developing species, Craugastor bransfordii. We are currently conducting work on a larger dataset at the
same location and have found additional positive samples. These same individuals were also sampled
for the amphibian chytrid fungus (known to be present at the site) to determine any patterns in co-
infection. Future work will investigate the impacts of ranavirus to Costa Rican amphibian species.



Doody, Sean (The Orianne Society); Castellano, Christina (The Orianne Society, Clayton, GA, United
States); Rhind, David (Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Populations, and Communities,
Canberra, N, Australia); Green, Brian (University of Canberra, University of Canberra, N, Australia)

Paradise Poisoned: The Ecological Effects of a Toxic Invasive Species

Invasive species are a threat to native biodiversity worldwide, but can also facilitate native species. When
invasive animals reduce top predators, mesopredator ‗outbreaks‘ can occur; top predators can suppress
mesopredators both by killing them and by motivating changes in their behavior. The cane toad, Bufo
marinus, is toxic to naïve predators, was introduced into Australia in 1935, and has been filling its niche
by moving westward ever since. Our field research demonstrated that cane toads cause severe
population-level declines in some predatory lizards via lethal toxic ingestion. We also revealed releases
(associated with toad-induced top predator declines) in selected mesopredators, an apex predator, and a
herbivore, We predict releases in other species, including a threatened species. The severe declines of
predatory monitor lizards coupled with recent evidence of cascading effects on their prey suggest that
cane toads are re-shaping riparian communities in tropical Australia through both direct negative effects
and indirect facilitation.




                                                                                                        180
Dorcas, Michael (Davidson College); Hart, Kristen (U.S. Geological Survey, Davie, FL, United States);
Pittman, Shannon (University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United States); Snow, Ray (National Park
Service, Homestead, FL, United States); Cherkiss, Michael (U.S. Geological Survey, Davie, FL, United
States); Fujisaki, Ikuko (U.S. Geological Survey, Davie, United States); Mazzotti, Frank (University of
Florida, Davie, FL, United States)

Translocated Invasive Burmese Pythons Demonstrate Remarkable Movement and Navigational
Abilities

Animals must navigate in order to obtain resources within their environment. The navigational strategies
that individuals employ in both familiar and novel environments have important implications for their ability
to use their environment. A variety of navigational strategies have been documented in reptiles, most of
them based on some form of path integration, which requires the memory of an outward path to return
―home‖. True navigation, the ability to travel directly towards a goal after displacement to an unfamiliar
location without using familiar routes, has rarely been documented in reptiles, primarily in sea turtles.
Evidence for true navigation is typically found in long-distance migrants such as birds, marine fish, and
monarch butterflies. We conducted a study to examine the ability of invasive Burmese pythons (Python
molurus bivittatus) to navigate ―home‖ when displaced considerable distances from their point of capture.
We translocated 6 adult Burmese pythons 20-35 km from their capture locations. Within 3-8 months, all
snakes exhibited directed, long-distance movements towards their original capture locations (rho=0.96,
P<0.0001). Most snakes resumed less-directed movement patterns when they arrived close to their
original capture locations. Our results indicate that invasive Burmese pythons exhibit true homing and
navigational abilities when displaced long distances from their home range. Such abilities may reduce
risk associated with the exploration of new areas outside their home range and may have important
implications for expansion of the geographic range of invasive python in south Florida.



Dorr, Scott (California Polytechnic State University); Holding, Matthew; Frazier, Tony; Taylor, Emily
(California Polytechnic State University, Canada)

Stress Reactivity of Male and Female Western Rattlesnakes (Crotalus o. oreganus and C. o.
helleri)

The effects of stress hormones on reptile physiology are poorly understood, with some literature
indicating correlations between elevated glucocorticoid (e.g., corticosterone) concentrations and reduced
reproductive fitness, and others suggesting no effect. In theory, divergent selective pressures should
result in differential stress reactivity between males and females due to unequal lifetime reproductive
success and reproductive costs. We hypothesized that female western rattlesnakes will exhibit blunted
stress reactivity in order to avoid detrimental effects of high corticosterone levels on reproductive
physiology and behavior. We obtained blood samples from free-ranging Northern Pacific rattlesnakes ( C.
o. oreganus) and Southern Pacific Rattlesnakes ( C. o. helleri ) at two sites in Central California. Stress
reactivity was evaluated by measuring the change in plasma concentrations of the stress hormone
corticosterone in response to a stressor (confinement in an opaque bucket for one hour). We predicted
that the increase from basal (stress response) levels of corticosterone would be lower in female
rattlesnakes than in males. These data will allow us to progress toward a better understanding of sex
differences in adrenocortical physiology.




                                                                                                         181
Drake, Dana (University of Missouri);

Sampling of Terrestrial Salamanders Reveals Atypical Color Morphs in the Southern Redback
Salamander, Plethodon serratus

While much is known about the common, widely distributed, and widely studied Eastern Redback
Salamander, Plethodon cinereus , far less is known about its more geographically restricted sister taxon,
the Southern Redback Salamander, P. serratus , including habitat use and the occurrence frequency and
types of color morphs. In the spring and fall of 2010 and 2011, we conducted area-constrained leaf litter
and natural cover object searches for terrestrial salamanders in 800 different 3m2 plots in mature upland
hardwood forests of Sinkin Experimental Forest (USDA), Dent County, Missouri, USA. We encountered
1876 Plethodon serratus , 20 Plethodon albagula and 4 Eurycea longicauda . Of the salamanders
encountered, 75 % were found in leaf litter, 14 % under woody cover and 11 % under rocks. Two
salamanders were encountered in cicada burrows. Five of the salamanders encountered during the
surveys were atypical color morphs, and all atypical color morphs occurred in P. serratus . In addition to
the namesake redback phase and the leadback phase known to occur in P. cinereus , we encountered
a silverback (light gray dorsal stripe), a ghostback (white dorsal stripe) and a hypomelanistic (leucistic), or
milky, version of a redback phase. In the populations sampled, leaf litter sampling proved to be the most
effective for encountering P. serratus , and the frequency of non-redback phases of P. serratus was
extremely low but diverse.



Drake, Kristina (US Geological Survey); Nussear, Kenneth; Esque, Todd (US Geological Survey,
Henderson, NV, United States); Barber, Amy (University of Nevada-Reno, Reno, NV, United States);
Vittum, Katherine (US Geological Survey, Hendeson, NV, United States); Medica, Philip (US Geological
Survey, Henderson, NV, United States); Tracy, Richard; Hunter, Kenneth (University of Nevada-Reno,
Reno, NV, United States)

Does Translocation Influence Physiological Stress in the Agassiz's Desert Tortoise?

Wildlife translocation is increasingly used to mitigate disturbances to animals or habitat due to human
activities, yet little is known about the extent to which translocating animals causes stress. To understand
the relationship between physiological stress and translocation, we conducted a multi-year study (2007-
2009) using a population of Agassiz‘s desert tortoises (Gopherus agassizii) near Fort Irwin, California.
Blood samples were collected from adult tortoises in three treatment groups (resident, translocated, and
control) for one year prior to and two years after translocation to determine if this activity caused a
measurable physiological stress response, and the time frame over which animals adjust to translocation.
Samples were analyzed by radioimmunoassay for plasma total corticosterone (CORT), a glucocorticoid
hormone commonly associated with stress responses in reptiles. CORT values were analyzed in relation
to potential covariates (e.g. animal sex, date, activity, treatment, handling time, air temperature,
movement, precipitation, and annual plant production) among seasons and years. On a broad scale, we
measured lower CORT in years of low annual forage and precipitation and higher concentrations in years
with more abundant forage and precipitation. However, when attempting to tie this to the areas inhabited
by individual tortoises, estimated annual biomass production, precipitation, and movement did not
significantly explain CORT concentrations. CORT values in males were higher than in females, and
values for both varied monthly throughout the activity season and among years. We found that
translocation of desert tortoises did not result in elevated stress levels. Rather variations in CORT
concentration were best explained by the year and sex of the animal. From these results, we conclude
that translocation does not elicit a physiological stress response in desert tortoises.




                                                                                                           182
Drechsler, Axel (University of Bielefeld); Ortmann, Daniel (Forschungsmuseum Alexander König, Bonn,
Germany); Schmidt, Benedikt R. (University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland); Steinfartz, Sebastian
(University of Bielefeld, Bielefeld, Germany)

Applied conservation genetics in the context of a human induced decline: a case study on the
endangered crested newt (Triturus cristatus) in Germany

The Fauna-Flora-Habitat-Directive (FFH-Directive) was established to protect endangered plants and
animals in Europe and thus became therefore also an important tool to protect threatened amphibian
species. According to its danger of extinction, the great crested newt (Triturus cristatus) is one of the
amphibian species listed in this FFH-Directive (appendix II and IV). Irrespective of its high protection
status, a population of crested newts in Krefeld (Germany) representing the so far species‘ highest single
evidence with more than 4000 adult individuals was heavily disturbed by performed reconstruction
measures. By inserting a bentonite ground layer in the year 2001 the main reproduction habitat of the
newts lost its temporal periodicity leading to an increase in predatory fish species. As a consequence, the
population of crested newts in this central habitat collapsed. In order to find out in how far other
subpopulations in that area have been affected by this human impact, we performed from 2004-2011 a
monitoring of 26 habitats of crested newts. In the course of this monitoring all crested newts were trapped
by Ortmann`s funnel traps and tagged to perform a capture-mark-recapture analysis. Additionally a set of
20 microsatellite loci as genetic marker was used to get insights in the migration of crested newts.
Furthermore, an estimation of census versus effective population sizes of each subpopulation was
implemented to identify source and sink populations.

On the basis of more than seven years of monitoring and sampled 2.400 individuals for genetic analysis,
this study combines demographic aspects with population genetic data for this species to a so far non-
reached level. A future management plan based on these insights of demographic and genetic structure
should allow stabilising this former outstanding population of crested newts in terms of population size.



Dreher, Corinna (University of Veterinary Medicine of Hannover); Proehl, Heike (Institute for Zoology,
University of Veterinary Medicine of Hannover, Hannover, Germany)

The Importance of Coloration and Advertisement Calls for Mate Choice in Strawberry Poison
Frogs (Oophaga pumilio)

The interaction of sexual signals of different modalities can be important for mate choice decisions, but
has not yet been investigated in many animal taxa. In strawberry poison frogs both acoustic signals as
well as visual signals vary among populations and are supposed to be employed in courtship. While frogs
in Costa Rica are all red and considered to be aposematic, different populations of strawberry poison
frogs on the islands and adjacent mainland of the Bocas del Toro Archipelago in Panama differ widely in
color patterns. In Costa Rica the variability of calls is higher but the variability of coloration is smaller than
in Panama. To investigate the importance and the interaction of visual and acoustic signals for mate
choice we tested receptive females of strawberry poison frogs in Panama and Costa Rica for their
preference for local traits directly in their natural habitat. In total we tested 452 receptive females in two
Costa Rican and four Panamanian populations for their mate preference when given the choice between
two presented calls (local vs. non-local) in five types of playback experiments. In three of those
experiments the calls were presented in combinations with plasticine model frogs of two different colors
(local vs. non-local). Our results showed that females of Panamanian populations significantly preferred
the local call sequence over the non-local (i.e. Costa Rican) call sequence, independent of the color of
presented model frogs. In Costa Rica, females preferred the local call over the non-local (i.e.



                                                                                                              183
Panamanian) call only in one population in one out of three experiments. Additionally, in two Panamanian
populations females showed week preferences for either the local or the non-local color morph. Overall
our results suggest that acoustic signals are more important for mate choice than visual signals in
strawberry poison frogs. Furthermore the patterns of sexual preferences for advertisement calls or color
patterns seem to vary among populations. The study highlights the importance for testing receptive
females in the wild in multiple populations because sexual and natural selection pressures seem to differ
geographically within species.



Drumheller, Stephanie (The University of Iowa);

Exploring Patterns of Modern and Fossil Crocodylian Bite Marks from a Phylogenetic Perspective

Within the science of taphonomy, the study of the processes of preservation, it has been determined that
many patterns of fossil modification and survival can be correlated to anatomical features, particularly
skeletal element structure and overall shape. Systematists observe morphological similarities when
identifying phylogenetically informative characters. Despite this apparent source of potential overlap,
correlations between phylogenetic and taphonomic patterns have not been explored. An actualistic
survey of crocodylian bite marks provides an unprecedented opportunity to test whether phylogeny can
be used to predict taphonomic patterns in the fossil record. Bite mark samples were collected from 21 of
the 23 generally recognized species of extant crocodylian. Bite marks were observed under low
magnification and with a scanning electron microscope. Particular attention was paid to the bisected
marks previously identified as diagnostic for the group and to new types of marks. Presence or absence
of these feeding trace types were coded as binary characters and added to a published character-taxon
matrix encompassing extinct and extant eusuchians. A maximum parsimony analysis was performed with
and without these characters, and bite mark character states were mapped onto the resulting trees. The
bisected bite marks originally seen with actualistic studies of Crocodylus niloticus feeding can also be
identified on fossil specimens and associated with two extinct species, Crocodylus anthropophagus and
Deinosuchus riograndensis. The phylogeny generated during this analysis successfully predicts the
presence of bisected marks in both of these taxa. New fossil examples of bite marks attributed to a non-
crocodylian crocodyliform provide a case study in how using phylogeny to predict taphonomic patterns
can be projected beyond the crown group. This method does have limitations; extinct crocodyliforms filled
a wider array of ecological niches than their living relatives, and morphologies representing feeding
strategies no longer exploited by modern crocodylians are known. Actualistic data cannot be collected in
a phylogenetic framework for wholly extinct crocodyliform morphologies, such as ziphodont dentition or
expanded, anvil-like teeth associated with durophagy, but more distantly related extant groups may be
morphologically similar, and phylogeny can direct when and where those analogies are most appropriate.



Drymon, Marcus (Dauphin Island Sea Lab); Powers, Sean; Kroetz, Andrea (Dauphin Island Sea Lab,
Canada); Kevin, Feldheim (Field Museum, Canada); Gautreaux, Jill; Moore, Frank (University of Southern
Mississippi, Canada)

Are tiger sharks a seasonal conduit of terrestrial energy into marine foodwebs?

As apex predators, some shark species have the potential to couple energy pathways from disparate
foodwebs. This is particularly true of tiger sharks, highly migratory fish known for the breadth of items they
consume. In addition to foraging on invertebrates, bony and cartilaginous fishes, sea snakes, marine
mammals and seabirds, tiger sharks are known to consume terrestrial birds. While accounts of this



                                                                                                          184
predator-prey interaction date back over half a century, we know little about the pervasiveness of this
phenomenon within a population, or of the potential contribution terrestrial birds make to the diet of tiger
sharks. We investigated the extent to which individual tiger sharks are dietary generalists or specialists
using a combination of stomach content and stable isotope analyses. Tiger sharks were sampled during
routine, standardized bottom longline surveys of the coast of Alabama from 2009-2011. From fall 2010 to
fall 2011, stomachs (n=48) and muscle tissue (n=52) were collected. Gut contents were identified to the
lowest possible taxon, and avian remains (primarily feathers) were genetically identified. Three metrics
were calculated from gut content data: the Shannon index, individual specialization and mean niche
width. Individual isotope variation was used to compare to individual gut content variation. By using this
combination of techniques, in concert with time series data from a standardized coastal bird survey, we
combine datasets across marine and terrestrial ecosystems to evaluate the frequency of specialized
feeding behavior in a known generalist shark. While tiger shark populations consume a notoriously wide
range of items, identifying the extent that trophic strategy varies among individuals is increasingly
important in the face of management measures that may impact only portions of the population (e.g. the
recent harvest ban in Florida).



Du Preez, Louis (North-West university); Badets, Mathieu (School of Environmental Sciences &
Development, North-West University, Potchefstroom 2531, South Africa, Canada); Corrado, Costa (CRA
ING Via della Pascolare, 16 00015 Monterotondo Scalo (Roma) ¿ Italy, Canada); Claudio, Angelini
(Dipartimento di Biologia Animale e dell¿Uomo, Università `La Sapienza¿ di Roma, Viale dell¿Universita
32, 00185 Roma, Italy, Canada)

Investigating colors and patterns in Cacosternum boettgeri: Do parasites matter?

Polymorphic color and body patterns of anurans are underexploited systems for studying the evolution of
phenotypic variations in nature. A well documented part of this phenomenon is the sexual dimorphism
that may account for the intra specific variation of ecology and behavior. However, despite attempts to
find correlations between fitness-related traits and morph types, the results were mostly inconclusive. The
effects of direct selection by visually-oriented predators were more significant. Because parasites would
act as long term predators, their distribution within host populations may indirectly reveal cost associated
to sexual selection processes. We initiate here a first step towards answering this question, using the
amazing diversity of color and patterns variations in Cacosternum boettgeri (Pyxicephalidae) and its
species-specific parasite Polystoma sp . (Trematoda, Monogenea). The study involved 211 adult frogs
that were analyzed for both phenotypic traits and parasitic loads. In addition, 11 different clutches were
reared until metamorphosis resulting in 492 froglets to estimate the genetic inheritance of the phenotypic
traits. Preliminary results indicate a classic Mendelian genetic system behind the color and stripe patterns
of the host species. Although parasitic loads are not correlated to any specific phenotype among males, a
significant bias was observed between expected and observed female phenotypes. Relying on
preliminary analyses of this present study, a great, a great potential for evolutionary ecology is
uncovered.




                                                                                                        185
Du Preez, Louis (North-West University); Viviers, Joanita; Badets, Mathieu (North-West University,
Potchefstroom, South Africa)

Sex in the city: Amietia angolensis in an urban environment

We aim to understand the fundamental biological processes behind the distribution of amphibians in
urban environments. The description of social structure and appropriate spatial scales in amphibian
populations remain a major issue for their conservation, especially when they inhabit urban environments.
Although numerous studies have provided insight in the behavioural strategies and spatio-temporal
distribution of amphibians, there is a serious lack of long term monitoring to shed light on migration
patterns and mirco habitat utilization in a social context. The common river frog (Amietia angolensis)
presents an ideal model for a long term monitoring since they are active almost throughout the year,
utilize a variety of water bodies and have an extended breeding period. Intra specific interactions and
spatial distributions over various scales can be studied depending on large variation of abiotic
environmental parameters such as rainfall and temperature. We engaged in a long term monitoring of the
population dynamics of A. angolensis in order to describe how prenuptial migrations and intra specific
interactions affect the social structure of the population. The study was conducted at a semi-natural
environment namely the Botanical Garden of the North-West University (Potchefstroom, South Africa),
where 18 water bodies provide breeding habitat for the species. Throughout the botanical garden a total
of 165 frogs were captured by hand, measured, weighed, sexed and individually mark with a
subcutaneous pit tag that allow future identification without disturbing the frog. Over a period of one year
we conducted a survey every two weeks, scanning every frog we could find throughout the garden and
documented its position and behaviour. The following night we focussed on a single pond where we every
90 minutes documented the exact position, orientation and behaviour of each frog at this pond. Migration
between and within ponds were documented in relation to density and breeding events. Here we present
the preliminary results dealing with calls, migration, population dynamics and inter-individual interaction.
An integrated framework of spatial migration and individual behaviour allows describing the importance of
territorial aspects and social structures in the complete population of A. angolensis.



Duarte-Guterman, Paula (University of British Columbia); Navarro-Martin, Laia (University of Ottawa,
Canada); Ryan, Michael J. (University of Texas, Canada); Trudeau, Vance L. (University of Ottawa,
Canada)

Sexual development in frogs: a comparative study with implications for endocrine disruption

Several studies have shown that sex steroids alter frog sexual differentiation. Inhibition of sex steroid
synthesis or exposure to exogenous steroid can induce complete sex reversal or an intersex condition, in
which both ovarian and testicular tissue appear in the same gonad. The general impacts of sex steroids
on gonad morphology have been demonstrated in many different frog species, but with little exploration of
gonadal (sex) differentiation at the transcriptional and molecular level. To develop a broad perspective on
frog sexual development, we compared species of different families: the Neotropical Túngara frog (
Physalaemus pustulosus ), the African Western Clawed frog ( Silurana tropicalis ), and the North
American Wood frog ( Rana sylvatica ). We profiled the developmental expression of estrogen- and
androgen- related genes (respectively, aromatase and estrogen receptors, and 5alpha-reductases and
androgen receptor), and dmrt1 (sex determining gene in other vertebrates) in the gonad-mesonephros
complex (GMC). We measured transcript levels at three stages of tadpole development covering the
period of gonadal differentiation: premetamorphosis, prometamorphosis, and metamorphic climax. Most
genes showed similar expression in males and females across developmental stages in the three
species. The greatest exception was the estrogen-synthesising enzyme, aromatase, for which the



                                                                                                        186
expression was sexually dimorphic and diagnostic of sex in all species (greater in females than in males),
to the extent that sex could be identified even before visual identification of the gonadal sex (at pre- and
prometamorphic stages). These results suggest that aromatase can be used as a marker of anuran
ovarian development and it has a conserved role in gonadal development in vertebrates. Surprisingly, we
did not find the converse: no gene was a unique marker of testicular development in all species. We
therefore suggest that gonadal development is regulated by estrogen levels and similarly to other
vertebrates, absolute androgen levels do not seem to be important, i.e., high aromatase and estrogen
synthesis will guide ovarian development, while low estrogens relative to androgens will allow testicular
development. We suggest that aromatase and the ratio of estrogens to androgens are important
molecular and physiological endpoints for screening potential impacts of enviro



Dubey, Sylvain (University of Lausanne); Shine, Richard (University of Sydney, Sydney, N, Australia)

Are reptile and amphibian species younger in the Northern Hemisphere than in the Southern
Hemisphere?

The growing availability of phylogenetic information about major lineages provides an opportunity to
explore broad geographic patterns in evolutionary history. Our meta-analysis of molecular phylogenetic
data reveals that reptile and amphibian species distributed in temperate-zone areas of the Northern
Hemisphere are younger than taxa from the Southern Hemisphere according to (i) the inferred timing of
the split between two sister species and (ii) the oldest intraspecific diversification event within each taxon.
These results may be due to climatically driven cladogenic and extinction events or may be an artefact of
differing levels of taxonomic knowledge about the fauna. Current rates of species descriptions suggest
that many more taxa remain to be described in the Southern Hemisphere than the Northern Hemisphere;
for that bias to fully explain our results on species age differences, the proportion of undescribed
Southern taxa would need to be ≥12% in reptiles and ≥51% in anurans. In reptiles, taxonomic ignorance
plausibly explains the apparent difference in mean age of species between the Southern and Northern
Hemispheres; but this explanation can apply to amphibians only if a vast number of Southern taxa remain
to be described.



Duckett, Paul (Macquarie University); Wilson, Peter; Stow, Adam (Macquarie University, north ryde, N,
Australia)

Keeping up with the neighbours: Using a genetic measurement of dispersal and species
distribution modelling to assess the impact of climate change on an Australian arid zone gecko
(Gehyra variegata)

The distributions of species are predicted to be substantially influenced by global climate change (GCC).
Predictions include distributional shifts towards higher latitudes and altitudes, altered biotic interactions,
and species extinctions. The survival of species will be contingent on their ability to adapt or disperse.
While species distribution models are a popular tool for gauging how the distribution of favourable climate
may change over space and time, knowledge of dispersal is key to predicting if species are capable of
reaching new areas in the timescales imposed by GCC. Estimates of dispersal are also required to
predict future losses to intraspecific genetic diversity. Previously, species dispersal capabilities have been
assumed when assessing the impact of GCC, which either overestimates (no dispersal) or
underestimates (unlimited dispersal) losses in distribution and genetic diversity. We sampled 740 Gehyra
variegata throughout central and eastern Australia, encompassing much of the recorded distribution for



                                                                                                           187
this gecko. Genotypes from 16 microsatellite loci and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequence data were
obtained from each individual to estimate mean annual dispersal distance             and to quantify levels of
genetic diversity within each evolutionary significant unit identified. Species distribution modelling
predicted the current and future distribution of the species, and we used annual dispersal distances to
evaluate whether the species could keep up with shifts in the range of their favourable climatic conditions.
We show that 17-41% of the current G. variegata distribution is unlikely to reach their future distribution
within the timescale imposed by global climate change. Consequently, this will result in substantial losses
of genetic diversity, which may be detrimental to the evolutionary potential of this species. Our
interdisciplinary approach can make further use of molecular and occurrence record data sets to answer
the critically important question of whether a species has the capacity to reach future areas of favourable
climate, and will help quantify and prioritise areas that are important to conserve.



Dufresnes, Christophe (University of Lausanne); Wassef, Jérôme (University of Lausanne, Canada);
Ghali, Karim (University of Lausanne / Vivarium of Lausanne, Canada); Brelsford, Alan; Stöck, Matthias
(University of Lausanne, Canada); Lymberakis, Petros (Natural History Museum of Crete, University of
Crete, Canada); Crnobrnja-Isailovic, Jelka (University of Nìs / University of Belgrade, Canada); Perrin,
Nicolas (University of Lausanne, Canada)

Late Quaternary fine-scale phylogeography in Europe: Post-glacial recolonization, cryptic genetic
structure, and diversity hotspots in the European tree frog (Hyla arborea)

The major patterns of postglacial recolonization have been well characterized in many groups (Hewitt
2011, Genetica, 139: 617-638), but little is known on the fine-scale demographic and spatial intraspecific
changes that influenced ancestral populations and their postglacial expansion(s). Especially in
amphibians, such knowledge is scarce, but crucial to identify areas of high conservation value. While
Iberian ( Hyla molleri, Hyla meridionalis ) and Italian ( Hyla intermedia ) tree frogs were restrained by
Pyrenean and Alpine arcs in their postglacial expansions, the diverse Asia Minor taxon ( Hyla orientalis )
colonized northeastern Europe to the east of the Carpathians (Stöck et al., in review). European tree
frogs ( Hyla arborea ) had a Balkanian refugium, from which they recolonized Central and NW-Europe,
and thus provide a good model to study intraspecific variation in amphibians across Europe. Combining
phylogenetics and population genetics, we unraveled cryptic structure and strong variation of diversity in
65 populations across the entire H. arborea range , and inferred a historical biogeographic scenario.
MtDNA-phylogeny (1547 bp, n = 243) revealed a relic Eastern Adriatic clade (stemming from old range
contractions during the Riss glaciation; divergence time: 180 kya), and a younger, wide-spread
paraphyletic group with distinct haplogroups in the southern Balkans, Adriatic coast, Central and Western
Europe (90 kya, early Würm glaciation). Mismatch distributions suggest ancient range expansions in
Balkan populations (50-25 kya), whereas frogs from NW-Europe only expanded after the Last Glacial
Maximum (10-16 kya). We document complex genetic structure (up to 6 groups, 4 Balkanian; 28
microsatellites; n = 750), tightly linked to geography and past climate. Most diversity is found on the
Balkans (especially on the Adriatic and Greek coasts), and genetic diversity significantly decreases along
colonization routes (Pearson‘s r = -0.84). H. arborea survived in several genetically-rich regional sub-
refugia, from where few founders recolonized NW-Europe. Local ―diversity hotspots‖ should be
considered in future conservation management.




                                                                                                          188
Durso, Andrew (Utah State University); Somers, Ann B; Kirchoff, Bruce K (University of North Carolina -
Greensboro, Greensboro, NC, United States)

Development of visual learning tools for identifying herpetofauna

Taxonomic experts identify organisms by gestalt, the essence or shape of an entity's complete form. This
allows experienced herpetologists to identify their study organisms with split-second timing. However, the
vast majority of resources for teaching organism identification (e.g., taxonomic keys and field guides) are
instead feature-based. While we recognize the value of traditional, character-based approaches to
identifying organisms, we believe that the use of gestalt recognition approaches by students early in the
learning process can improve recognition and retention by involving the neural regions responsible for
holistic processing. Later, when learning characteristics helpful for understanding taxonomic and
phylogenetic relationships, the neural regions responsible for analytical processing can be informed by
prior holistic knowledge of species appearance. We are developing software that allows users to train
their visual systems to recognize images of 277 species of native southeastern herpetofauna by gestalt,
rather than by characteristics. Improvement in the speed and accuracy of students‘ abilities to recognize,
remember, and name species will allow herpetology classes to become more effective. Another
advantage of a gestalt approach using multiple photographs as models is the ability to better represent
variation within a species, commonly omitted from taxonomic keys and field guides. We believe this
approach will be useful not only in herpetology courses, but also in helping members of the public learn to
identify herpetofauna, a frequent challenge to the success of citizen science projects involving accurate
species identification.



Durso, Andrew (Utah State University); Mullin, Stephen (Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, IL,
United States)

Dietary ecology of a sand prairie snake community

Snake diets are difficult to study because individual snakes feed infrequently and opportunities to directly
observe predation by snakes are rare. These difficulties are compounded by the low detection probability
of individual snakes. As a result, comparative long-term data on snake diets are sparse, and the influence
of diet on snake community ecology is poorly understood. We used stable isotopes of nitrogen and
carbon to examine the vertebrate community at a sand prairie along the Mississippi River in northwestern
Illinois. Consistent with our prediction, snake scale tissues were enriched in nitrogen and carbon relative
to the whole-body homogenates of their prey. Among prey guilds, toads were enriched in carbon relative
to other anurans, small mammals, lizards, and turtle eggs from the same site, whereas turtle eggs were
enriched in nitrogen relative to the other prey guilds. We observed relatively high overlap among the
isotopic compositions of scale tissue of four snake species. Furthermore, we found that the snake species
traditionally considered the most specialized, Heterodon nasicus (Western Hog-nosed Snakes), had the
largest niche breadth and occupied the highest trophic position. Our results illustrate the value of stable
isotope analyses, and challenge the conventional wisdom from previous studies of prairie snake dietary
ecology.




                                                                                                        189
Durtsche, Richard D. (Northern Kentucky University); Bachman, Katherine; Carnahan, Kelsey; Cross,
Sarah (Northern Kentucky University, Canada)

Measurement of the mechanisms of digestion in tadpoles along the developing gastrointstinal
tract

Digestion and assimiliation of foodstuffs in developing vertebrates is often dependent upon changes in
the chemical environment along the gut depending on the level and type of food digestion and the
optimality of conditions for enzyme activity. Low pH in the stomach can chemically breakdown food while
activating pepsin protein enzymes. In vertebrates that consumed cellulose, there are areas of the gut
(e.g., colon) that could show lower pH and oxygen levels that would indicate locations of anaerobic
fermentation and the release of volatile, short-chain, fatty acids. Our measurements across
developmental stages of tadpoles (anuran larvae) document ontogenetic shifts in acid concentrations in
the gut suggesting upregulation of digestive activites within the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. As free living
vertebrates, anuran larvae undergo developmental changes in the formation of the GI tract, they are also
consuming foods as might an adult vertebrate. Functional changes in digestive processes in tadpoles can
therefore be either a response to the maturation of the system or to the the varied foods consumed.
Previous research in our lab has shown changes in pH across the GI tract, suggesting digestive
processes similar to adult vertebrates. Our continued investigations of differential acid concentrations
along the gut has resulted in the design and fabrication of improved pH and dissolved oxygen
microelectrodes. These microprobes have been used to measure digestive changes in various sections of
the gastrointestinal tract in various species of frog ( Lithobates clamitans, L. sylvatica ) tadpoles. These
solid-state microelectrodes with tip diameters of ≤ 5-10 µm maintain a precision of R 2 = 0.95 against
standard solutions.



Eads, Bryan (Indiana University - Purdue University Fort Wayne); Hayter, Lindsey (Indiana University -
Purdue University Fort Wayne, Dupont, United States); Kingsbury, Bruce (Indiana University - Purdue
University Fort Wayne, Fort Wayne, United States)

Road Responses and Culverts as a Tool for Increasing Habitat Connectivity for the Federally
Threatened Copper-bellied Watersnake (Nerodia erythrogaster neglecta) and other Wetland
Snakes

Habitat fragmentation is a major contributor to habitat degradation, with roads playing a major role in
dividing the landscape. Roads and their traffic are not only hazards that cause injury and mortality, but
also are potentially perceived barriers further inhibiting movement and thus further reducing gene flow
and increasing risks for small populations. If we are to mitigate the impacts of roads, we need to identify
means of controlling when and where snakes cross them, and provide safe corridors that they will utilize
―through‖ the barriers roads impose. We have been investigating the responses of a suite of wetland-
associated snakes, the Copper-bellied Watersnake ( Nerodia erythrogaster neglecta ), Midland
Watersnake ( N. sipedon ), Eastern Gartersnake ( Thamnophis sirtalis ), and the Eastern Ribbonsnake (
T. sauritus ) to various road surfaces and canopy cover combinations. We are examining relative
responses to gravel versus paved road surfaces, and those surfaces with tree canopy present or absent.
We are also exploring the willingness of these species to pass through culverts already existing in the
landscape. Our preliminary findings indicate that the two Thamnophis species and N. e. neglecta were
generally unwilling to cross roads regardless of treatment. However, in contrast, N. sipedon exhibited a
high frequency of crossing on all road and canopy cover combinations except for paved without canopy
cover. In general, canopy cover appears to be more important than road surface type when considering
road crossings. Nerodia sipedon also appears to have little aversion to utilizing the culverts tested thus



                                                                                                         190
far (0.5 and 1.0 m diameter), passing through both (avg. 83 and 86 %) of the time. Based on our findings,
to promote crossing roads at sites perceived to be most advantageous, canopy should be maintained
near and over the road, and, at least for some species, we can also utilize culverts to encourage
potentially less dangerous passage.



Earl, Julia (University of Missouri); Semlitsch, Raymond (University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United
States)

Carryover Effects in Amphibians: How Much Complexity is Needed to Predict Survival?

Carryover effects occur when experiences early in life affect an individual‘s performance at a later stage
and are important in many socially and economically critical research areas, including human health and
food production. Recent studies have shown that experiences in early stages can, but not always,
interact with later stages to create unintuitive patterns. These studies with different outcomes vary in taxa
and types of environmental variation. We were interested in whether similar patterns would emerge
under the same experimental design with similar taxa. To examine this, we implemented a four-way
factorial experimental design with different forestry practices on three species of anurans (in different
years) in the aquatic larval stage and terrestrial juvenile stage. We investigated whether one
environment, both environments, or the interaction between the environments best predicted survival.
We found that the most complex model (the four-way interaction) was never the best model. However, in
two species/years, the best predictors of juvenile survival included factors from both the terrestrial and
aquatic environments. In the third species/year, factors from only the terrestrial environment best
predicted survival, but low survival may have limited our ability to detect other differences. Both life
history parameters (size and time to metamorphosis) and aquatic habitat variables indicated carryover
effects, and these effects were found in the short- and long-term. Our study and others show that
environmental factors from different habitats have the potential to affect a single demographic parameter.
Future work recognizing the potential importance of multiple life stages simultaneously will better assess
their impacts on population dynamics.



Earl, Julia (University of Missouri); Semlitsch, Raymond (University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United
States)

Habitat-induced diet shifts in tadpoles: using stable isotopes in replicated experiments

Differences in habitat can alter many aspects of an organism‘s biology, including survival and growth. All
of these habitat-associated changes are affected by food quantity and quality, and organisms often shift
their diets with these changes. Anuran larvae are known to perform better in open canopy ponds than
closed canopy ponds, which has been attributed to lower food quality in closed canopy ponds. However,
understanding diet changes is important to understand the mechanisms associated with differences in
performance. To investigate this, we raised tadpoles (spring peepers, gray treefrogs, and toads) in
mesocosms where we manipulated shading and litter (grass, leaves or none). We collected tadpoles at
metamorphosis (Gosner stages 42 to 46) and possible food items and analyzed whole organisms for
carbon and nitrogen stable isotopes. We also looked for consistent changes in isotopic ratios with body
size, developmental stage, and time to metamorphosis, which were averaged by mesocosm. We were
particularly interested in developmental stage, because tail absorption during metamorphosis may alter
isotopic ratios. In toads and spring peepers, there was no effect of individual characteristics on isotopic
ratios. However, in gray treefrogs, nitrogen isotopic ratios increased with longer larval periods. We found



                                                                                                         191
no effect of developmental stage on either carbon or nitrogen isotopic ratios, which may indicate that
metabolism during metamorphosis does not alter isotopic ratios, though controlled laboratory experiments
are needed to confirm this. We found that carbon, but not nitrogen, isotopes in frog tissue were affected
by both shading and litter input. We consistently found that carbon isotopic ratios (CIR) decreased with
increases in canopy cover. Metamorph tissues in all three species also had higher CIR when raised in
mesocosms with no litter than other litter types. Additionally, spring peeper metamorph tissue had lower
CIR when raised with leaves than with grass. The significant effects of shading and litter on CIR in frog
tissue likely indicate distinct shifts in diet relating to canopy cover. Additionally, the similar responses of
all three species indicate that they likely shift their diet in similar ways with changes in canopy cover. This
study shows that using stable isotopes in replicated experiments can determine general patterns with
relation to diet and help us understand mechanisms of manipulated variables.



Ebrahimi, Mehregan (Flinders University); Bull, Michael (Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia)

How to decrease dispersal after translocation in the endangered pygmy bluetongue lizard (Tiliqua
adelaidensis)

Many methods have been suggested by conservationists to protect endangered species. One method
that is not always successful is translocation to new or to previously occupied sites. Regular monitoring,
an important component to determine success of translocation, has often shown low success in reptile
translocation attempts due to disperse from release sites. Therefore, any factor which can persuade a
species to remain close to the release site will be useful in a translocation program. Habitat quality, food
availability, predation risk and competition are all potentially influential factors. The pygmy bluetongue
lizard (Tiliqua adelaidensis) was thought to be extinct until 1992, when it was discovered in the stomach
of dead brown snake (Pseudonaja textilis) near Burra in South Australia. It is now known from a few
highly isolated fragments of native grasslands, all privately owned and all restricted to a small region in
the mid-north of South Australia. Translocation to more sites within their previous range will spread the
risk of extinction for this species, if animals will establish at translocation sites. They spent most of their
time inside single entrance burrows made by lycosid and mygalomorph spiders. We simulated
translocation of this species by releasing four individuals into each of four bird-wire roofed 15 m diameter
circular enclosures. Each cage was divided into three areas. A central (4 meter diameter) area was the
main translocation site in which we experimentally changed habitat factors. This area included artificial
burrows as refuges. A surrounding 10 m wide ring of bare ground represented a matrix of unsuitable
habitat around the central area. A 1 m wide marginal area around the inner perimeter of the cage was
also provided with artificial burrows to identify any lizards that dispersed from central area. Four
surveillance cameras in each cage monitored lizard behaviour. Our experimental design allowed us to
compare the tendency for lizards to remain in the central area where they were released, under different
sets of conditions at the release site. For instance we found lizards were less likely to disperse if provided
with additional food each day. We also considered factors such as burrow density, spatial pattern of
burrows, vegetation density, and the presence of additional conspecific cues. These trials will be the
basis for release site design in more realistic translocation trials in the future.




                                                                                                           192
Echaubard, Pierre (Laurentian University); Wilkinson, Lindsay (Laurentian University, Canada); Pauli,
Bruce (Environment Canada, Canada); Lesbarrères, David (Laurentian University, Canada)

Habitat fragmentation, host genetic diversity depletion and pathogen prevalence in Lithobates
(Rana) pipiens: a landscape genetics approach

Amphibians are the vertebrate group facing the most severe decline worldwide with half of the roughly
6000 species described having at least a threatened status. While several other factors have been listed,
habitat fragmentation and the occurrence of Emergent Infectious Diseases have been suggested to be
two of the main determinants associated with population declines. Considering both the individual severity
of each of these two threats and the potential for synergistic effects between them, the objective of the
present study is to investigate the tripartite interconnection between habitat fragmentation, genetic
diversity depletion and ranavirus occurrence in Ontario populations of Lithobates (Rana) pipiens. We
sampled L.pipiens populations in 18 Ontario locations for toe-clips from which we extracted DNA. We
then typed each samples at seven polymorphic microsatellite loci (Rpi100, Rpi101, Rpi102, Rpi 103, Rpi
105, Rpi 106, Rpi 108) and screened them for ranavirus presence by PCR using primers known to
amplify a portion of the major capsid protein within the Frog Virus 3 genome. Additionally, in order to
quantify habitat quality with regard to frog biology we built a landscape matrix incorporating indexed
landscape variables for each location sampled. We used GIS as a tool for merging geographic
information on road density, buildings and forest cover, rail presence, types of aquatic habitats, amount of
water edges and land use layers.

Our results suggest that both rail and road density were related to lower intra and among population
genetic diversity while forest density and the quality and extent of aquatic habitat were positively related
to genetic diversity components. Our results suggest thus that both fragmentation of habitat and
landscape permeability are important environmental features potentially affecting amphibian
metapopulation dynamics by reducing gene flow between interconnected populations. Furthermore we
found a significant negative relationship between two measures of intra-population genetic diversity and
ranavirus prevalence. Our study therefore tend to confirm that increasing the extent of landscape
fragmentation and habitat deterioration, in addition to have direct consequences in terms of individual
survival, might also result in free-ranging populations having less conserved genetic diversity and higher
risk of extinction, particularly upon future exposure to emerging pathogens.



Echelle, Anthony (Oklahoma State University); Schwemm, Michael (Oklahoma State University,
Canada); Nagle, Brett; Simon, Andrew (University of Minnesota, Canada); Lang, Nicholas; Van Den
Bussche, Ron (Oklahoma State University, Canada)

Molecular systematics of the Nocomis biguttatus complex

Nuclear (S7) and mitochondrial (cytb) sequences were used to investigate the systematics of the
Nocomis biguttatus complex ( N. biguttatus, N. asper, and N. effusus ). The widespread N. biguttatus
seems paraphyletic with respect to N. effusus . The White River (Ozark) population of N. biguttatus is
sister to a clade in which the remainder of N. biguttatus is sister to N. effusus . The primarily Ozarkian
species, Nocomis asper , is sister to N. biguttatus-N. effusus . The disjunct population of N. asper in
Blue River, southcentral Oklahoma, carries alleles from N. biguttatus at low (0.05, S7) to moderate
(0.15, cyt b) frequencies, whereas haplotypes of N. biguttatus appear absent from Ozark populations of
N. asper . The small sample (n = 2) of the disjunct population of N. asper from the Ouachita River in
central Arkansas carried haplotypes that were identical, or nearly so, to haplotypes from the Ozark




                                                                                                        193
population. These results are discussed with respect to historical biogeography and the possibility of
anthropogenic introductions.



Edgehouse, Michael (Lewis-Clark State College); Brodie III, Edmund D. (University of Virginia, Canada);
Brodie Jr., Edmund D (Utah State University, Canada)

Interspecific aggression and habitat partitioning in garter snakes from Santa Lucia Preserve,
Monterey County, California.

Defense of a limited resource, such as space or food, has recently been discovered in snakes and has
been widely documented in lizards. Garter snakes ( Thamnophis spp. ) are historically considered
generalist predators and not subject to food as a limiting resource. Our data, however, show that the
common garter snake ( Thamnophis sirtalis ) and the aquatic garter snake ( Thamnophis atratus ) show a
preference for amphibians as their primary food source at the Santa Lucia Preserve (SLP), Monterey
County, California. This food preference forces snakes at SLP to utilize similar habitats. We show, when
snakes are alone, a 100% preference for aquatic or near aquatic habitat.         In contrast, when counter-
specific snakes are together, Thamnophis sirtalis will occupy the aquatic habitat and Thamnophis atratus
will occupy an area far removed from water. Thamnophis sirtalis will often physically force Thamnophis
atratus from the aquatic habitat through repeated biting or through other displays of aggression.



Edwards, Danielle (Yale University); Evans, Ben; Garrick, Ryan; Benavides, Edgar (Yale University,
Canada); Tapia Aguilera, Washington (Galapagos National Park, Canada); Rusello, Mike (University of
British Columbia, Canada); Gibbs, James (Syracuse University of New York, Canada); Caccone, Gisella
(Yale University, Canada)

The application of extant and museum genetic samples for investigating the genetic
consequences of species recovery efforts from hybrid Giant Galapagos tortoises

Repatriation of species that have become extinct either locally or in the wild can have important
consequences for maintaining natural ecosystem processes. However, what are our options for
repatriation when all that remains of a species are hybrids? For species with few or no individuals
remaining historical DNA samples are vital for establishing background estimates of original allele
frequencies and diversity. For Giant Galapagos tortoises, studies using historic genetic samples from
museum specimens have been critical in clarifying the genetic architecture of extinct and endangered
species. These data have also been combined with extant DNA samples to identify individuals from a
population on northern Isabela Island that are hybrids containing ancestry in various Giant Galapagos
tortoise species (e.g., Chelonoidis elephantopus, a species previously thought to be extinct). Historical
interactions between humans and Giant Galapagos tortoises lead to the establishment of a hybrid
population on Volcano Wolf (northern Isabela) containing the ancestry of many of the extant and some
extinct species of tortoise. We use historic DNA samples taken from museum samples collected from
Pinta to identify hybrids on Volcano Wolf with ancestry in C. abingdoni – typified by Lonesome George as
the world‘s most endangered species that consists of a single individual. In order to explore the
genetic outcomes that can be achieved using hybrid individuals in repatriation programs we use the
genetic data from these hybrids in combination with demographic data taken from captive and wild
tortoise populations to simulate the genetic outcome, relative to that previously observed on Pinta Island,
of various repatriation strategies in a management and evolutionary perspective. Specifically, we sought
to understand what the effects of long-term versus short-term backcrossing (i.e., for one to 5 generations)




                                                                                                       194
would have on the evolutionary trajectory (after 10 to 100 generations post repatriation) of the species
under both unlimited and more economically realistic scenarios. Additionally, we analyze the effect of
―successfulness‖ of the breeding program on the future potential genetic architecture of the species. We
present these results, in addition to discussing the challenges of species repatriation with limited genetic
material and with only historical samples as a benchmark.



Edwards, Robert J. (University of Texas-Pan American); Garrett, Gary P. (Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department, Mountain Home, TX, United States); Remshardt, Jason (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
Albuquerque, NM, United States); Roberson, Aimee M. (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Alpine, United
States)

Conservation efforts for the Rio Grande silvery minnow into the Big Bend region of Texas and
Mexico

The Rio Grande silvery minnow ( Hybognathus amarus ) is one of the most endangered fishes in North
America and was first federally listed in 1994. Originally inhabiting the Rio Grande from Española, New
Mexico to the mouth of the river near Brownsville, the species is currently found in approximately 5% of its
former range in central New Mexico. The Recovery Plan for the species recommended that it be
reintroduced into portions of its former range. The first experimental reintroductions of the species was
approved and undertaken in December 2008. More than 600,000 minnows were released at four sites in
the Big Bend region in each of the past 4 years. The reintroduced fish have shown at least some survival
at each of the sites and have been found considerable distances away from the reintroduction sites. Rio
Grande silvery minnow eggs have been collected from two of the monitoring sites in 2010 and in August
2010, a 37 mm standard length juvenile Rio Grande silvery minnow was taken at one site, indicating
some successful reproduction.



Edwards, Shelley (University of Stellenbosch); Vanhooydonck, Bieke (University of Antwerp, Antwerpen,
Belgium); Herrel, Anthony (CNRS-MNHN, Paris, France); John, Measey (Nelson Mandela Metropolitan
University, Port Elizabeth, South Africa); Tolley, Krystal (South African National Biodiversity Institute,
Cape Town, Western Cape Province, South Africa)

Convergent evolution associated with substrate decouples phenotype from phylogeny in the
southern African lacertid lizards (Eremiainae, Lacertidae)

Convergent evolution can explain similarities in morphology between species, due to strong selection on
a fitness-enhancing phenotype in response to local environmental conditions. Previous work has revealed
how morphological convergence exists between ecotypes, with morphology being directly related to
microhabitat usage, some well-known examples of which include cichlids, finches and anoline lizards.
Southern Africa possesses a high diversity and endemism of reptile taxa. The southern African landscape
is varied in terms of habitat, with many lizard species inhabiting a particular micro habitat (e.g. rock,
compact sand, loose sand, grass, trees). Within the African radiation of lacertid lizards, species range
from strictly rupicolous to strictly psammophillic, whilst others are generalists in terms of habitat choice.
We hypothesised that in the African radiation of lacertid lizards (Eremiainae) overall body and limb
morphology would be independent of phylogeny, but dependent on substrate type. To test this hypothesis
Bayesian inference and maximum likelihood methods were used to examine evolutionary relationships for
17 species from all 5 Eremiainae genera using two mitochondrial (16S and ND4) and two nuclear (RAG1
and KIAA-2018) markers. Principal component analysis and clustering analysis on size-corrected linear
measurements of body, head and limbs were conducted to examine congruence between evolutionary



                                                                                                         195
relationships and morphology. Our phylogenetic analysis reveals taxonomic mis-assignments of species
within Australolacerta and Ichnotropis. However, morphological analyses indicate that the mis-assigned
species are convergent in body features: species utilising compact substrates exhibited more slender
bodies and shorter limbs compared to the stockier bodies and longer limbs of the sand-dwelling species.
Sand-diving lacertids possessed significantly larger heads. We attribute this to convergence as a result of
adaptation to substrate types, and we conclude that in the Eremiainae, similarity in body plan is not
always congruent with shared ancestry, but in all cases it is coupled to habitat usage.



El Mouden, El Hassan (Cadi Ayyad University); Fattah, Abderazzak Fattah; Slimani, Tahar Slimani;
Radi, Mohamed; Tabrouri, Fatima Ezzahra (Cadi Ayyad University, Faculty of Sciences-Semlalia,
Laboratory of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, Marrakech, Morocco, Canada); Marquez, Rafael
(Fonoteca Zoológica, Departamento de Biodiversidad y Biología Evolutiva, Museo Nacional de Ciencias
Naturales (CSIC), Madrid, Spain, Canada); Beltran, Juan Francisco (Departamento de Fisiología y
Zoología, Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain, Canada); De Pous, Philip (Society
for the Preservation of Herpetological Diversity, Den Haag, the Netherlands; Institute of Evolutionary
Biology (CSIC-UPF), Barcelona, Spain, Canada)

Breeding site characteristics and amphibian species diversity in the Tensift-Haouz region
(Marrakech-Morocco)

Several studies show that amphibians are the most threatened animal group in the world. The causes of
this phenomenon are very diverse and include habitat destruction and fragmentation, pollution,
pathogens, climate change or interactions among several factors. Understanding habitat use and
characteristics of different species is than a major challenge in conservation biology. This study focused
on amphibian species diversity and their abundance in the Tensift-Haouz region in south-western
Morocco, as well as on the environmental factors (including human activity impact) determining their
occurrence patterns and abundance. For this purpose, we used 16 variables to characterize the breeding
site and their surrounding terrestrial areas. The fieldworks were taken between February 2007 and
March 2011. From the 13 species inventoried in Morocco, a total number of 7 species were identified in
the studied region.      Pelophylax saharicus, Amietophrynus mauritanicus and Bufo boulengeri are
common in the studied region. Among these species, only the first one occurred in a polluted site (the
Tensift River with Pt>13 mg/l, NH4+>3 mg/l, DCO>2000 mg/l; indicating high pollution). Bufo bufo, Hyla
meridionalis and Discoglossus scovazzi are localized in the mountainous region and surrounding areas,
whereas Bufo brongersmai is restricted to the arid zone of the northern part of studied region.
Concerning the distribution of this Moroccan endemic species, five new localities were identified in the
Jbilet region which reveals its abundance in the region, while its absence and despite several
prospecting, in the Tensift River indicate its disappearance from this site, likely as a result of pollution.
Based on the collected data and additional data from literature and fieldwork, the potential distribution
under current climatic conditions was predicted using maximum entropy modelling.

This study has been supported by the Hassan II Academy for Science and technique – Project ICGVSA.




                                                                                                         196
Emel, Sarah (Washington State University); Storfer, Andrew (Washington State University, Canada)

Predicting the distributions under climate change of two Pacific Northwestern salamanders:
Rhyacotriton kezeri and R. variegatus

In the face of global climate change and the expected rapid shift in species‘ suitable habitat toward the
poles, the accurate prediction of future geographic distributions of species is essential to mitigate the
anticipated loss of biodiversity. The ability to predict future ranges is especially important for organisms
with restricted distributions and limited dispersal abilities, particularly amphibians. We examined two
endemic Pacific Northwestern amphibian species that are likely to be heavily impacted by climate change
due to their restricted ranges and specific habitat needs, Rhyacotriton kezeri and R. variegatus.
Rhyacotriton kezeri has a restricted range in coastal southern Washington and northern Oregon, while R.
variegatus has a larger, yet still restricted range in coastal Oregon and northern California. Both species
inhabit old-growth forest and require the highly-oxygenated water of waterfall splash zones in headwater
streams due to their high susceptibility to desiccation. We constructed correlative ecological niche models
for the future geographic distributions of R. kezeri and R. variegatus using multiple modeling methods:
the maximum entropy-based program Maxent and the genetic algorithm-based model GARP. These
models combined hundreds of presence/absence data points for each species with current climate and
topographic data layers to predict suitable future habitat based on a range of future climate scenarios.
Occurrence data was partitioned equally into training and testing data for assessing the predictive
performance. We found that predicted future geographic distributions of both species will shift northward,
leading the future distribution of R. kezeri to overlap with the current distribution of the congener R.
olympicus in the Olympic Peninsula of Washington, whereas the future distribution of R. variegatus may
include habitat currently occupied by R. kezeri or R. cascadae to the north and northeast of its current
distribution. Although further research is required to predict a more likely realized niche incorporating
biotic factors such as dispersal for these species, predicting the future distribution based on the
fundamental niches is valuable. These analyses defined the maximum potential for the future distribution
of R. kezeri and R. variegatus, allowing for the targeted conservation of major portions of the core of
those predicted ranges.



Engler, Jan (Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig Bonn); Ihlow, Flora; Dambach, Johannes;
Flecks, Morris; Hartmann, Timo; Nekum, Sven; Rajaei, Hossein; Rödder, Dennis (Zoological Research
Museum Alexander Koenig Bonn, Bonn, Germany)

On the brink of extinction? How climate change may affect global chelonian species richness and
distribution

Anthropogenic global climate change has already led to alterations in biodiversity patterns by directly and
indirectly affecting species distributions. It has been suggested that poikilothermic animals, including
reptiles, will be particularly affected by global change and large-scale reptile declines have already been
observed. Currently, half of the world's freshwater turtles and tortoises are considered threatened with
extinction, and climate change may exacerbate these declines. In this study, we assess how global
chelonian species richness will change in the near future. We use species distribution models developed
under current climate conditions for 78% of all extant species and project them onto different
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) scenarios for 2080. We detect a strong dependence
of temperature shaping most species ranges, which coincide with their general temperature-related
physiological traits (i.e., temperature-dependent sex determination). Furthermore, the extent and
distribution of the current bioclimatic niches of most chelonians may change remarkably in the near
future, likely leading to a substantial decrease of local species abundance and ultimately a reduction in



                                                                                                        197
species richness. Future climatic changes may cause the ranges of 86% of the species to contract, and of
these ranges, nearly 12% are predicted to be situated completely outside their currently realized niches.
Hence, the interplay of increasing habitat fragmentation and loss due to climatic stress may result in a
serious threat for several chelonian species.



Ennis, Bradley (University of Southern Mississippi); Peterson, Mark (University of Southern Mississippi,
Canada)

Fish and decapod crustacean intertidal habitat use patterns within micro-tidal salt marsh systems

The intertidal marsh surface has widely been accepted as an essential fish habitat as it provides resident
nekton an area for breeding, foraging, and shelter from predators.            However, the potential use of this
habitat is often limited based on the hydrodynamic patterns of the region. For example, some studies
have supported the notion that the variation in accessibility to the salt marsh intertidal created by different
tidal dynamics can directly influence the overall marsh nekton productivity. In addition, previous published
work in US East coast meso-tidal systems showed differences in intertidal salt marsh use based on
species and size class distributions. The purpose of this project was to provide a better understanding of
how nekton use the salt marsh intertidal of a micro-tidal system by focusing on the role of tidal dynamics
along salt marsh gradients. Nekton were captured from the marsh surface twice in August and twice in
September 2011 with an array of bottomless lift nets during slack high tide at three sites within Crooked
Bayou, Grand Bay NERR. Each sampling site consisted of three arrays of four bottomless lift nets that
extended from the main channel edge to the marsh interior centered between 0-8, 9-16, 17-24, & 25-36 m
from the channel edge. Elevation data was acquired for each site. Time-averaged abundance of all
species within a site marsh level indicated no significant difference in mean total density nor species
richness (p > 0.05) among salt marsh levels at any site suggesting the habitat use patterns as a whole
are homogeneously on the marsh surface at high tide as far in as 30 meters. In contrast, a significant site
difference (p < 0.05) existed for mean species density and richness. This may be attributed to variation in
elevation among sites; however, there was minimal variation between site rivulets morphology, channel
width, DO, and salinity. We anticipate making direct comparisons of these patterns based on community
structure, species density and size class distributions. By facilitating our understanding of nekton habitat
use on the marsh surface, enhanced management practices can be implemented in an effort to conserve
this critical fisheries habitat, and further identify potential risks that may be created through anthropogenic
impact, poor restoration efforts, or climatic change.



Ernst, Raffael (Senckenberg Natural History Collections Dresden);

Merging community ecology and phylogenetic biology in amphibian research: How habitats shape
anuran trait communities and species life-history traits

Amphibians are not only known to be one of the most diverse tetrapod vertebrate groups, they also
exhibit an outstandingly high diversity in terms of life history traits that have evolved in particular lineages.
Amphibian habitat requirements are very diverse and complex. They exhibit distinct assemblage patterns
over a range of spatial, temporal, and functional scales and community composition is largely influenced
by the effects of environmental variables and spatial or biotic processes. Provided that similar
environmental templets lead to similar adaptations, observed trait distribution patterns would reflect how
evolution has shaped amphibian species to cope with the temporal and spatial variability of their present
environment. Human activities and global change processes would therefore not only have the potential



                                                                                                             198
to alter species ranges but also the trait composition and therefore the response variability and thus
flexibility of entire ecosystems. Within a large scale meta-analysis we searched for multiple trait-habitat
relations in tropical anuran assemblages. Our aim was to investigate whether these relations converge
across global regions. The specific goal was to test whether trait-habitat relations reflect common
evolutionary history or environmental trait filters. We compared large anuran data sets derived from
investigations of anuran assemblages in three biogeographic regions (Guiana Shield, South America;
Upper Guinea Forest Block, West Africa; Borneo Rain Forests, South-East Asia). These were
complemented by molecular community phylogenies in order to test for phylogenetic structure and
phylogenetic signal in traits. We present first results that highlight the importance of integrating trait-
habitat links into analyses of biological assemblages as this can enhance the predictive power and
general application of species assembly rules in ecology, particularly when phylogenetic comparative
methods are simultaneously applied. In order to predict anuran trait composition based on habitat
templets, trait-habitat links cannot be assumed to be universal but rather have to be individually
established prior to model building. Only then can direct trait-based approaches be useful tools in
predicting fundamental anuran community patterns.



Espindola, Vinicius (Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro);

Comparative anatomy of the swim bladder and associated structures of Callichthyidae:
phylogenetics implications (Ostariophysi, Siluriformes)

The Neotropical catfish superfamily Loricarioidea contains six families: Trichomycteridae,
Nematogenyiidae, Callichthyidae, Scoloplacidae, Astroblepidae and Loricariidae, including about 144
genus and 1,130 species. Loricarioidea is characterized by odontodes and a reduced and paired swim
bladder encapsulated in expansions of the parapophysis of the complex centrum. The family in study is
Callichthyidae including eight genus and 200 species, characterized by two rows of overlapping bony
plates on each side of the body. Several hypotheses were used to express the interrelationships of the
subfamily Callichthyiane and Corydoradinae, containing the complex genus Corydoras the largest in
Siluriforms with more than 180 species, plus the genus Aspidoras and Scleromystax . The previously
species analyze were defined in nine different clades in Corydoradinae and also Aspidoras, Callichthys,
Hoplosternum, Lepthoplosternum, Megalechis and Dianema. Over different 60 specimens were cleared
stained to analize the swim bladder and the Weberian apparatus. New characters were provided as
encased swim bladder elongated or short, ventral processes lateral or anterior to canals between the
swim bladder, fifth and sixth parapophysis fused only in Callichthyidae, robust sixth ribs and canals
between the swim bladder over the middle section of the capsule or near the complex vertebra centrum.
The phylogeneticss implications are important for the understanding the relationships within Corydoras
and the subfamilies.



Espinoza, Mario (Universidad de Costa Rica - CIMAR); Clarke, Tayler; Villalobos-Rojas, Fresia;
Wehrtmann, Ingo (Universidad de Costa Rica - CIMAR, Canada)

Dietary overlap and resource partitioning of four elasmobranch species off the Pacific of Costa
Rica: implications for management

Sharks and rays are believed to play a significant role as top predators in aquatic food-webs, and
presumably their removal can have significant ecological consequences. Twenty-five elasmobranch
species are captured as by-catch in the commercial trawling fishery off the Pacific coast of Costa Rica,



                                                                                                       199
which accounts for over 36% of its elasmobranch diversity. At the moment Costa Rica lacks of adequate
landing statistics, species-specific catch data and basic biological information on demersal
elasmobranchs. Therefore, a better understanding of the distribution, diet composition, and ontogenetic
shifts of common demersal elasmobranch species was used 1) to assess the degree of dietary overlap
between species, 2) to identify feeding habitats and 3) to generate management strategies. A total of
1174 stomachs from four elasmobranch species were analyzed: Raja velezi (N = 512; 86% full),
Mustelus henlei (N = 333; 83% full), Zapteryx xyster (N = 234; 80% full) and Torpedo peruana (N = 95;
58% full). Decapods were the most important prey item in immature R. velezi , M. henlei and Z. xyster
, particularly in the Central Pacific region, while teleost fishes and stomatopods were more abundant in
adults captured in the North Pacific. All life-stages of T. peruana fed primarily on teleost fishes along the
entire Pacific coast. Dietary overlap was typically high between R. velezi and Z. xyster, with little overlap
between M. henlei and T. peruana. The relative importance of crustaceans in the diet of elasmobranch
species captured in the Central Pacific region suggest that shallow coastal habitats may be important for
early stages. Additionally, differences in patterns of habitat use and ontogenetic dietary shifts may be
reducing intra and inter-specific competition for resources. Management and conservation strategies for
elasmobranch species associated to trawling fisheries in Costa Rica should focus on reducing by-catch
rates and fishing effort in shallow coastal waters, particularly in the Central Pacific region.



Esque, Todd (US Geological Survey); Drake, Kristina (US Geological Survey, Henderson, NV, United
States); Nussear, Kenneth (US Geological Survey, Henderson, NE, United States); DeFalco, Lesley;
Scoles-Sciulla, Sara; Medica, Philip (US Geological Survey, Henderson, NV, United States)

Desert Tortoise Use of Burned Habitat

Wildfires burned more than 36,000 acres of critical habitat for the desert tortoise ( Gopherus agassizii ) in
southern Nevada in 2005. In the Mojave Desert, the proliferation of introduced annual grasses,
particularly red brome ( Bromus madritensis ssp. rubens ) and Mediterranean grass ( Schimus barbatus
and S. arabicus ), has increased fire frequency and fire size, resulting in long-term habitat alteration
across portions of the landscape. Direct effects of fire on desert tortoises include mortality due to acute
heat exposure, and potential loss of food and cover. Indirect effects include long-term changes in
vegetation composition and structure, and these are hypothesized to affect the quality of desert tortoise
habitat. To investigate the indirect effects of wildfire on tortoises, we compared movement patterns, home
range size, microhabitat use, behavior, and survival for desert tortoises located in, and adjacent to,
burned habitat. Annual plant production in burned habitat was higher than in unburned habitats and
primarily consisted of invasive annual grasses. As expected, burned habitat had notably lower perennial
plant cover throughout the study. To evaluate how the shifts in vegetation affect habitat use, animal
activity, and behavior, tortoises were monitored using radio telemetry. Approximately 45% of observed
home ranges in the post-fire environment contained burned habitat, and numerous observations
(n=11,407) corroborated tortoise use of both habitat types (48.7% burned, 51.3% unburned). We found
that tortoises moved further into burned habitat with each successive year following the fire. Foraging
behavior was most often observed in burned habitat and ―resting‖ was the most frequent behavior
observed in unburned habitat. Tortoises were more likely to use burrows for shelter in burned habitat,
while vegetation was used as a shade resource more often in unburned areas. This study demonstrates
the continued use of severely fire-altered habitat by desert tortoises, with evidence of increasing re-
colonization of the area over time, suggesting that burned habitat should continue to be managed for
desert tortoises.




                                                                                                         200
Etchison, Luke (Ball State University); Pyron, Mark (Ball State University, Muncie, United States)

Quantifying substrate, flow, and depth to explain stream fish assemblages

The majority of stream fish assemblage studies quantify potential habitat, and include substrate, flow, and
water depth. However, these rely on observational associations and lack empirical control. Experimental
tests for substrate choice or other habitat in nongame fishes are less common and seemingly nonexistent
for complete assemblages. We reviewed published studies of fish assemblages for current science of
stream substrates, flow, and depth as habitat, and suggest future directions and methods. We provide
examples of substrate quantification techniques and experimental studies of substrate use by fishes.



Evans, Susan (University College London);

On the evolution and early history of lepidosaurian reptiles

Lepidosauria is a large and successful clade encompassing squamates (lizards, snakes and
amphisbaenians) and rhynchocephalians (tuatara). Research into their origins and evolutionary history
has been ongoing for more than 150 years, stimulated in part by Gunther's 1869 description of the skull of
the extant New Zealand tuatara, Sphenodon . Over the last few decades, however, new fossil
discoveries combined with the application of more rigorous phylogenetic analyses (molecular and
morphological) have helped to clarify the story. Moreover, experimental computer modelling of
anatomically accurate 3-D representations of modern lepidosaur heads, validated by in vivo data, is
providing valuable insights into the selective advantages of different morphologies. Lepidosaurs arose at
least 240 million years ago, probably earlier, and had split into the two living daughter lineages,
Squamata and Rhynchocephalia, by at least 230 mya. Contrary to long held opinion, the ancestral
lepidosaur did not have a fully diapsid skull and the contrasting skull morphologies of squamates and
rhynchocephalians are equally derived. A literal reading of the fossil record suggests that
Rhynchocephalia radiated first, achieving a global distribution throughout Pangaea by the end of the
Triassic. The early squamate record is much poorer and there is some evidence that the two groups had
different ecological tolerances. Both groups diversified in the Late Jurassic but by the end of the Early
Cretaceous rhynchocephalians had disappeared from northern continents and squamates were the
dominant group there. Nonetheless, much of their contrasting history remains to be discovered.



Evans, Susan (University College London);

The origins of modern squamate diversity: insights from the Mesozoic record

Squamates are one of the most diverse groups of living tetrapods combining high species numbers,
global distribution, morphological disparity, and varying size, reproductive strategies, diet, locomotion and
ecology. The evolution of at least some of these traits can be followed in the fossil record. Although the
ancestors of squamates and rhynchocephalians had separated by at least the Late Triassic, the early
record of squamates is comparatively poor. It improves somewhat in the Late Jurassic (Europe, North
America, Asia), but most of the described taxa are morphologically generalised showing limited dietary or
locomotor specialisation. There is a striking change in the Early Cretaceous where the record provides
the first examples of herbivory, viviparity, aquatic specialisation, climbing and gliding adaptations, and
size reduction. Palaeobiogeographically, the record extends across both Laurasia and Gondwana
although the latter record remains poor. Major Late Cretaceous groups like the borioteiioids and




                                                                                                         201
mosasauroids are recorded for the first time, as are representatives of modern clades like snakes and
monstersaurs. Whether this apparently sudden diversification is an artefact of the greater number of
known fossil localities, many preserving more complete material, or reflects a genuine explosive radiation
is currently difficult to judge, although molecular analyses can provide a complementary source of data.



Farallo, Vincent (Ohio University);

The role of micro-habitat in shaping the evolutionary ecology of Plethodontid salamanders of the
eastern United States

Habitat is a critical component of any organism‘s ecology. However, determining what aspects of a
habitat are the most influential to an organism‘s survival is not always as clear. Salamanders of the family
Plethodontidae are an important component of the ecosystems of the Appalachian Mountains. Although
this group has been studied extensively, the majority of studies either utilize microhabitat data with a
small number of species or broad scale climate data with a large number of species. Ultimately
salamanders are influenced by microhabitat as this is the scale at which these organisms live. Therefore
in order to make large scale multi-species inferences one most incorporate large scale microhabitat data.
I will gather microhabitat data over a large area of the range of Plethodontid salamanders. These data
will be used to determine how microhabitat is affected by macrohabitat variables such as climate, and
then in turn how the salamanders are influenced by changes in microhabitat. These results will be
especially important because salamanders are an excellent bioindicator and will therefore I will be able to
infer potential impacts of the ecosystem as a whole as a result of changes to salamanders microhabitat. I
will be presenting preliminary results from spring 2012 as well as discussing the goal of the continuing
work on this project.



Fares Sabbag, Ariadne (UNESP); Lúcio Lyra, Mariana; Fernando Baptista Haddad, Célio; Aguirre
Brasileiro, Cinthia (UNESP, Canada)

Phylogeographic analyses of the Thoropa miliaris group (Amphibia, Anura)

The genus Thoropa (Anura: Cycloramphidae) is endemic to the Atlantic Forest in Brazil, with the
exception of one species ( T. megatympanum ) inhabiting the transition zone between Atlantic Forest
and Cerrado. The adults are usually found on humid rocky outcrops and they place their eggs in
freshwater films on rocks, where the tadpoles continue living after hatching. Some species can even
inhabit rocky seashore, showing an interesting adaptation to high levels of salinity. This genus includes
six nominal species that are currently divided into two groups: T. miliaris ( T. miliaris, T. taophora, T.
saxatilis, and T. megatympanum ) and T. petropolitana ( T. petropolitana and T. lutzi ). Previous work
with T. miliaris and T. taophora suggested that diversity in this group may be underestimated. In this
context, the aim of our study was to analyze the phylogeographic structure of T. miliaris group using
mitochondrial and nuclear molecular markers. Our analyses using mitochondrial markers revealed 87
haplotypes in nine well defined clades for the four species. Thoropa saxatilis and T. megatympanum
are both monophyletic and do not show population structure, whereas T. taophora is also monophyletic,
but shows geographic population structure. For T. taophora, we have found a population in Juréia (state
of São Paulo) which forms an independent clade when compared with the rest of the samples for the
species, supposedly because Juréia was once an island which resulted in genetic differentiation between
these samples and those from other parts of the state. The samples identified as T. miliaris showed a
subdivision into five distinct non-monophyletic clades. Although these clades are somewhat concordant



                                                                                                        202
with geography, some individuals from some of the clades of T. miliaris have similar distributions, which
probably reflects a contact zone. Thus, we conclude that T. miliaris is a complex of species. We
corroborate the previous hypothesis that the T. miliaris group includes more than four species. We are
expanding our sampling collection and conducting further analyses to clarify the phylogenetic relationship
among these species.



Faria, Marina (Unesp); Lyra, Mariana; Haddad, Célio (UNESP, Canada)

Molecular analysis of species of the genus Fritziana Mello-Leitão, 1937 (Anura; Hemiphractidae)

The genus of marsupial tree frogs Fritziana (Family Hemiphractidae) is endemic of mountain regions of
Brazilian Atlantic Rain Forest. There are three species described for this genus considered valid today:
Fritziana fissilis, F. goeldii, and F. ohausi. Although the genus has been subject of several studies
dealing with its taxonomy, phylogeny and systematic, some populations remain without identification. It is
mainly because of data deficiency in the original descriptions, the small number of correctly identified
specimens in collections, and the difficult access to the type materials. There is a huge overlap on
morphological characters, which makes it difficult to use them to identify each species, being necessary a
molecular analysis to try to define each one. The present study aimed to understand the relationship
between species of the genus Fritziana, as well as the relationship between populations of each species,
using molecular markers. We already have 90 DNA samples from throughout the distribution of the three
species of the genus. The DNA amplification and sequencing were made using two mitochondrial loci
(16S and COI). Our data shows that the genus is separated in five or six groups, depending on the type
of analysis made. All the populations identified as F. ohausi belong to the same clade, well separated of
the other species. This result was expected because morphologically and ecologically this species is
clearly different from the others. However, this clade is structured into four internal groups, with
specimens from the same locality in different clades. Samples identified as F. fissilis and F. goeldii are
both paraphyletic, but the phylogenetic relationship among all clades is not yet resolved. Based on our
results we believe that the populations of F. fissilis from Santa Catarina, Paraná, Minas Gerais, São
Paulo, and Espírito Santo states probably represent a new species. The same situation happens with F.
goeldii , but in this case it is possible that the species are sympatric. Currently we are analyzing new
nuclear loci aiming to better understand the relationship between the observed clades. We are also
conducting morphological analysis of all specimens looking for additional evidence for new candidate
species.



Farrugia, Thomas (University of Alaska Fairbanks); Seitz, Andrew (University of Alaska Fairbanks,
Fairbanks, AK, United States)

Movement patterns of skates in the Gulf of Alaska and implications for the management of a skate
fishery

Skates are in growing demand worldwide, specifically in European and Asian markets. As part of
supplying this demand, the U.S. landings of skates in 2008, mainly from the Atlantic Ocean, was
estimated at 65 million pounds, worth US$11 million. However, several Atlantic Ocean skate stocks are
declining. In contrast, Alaska has relatively healthy skate stocks but skates can only be retained as non-
target catch in federal and state waters of Alaska. Big skates ( Raja binoculata ) are the most frequently
landed skate in the Gulf of Alaska and are managed by two management agencies, that each divide the
skate non-target catch quota into multiple management areas and assume that big skates do not move



                                                                                                       203
among these areas. If a directed skate fishery is to be developed, more ecological data such as
movement patterns and habitat use need to be explored. We deployed pop-up archival transmitting (PAT)
tags on seven big skates in Prince William Sound, Alaska in July 2011 and set them to pop up in May and
June 2012. This was the first instance of an electronic tag being deployed on any skate species in the
Pacific Ocean and provided novel data on the movement patterns, temperature and depth utilization of
big skates. It also provided a fishery-independent estimate of the connectivity of big skates between
management areas. Ecological data such as these are crucial when managing a novel fishery, and are
necessary when employing increasingly popular ecosystem-based management.



Faruk, Aisyah (Institute of Zoology); Belabut, Daicus (University Malaya, Canada); Norhayati, Ahmad
(University Kebangsaan Malaysia, Canada); Knell, Robert (Queen Mary University of London, Canada);
Garner, Trenton (Institute of Zoology, Canada)

Evaluating the impact of oil palm plantations on tropical amphibians

Agriculturally-altered habitats, especially oil palm plantations, are coming to dominate the Southeast
Asian landscape. Recent studies have shown reduced species diversity associated with this commodity,
but data on amphibian diversity are lacking. We set out to answer the following questions: (1) Are there
substantial differences in species richness and individual abundances between the forest and palm-oil
plantation and (2) What are the differences in assemblage composition within this group between the two
habitat types? Based on other studies of oil palm, we predicted that species richness would be lower
compared to complex forest habitats and that plantations would support a larger proportion of
disturbance-tolerance species.

Survey work was undertaken in four mature oil palm plantation sites and two adjacent native forest sites
in Malaysia. Stream, riparian and terrestrial plots were surveyed in 2009 and 2010, allowing species
richness and species assemblage composition to be compared between oil palm plantations and forest
for the two habitat types.

There were no significant differences in species richness between plantation and forest for either year,
although the species richness of forest plots in 2010 was somewhat higher.

Although species richness showed little difference, amphibian community composition differed greatly
between the two habitat types. All plots (stream, riparian and terrestrial) showed significant variation
between the two habitat types. Whereas the community structures in plantation streams were consistent,
forest stream communities were not.

Although plantation habitats do support large numbers of breeding amphibians, abundance-based
estimates fail to show the fundamental differences in species composition between the two habitat types.
Those found dominating the plantations were mostly least concern species, frequently found in other
disturbed habitats. We conclude that under current management regimes oil palm plantations do not
serve as a refuge or alternative habitat for forest dwelling amphibians.




                                                                                                     204
Feldman, Chris (University of Nevada, Reno); Brodie, Jr., Edmund (Utah State University, Canada);
Brodie, III, Edmund (University of Virginia, Canada); Pfrender, Michael (University of Notre Dame,
Canada)

Constraint shapes convergence in tetrodotoxin resistant sodium channels of snakes

Natural selection often produces convergent changes in unrelated lineages, but the degree to which such
adaptations occur via predictable genetic paths is unknown. If only a limited subset of possible mutations
are fixed in independent lineages, then it is clear that constraint in the production or function of molecular
variants is an important determinant of adaptation.             We demonstrate remarkably constrained
convergence during the evolution of resistance to the lethal poison tetrodotoxin (TTX) in six snake
species representing three distinct lineages from around the globe. Resistance conferring amino acid
substitutions in a voltage-gated sodium channel (Na v 1.4) are clustered in just two regions of the protein
and a majority of the replacements are confined to the same three positions. The observed changes
represent only a small fraction of the experimentally validated mutations known to increase Na v 1.4
resistance to TTX. These results suggest that constraints due to functional tradeoffs between ion channel
function and toxin resistance lead to predictable patterns of evolutionary convergence at the molecular
level.    Our data are consistent with theoretical predictions and recent microcosm work that suggest a
predictable path is followed during an adaptive walk along a mutational landscape, and that natural
selection may be frequently constrained to produce similar genetic outcomes even when operating on
independent lineages.



Fellers, Gary (U.S. Geological Survey); Kleeman, Patrick (U.S. Geological Survey, Point Reyes Station,
CA, United States); Miller, David (U.S. Geological Survey, Laurel, MD, United States); Halstead, Brian
(U.S. Geological Survey, Dixon, CA, United States)

Amphibian population trends in Yosemite National Park: What do we know from long-term
monitoring?

In 2000, the U.S. Geological Survey implemented the Amphibian Monitoring and Research Initiative
(ARMI) which is designed to provide data on amphibian population trends on federal lands throughout the
U.S. We implemented the ARMI program at Yosemite National Park, California (USA) using two different
approaches. One was a focused mark-recapture study of Rana sierrae at a single meadow complex, and
the other was a statistically-based design that used double surveys at 175 sites across 14 watershed
units to evaluate population trends in three anuran species (R. sierrae, Pseudacris regilla, Bufo canorus)
throughout the 3,081 km2 park. We tagged 757 individual R. sierrae from 2003 to 2011 and used mark-
recapture data based on 2,431 captures to model population trends related to precipitation, sex, and year.
The R. sierrae population fluctuated from 45 to 115 frogs over the nine years of our study, but there was
no clear up or downward trend. We conclude that this R. sierrae population at Yosemite NP is stable
over a relatively long period of time, even in the presence of Bd. The watershed research was initiated in
2004 and continues as an ongoing program. We use double survey protocol at each site (pond, lake or
meadow) to assess detectability for each species for each year. Detectability for the three anurans is
high, ranging from approximately 0.70 - 0.90. We have analyzed presence data along with 15 site and
survey covariates to evaluate population trends for each of the three study species. There are different
population trends for different species, and different trends in the two major river drainages within the
park. While population trends for Bufo and Rana are somewhat inconsistent, Pseudacris populations are
declining within each of the major drainages.




                                                                                                          205
Fenker Antunes, Jéssica (Universidade de Brasília); Gonçalves Tedeschi, Leonardo; de Campos
Nogueira, Cristiano (Universidade de Brasília, BRASÍLIA, Brazil)

Phylogenetic diversity, habitat loss and conservation priorities in Neotropical pitvipers

The biodiversity crisis requires the urgent need to evaluate in a more criterions distribution patterns and
threats to the species and the planet‘s biological wealth. However, few studies quantifying the effect of
habitat loss on patterns of phylogenetic diversity, an important measure of diversity that incorporates
information about relation between species. The aim of our study is understand this relation and test
widely used common metrics of biological diversity as surrogates for conserving evolutionary diversity in
well studied, wide ranging Neotropical endemic pitvipers. We compiled species occurrence records for the
40 terminal taxa in pitviper phylogeny. We then generated niche models for all terminal taxa and
calculated range sizes and percentage of habitat loss. We estimated ED and EDGE values, weighted with
data on habitat loss (EDHL) and threat status (EDGE). We tested the phylogenetic signal in range size,
percentage of habitat loss and IUCN threat status, and then regressed these values with ED scores. We
mapped areas of high richness and high phylogenetic diversity. Finally, we tested the performance of
widely used biodiversity measures for capturing phylogenetic distinctiveness of pitvipers faunas selected
according to endemism, richness, threat, presence in major biomes or biodiversity hotspots to random
values. Taxonomic priority ranks differed according to the metric of evolutionary diversity, with EDGE
categories wider differences found when. We found no phylogenetic signal in range size, threat and
habitat loss, and no significant regressions between ED values and range size, threat and habitat loss.
Usual methods like richness, endemism and threat are not good surrogates for preservation the history of
the group. The spatial distribution of phylogenetic diversity (PD) shows three areas of high levels of PD,
being generally coincident with spatial variations in richness. Pitviper faunas assembled according to
endemism, open and forest biomes and biodiversity hotspots were not significantly different from random.
However, the species subset included in the IUCN redlist showed significant phylogenetic clustering as
did the species subset found in the richest areas. An approach taking into account habitat loss and
phylogenetic diversity would be the best way to preserve the history of this group of Neotropical snakes,
and could aid in the conservation of other organisms for which phylogenetic or spatial data are not
available.



Fenolio, Danté (Atlanta Botanical Garden);

Conserving South Chile's Imperiled Amphibians

The Darwin‘s Frog Conservation Initiative (DFCI) is a collaboration between the Atlanta Botanical Garden
(ABG), the National Zoo of Chile, the Catholic University of Chile, and biologists from Northern Arizona
University and the University of Texas at Tyler. Goals of the initiative focus on (1) elucidating reasons
behind the declines of Darwin‘s Frogs and other amphibians endemic to Chile‘s temperate forests, (2)
developing captive assurance colonies with ex-situ breeding of endangered species, (3) monitoring
diseases in wild populations, and (4) educating the public regarding amphibian declines. We developed a
captive breeding facility on grounds of the National Zoo of Chile (Parque Metropolitano de Santiago). The
lab is modeled after facilities at ABG with one exception; we designed one of its walls made of glass so
that the visiting public could see into the laboratory, rendering the lab an attraction at the zoo. Key
features include ﬁltered water with a spare storage tank and a backup generator that activates when the
power grid goes down. Automated misting, light, and temperature systems maintain appropriate
environmental conditions. All of these features worked perfectly after the 2010 earthquake. An insect
culture facility exists on the ﬁrst ﬂoor, providing live food for the colony. A bilingual website featuring our




                                                                                                           206
project (www.savedarwinsfrogs.org) provides another public interface. We have emphasized education
for the personnel running the facility with training at ABG and at the Association of Zoos and Aquarium‘s
captive amphibian management program. Fieldwork has involved visiting historic localities where
Darwin‘s Frogs (Rhinoderma) have been reported as well potential sites, collecting skin swabs and
testing for the presence of amphibian chytrid fungus.

We are now working toward the conservation of additional species of southern Chile‘s most endangered
amphibians. The DFCI is expanding their amphibian conservation program within Chile to include four
new goals: (1) to implement a new, cost-effective, amphibian breeding laboratory made from two
repurposed cargo shipping containers; (2) to increase the capacity of the existing in-country project such
that assurance colonies of six more imperiled Chilean amphibian species can be accommodated; (3) to
work toward assurance colonies ranging from 50 to 65 individuals of each species; and (4) to train two
additional Chilean zoo staff members in captive amphibian management at the ABG.



Fernandez de Carvalho, Joana (Center of Marine Sciences (CCMAR)); Coelho, Rui (CCMAR, Faro,
Portugal); Neves dos Santos, Miguel (IPIMAR, Olhão, Portugal); Erzini, Karim (CCMAR, Faro, Portugal)

Life history of the bigeye thresher shark, Alopias superciliosus, in the Tropical Eastern Atlantic
Ocean

The bigeye thresher, Alopias supercilious, is commonly by-catch in pelagic longline fisheries targeting
tunas and swordfish. Still, very little information is available for this species‘ life history in the Atlantic
Ocean. As part of the EU Data Collection Regulation framework, Portuguese fishery observers have been
placed aboard fishing vessels collecting information on captures, size, sex, maturity stage, and biological
samples such as vertebrae. A total of 760 bigeye threshers were recorded between 2008 and February
2011, throughout the Atlantic. In the NE Atlantic, almost all size classes were observed and there was a
higher proportion of females (65.08%). In the SE Atlantic, larger specimens were found and the presence
of males (56.12%) was higher than females. Vertebrae of 356 bigeye threshers were collected and
analysed so far. These were collected along a wide geographical range (between 18ºN and 28ºS), mostly
along the East Atlantic, with size of specimens ranging from 101 to 265 cm fork length (FL). Preliminary
trials were carried out to determine the most efficient band enhancement technique for this species, in
which crystal violet section staining was found to be the best methodology. A linear relationship between
specimen size and vertebrae diameter was found and observed vertebrae showed 1 to 22 pairs of
opaque and hyaline bands. Preliminary growth models based on the Von Bertalanffy growth function
(VBGF) and the VBGF with fixed size at birth were calculated and the parameters are presented and
discussed. Maturity ogives were fitted for 402 specimens that had maturity data available, and size at first
maturity was estimated at 206.1 cm FL for females and 159.7 cm FL for males. The results presented in
this paper can be used and integrated in future ecological risk analysis and stock assessment models for
this species in the Atlantic Ocean.




                                                                                                           207
Ferreira, Luciana (UFRPE); Afonso, André (UFRPE, Recife, Brazil); Castilho, Pedro (UFRPE, Serra
Talhada, Brazil); Hazin, Fábio (UFRPE, Recife, Brazil)

Habitat use of the nurse shark, Ginglymostoma cirratum, off Recife, Northeast Brazil: a combined
survey with longline and acoustic telemetry

Despite the high abundance of nurse sharks Ginglymostomas cirratum in shallow waters, knowledge on
its ecology is still rather limited, with most studies restricted to the Caribbean and Florida coast. This
study presents results on the relative abundance, sex ratio, size distribution, seasonal fluctuations and
residency of the nurse shark, off Recife, northeast Brazil. Nurse sharks comprised 13.3% of the total
catch of 1033 bottom longline sets, done from 2004 to 2011, and ranged in size from 107 to 300 cm TL.
98 sharks were tagged with an 8% recapture rate. The overall sex ratio for nurse sharks was 1.3♀:1♂,
however, it showed a strong variation throughout the year. The monthly CPUE of male nurse sharks
showed a somewhat more seasonal trend than females. Male CPUE tended to be lower ( 0.02) from
October to April (except for December). Although female CPUE oscillated within a range similar to that of
males, it showed no clear seasonal pattern. Of 8 acoustically tagged sharks, 6 were detected by the array
of acoustic receivers. Most detection of males were recorded during the first semester of the year,
peaking in February and March with zero detection from May to September. Females, in turn, were
detected throughout the year, although most detection happened in the second semester, peaking in
September. The results indicate that nurse sharks have a year-round occurrence in the study area and
remain in the monitored area for variable periods of time. The strong seasonal shifts in the sex ratio of
catches and the patterns revealed by the acoustic detections also suggest a possible difference in habitat
usage or in seasonal movements between sexes, which hadn‘t been described so far for the Brazilian
coast and may have serious implications for the management and conservation of nurse sharks at
Northeast Brazil.



Ferry, Lara (Arizona State University West);

Elasmobranchs in Biological Research

Elasmobranchs get a lot of attention both within and beyond the scientific realm due to their fascinating,
and sometimes terrifying, habits. This high profile has, in many cases, overshadowed some of the most
amazing insights that have come from the study of this group. Such studies have taught us not only
about the cartilaginous fishes, but also have given us novel insights into the most important and difficult to
penetrate areas of biology. These advances could not have been made with the use of any other study
system. This presentation will highlight several recent advances that should serve as inspiration for
biologists interested in exploring fundamental biological questions. Among the exemplar projects that I
will highlight are what shark and ray brains have to tell us about the evolution and function central
nervous systems, what can be learned of sensory hierarchy from blacktip sharks, how stingrays crushing
hard prey has inspired new biomaterials, and how the shark immune system and is teaching us about our
inherent ability to recognize self and non-self.




                                                                                                          208
Fessler, Brandon (Central Washington University); Irwin, Jason; Beck, Daniel (Central Washington
University, Canada); Hayes, Marc (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada)

The Spatial Ecology and Behavior of Terrestrial Coastal Giant Salamanders (Dicamptodon
tenebrosus) Monitored by Radio-Telemetry and Remote Cameras

Coastal Giant Salamanders ( Dicamptodon tenebrosus ), largest of terrestrial urodeles, are one of four
extant species in the monotypic family Dicamptodontidae. Endemic to the Pacific Northwest of North
America, dicamptodontids share a similar life-cycle, with stream-type (reduced gills) aquatic larvae and
facultatively-paedomorphic adult forms. While larvae are common in mountain streams, post-
metamorphic individuals are rarely observed; hence little is known regarding terrestrial Dicamptodon
ecology. Few encounters of the terrestrial forms is thought to reflect a largely fossorial existence. Using
radio-telemetry we examined the movement, behavior and habitats of 12 post-metamorphs (35-167.4 g,
124-183 mm SVL) between June 2010-December 2011 at sites in the Wenatchee National Forest,
Washington State. Individuals were monitored an average of 348 ± 40 SE (151-536) days and located ca.
2-3 times per week May-November and once per month in winter/early spring. From May-November
2011, we used remote time-lapse cameras (2-min interval) to provide high-resolution observations of
salamander activity between telemetry sessions. Average recorded movement distance between
locations was 15.5 ± 1.8 SE m ( n = 267), with most being relatively short (84% <20 m), though six moves
were >100 m (max: 271 m). Most movements seen on camera were initiated between dusk and dawn
(98%). During both telemetry and camera monitoring, salamanders were often observed at the surface.
By day, salamanders typically used a crevice refuge (e.g., in rocks, decayed wood), emerging at night,
remaining partially in or near the shelter, then returning by dawn. All salamanders returned to one or more
previously occupied shelters, with large variation in the intervening times (6-381 days) and total distances
traveled (3-259 m). Most salamanders occupied both terrestrial and aquatic refuges. Although some
individuals traveled >150 m upland from streams, no salamander was observed >50 m from aquatic
habitat (e.g., stream, rivulet, or seep). Our study reveals the first accounts of terrestrial and aquatic refuge
site fidelity within adult Dicamptodontidae, and previously unreported regular terrestrial surface presence,
contrasting with former accounts of D. tenebrosus behavior. Further, these behaviors are rarely
documented among terrestrial urodeles, and we advocate the combined use of long-term and high-
resolution (e.g., remote imaging) monitoring for future investigations of such activity.



Ficetola, Gentile Francesco (Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca); Siesa, Matteo Elio; Manenti,
Raoul (Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy); Padoa-Schioppa, Emilio (Università degli Studi di
Milano-Bicocca, Milano, Italy); De Bernardi, Fiorenza (Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy);
Bottoni, Luciana (Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Milano, Italy)

Crayfish invasion alters the structure of amphibian communities through multiple processes

Invasive alien species can have complex effects on native ecosystems, and interact with multiple
components of food webs, making it difficult a comprehensive quantification of their direct and indirect
effects. The red swamp crayfish, Procambarus clarkii, is native of Eastern North America but has been
introduced worldwide. This crayfish may impact amphibians through multiple processes: 1) adult
amphibians avoid breeding in invaded wetlands; 2) the crayfish disrupts vegetation, making wetlands
unsuitable for amphibians; 3) direct predation of larvae; 4) alteration of the whole freshwater food web,
with modification of the abundance of native predators. We used multiple approaches to unravel the
ongoing processes. We surveyed about 150 wetlands in an area recently invaded in Northern Italy, and
recorded amphibian breeding attempts. In a subset of wetlands we also used pipe sampling to quantify
the abundance of the crayfish, amphibian larvae and their major predatory insects (dragonfly larvae,



                                                                                                            209
Ditiscidae and Notonectidae) in invaded and uninvaded ponds. We also assessed long-term community
changes determined by the crayfish in wetlands surveyed before the invasion, and 10 years after the
invasion onset. In terms of breeding attempts, only two amphibians (the newts Triturus carnifex and
Lissotriton vulgaris ) avoided invaded wetlands, while the other species attempted breeding in invaded
wetlands. However, larval abundance for all amphibian species was negatively associated with the alien
crayfish, suggesting poor fitness in invaded wetlands. Long term surveys indicated that newts can be
completely extirpated from invaded areas in about 10 years, while tree frogs ( Hyla intermedia ) and pool
frogs ( Pelophylax synkepton esculentus ) can survive. Quantitative estimates of the abundance of
larvae and predatory insects show that the crayfish had a negative, direct impact on both amphibian
communities and their predators. The negative direct effects of crayfish on amphibians were much
stronger than the overall predation by all native predatory insects. This crayfish impacts multiple levels of
food webs, disrupting natural prey-predator relationships and causing dramatic declines of most
amphibians.



Ficetola, Gentile Francesco (Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca); Soccini, Christiana (Centro Studi
Arcadia, Tarquinia, Canada); Bottoni, Luciana; Padoa-Schioppa, Emilio; Bonardi, Anna (Università degli
Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Milano, Italy); Manenti, Raoul (Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy);
Corbetta, Andrea (Stazione Sperimentale regionale per lo studio e la conservazione degli anfibi, Endine,
Italy); Ferri, Vincenzo (Stazione Sperimentale regionale per lo studio e la conservazione degli anfibi,
Tarquinia, Italy); Fiacchini, David (Pievebovigliana, Italy); Giovine, Giovanni (Stazione Sperimentale
regionale per lo studio e la conservazione degli anfibi, Endine, Italy); Macchi, Silvia (Varese, Italy);
Romanazzi, Enrico (Montebelluna, Italy)

Detecting large scale declines of toad populations using data collected by volunteers

Measuring a species decline is pivotal to evaluate their conservation status, but an accurate assessment
of demographic trends requires observations collected across broad spatial and temporal scales.
Volunteers can help to collect information over large scales, but their data may be heterogeneous for both
sampling efforts (which may change across years) and protocols (as different volunteer groups can have
different protocols). Differences in sampling efforts and protocols may influence detection probability. This
issue makes it complex inferring demographic trends from volunteer data. Here we show that data
collected by different volunteer groups can be integrated with measures of sampling effort to obtain
information on demographic trends over large spatial and temporal scales. We collected data on 33
common toad ( Bufo bufo ) populations across             Italy  for the period 1993–2010. We used two
approaches (meta-analysis; analysis of average change in population size) to evaluate the overall
demographic trend. We incorporated measures of volunteer sampling effort into analyses, to take into
account changes in detection probability. Toad abundance significantly declined in the last decade. From
2000 to 2010, 70% of populations showed a significant decline, while only 10% increased. Trends were
heterogeneous among populations, but taking into account sampling effort reduced heterogeneity by
40%. We detected a 76% cumulative average decline of toad populations, despite an increasing mean
sampling effort. The widespread toad decline rises concern for its future, also because the causes are not
completely understood. Urbanization, loss of habitat and increase of vehicular traffic are likely causes of
toad decline in several populations. Volunteer data can be extremely useful to identify large scale
population trends, but information on sampling effort is needed to adjust counts and obtain reliable
estimates of ongoing processes. Volunteers can also collect data on potential threatening factors
(samples for disease analysis, information on disturbance and habitat changes) that can allows to
understand processes determining demographic trends. A tight collaboration among scientists, managers
and volunteers can be extremely fruitful for amphibian conservation in human-dominated areas.




                                                                                                         210
Fichberg, Ilana (MZUSP);

Taxonomic revision of Spatuloricaria Schultz, 1944 (Siluriformes: Loricariidae: Loricariinae)

The genus Spatuloricaria Schultz, 1944 was created to allocate S. phelpsi Schultz, 1944. One year later,
Fowler described the genus Euacanthagenys to accommodate E. caquetae, but in 1979, Isbrücker
considered this genus a synonym of Spatuloricaria. In 1980, Isbrücker transferred seven other species to
Spatuloricaria, which then comprised Loricaria nudiventris Valenciennes, 1840, Loricaria evansii
Boulenger, 1892, L. fimbriata Eigenmann & Vance, 1912, L. gymnogaster Eigenmann & Vance, 1912, L.
puganensis Pearson, 1937, L. curvispina Dahl, 1942, and L. caquetae Fowler, 1943. Loricaria cirrhosa
Perugia, 1897 was considered as a senior synonym of L. evansii by Isbrücker, 1979, L. gymnogaster
lagoichthys Schultz, 1944 was transferred in 1979 by Isbrücker with a new nomenclatural combination:
Spatuloricaria lagoichthys. The last species described was Spatuloricaria atratoensis Schultz, 1944.
Recent collections in tributaries of the Amazon River in Brazil have revealed some undescribed species
and widely expanded the distribution of others. The aim of the present study is to present a
comprehensive taxonomic revision of Spatuloricaria. The genus is distinguished from all Loricariinae by
having two exclusive synapomorphies: a long papillae that can be branched over the rictal region,
between the upper and lower lips, directed to mouth cavity; a pair of digitiform papillae on the roof of
mouth cavity with variable length. Spatuloricaria shares with other Loricariinae caudal peduncle strongly
depressed, absence of adipose fin, and a conspicuous sexual dimorphism characterized by the
developed odontodes around the lateral region of head and over pectoral-fin and teeth thin and long in
mature males. To this study were taken 32 measurements and 10 counts from 461 specimens including
type series. Seven species are recognized as valid: Spatuloricaria curvispina is considered a junior
synonym of S. atratoensis, S. lagoichthys and S. phelpsi; S. caquetae is junior synonym of S.
euacanthagenys; S. evansii is junior synonym of S. cirrhosa; S. puganensis; S. gymnogaster.
Spatuloricaria fimbriata is transferred to Limatulichthys. Spatuloricaria nudiventris is considered a nomen
nudum because the holotype is damaged, its original description does not allow species recognition and
the type locality, São Francisco River, is probably incorrect. Two species are considered to be
undescribed, one of them from rio Purus and rio Juruá and the other from the rio Orinoco basin.



Field, Kimberleigh (US Fish and Wildlife Service); Averill-Murray, Roy (US Fish and Wildlife Service,
Reno, United States)

Policy and regulation of desert tortoise translocation in the Southwestern USA

The Mojave Desert Tortoise, Gopherus agassizii, is federally listed as threatened under the Endangered
Species Act. The recovery strategy for the species includes population augmentation, particularly through
translocations, primarily as a research-based, experimental means of evaluating the impact of threats or
the effects of threat-mitigation activities. Recently, the number of large-scale renewable energy
developments proposed in desert tortoise habitat has dramatically increased, thereby accelerating
pressures to translocate tortoises for the primary purpose of minimizing project impacts rather than for
recovery purposes. While translocation can be a useful tool, its misuse has the potential to cause great
damage. Numerous factors must be taken into consideration to minimize risk to the translocatees and
residents at both an individual and population level. We assessed the factors that need to be evaluated
when proposing to translocate desert tortoises and prepared guidance that addresses a breadth of issues
including site selection, assessment of individual and population health, release methods, monitoring, and
collection of data. Despite several decades of desert tortoise translocations, we still have much to learn.
Translocations of desert tortoises need to be conducted as experiments such that we learn from them




                                                                                                       211
and modify our techniques accordingly. Whether a translocation is conducted for conservation objectives
or for human-animal conflict reasons, the same scrutiny is needed.



Figueroa, Daniel (Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata); Barbini, Santiago; scenna, lorena; Delpiani,
Gabriela; Spath, Cecilia (UNMdP, CONICET, Mar del Plata, Argentina); Belleggia, Mauro (UNMdP,
INIDEP, CONICET, Mar del Plata, Argentina)

Antarctic history of the family Rajidae

Skates are a group of fish of an ancient lineage, a high specific diversity, a cosmopolitan distribution and
a non-migratory mode of life, given that they are benthic fishes all along their ontogeny, which starts from
the embryo stage in ovarian capsules with adhesive filaments. They constitute a valuable analytical tool
when associated to geological processes. In modern Antarctica, the family Rajidae is represented by two
cosmopolitan genera, Amblyraja with two species, and the most speciose genus in the world, Bathyraja,
with approximately seven species. Climate of the late Cretaceous and early Tertiary times in the
Antarctica was much more temperate than nowadays. Of coastal waters and extensive shelves, fossil
records reveal the presence of siluriform, gadiform, cupleoid, trichiurid and labrid fishes, all typical modern
exponents of the Buenos Aires District north of the Argentine continental shelf. This southwestern Atlantic
sector shows at world level one of the oddest overlapping of endemic genera of skates. The fossil rays
teeth found in the Eocene La Meseta Formation would probably belong to this group of skates instead of
to Bathyraja and Amblyraja, as stated by some other authors. Both these two genera of rays
accompanied by two families of bony fish (Zoarcidae and Liparidae), of sympatric distribution with these
genera of skates in the Northern Hemisphere, probably joined the opening of Drake Passage in the late
Tertiary, together with the incoming of the Pacific deep cold waters.



Fill, Jennifer (University of South Carolina Columbia); Waldron, Jayme; Martin, Michael; Welch, Shane;
Mousseau, Timothy (University of South Carolina Columbia, Canada)

Breeding and Reproductive Phenology of the Eastern Diamondback Rattlesnake

The eastern diamondback rattlesnake (Crotalus adamanteus; EDB) has become extremely rare across
much of its former range in the southeastern United States, and has recently been petitioned for listing
under the Endangered Species Act. Information about its breeding and reproductive phenology is critical
to effective conservation of this imperiled species. We summarized the phenology of EDB breeding and
reproduction using observations of free-ranging, radio-telemetered rattlesnakes in South Carolina from
1997-2011. To describe breeding phenology, we considered paired, copulating, or courting individuals as
breeding observations. We noted the earliest and latest dates on which breeding occurred for each
individual. If only one observation was available for a given individual, this was coded as the latest date.
If two individuals were breeding together, this observation was counted only once. To describe
reproductive phenology, we noted the earliest date on which a female was observed at a rookery, and the
earliest date on which she was observed with a litter. We converted all dates to Julian day (1-365). Mean
date of breeding activity was August 21 (range: March 18 to October 14). Mean date of female arrival at
a rookery site was August 15 (range: July 26 to August 28). Mean date on which a clutch was observed
was August 31 (range: August 10 to September 14). Our observations also included four observations of
female minimum clutch size (2, 4, 8, 11) and two observations of total clutch size (11, 13). We urge that
the breeding and reproductive phenology of this rattlesnake be strongly considered in the planning of
conservation activities.



                                                                                                           212
Filz, Katharina (Trier University); Wagner, Norman (Trier University, Trier, Germany)

Amphibians in the agrarian landscape: linking different phenologies to future cultivation practises
and climate change

The intensification of industrial farming and especially the increasing amount of pesticide entries have
caused growing habitat deterioration. Today they represent a constant threat to biodiversity. Due to global
warming, changes in future agrarian practices are currently debated including the cultivation of genetically
manipulated crops as well as seasonal shifts in plant growth and cultivation patterns. Climate change in
combination with climate-driven changes in cropping systems can lead to additional threats for species in
agrarian landscapes. We targeted amphibians in the temperate zone as they are globally declining at
alarming rates for multiple reasons. Two important reasons for the observed declines are habitat
destruction due to expanding agriculture and pesticide contamination. Especially, pesticides have been
shown to directly or indirectly affect amphibians in the agrarian landscape both on individual and
population levels. We link the exposure of amphibians in agrarian landscapes to risks of different
cultivation methods and herbicide application scenarios under climate change.

Amphibians are known to reflect climate change to some extent in the timing of their breeding behaviour.
We distinguished three groups of amphibian species by means of their reproductive modes being
differently affected by increasing winter and spring temperatures. Correlations between earlier breeding
activities and temperature increases were already observed in early and retarded breeders whereas
stable breeders might not be particular responsive to climate change. Unfavourable climatic conditions in
early spring leading to reduced growth and fitness of larvae are expected to threaten populations of
amphibians performing phenological changes. However, we argue that amphibians that show no changes
in their breeding behavior, depending on the cultivation method, might have to deal with an increasing
contamination risk of pesticides in agricultural landscapes as their reproductive activity phase might
match the time of herbicide application more often in the future. By linking future shifts in cropping
systems and pesticide applications to phenological changes in amphibian populations under climate
change, we want to contribute to the discussion on future agrarian practices and their potentially negative
effects on biodiversity and facilitate early and appropriate mitigation action.



Firth, Bruce (University of Adelaide); Belan, Ingrid (Flinders University, Adelaide, SA, Australia)

Effect of thermoperiodic acclimation on rhythms of thermal selection in lizards

It is well known that thermoregulatory parameters of reptiles can be modified by photothermal
acclimation. This study examines how long-term acclimation influences rhythms of thermal selection in
the scincid lizard, Tiliqua rugosa . These lizards undergo a daily voluntary hypothermia whereby they
seek out lower temperatures at night in an artificially imposed light cycle in a laboratory thermal gradient.
In the first experiment, we tested the hypothesis that acclimation to 6 h cold pulses of 15 C in an
otherwise 33 C environment and 12L:12D photocycle could influence the night-time hypothermia,
depending upon the phase relationship between the thermocycle and the photocycle. Groups of lizards
were subjected to a cold pulse around dawn, midday, dusk or midnight for 6-7 weeks in autumn after
which they were tested in a thermal gradient for 72 h in a 12L:12D photocycle. The daytime temperature
selected by all four groups was unaffected by the acclimation treatment, but the night-time temperature
varied depending upon the phase of the cold pulse. The highest temperature was with a pulse delivered
at dusk, the lowest with a pulse delivered at midnight, and the dawn and midday pulses having
intermediate effects. In a second experiment, we tested the effect of 6 h cold pulses in constant light (LL)
to determine whether the interaction of light and temperature cycles influenced the night-time selected



                                                                                                         213
temperature in experiment 1. Four groups of lizards were acclimated for 6-7 weeks in autumn to cold
pulses delivered at the same time as in the previous experiment, but in LL, and then tested for 72 h in a
thermal gradient in a 12L:12D photocycle. The night-time selected temperature did not differ significantly
among the four treatment groups. These experiments indicate that light and temperature cycles interact
with a circadian clock to affect seasonal changes in night-time body temperatures of these lizards.



Fisher, Robert (US Geological Survey); Niukula, Jone (The National Trust of Fiji Islands, Canada);
Thomas, Nunia (NatureFiji-MareqetiViti, Canada); Grismer, Jesse (University of Kansas, Canada);
Harlow, Peter (Taronga Conservation Society Australia, Canada)

Reassessment of the distribution and conservation priorities of Fijian iguanas based on recent
field work

The enigmatic monotypic iguanid genus Brachylophus was known monotypically from the south Pacific
for 170 years before there was suggestion of diversification in the genus. Over the last 40 years several
species were described and currently the iguanids from the south Pacific are now represented by two
genera and a total of five species, although two of the species are extinct. Recent published analysis of a
molecular and morphological dataset indicated that there were three clear species units within the
Brachylophus populations sampled, but many island populations were not represented in that study. The
living three endemic species of Brachylophus iguanas described from Fiji have been listed under CITES,
the US Endangered Species Act, and IUCN Red List for a very long time.             Additionally one invasive
iguana species ( Iguana iguana ) has become a threat in northern Fiji, on islands occupied by native
iguanas. Work has been initiated to control and/or eradicate that invasive from Fiji. For much of the last
decade conservation actions have generally focused on only one of these three species ( vitiensis ), and
the other two species ( bulabula, fasciatus ) remained poorly known. Field research on over 40 islands
over the last two years has greatly increased our knowledge base for these other two species and now
conservation priorities can be discussed.       This research has also shown that additional undescribed
species of iguanas still persist in Fiji and their descriptions are now a priority so that they are properly
recognized and conserved. We also found that many islands are now unsuitable for iguanas and the
populations are restricted to a smaller list then we expected. Additionally, significant new gaps in
knowledge of the distribution of all of these iguanas have been identified and are targeted for future
studies. This program is a model of how an international governmental collaboration, with an in country
NGO has made great knowledge strides over a relatively short period of time, with limited resources on a
priority taxa for conservation.



Fitzgerald, Lee (Texas A&M University); Ryberg, Wade; Hill, Michael (Texas A&M University, College
Station, United States); Painter, Charles (New Mexico Department of Game and Fish, Santa Fe, United
States)

Conservation of a Dune-Dwelling Lizard (Sceloporus arenicolus): From Neighborhoods to
Landscapes

A central question in conservation biology is ―What allows a species to persist across the landscape and
conversely, what causes it to disappear?‖ The answer to both sides of the question depends on the
species‘ life history and behavioral constraints, its role in ecological communities, and its sensitivity to
landscape change. Moreover, the species‘ place in the landscape is determined by the way individuals
select habitat within a hierarchy of spatial and temporal scales. Our research on the Dunes Sagebrush




                                                                                                        214
Lizard (Sceloporus arenicolus) is revealing how populations of these lizards are organized from local
neighborhoods of interacting individuals up to the distribution of the species across its geographic range.
Dunes Sagebrush Lizards are endemic to the Mescalero-Monahans shinnery oak sand dunes in
southeastern New Mexico and adjacent Texas. Within this ecosystem they are ecological specialists,
living and reproducing only in and around wind hollowed blowouts in shinnery oak dunes. High quality
habitat consists of many interconnected large blowouts; the quality and quantity of habitat are correlated.
Detailed demographic studies show that locally, dunes sagebrush lizards live together in
―neighborhoods‖. Large neighborhoods produce an excess of recruits that disperse across the
interconnected landscape. Moreover, neighborhood size is correlated with habitat quality; poor quality
habitat supports smaller neighborhoods, and recruitment does not balance mortality in the smallest
neighborhoods. However, dispersal among neighborhoods maintains the population at a regional scale.
At the landscape scale, the species‘ presence is associated with contiguous areas of shinnery oak dunes,
and its absence is associated with shinnery oak dunes infiltrated by patches of mesquite and other
vegetation. Landscape fragmentation disrupts both the geomorphologic processes that maintain shinnery
oak dunes and the quality of habitat needed to support thriving lizard neighborhoods. The Dunes
Sagebrush Lizard is proposed for listing as Endangered by the US Fish and Wildlife Service because of
perceived threats of habitat loss from shinnery oak removal and landscape fragmentation associated with
oil and gas development. To preserve the complex relationship between habitat quality, habitat area, and
the scaling of population dynamics, land use policies should explicitly recognize the scalar effects of
habitat fragmentation and degradation.



Fitzpatrick, Benjamin (University of Tennessee);

Hybridization, speciation, and amphibian diversity

Speciation is a gradual process and many lineages can maintain the ability to hybridize and exchange
genes for extended periods without halting or reversing divergence. Amphibians are well-known for
retaining hybridization potential for millions of years, facilitating gene exchange across divergent lineages.
I investigate the effects of interbreeding on the process of diversification and the nature of diversity by
reviewing the causes and consequences of hybridization in amphibians. I discuss the variety of barriers to
gene flow and rates at which they arise. I consider what is known about the fitness of hybrids and what
prevents hybridizing taxa from fusing. Finally, I consider the potential for hybridization to play a creative
role in diversification and the origin of novelty.



Flechas, Sandra (Universidad de los Andes); Sarmiento, Carolina; Cárdenas, Martha; Medina, Edgar;
Restrepo, Silvia; Amézquita, Adolfo (Universidad de los Andes, Canada)

Surviving chytridiomycosis: Differential anti-Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis activity in bacterial
isolates from three lowland species of Atelopus frogs

Chytridiomycosis, a disease caused by the pathogenic fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ( Bd ),
has been associated with dramatic declines and extinction of amphibian species worldwide. In the
neotropics, almost every species of the stream-dwelling harlequin toads of the genus Atelopus occurring
above 1000 m have experienced catastrophic declines. The persistence of lowland Atelopus could be
explained by the lower growth of Bd at temperatures above 25ºC. We tested the complementary
hypothesis that the toads‘ skin microbiota acts as a protective barrier against the pathogen, perhaps
delaying or impeding the symptomatic phase of chytridiomycosis. We isolated 130 cultivable bacterial



                                                                                                          215
strains from three lowland Atelopus speciesand quantified the anti- Bd activity through antagonism
assays. Twenty-seven percent (38 strains) of the bacteria inhibited Bd growth and less than 2% of them
were shared among toad species. Interestingly, the strongest anti- Bd action was measured in bacteria
isolated from A. elegans, the only species that tested positive for the pathogen. The cutaneous microbiota
is thus revealed as both an exaptation and adaptation against the selective pressure represented by Bd.
Our findings reveal enough bacterial strains to eventually develop local probiotic treatments against
chytridiomycosis and also shed a light the mechanisms behind the frog-bacteria-pathogen interaction.



Flecks, Morris (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig); Weinsheimer, Frank; Böhme,
Wolfgang (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Canada); Chenga, Jumapili (TRAFFIC
East/Southern Africa, Canada); Lötters, Stefan (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Herpetologie und
Terrarienkunde, Canada); Rödder, Dennis (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig,
Canada)

Watching extinction happen: the dramatic population decline of the critically endangered
Tanzanian Turquoise Dwarf Gecko, Lygodactylus williamsi

The Turquoise Dwarf Gecko ( Lygodactylus williamsi ) is endemic to two small forests in eastern
Tanzania, where it exclusively dwells on screwpines ( Pandanus rabaiensis ). To assess its population
status, we surveyed its habitats at the Kimboza Forest Reserve and (under different assumptions)
estimated the population size of the territorial L. williamsi based on habitat availability, using Pandanus
abundance as a proxy. Furthermore, threats to the species, especially the impact of the international pet
trade on the population, were studied. Our results suggest a severe population decline, as the observed
population size is one third smaller than its potential size based on habitat availability (i.e., Pandanus ).
We estimate that in a period of four and a half years, at least 15% of the potential population were
collected for the pet trade, making it a major threat to L. williamsi next to habitat degradation. The
species‘ extent of occurrence covers only 20 km² and suitable habitats are severely fragmented, leading
to an area of occupancy of less than 1 km². Based on our results, we consider this species to be
threatened with extinction (‗Critically Endangered‘ according to the IUCN Red List criteria).



Fleming, Trish (Murdoch University); Bateman, Bill (University of Pretoria, Canada)

Why grow a tail? Selective pressures acting on investment in lizard tails

Caudal autotomy is a common defence mechanism in lizards, where the animal may lose part or all of
their tail to escape entrapment. The degree of investment in a tail varies greatly across lizard species,
with some species having hardly any tail, and others a tail that may be up to three or four times body
length (snout-vent length; SVL). When these animals drop their tails, they may therefore undergo
markedly different changes in their overall body form and size. A number of intrinsic factors have been
proposed as influencing the incidence of tail autotomy across species, including body form, size and
robustness, specialisation of the tail, and physical and temporal niche. We were interested in how these
factors were related to proportional investment in the tail and therefore potential costs of losing the tail
through autotomy as well as the incidence of autotomy (evident as growing or regenerated tails) in natural
populations.

We examined museum specimens and field data bases to explore the relationship between the incidence
of caudal autotomy and these factors. Body form was assessed: [degree of leg development (legged,
reduced legs or legless), SVL, robustness (mass/total length), relative tail length tail length (tail as a



                                                                                                         216
proportion of SVL)], and we recorded specialisation of the tail, as well as physical (climbing or ground)
and temporal (nocturnal or diurnal) niche for the species.

More gracile species have relatively longer tails, as do legless, diurnal, terrestrial species that do not have
specialised tails. The incidence of caudal autotomy is not directly correlated with proportional tail length
for diurnal species, although it is positively correlated for nocturnal species.       The incidence of caudal
autotomy is also correlated with robustness and lack of a tail specialisation, and is highest for
intermediate sized lizards (lower for both small and large species).

The factors that are correlated with relatively longer tails would suggest that there is a selective
advantage to investing in the tail for legless, diurnal, terrestrial species that lack a tail specialisation.
The selective advantage of investing in a relatively longer tail may be due to locomotion mechanics, while
the effects of predation are also likely.



Flynn, Claire (Adelphi University); Jagnandan, Kevin; Sanford, Christopher (Hofstra University,
Hempstead, NY, United States); Ward, Andrea (Adelphi University, Garden City, NY, United States)

Kinematics and muscle activity patterns of two distinct escape behaviors in South American
lungfish

Most aquatic vertebrates perform a rapid response to escape from potential predators. The C-start is one
highly stereotyped response during which the animal bends into a tight C-shape and then swims away
from the stimulus. A second stereotypical startle response, head retraction, has been described for highly
elongate species. During head retraction, the head and tail move towards the center of mass
compressing the body like an accordion. Both responses are controlled by the Mauthner cells, an axon
bundle found in the hindbrain which controls involuntary behaviors. One of the major differences between
the responses is that the body has a single curve during a C-start and multiple curves during a head
retraction. Although several studies have examined escape behavior in aquatic vertebrates only the
South American lungfish ( Lepidosiren paradoxa ) is known to perform both responses. The goals of this
study were to describe the pattern of muscle activity during both behaviors in order to determine how a
single set of cells could control these two distinct responses. We filmed escape behaviors using high-
speed video to analyze movement patterns. Additionally, we recorded muscle activity patterns bilaterally
at three points along the body (0.25BL, 0.5BL, 0.75BL). During both behaviors there was bilateral muscle
activation. However, the relative timing and intensity of muscle contraction differed between the two
responses. These findings provide critical new information for understanding the neuromuscular control of
escape behaviors in aquatic vertebrates.



Folt, Brian (Auburn University); Reider, Kelsey (Florida International University, Canada)

The effect of individual tree species on amphibian and reptile assemblages in a Neotropical wet
forest environment

Herpetofaunal abundance is patchily distributed throughout La Selva Biological Station, and clumped
patches of leaf-litter may explain this. To better understand how individual tree species affect their
environment, we tested the hypothesis that tree species support unique herpetofaunal assemblages by
comparing frog and lizard species richness, density, and community assembly in three native tree species
plantations ( Pentaclethra macroloba , Virola koschnyi , Vochysia guatemalensis ) to primary forest at La




                                                                                                           217
Selva Biological Station in the Caribbean lowlands of northern Costa Rica. Primary forest and V.
guatemalensis supported more species-rich assemblages than P. macroloba and V. koschnyi .
Pentraclethra macroloba and V. guatemalensis supported significantly lower median densities of frogs
and lizards relative to primary forest. We compared community assembly with non-metric
multidimensional scaling (NMDS) and permutational multivariate analysis of variance using distance
matrices. Pentaclethra macroloba treatments supported significantly different assemblages of frogs and
lizards compared to primary forest. Using a RELATE analysis, changes in assemblage are positively
correlated to environmental variables across all plantation treatments. Our results suggest that because
individual tree species differ in functional traits and create unique habitats, tree species can support
unique herpetofaunal assemblages.



Fontenot, Clifford L (Southeastern Louisiana University); Pojman Sr., John A.; Pojman Jr., John A.
(Louisiana State University, Canada)

Extremely high biomass density in the aquatic salamander, Amphiuma tridactylum

Population biomass density of a given taxon can be an index of its relative energetic importance within an
ecological community. This density is a reflection of the efficiency of the species in converting
environmental energy into biomass. Reviews of animal biomass density suggest that invertebrates play a
primary role in this respect, on the order of 100 kg/ha. (Smil 2008), although amphibians and reptiles may
rival this density (Reagan and Waide, 1996). We addressed this in a common, large (max > 1kg) aquatic
salamander, by collecting body mass data on a population of Amphiuma tridactylum in a small ephemeral
pond in Baton Rouge Louisiana. Our data show a biomass density of 1000 kg/ha, in a pond that is dry for
approximately half of the year. Although this density occurs in pockets, as a small pond, it suggests that
aquatic salamanders like Amphiuma represent a substantial energetic component of its ecosystem, and
may represent the highest biomass density of any vertebrate.



Ford, David (University of Texas at Tyler);

Behavioral differences between adult and neonate Trinket Snakes, Coleognathus helena

Behavioral differences between adult and neonate Trinket Snakes, Coleognathus helena David Ford*
Snakes are particularly vulnerable to misrepresentation of their natural history traits due to the fact that
the data collectors (i.e. humans) are diurnal and terrestrial, often leading to assumptions based upon
those animals seen during the collecting period. In addition most studies of snake behavior in the wild
are based on observations of adults, and knowledge of neonatal behavior is limited to very few studies.
There is a dramatic difference between adult and neonate snake mass and lengths so we would expect
different behaviors and habitats to be accessed during ontogeny and laboratory investigations should give
insight into basic behavioral patterns for a species. Behavioral observations on the Sri Lanan Trinket
snakes in the wild are minimal. The activity of 15 adult Trinket snakes, Coleognathus helena, and 26
neonate C. helena was recorded in large cages for 72 hours, using both visual observations during the
day and infrared monitoring at night. The snakes were given three refuges: a subterranean, a terrestrial,
and an arboreal shelter. Almost all movements of both the neonates and the adults occurred during the
scotophase of the photoperiod. During the daylight hours, the neonates spent most of the time in the
arboreal shelters, while the adults moved from among the shelters. This seemed indicative of a prey
searching behavior. These results suggest that C. helena is a species that is both diurnal and nocturnal,
and that neonate C. helena utilize behaviors different from those they use once fully grown.



                                                                                                        218
Ford, Linda S. (Harvard University, MCZ);

Regulatory compliance and permits for US borders: Developing a framework to comprehend, cope
and comply

A steady and dramatic increase in regulatory responsibilities related to the collecting, transporting, and
storage of animals and animal products have greatly affected natural history museums and educational
institutions around the world. Ensuring compliance to the multitude of laws and regulations has become a
major obligation for these institutions. The seriousness of this responsibility, especially in the US, stems
from the broad application and potentially harsh legal consequences when these regulations are not
followed. Compliance broadly applies whether the animal material is whole or just DNA, whether it‘s
personally collected or an incoming/outgoing loan belonging to others, and whether the purpose is for
scientific research or commerce. In many countries including the US, there is an added complexity in that
regulations may involve multiple agencies within multiple governmental departments in both the sending
and receiving countries. In the US, consequences for noncompliance generally fall under the Lacey Act,
which can potentially include civil and/or criminal penalties for both the individual and institution. In
addition, the Lacey Act not only enforces US laws but, also, any relevant laws of foreign countries within
the borders of the US. With these various factors, scholars, who generally support regulations that serve
to protect and conserve species in the wild, domesticated livestock, and the health and safety of people,
frequently, find themselves at odds with these same laws. With a brief overview, a framework can be
developed to help manage the legal expectations involved with moving amphibians, reptiles, and fish
across the US borders.



Ford, Neil (University of Texas at Tyler); Pettingill, Kaitlyn (University of Texas at Tyler, Tyler, TX, United
States); Cates, Corey (University of Texas at Tyler, Tyler, United States); Bronikowski, Anne (Iowa State
University, Tyler, Canada)

Diet and compensatory growth in two species of snake that contrast in sexual dimorphism

Nutritional stress during natal periods has significant long-term consequences for adult characteristics
such as size at first reproduction. When subsequent improvement in prey availability allows, some
species compensate with rapid growth. However, this may require a trade-off in terms of increased
exposure to predation, increased metabolic rates, and shifts from acquired to innate immunity. For
snakes, there are contrasting paradigms for adult size, which creates different sexual size dimorphism
(male biased or female biased SSD). For species with male combat such as Corn snakes, (Panterophis
guttata) males are the larger sex. For other species such as Checkered garter snakes (Thamnophis
marcianus) the females have a fecundity advantage by being large but males have an advantage by
reaching reproduction sooner (smaller). We examined the growth trajectories of 30 males and 30
females of both these species on either a restricted or high diets early in life (4 months) and then for 4
months with both groups on ad libitum diets. The corn snakes from early dietary restricted groups
tended to show catch up growth when food availability increased. However, garter snakes in general did
not, although a few early food restricted females did show a trend to grow rapidly with the additional food.
In corns both sexes would receive an evolutionary advantage to compensatory growth and achieving a
large body size quickly. In garter snakes females might be expected to have more evolutionary pressure
to grow quickly to a large size than males.




                                                                                                           219
Ford, Ryan (University of North Florida); Gelsleichter, James (University of North Florida, Canada);
Frazier, Bryan (South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Canada); Belcher, Carolyn (Georgia
Department of Natural Resources, Canada); Piercy, Andrew (University of North Florida, Canada);
Grubbs, R. Dean (Florida State University Coastal Marine Lab, Canada)

Reproductive Periodicity of the Blacknose Shark (Carcharhinus acronotus) within its Atlantic
Range

The blacknose shark ( Carcharhinus acronotus ) is a common small coastal shark species found in
nearshore waters along the southeast coast of the United States, from North Carolina into the Gulf of
Mexico and extending further south into the Bahamas. There has been some debate in recent years over
the reproductive periodicity of C. acronotus in waters off the U.S. coast. Earlier studies have suggested
that Gulf C. acronotus reproduce on an annual basis whereas the Atlantic populations of this species
may reproduce biennially. The goal of the present study was to re-evaluate the reproductive periodicity of
the Atlantic populations of C. acronotus with the intent on clarifying these differences. This was
accomplished by examining male and female reproductive tracts in animals caught via fishery dependant
and fishery independent gillnet and longline surveys conducted throughout the Atlantic range of C.
acronotus. Based on these data, spermatogenesis appears to occur between late May to early July with
peak sperm production occurring in June and July. In females, follicular development is likely complete by
late June-early July with ovulation occurring shortly afterwards. Mating appears to occur between mid-
June and early July based on the presence of fresh mating scars on females captured during this time.
Current data suggests that gestation begins late July with parturition occurring late May to early June the
following year. As observed in earlier studies, reproductive periodicity appears to be largely biennial.
However, evidence for concurrent follicular development and pregnancy was observed in several
females, suggesting that at least a portion of the Atlantic population may reproduce on an annual basis.



Foster, Jim (Cristatus Ecology); Smith, Freya; Cunningham, Andrew (Institute of Zoology, London,
United Kingdom)

Working with volunteer surveyors to determine the distribution of chytrid fungus in the UK

A partnership approach, combining the strengths of research scientists and volunteers, was used to
determine the UK distribution of the amphibian chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis [―Bd‖].
Using similar methods, national Bd surveys were organised in 2008 and 2011. An authoritative national
co-ordinator was appointed at the Institute of Zoology, London. Volunteers were recruited to allow
sufficient sample sites for each UK region. Volunteers were trained in swabbing techniques and given a
survey protocol. Swabs were tested for Bd using PCR. The results demonstrate the remarkable capacity
for volunteers to contribute to large-scale surveys. In 2008 (figures for 2011 in parentheses), volunteers
contributed 5,833 (3,122) swabs for 127 (121) sites, from 9 (10) species. 54% of sites visited in 2008
were resurveyed in 2011. Full details of the Bd survey methods and results will be reported separately,
since this paper focuses on volunteer engagement; in summary, prevalence was 3% in 2008, with 20% of
sites infected. Volunteers spent approximately 3,200 person-hours undertaking fieldwork over the two
surveys. This represents a nominal value of GBP 92,000 (CAD 144,000) at typical commercial rates.
However, it would be remiss to describe the value of volunteer surveys solely in terms of financial
savings. Substantial mutual benefits can accrue from partnership projects, aside from achieving scientific
objectives cost effectively. In our case, the volunteers and their national supporting body appreciated
being involved in a cutting-edge research project. This improved survey skills, and in many cases acted
as a local focus for volunteer groups, enhancing group cohesion. The project also reinforced connections
between volunteers, researchers and government agencies, paving the way for future collaborations. The



                                                                                                       220
main potential disadvantages and limitations of a volunteer approach were a lack of control over the
scope and quality of fieldwork, notably some uncertainty about the number of sites eventually sampled,
and the risk of over-burdening volunteers. Mitigating measures helped to ensure they were not especially
problematic in this study. The following actions help in large-scale volunteer projects: clear instructions,
frequent feedback to demonstrate appreciation, and managing expectations about the announcement of
results.



Foufopoulos, Johannes (University of Michigan); Pafilis, Panayiotis; Valakos, Stratis (University of
Athens, Canada); Anthony, Nicola (University of New Orleans, Canada)

Interactive effects of predation, marine subsidies, overgrazing and parasitism on island lizards.

On islands worldwide, lizards are frequently the most important vertebrates, both in terms of aggregate
biomass and total population size. While some research has been done on the effects of predation on
lizard population size, little is known on the effects of marine nutrient subsidies or herbivory on lizard
population size. In this study we investigate the effects of seabird-delivered marine subsidies, herbivory
by introduced goats, and predation by native snakes on the populations of the Aegean Wall lizard
(Podarcis erhardii, Lacertidae, Reptilia) living on islands in the Aegean Sea (Greece).

Our results indicate that lizard population densities are determined by a hierarchical interplay between
predation on the one hand, and nutrient availability - mediated through goat browsing and seabird
subsidies- on the other. Predation by snakes significantly depresses lizard densities on those islands that
are big enough to support resident snake populations. On snake-free islands only, lizard numbers are
positively associated with breeding seabird populations, presumably because of seabird subsidies. Also
only on snake-free islands, lizard numbers are negatively associated with density of stocked goats.
Experimental goat removal and addition experiments lead to the same results. Goats appear to impact
lizard populations through the destruction of the vegetation and through the introduction of invasive
generalist ticks, that switch hosts from goats to parasitize lizards.



Fouquet, Antoine (CNRS Guyane); Noonan, Brice (Uni of Mississippi, _, MS, United States); Rodrigues,
Miguel (Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil); Pech, Nicolas; Gilles, Andre (Université Aix-
Marseille, IMEP, Evolution Génome Environnement,, Marseille, PR, France); Gemmell, Neil (Centre for
Reproduction and Genomics, Department of Anatomy uctural Biology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New
Zealand)

Multiple Quaternary Refugia in the Eastern               Guiana Shield      Revealed    by Comparative
Phylogeography of 12 Frog Species

The Guiana Shield (GS) is one of the most pristine regions of Amazonia and biologically one of the
richest areas on Earth. How and when this massive diversity arose remains the subject of considerable
debate. The prevailing hypothesis of Quaternary glacial refugia suggests that a part of the eastern GS,
among other areas in Amazonia, served as stable forested refugia during periods of aridity. However, the
recently proposed disturbance–vicariance hypothesis proposes that fluctuations in temperature on orbital
timescales, with some associated aridity, have driven Neotropical diversification. The expectations of the
temporal and spatial organization of biodiversity differ between these two hypotheses. Here, we compare
the genetic structure of 12 leaf-litter inhabiting frog species from the GS lowlands using a combination of
mitochondrial and nuclear sequences in an integrative analytical approach that includes phylogenetic
reconstructions, molecular dating, and Geographic Information System methods. This comparative and



                                                                                                        221
integrated approach overcomes the well-known limitations of phylogeographic inference based on single
species and single loci. All of the focal species exhibit distinct phylogeographic patterns highlighting
taxon-specific historical distributions, ecological tolerances to climatic disturbance, and dispersal abilities.
Nevertheless, all but one species exhibit a history of fragmentation/isolation within the eastern GS during
the Quaternary with spatial and temporal concordance among species. The signature of isolation in
northern French Guiana (FG) during the early Pleistocene is particularly clear. Approximate Bayesian
Computation supports the synchrony of the divergence between northern FG and other GS lineages.
Substructure observed throughout the GS suggests further Quaternary fragmentation and a role for
rivers. Our findings support fragmentation of moist tropical forest in the eastern GS during this period
when the refuge hypothesis would have the region serving as a contiguous wet-forest refuge



Fox, Alicia (University of South Florida); Schrey, Aaron; Mushinsky, Henry; McCoy, Earl (University of
South Florida, Canada)

Are roads a barrier to gene flow in a sand burrowing lizard, the Florida Sand Skink, Plestiodon
reynoldsi?

The scrub of peninsular Florida is a highly imperiled ecosystem and home to numerous federally listed
species. Effective conservation of these species will benefit from understanding how anthropogenic
habitat modification alters the genetic characteristics of populations. Roads are a common anthropogenic
habitat modification, and understanding their effect on local populations is important for management. Our
goal is to determine if Florida State Road 40 (SR40), which bisects the Florida scrub habitat of the Ocala
National Forest in northern peninsular Florida, is a barrier to gene flow in the threatened Florida Sand
Skink, Plestiodon reynoldsi . The fossorial Sand Skink requires fine, well-drained sand for locomotion;
thus, roads may have a direct impact on individual movement. Construction of SR40 began between 80
and 100 years ago, for which approximately 20-25 generations of the Florida Sand Skink have occurred
prior to sample collection. We collected individuals (n = 44) from sites north and south of SR40 and
screened them for allelic variation at 8 microsatellite DNA loci and mitochondrial DNA variation at the
cytochrome-b gene. Because we know the approximate time SR40 altered the habitat of the Florid Sand
Skink, we may be able to calibrate the time required for genetic characteristics of the local populations to
change. We will also compare our findings to those from recent studies of the Florida Sand Skink in the
southern extent of its range.



Fox, Alicia (University of South Florida); Schrey, Aaron; McCoy, Earl; Mushinsky, Henry (University of
South Florida, Canada)

Parentage Analysis of the Florida Sand Skink, Plestiodon reynoldsi, following relocation on the
Lake Wales Ridge in Central Florida

Little is known about the mating system in the threatened Florida Sand Skink, Plestiodon reynoldsi ,
which occurs in xeric habitat on the central ridges of Florida. Multiple forms of land development and
mining have occurred on these ridges and one of our study locations near Davenport, Florida on the Lake
Wales Ridge is scheduled to be mined for sand. As a result of the sand mining, all individuals captured at
this site were relocated in the spring and summer of 2007 to a site on the northern end of Lake Wales
Ridge. Individuals moved to the relocation site were placed in 20m X 20m enclosures that contained
multiple pitfall arrays and had various shade and ground cover treatments. Twenty individuals were
placed into each enclosure with recapture efforts beginning in 2008. While our relocation site provided



                                                                                                            222
opportunity for multiple studies, such as survivorship and habitat preference, the purpose of this study is
to examine reproductive success in P. reynoldsi . A total of 63 juveniles, resulting from mating presumed
to have occurred between 2008 and 2010, were captured from 13 enclosures. Genotypes were
determined at multiple microsatellite loci for all individuals originally captured at our Davenport location
and for all juveniles captured at the relocation site. A parentage analysis was done to determine parents
of juveniles in each enclosure and reproductive success of both males and females. This study is a first
step in understanding the genetic mating system of the Florida Sand Skink that can be used in the
conservation and management of this species.



Fox, Dewayne (Delaware State University); Armstrong, Jim (Mid Atlantic Fisheries Management Council,
Canada); Brown, Lori (Delaware State University, Canada); Wark, Kevin (Endeavor Fisheries Inc.,
Canada)

Cooperative Development and Testing of Sink Gillnet Modifications for Reducing Atlantic
Sturgeon Bycatch in the Monkfish Fishery

In 2012, five Distinct Population Segments of Atlantic sturgeon ( Acipenser oxyrinchus oxyrinchus ) were
listed as endangered or threatened under the Endangered Species Act. A preceding Status Review
concluded that bycatch in sink-gillnets was a significant hurdle to Atlantic sturgeon recovery. Over two
field seasons (2010, 2011), we worked collaboratively with commercial harvesters to modify sink gillnet
configurations to reduce Atlantic sturgeon bycatch while still achieving adequate catches of monkfish (
Lophius americanus ) and winter skate ( Leucoraja ocellata ) which were the primary target species. In
2010, we fished paired replicates of gillnets (12 meshes x 30.5cm stretch) with and without tie-downs and
although Atlantic sturgeon bycatch did not differ significantly, target species catches were reduced in nets
without tie-downs. In 2011, we subjected two different tie-down configurations (standard (12 meshes)
and low profile (6 meshes) to the same experimental protocol. Bycatch of Atlantic sturgeon was reduced
in the lower profile tie-down gillnets but landings of target species were minimally impacted. Our findings
suggest that the use of tie-downs is important for maintaining adequate catches of target species, and
that certain tie-down configurations can reduce Atlantic sturgeon bycatch. Additionally, experimental
testing of gear developed by harvesters allows for the identification of gear configurations that both
address conservation objectives and are realistic for use in commercial harvest. This model of
collaborative research may prove useful in the recovery of other imperiled sturgeons.



Fox, Stanley (Oklahoma State University); Baird, Troy (University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, United
States); Rodriguez, Felipe (Universidad Autonoma del Estado de Mexico, Toluca, Mexico); Acevedo,
Andrea (Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, United States)

Sexual selection in toddlers? Precocial sexual signaling in hatchling collared lizards (Crotaphytus
collaris)

Many animals show sexual dichromatism, but this is nearly universally reported only in sexually mature
adults, as expected theoretically via sexual selection. A good example is seen in adult collared lizards
(Crotaphytus collaris), who exhibit strong sexual dimorphism and dichromatism. Surprisingly, sexual
dichromatism is also seen in pre-reproductive hatchlings. Hatchling males display conspicuous
dorsolateral orange bars and previous research has shown that the signal value of these orange bars is
not directed toward adults as once hypothesized. We conducted field experiments with hatchling collared
lizards to determine the function of these orange bars. In the first experiment, we introduced a tethered




                                                                                                        223
male or female hatchling in random order to untethered resident male hatchlings and recorded the
behavior of the residents for 10 minutes. Residents were significantly more aggressive to male intruders
than to female ones. In order to determine if residents modulated their aggression because of the orange
bars of the male intruders or perhaps because of sex-specific chemical cues or behavior, we conducted a
second experiment. In this one, we used only male hatchlings as intruders; treatment intruders had their
orange bars emphasized with non-toxic orange paint, and control intruders had their orange bars
obscured by background-colored paint. Reflectance spectroscopy revealed that the paint treatments
closely matched natural coloration of hatchlings. Resident males were significantly more aggressive to
male intruders with the painted orange bars than to those who lacked them. We suggest that the orange
bars on territorial hatchling males function to identify the sex of the intruder to the resident male and
trigger aggressive behavior toward intruding males in order to repel them as future reproductive rivals,
and their absence identifies female intruders, who are tolerated and accepted as future potential mates.
This appears to be precocial sexual selection and may occur in other sexually selected, polygynous taxa
in which individuals are philopatric from an early age through reproduction.



Frable, Benjamin (Smithsonian Institution); Baldwin, Carole (Smithsonian Institution, Canada); Luther,
Brandon (Clemson University, Canada); Weigt, Lee (Smithsonian Institution, Canada)

A new species of western Atlantic lizardfish (Teleostei: Synodontidae: Synodus) and resurrection
of Synodus bondi Fowler, 1939, as a valid species from the Caribbean.

Western atlantic synodontid species were studied as part of an ongoing effort to reanalyze Caribbean
shorefish diversity. A neighbor-joining tree constructed from base-pair sequences of the mitochondrial
gene cytochrome c oxidase I (COI) revealed two highly divergent genetic lineages within both S.
intermedius and S. foetens . A new species is described for one of the S. intermedius lineages. The
new species and S. intermedius differ in number of lateral-line scales, caudal pigmentation, size of the
scapular blotch, and shape of the anterior-nostril flap. The new species and S. intermedius have
overlapping geographic and depth distributions, but the former generally inhabits deeper water (> 28 m)
than S. intermedius and is known only from coastal waters of the southeast United States and the Gulf
of Mexico as opposed to those areas and the Caribbean for S. intermedius. Synodus bondi Fowler,
1939, is resurrected from the synonymy of S. foetens for one of the S. foetens genetic lineages. The
two species differ in the length and shape of the snout, number of anal-fin rays, and shape of the anterior-
nostril flap. Synodus bondi and S. foetens co-occur in the central Caribbean, but S. bondi otherwise
has a more southerly distribution than S. foetens. Neotypes are designated for S. intermedius and S.
foetens . A revised key to western Atlantic Synodus species is presented. We also discuss preliminary
evidence of population structure within western Atlantic Synodus, Saruida and Trachinocephalus myops
and species-level genetic structure within Synodus poeyi .



Francis, Jennifer (The University of Western Australia); Roberts, J Dale (The University of Western
Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia)

Feeding ecology of tadpoles in the Australian tropics: complex trophic guilds in freshwater food
webs

Tadpoles are important components of freshwater food webs as they are seasonally abundant, consume
large quantities of food, transfer energy from aquatic to terrestrial environments and are important
resources for many predators. However, little is known about tadpole diets. Most discussions of tadpole



                                                                                                        224
diet are speculative and based on indirect inference. For instance, a long gut indicates herbivory, or, they
do not distinguish between ingested and assimilated material. We documented anuran habitat use and
resulting tadpole assemblages in north-western Australia where freshwater habitats are under threat from
invasion by toxic cane toads and alteration from agricultural expansion. Using natural isotope abundance
of δ13C and δ15N and gut-content analysis of tadpoles (nine Hylids and three Myobatrachids) from six
temporary wetlands, we tested the null hypotheses: i) tadpoles are strict herbivores; ii) they are non-
selective consumers and therefore feed across different carbon food chains (phytoplankton, algae,
detritus); iii) they feed opportunistically and do not show species-specific differentiation in food quality and
iv) their diet does not change through ontogeny. Tadpoles displayed selective assimilation and species-
specific feeding niche differentiation, consuming at multiple trophic levels: herbivory and predatory and
between trophic levels: omnivory. These results revealed complex trophic guilds in subtropical tadpoles
and reinforce the need to evaluate their ecological roles.



Franco, Francisco Luís (Francisco L Franco);

The Herpetological Collection of Butantan Institute, São Paulo, Brazil: past, present, and future

The Herpetological Collection Alphonse Richard Hoge of Butantan Institute, São Paulo, Brazil was the
biggest snake collection of the world, with more than 77.000 registered specimens and another 10.000 to
be registered. It had the most important type‘s collection of Brazilian snakes; about 150 species or
subspecies of snakes were included in this assemblage. This collection had world representativeness and
was utilized by several researchers along the years. It is hard to find a Neotropical snake paper without
the contribution of this collection. Tragically the fire on Saturday, May 15, 2010 destroyed about 80% of
the preserved snakes. Fortunately, nobody was injured. Despite budget to buy fire prevention equipment,
the fire happened few months before these acquisitions. The fire beginning about 07h00, and smoke
were detected around 07h30, while the fire already destroyed the collection. At this same time the
Engineering Department of the Butantan Institute (BI) began working in the maintenance of electric
network of the BI. The experts of Fire Department explain that the fire must have started by an electric
problem in a heating stone in a terrarium that was in the mezzanine beside the collection. In few hours
the collection was almost all destroyed. Immediately a big wave of solidarity was begun. In a few minutes
many people arrived at the IB to offer help. Brazilian and foreign people expressed solidarity in several
and different ways. Thousands of emails pop up inboxes. We are deeply grateful with all. The rescue of
the spared material began immediately and continued until June 04, when the procedures of demolition
and removal of debris finished. Many actions to help the restructuring the collection as well as
laboratories were made by individuals and private companies worldwide. Donations of books to
recompose lost library, donation of much material for rescue and save provisionally the rescued
specimens, rescue data of burned computer, creating Web sites offering support and solidarity, and
donation of specimens to recompose the collection, etc. Also, multiple instances of the State and federal
governments acted immediately to help the reconstruction of the collection of the BI and, even better, to
try to help other Brazilian collections to get structure to prevent tragedies such this. There are a brand
new build, safe and functional to BI collections, labs and offices. We must use this tragedy to prevent
recurrences. We must not forget it.



Frazier, Bryan (South Carolina Department of Natural Resources);

Age and Growth of the Bonnethead, Sphyrna tiburo, in the Coastal Atlantic Waters off the
Southeastern United States



                                                                                                            225
The bonnethead is a relatively small shark, reaching a maximum length of 150 cm.             It occurs in the
western Atlantic Ocean from North Carolina to Southern Brazil, including the Gulf of Mexico (Compagno
1984). The bonnethead is placentally viviparous and unique among coastal sharks in the region, as its
gestation period lasts for only five months and parturition occurs in the early fall. Life history
characteristics have been well studied in the Gulf of Mexico, where maximum ages for males and females
are 8+ and 12+ years, respectively (Parsons, 1993; Carlson and Parsons 1997). By contrast,
comparatively little is known about bonnetheads in the Atlantic waters off the southeastern United States,
although recent survey data suggests that their life history could differ from Gulf of Mexico bonnetheads.
In South Carolina, where the majority of specimens were collected, bonnetheads are seasonally present
and females primarily inhabit estuarine waters while males primarily inhabit shallow coastal waters. The
objectives of this study were to (i) validate the periodicity of vertebral band pair formation in the Atlantic
waters off the southeastern United States, (ii) characterize the age and growth of the bonnethead in the
region, and (iii) investigate whether clinal variations in growth exists. Data from previous works were
utilized to compare growth parameters determined during the current study with those conducted in other
areas. Within population variation between northern and southern Atlantic specimens were also
examined. A variety of growth models were fitted to age and size data and also compared against
observed individual growth from tag-recaptures in order to determine the model that best fit the
population. These data were used to generate regionally specific information on growth, maximum
observed age, theoretical maximum age, and theoretical maximum length. This study contributes to the
biological knowledge of this species and provides parameters that are essential for stock assessment
purposes.



Frazier, Julius (California Polytechnic State Univ.); Taylor, Emily (California Polytechnic State U, San
Luis Obispo, United States)

Snakes on the Juice: The role of Testosterone in Rattlesnake Spatial Ecology

Numerous studies on the spatial ecology of rattlesnakes have demonstrated that males inhabit larger
home ranges and move more frequently and over longer distances than females, presumably because
males search for widely distributed females. We tested the hypothesis that the steroid hormone
testosterone stimulates males to move more than females, leading to sex differences in home range. We
conducted a radiotelemetry study on a population of Northern Pacific Rattlesnakes ( Crotalus o.
oreganus) in central California and collected spatial data and blood samples for quantification of
testosterone. First, we predicted that naturally occurring levels of testosterone would be positively
correlated with home range size and distance moved. We found a significant, positive relationship
between testosterone concentrations and each of the following spatial variables: home range size (100%
MCP), mean distance per movement, and total distance moved. Next, we predicted that males with
experimentally elevated testosterone concentrations would exhibit larger home range sizes and longer
movements than control males. Testosterone implants successfully increased testosterone
concentrations during the summer, when levels dropped very low in control snakes. However, the
artificially elevated testosterone concentrations did not affect home range size, mean distance per
movement, total distance moved, and mean distance moved per day. It is possible that adding extra
testosterone failed to produce an effect because hormone binding proteins or receptors were saturated at
lower concentrations. Snout-vent length was not related to testosterone concentrations or to any spatial
variables. However, at our study site, large males emerge earlier from overwintering and began mate-
searching than small males, suggesting that temporal variation in spatial ecology may be important in
determining mating success.




                                                                                                          226
Frenette, Bryan (University of Oklahoma); Marsh-Matthews, Edie; Matthews, William; Barkstedt, Judith;
Geheber, Aaron (University of Oklahoma, Canada); Moody, Raymond (Tinker Air Force Base, Canada)

The fish community of an urbanized stream: perspectives over a quarter of a century.

The Crutcho Creek drainage in central Oklahoma (USA) has headwaters on Tinker Air Force Base, with
lower reaches flowing through highly urbanized to semi-rural areas near the confluence with the North
Canadian River. Fish communities in the lower reaches of the drainage were sampled in 1987 by
Matthews and Gelwick. From 2009 through 2011, sites throughout the drainage were collected, including
localities on Tinker Air Force Base. Here we compare historic and current collections from the lower
reaches and assay changes in the fish communities. Overall, 21 species were collected in both time
periods combined: Historic collections contained 17 species and current contained 18. Of the 3 species
present in historic, but not current, collections from the lower reaches, 2 were present in current
collections from upper reaches. Although Oreochromis aurea was present in large numbers at some sites
in historic collections, this species was absent in current collections. This suggests that this introduced
species has not become established in the watershed. Of the 4 species present in current, but not
historic, collections from the same locality, 3 were rare. The fourth, Micropterus salmoides, was caught
in significant numbers ranging from fingerling size to large adult. Matthews noted during the historical
collections that suitable habitat for M. salmoides was present at sites in the lower reaches of the Crutcho
drainage, but that the species was absent from collections. In both time frames, the community has been
dominated by Red Shiners ( Cyprinella lutrensis ), totaling >50% of individuals. Notropis stramineus also
was present in large numbers in both historic and current collections, making up 11% and 16% of the
community respectively. Overall, Spearman‘s Rank correlation of species abundances was significantly
positive (rho=0.624, p=0.003) and similarity of fish communities in the two time periods was greater than
75% (Percent similarity index=0.757).



Frishkoff, Luke (Stanford University); Hadly, Elizabeth (Stanford University, Canada)

Anthropogenic habitat modification and the reversal of ecological fortunes: deforestation both
enhances and disrupts geneflow of neotropical leaflitter frogs

Human domination has dramatically altered the ecological and evolutionary dynamics of life on Earth.
While many species are ill equipped to survive human impacts, others persist and even thrive amidst
anthropogenic change. Clearly the current ecologies of these two types of species differ, but how did
attributes that today permit species to survive in human-modified habitats influence their ecologies prior to
recent anthropogenic change? We explore this question by comparing the demographic history and
population connectivity of two species of neotropical leaf litter frogs with contrasting habitat affiliations in a
human-dominated landscape. Both Craugastor crassidigitus (restricted to native forest habitats) and C.
fitzingeri (human affiliated) are native to the study area in southern Costa Rica, broadly similar
ecologically, and closely related phylogenetically. The study region was largely covered by tropical moist
forest until the mid-20th century, when much of the native habitat was converted to agricultural lands.
Specifically, we asked:

i) What were the relative population sizes of these two species before widespread human modification of
the landscape? ii) How were ancient populations structured spatially? and iii) How has recent agricultural
expansion altered population structure? We sequenced 783 bp of mitochondrial cytochrome b from a total
of 529 individuals of both species across the landscape. In addition to revealing recent demographic
change, we uncovered patterns of older demographic history. We recovered 20 unique haplotypes in the
forest-restricted C. crassidigitus, all of which are closely related and spread throughout the landscape.



                                                                                                              227
However, smaller forest fragments possessed fewer haplotypes, signaling that genetic drift is already
altering evolutionary dynamics after 60 years of land conversion. In contrast, our sample of the human-
affiliated C. fitzingeri possesses only 10 haplotypes, segregated spatially across the landscape into two
distantly related groups, corresponding to either side of a prominent ridge. Such partitioning indicates
ancient barriers to dispersal—barriers not experienced by the forest-restricted species.

However, in deforested areas immediately along the ridge both haplotype groups are present within
single populations, suggesting that recent land conversion has connected these anciently divided clades.
Thus, depending on individual species‘ life history, anthropogenic modification can either disrupt or
enhance population connectivity. Such landscape conversion can lead to small populations at risk of
inbreeding depression, or newly connected populations exchanging genes between anciently diverged
lineages, with unpredictable microevolutionary consequences.



Funck, Sarah (Florida Gulf Coast University); Allman, Phil (Florida Gulf Coast University, Fort Myers, FL,
United States)

Feeding Ecology and Potential Impacts of an Introduced Iguanid (Ctenosaura similis)

The introduced Central American black spiny-tailed iguana (Ctenosaura similis) has disjunct populations
throughout southern Florida (Krysko, 2003; Townsend, 2003b), one residing on Keewaydin Island (KI) in
Collier County. Little information is known about the biology of this introduced population and how it may
influence its host environment. I investigated aspects of this population‘s feeding ecology to determine
which life history or environmental factors may contribute to variation in their diets and to determine some
potential ecological implications of their diets. Specimens were obtained over a year period using noose
poles, opportunistic hand captures and through donation from an environmental state agency. Stomach
contents were then identified as completely as possible and grouped into food resource categories.

A total of 54 iguanas in all age classes and sexes were captured in four sampling seasons. A total of 56
food resource categories were identified, most to the level of family. Results indicate that an ontogenetic
diet shift occurs in this population around 100 mm snout-vent length (SVL) with smaller juveniles feeding
on more animal prey items, then switching to primarily plant material as they grow, 87% by volume. Most
plant families consumed by adults included Fabaceae (i.e. legumes), Compositae (i.e. asters),
Bignonaceae (i.e. trumpet creepers), Myrtaceae (i.e. myrtles and guavas), Euphorbiaceae (i.e. spurges)
and Poaceae (i.e. grasses). Significant differences in diet also existed between seasons. This population
appears to be feeding similarly to C. similis in their native range, by exhibiting a broad diet with the
presence of a diet shift. C. similis as an introduced species, may exhibit diet plasticity and may feed
opportunistically, thus contributing to its success in a foreign environment.



Furumitsu, Keisuke (Nagasaki University); Kume, Gen; Yamaguchi, Atsuko (Nagasaki University,
Nagasaki, 3, Japan)

The importance of the innermost area of Ariake Bay, Japan as the nursery ground for
elasmobranchs

Coastal shallow areas such as estuaries and mangrove swamps have been widely recognized to function
as ideal nursery grounds for many elasmobranchs. The study area, Ariake Bay, is located in the west part
of Japan, next to East China Sea. The bay has a great tidal range (approx. 6 m) that creates the large
mudflats in the innermost area. Our latest research demonstrated that the innermost area of Ariake Bay is



                                                                                                        228
utilized for nursery grounds of many elasmobranchs. For example, hammerhead sharks, Sphyrna lewini
and S. zygaena, immigrate into the innermost areas of the bay for parturition during the summer season.
In Ariake Bay, genus Dasyatis is abundantly distributed and some of them are economically important.
We had confirmed that six Dasyatis species ( Dasyatis acutirostra , D. akajei, D. izuensis, D.
laevigata, D. zugei, D. sp.) inhabit in the bay. Except for D. izuensis, five species also give birth to
neonates mainly from June to August in the bay, which emerge in the innermost area including estuaries.
They feed mainly on gammarids, mysids, and small fish there. In addition to its high productivity, the
environmental conditions of the innermost area are characterized by highly turbid waters, which may
provide suitable feeding grounds and shelters against predatory sharks to their neonates.



Gafny, Sarig (School of Marine Sciences, Ruppin Academic Center); Malka, Yoram (Israel Nature and
Park Aouthority, Canada); Cohen, Orly (Zoology Department Tel Aviv University, Canada); Artzi, Yifat;
Milshtein, Dana (Israel Nature and Park Aouthority, Canada); Gafny, Sarig (School of Marine Sciences,
Ruppin Academic Center, Michmoret, Israel); Geffen, Eli (Zoology Department Tel Aviv University,
Canada)

The return of the lost frog - rediscovery of the Hula Painted Frog

The Hula Painted Frog Discoglossus nigriventer is one of the rarest amphibians known to science. The
species was first described in the early 1940s when two adults and two tadpoles were found in a in
marginal freshwater habitat at the eastern part of the Hula Valley. An additional single adult collected in
1955 during the drainage of the Hula valley wetlands was the last confirmed sighting (adult or tadpole)
of this species. In 1996 the Hula Painted Frog was the first amphibian species that was defined by the
IUCN as extinct. It was selected as one of the ―top ten‖ species during the " Search for Lost Frogs " and
became a poignant symbol for extinction in Israel.

The Hula Painted Frog is the only species of its family found at the eastern Mediterranean. So far all
records indicate that the species is endemic to the Hula Valley in northern Israel. Paleontological findings
show that this species populated northern Israel for over 1 million years. In 2000, it was claimed that the
species was allegedly seen in a marsh south of the Lebanese Beqaa Valley, however two expeditions
held in 2004 and 2005 could not confirm this report. Other searches for the species held by local and
international organizations revealed no positive results.

In October 2011, during a routine patrol of the Hula Nature Reserve, an adult male of D. nigriventer was
recorded. The specimen was recorded in mid-day, at a terrestrial habitat, about 10 m from a large water
body. Since the October rediscovery, we found eight more adult specimens (4 males 1 female and 3
juveniles) all within a restricted area of about 1.25 ha. Of the above, 6 individuals were located in
terrestrial habitat, barrowed underneath c.a. 20 cm layer of wet detritus, within a dense canopy of
Phragmites australis and Rubus sanguineus . The 2 other individuals were found while being preyed by
water birds (i.e. Halcyon smyrnensis).

Almost nothing is known on the life history of D. nigriventer . The limited data we have collected so far
indicate that the species differ from other species of its genus. The largest male among the 9 specimens
recorded (84 mm, 53 g) is also the largest individual Discoglossus ever reported. Preliminary mtDNA
analysis indicates that the species is basal to the genus. In the coming future we intend to widen our
knowledge on species life history and to collect more information that will help preserving the Hula
Painted Frog.




                                                                                                        229
Gaither, Michelle (California Academy of Sciences); Bowen, Brian (Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology,
Kaneohe, United States); Rocha, Luiz (California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, United States);
Craig, Matthew (University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez, United States)

Phylogeography of the reef fish Cephalopholus argus (Epinephelidae) indicates Pleistocene
isolation across the Indo-Pacific Barrier with contemporary overlap in the Coral Triangle

The Coral Triangle (CT), bounded by the Philippines, the Malay Peninsula, and New Guinea is the
epicenter of marine biodiversity. Hypotheses that explain the source of this rich biodiversity include 1) the
center of origin, 2) the center of accumulation, and 3) the region of overlap. Here we contribute to the
debate with a phylogeographic survey of a widely distributed reef fish, the Peacock Grouper
(Cephalopholis argus; Epinephelidae) at 21 locations (N = 550) using DNA sequence data from mtDNA
cytochrome b and two nuclear introns (gonadotropin-releasing hormone and S7 ribosomal protein).
Population structure was significant (ΦST = 0.297, P < 0.001; FST = 0.078, P < 0.001; FST = 0.099, P <
0.001, for the three loci respectively) among five regions: French Polynesia, the central-west Pacific (Line
Islands to northeastern Australia), Indo-Pacific boundary (Bali and Rowley Shoals), eastern Indian Ocean
(Cocos/Keeling and Christmas Island), and western Indian Ocean (Diego Garcia, Oman, Seychelles). A
strong signal of isolation by distance was detected in both mtDNA (r = 0.749, P = 0.001) and the
combined nuclear loci (r = 0.715, P < 0.001). We detected evidence of population expansion with
migration toward the CT. Two clusters of haplotypes were detected in the mtDNA data (d = 0.008),
corresponding to the Pacific and Indian Oceans, with a low level of introgression observed outside a
mixing zone at the Pacific-Indian boundary.We conclude that the Indo-Pacific Barrier, operating during
low sea level associated with glaciation, defines the primary phylogeographic pattern in this species.
These data support a scenario of isolation on the scale of 105 year glacial cycles, followed by population
expansion toward the CT, and overlap of divergent lineages at the Pacific-Indian boundary. This pattern
of isolation, divergence, and subsequent overlap likely contributes to species richness at the adjacent
Coral Triangle and is consistent with the region of overlap hypothesis.



Galindo Uribe, Diana María (Universidad de los Andes); Amézquita, Adolfo (Universidad de los Andes,
Canada)

Climate and physiology as diversification drivers in Neotropical poison frogs: a comparison of
macro- and micro-geographic scales

Disentangling the role of climatic variables on diversification patterns has been one of the greatest
questions for ecologists and evolutionary biologists. To achieve this goal, one should understand the
behavioral and physiological mechanisms linking ecology and evolution at the individual, population and
species scales. Amphibians are excellent models to evaluate this question because their ecological
performance strongly depends on climatic factors such as temperature and humidity. On the other hand,
predation, sexual selection and neutral processes have been evaluated as possible mechanisms
generating diversity. We evaluated the ecology-divergence link by studying the physiological and
behavioral responses to climatic variables at different spatial scales in Oophaga and Dendrobates frogs
(Dendrobatidae). At a broad scale, we used environmental niche models that correlate species
occurrence with biologically relevant climatic factors. Also, we measured evaporative water loss (EWL)
using a wind tunnel. We correlated niche divergence with differences in EWL to explain the current
distribution patterns of these frogs. At a finer spatial scale, we estimated frog abundance of O. histrionica
in a patchy environment and tested for correlation with microclimatic factors such as relative humidity and
local temperature. Lineage splitting was often correlated with niche divergence, but the latter did not
always predict present-day differences in EWL. At a local scale, microclimate predicted frog abundance.



                                                                                                         230
Altogether, our results suggest a contribution of climate heterogeneity to macro and micro geographic
discontinuities in frog distribution.



Gallagher, Austin (University of Miami);

Evolved for Extinction? The rise and fall of the hammerhead sharks

The hammerhead shark is arguably one of the most recognizable and mysterious species on the planet, a
fascinating example of biodiversity and evolution. The large hammerheads are apex predators and hold
significant ecological importance in structuring food web dynamics and function. Recent scientific
assessments of this Family of sharks suggest that they are among the most exploited globally. To
illustrate the drivers of such declines, we suggest that all hammerhead sharks have become victims of an
‗evolutionary trap.‘ Evolutionary traps occur when aspects of a species‘ selected biology and ecology
intersect with human disturbance factors to lead to maladaptive outcomes (i.e., mortality, fitness loss).
While these phenomena have been widely documented in terrestrial systems and has subsequently led to
increased conservation attention for certain species, similar evidence in marine systems is lacking. We
present novel insights and quantitative data on this issue by linking biological (life-history), evolutionary
(phylogeny), physiological (high stress response), behavioral (schooling and migrations), economic (high
economic value to the finning industry) and human/ social (irrational fear and disvalue) drivers of an
evolutionary trap specific to large hammerhead sharks. Finally, we discuss these findings in terms of risk
assessment and conservation triage.



Galland, Grantly (Scripps Institution of Oceanography); Hastings, Phil (Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, Canada)

Oceanographic and Ecological Factors regulating the Cryptobenthic Fish Community on Gulf of
California Rocky Reefs

The Gulf of California is an ocean basin characterized by a highly variable physical environment driven by
tidal and coastal upwelling, nearly daily changes to wind strength and direction, and the existence of a
North American seasonal monsoon. The Gulf is also characterized by a relatively high percentage of
endemic fishes (10%), even higher for cryptobenthic species on reefs (40%). Gulf reef species that are
more widely distributed along the tropical eastern Pacific generally have centers of distribution in southern
Mexico or Central America, implying that species rarely migrate out of the Gulf but often migrate in. We
ask whether or not these oceanographic and macroecological observations are related. Using data from
over 60 in situ temperature loggers and a series of quantitative cryptobenthic fish collections, we have
obtained both physical and ecological representations of the shallow rocky reef environment from several
sites, throughout the Gulf. Temperature logger data confirm the high oceanographic variability that these
small-bodied fishes experience at seasonal and daily scales and reveal incredible swings in temperature
(~8 degrees C) that can occur during a single tidal cycle. Interactions between solar heating and wind-
driven vertical mixing prove to be especially important in this hot, arid climate. Not surprisingly, sites
characterized by Gulf-like high frequency variability also have more Gulf-like fish communities, while
species with a more southern affinity are more successful at sites characterized by lower high frequency
variability. This perhaps implies some competitive advantage for more widely dispersed species in the
absence of high variability. However, why species that have long evolutionary histories under such
variable oceanographic conditions do not (or cannot) successfully emigrate from the Gulf to warmer, more
stable southern locations is equivocal. By ranking our sites using a previously published gradient of Gulf



                                                                                                         231
reef health (based on several ecological indicators), we can also address whether or not Gulf endemics or
more widely distributed species are more or less successful on reefs designated as degraded or healthy.
Interactions between these two axes (temperature variability and ecosystem status) may further explain
the ongoing interactions between these two broad groups of cryptobenthic reef fishes.



Galoyan, Eduard (Moscow State University); Tsellarius, Alexey (2A.N. Severtsov Institute of Ecology and
Evolution, Moscow, Russian Federation); Tsellarius, Elena (2A.N. Severtsov Institute of Ecology and
Evolution, Moscow, Canada)

Social interrelations as the main factor of differences in population density of bisexual (Darevskia
brauneri) and parthenogenetic (D. armeniaca) Rock lizards

During 1997-2009, we studied the spacing pattern and social interactions of individually marked Rock
lizards Darevskia brauneri and D. armeniaca . Both species are small diurnal insectivorous lizards,
similar in ecological preferences and inhabiting rather similar biotopes. However, the population density in
D. armeniaca may reach a much higher level. Range structures of unisexual and gonochoristic females
are the same and include Sally zone, Home Range (30-100 m2) (HR), Core area (2-9 m2) (CA) and
Basking centres (1-1.7 m2) (BC). In bisexual D. brauneri , stable female groups exist. Each group consist
of adult dominant female and several satellites, generally subadults. The Satellites use CA of dominant
female, their CA are overlapped too, but BC of each member of a group are monopolized, and the highest
level of monopolization was recorded in dominants. Aggressiveness between members of a group was
less then towards female intruders. Maximal aggressiveness was recorded in dominant females stably
associated with territorial males. Territorial males regulary visited female‘s BC and, thereby, defended
females from ―sexual harassment‖ of non-territorial males. Each territorial male was able to keep up a
stable association with only one adult female. Females of parthenogenetic D. armeniaca never formed
stable groups, and their BC often broadly overlapped among large numbers of individuals (up to 20-30).
Aggressiveness in this species is comparatively low and rarely expressed as direct attack. In addition, D.
armeniaca regularly displays intrasexual affiliative behaviour never recorded in intrasexual interactions of
females of D. brauneri . Obviously, these features ensure high level of population density in
parthenogenetic Rock lizards. We suppose that there is a necessity of bisexual females to compete for
defence from nonterritorial males, and that is the main factor determining behavioural differences of
studied species and, as a result, differences in spatial structures of populations.



Galván-Tirado, Carolina (Posgrado en Ciencias del Mar y Limnología - UNAM); Díaz-Jaimes, Píndaro
(Instituto de Ciencias del Mar y Limnología - UNAM, Mexico, Mexico); García de León, Francisco Javier
(Laboratorio de Genética para la Conservación, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas del Noroeste
(CIBNOR), La Paz, Mexico); Galván-Magaña, Felipe (Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas
(CICIMAR), La Paz, Mexico); Uribe-Alcocer, Manuel (Instituto de Ciencias del Mar y Limnología - UNAM,
Mexico, Mexico)

Genetic differentiation of silky shark (Carcharhinus falciformis) populations in the Pacific Ocean

The population genetic structure of the silky shark Carcharhinus falciformis in the Pacific Ocean was
studied using analysis of the mtDNA control region. A 732 bp fragment was sequenced in 353 silky shark
individuals; analysis provided 14 haplotypes. Mean haplotype (0.48 ± 0.03) and nucleotide diversity
(0.0009 ± 0.00008) were unusually low for pelagic species. The AMOVA analysis comparing Western and
Eastern regions was at a low but significant level of variance associated with differences between groups
(ΦCT = 0.0199, P = 0.008). We present the first population genetic study of the silky shark in the Pacific



                                                                                                        232
and provide evidence that there are Eastern and Western Pacific populations. Even thought, the
significance on the levels of population subdivision found, it is hard definitively to reject the hypothesis of
panmixia because of the small differences registered owing to the low levels of mtDNA genetic variation.
Based on our results and on the levels of population exploitation, we suggest evaluating the adoption of a
two-stock management strategy to sustain the long-term use of this resource.



Galvis, Pedro (Pueblo Viejo Dominicana Corporation); Gil, José (Pueblo Viejo Dominicana Corporation -
Consultant, Canada); Rada, Marco (2. Lab. de Sistemática de Vertebrados, Pontifícia Universidade
Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, Canada)

Hylid tadpoles of Hispaniola: Ontogeny, description and external comparative morphology

The island of Hispaniola (Dominican Republic and Haiti) is the second largest island in the Caribbean
region, and has four species of tree frogs (one Hypsiboas genus and three Osteopilus ). All of these
species are endemic to the island and occupy large areas of the mid and low lands (below 1500 meters
above sea level on average). The deforestation and degradation of natural environments, as in many
other places, has meant that amphibian populations are highly fragmented and extant in many localities.
Among the species that this study considers, two are Endangered and one is Vulnerable, according to
IUCN criteria.

We describe the larvae of Osteopilus dominicensis (n = 222) , O. pulchrilineatus (n= 219) , O. vastus
(n= 371) and Hybsiboas heilprini (n=83) based on a total representative sample of 895 specimens
reared from egg masses collected in Cibao Central region in the Dominican Republic (constituting 80% of
Gosner stages). Tadpoles were maintained in laboratory conditions for almost four months, some were
reared through metamorphosis until froglet emergence to confirm their identity. We used 13
morphological measurements and 15 traits for the identification, comparison and description of the larvae.
The use of a statistical approach including simple linear regression permitted comparisons among
species. These tadpoles show stream adaptation through a robust body with strong tail musculature,
small to medium fins, relatively enlarged oral disc, increased number of labial tooth rows, and complete
marginal papillae. A wide variation of larval tooth row number is compiled. Marked ontogenetic changes in
body form and coloration characterize the first and post-metamorphic stages. The high similarities shown
by the tadpoles of the species studied are interesting despite one of them not being closely related
(Hypsiboas ).Our results highlight the importance of tadpoles ontogeny research as relevant to testing
phylogenetic hypothesis. We present a field guide including a taxonomic key to distinguish among the
tadpoles of Hispaniola hylids and present information on their ontogenetic development, photographs and
illustrations.



Gandara, Anthony J. (University of Northern Colorado); Broughton, Brianne; Traverse, Madeleine J.
(University of Northern Colorado, Canada); Bryson Jr., Robert W. (University of Nevada, Las Vegas,
Canada); Mackessy, Stephen P. (University of Northern Colorado, Canada)

Intraspecific variation in the venom of the Ridge-nosed Rattlesnake (Crotalus willardi).

Rattlesnake venoms commonly vary in composition as a function of several factors, including phylogeny,
age and population. Little is known about the biology of Mexican mountain rattlesnakes, and information
regarding their venom composition is even scarcer. Herein we report the characterization of venom from
the Ridge-nosed Rattlesnake ( Crotalus willardi ), along with an analysis of geographical variation in



                                                                                                           233
venom composition. Venom samples from four of five recognized subspecies were used in this study.
Venom profiles were created using SDS-PAGE and individual venom chromatographs were constructed
using reverse-phase HPLC. The activity of six common rattlesnake venom enzymes were measured and
analyzed between populations. Coagulation time and fibrinogen digest assays were performed to
investigate effects on hemostasis, and venoms were also assayed for lethality towards mice, lizards, and
crickets. Finally, cytotoxicity assays towards MCF-7 breast cancer cells were completed to screen for
compounds with possible anti-proliferative activity. Electrophoretic analyses revealed that venoms
commonly contained 20-23 proteins, including L-amino acid oxidase, serine proteases, PI and PIII
metalloproteases, and phospholipases. Protein composition was consistent between individuals and did
not vary between subspecies, an observation corroborated by comparative HPLC. Enzyme activities and
coagulation time did not differ significantly between subspecies. Venom toxicity also did not differ
significantly between subspecies. Cytotoxicity assays revealed that all venoms contained significant
inhibitory effects on MCF-7 breast cancer cell proliferation. Currently we are purifying select proteins to
evaluate their utility in drug development. Many studies evaluating intraspecific venom variation have
shown differences between populations, and the lack of pronounced variation in the venom of the
subspecies of Ridge-nosed Rattlesnakes raises interesting questions. Differences in diet, and the
evolutionary arms race between predator and prey, have long been thought of as the main driving force
behind venom evolution, but detailed information on diet is available for only one population of C. willardi
obscurus . A study looking at the comparative toxicity of venom to natural prey species could help explain
the lack of subspecies level variation in venom composition in the Ridge-nosed Rattlesnake.



Garcia, Gerardo (Chester Zoo, North of England Zoological Society);

Using volunteers in ex situ and in situ conservation programmes

Large amounts of resources are necessary for the long term support of ex-situ and in-situ conservation
programmes. However, funding is always limited. Despite the fact that many species or habitat restoration
programmes require long-term commitments to achieve their aims, funding is often only available in short-
term tranches. There are examples of funding made available by statutory and non-government bodies to
start new programmes. However, salaries, which form the highest proportion of costs, are difficult to
secure because in many cases personnel costs are not supported (directly or indirectly) by many funding
organisations. In some cases, the only possibility of starting and even maintaining vitally important
conservation projects is by engaging networks of volunteers. These networks can provide many hours of
work, which, if coupled with the collection of good quality scientific data can provide very important
practical results. To achieve this, adequate training and tutoring of the volunteers is vital.

A summary of the key components that have produced effective conservation programmes using
volunteers is presented with particular reference to potential new programmes. We present costs of a
number of conservation programmes and the contributions -in monetary as well as in time investment
terms – made by volunteers. The working relationship between volunteers and the host institutions is
vital, and we discuss how this can be managed smoothly. Because in many cases, the survival of a
species is fully dependent on the enthusiasm and dedication of volunteers, ensuring that volunteer
networks work efficiently and sustainably is a clear aim for those institutions relying on them.




                                                                                                        234
García-Castillo, Mirna G. (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México); Parra-Olea, Gabriela
(Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico)

Molecular phylogeny of the genus Chiropterotriton

The use of molecular tools in recent research has shown that the diversity of amphibians in Mexico is
highly underestimated, containing a large number of cryptic species. The genus Chiropterotriton, is
endemic to Mexico with a geographical distribution along the Sierra Madre Oriental, the Transverse
Volcanic Belt and Sierra de Juarez. It has the peculiarity of having a rich morphological and ecological
diversification that is atypical in a group clearly marked by morphological stasis. Chiropterotriton has 12
described species with terrestrial, arboreal and cave dweller species. In this study, 190 individuals were
collected, and amplified for mitochondrial (16S, 12S) and nuclear (POMC and RAG1) genes. A
preliminary phylogeny detected up to 15 undescribed species increasing considerably the number of
species in this genus.



García-de-León, FJ (CIBNOR); Claudia, Silva-Segundo (Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas del
Noroeste, La Paz. BCS, Mexico); Eric, Iwamoto (National Marine Fisheries Service, Northwest Fisheries
Service Center, Conservation Biology Division, WA, United States); Paola, Acuña-Gómez (Fundación
CEQUA, Punta Arenas, Chile, Chile)

Population genetic structure revealed by microsatellite loci in Merluccius productus (Pisces:
Merlucciidae) in the Northeastern and Central Pacific

Three hake morph-species: Merluccius productus, M. angustimanus, M. hernandezi have been described
from the Northeastern and Central Pacific. Only the first two have been considered as valid species,
however, Silva-Segundo et al. (2011) recently established that only M. productus exists in this geographic
area. In the northeastern Pacific four stocks have described: two located in partially isolated waters
(Puget Sound and the Strait of Georgia), another called "coastal" is genetically homogeneous and highly
migratory along the coasts of the northeast Pacific, and a stock called "dwarf" is known from southern
Baja California. The aim of this study was to investigate the population genetic structure of Pacific hake in
the northeast and central Pacific, using mitochondrial and microsatellite markers. The sampling sites
were: five along the U.S. Pacific coast (Puget Sound, Washington, Oregon, Eureka and San Francisco),
three off the coast of Mexico (Gulf of California, Bahía S. Vizcaíno and the southern part of Baja
California Sur) and one in Costa Rica. We analyzed sequences of three mitochondrial genes
(Cytochrome b, Cytochrome Oxidase Subunit I and 16S ribosomal DNA) and ten microsatellite loci. High
levels of genetic differentiation were observed between hakes living in partially isolated waters (the Puget
Sound and the Upper Gulf of California) and hake present in the open waters of the Eastern and Central
Pacific. In prior studies, significant genetic differences had not been noted between coastal populations
separated by several miles. However, microsatellite loci did detect isolation by distance structure related
to the migration pattern of the species. The origin of genetic isolation observed among the coastal
populations and the Upper Gulf of California coincides with a potential population expansion and
reduction of gene flow. This probably occurred during the closure of an inter-peninsula corridor in the
region of La Paz, Baja California Sur that connected the Pacific Ocean with the Gulf of California during
the Late Pleistocene. Neutrality tests and mismatch analysis of mitochondrial genes suggest that these
populations have recently undergone a sudden population expansion during the last period of glaciation.
In particular, the hake of the Upper Gulf of California is characterized by a high number of unique
haplotypes (excess low-frequency polymorphisms), supporting the idea that the area should be
considered as refuge and therefore a priority area for conservation.




                                                                                                         235
Gardiner, Jayne (Mote Marine Laboratory); Atema, Jelle (Boston University, Boston, MA, United States);
Hueter, Robert (Mote Marine Laboratory, Sarasota, FL, United States); Motta, Philip (University of South
Florida, Tampa, FL, United States)

Multimodal Integration and Sensory Plasticity in Shark Feeding Behavior

Multimodal sensory input directs simple and complex behaviors in animals, but most research to date has
focused on individual senses. We investigated three species of sharks from different ecological niches:
benthic, suction-feeding nurse sharks hunt nocturnally for fish; ram-biting bonnethead scoop crustaceans
off the bottom of seagrass beds; and ram-feeding blacktip sharks rapidly chase down midwater teleost
prey. We deprived animals of information from the senses (olfaction, vision, mechanoreception, and
electroreception), alone and in combination, to elucidate their complementary and alternative roles in
detecting, tracking, orienting to, striking at, and capturing live prey. This work revealed similarities and
differences among species in the use of the senses for particular behaviors. In most cases, multiple
senses can be used for the same behavioral task. Thus, sharks are capable of successfully capturing
prey, even when the optimal sensory cues are unavailable, by switching to alternative sensory modalities.
This indicates that feeding behavior is plastic. Nurse sharks rely on olfaction for detection, and track
using olfaction combined with vision, the lateral line, or touch. They orient to prey using the lateral line,
vision, or electroreception, but will not ingest food if olfaction is blocked. Capture is mediated by
electrosensory or tactile cues. Bonnetheads normally detect prey using olfaction, use olfaction combined
with vision or the lateral line to track, vision to line up a strike, and electroreception for capture. They can
detect, orient, and strike visually in the absence of olfactory cues. Blacktip sharks can also detect prey
using olfaction or vision. They use olfaction combined with vision or the lateral line to track. Long-distance
orientation and striking is visually mediated but strikes are fine-tuned just prior to capture using the lateral
line. Short-range orientation and striking can occur in the absence of vision using lateral line cues.
Capture is mediated by electrosensory or tactile cues. The blacktip shark shows the greatest amount of
modulation in capture kinematics, followed by the nurse shark. Little to no modulation was observed in
the bonnethead. These results suggest that capture is less plastic in elasmobranchs than in bony fishes
and that modulatory ability varies by species.



Gardiner, Laura (University of Regina and Royal Saskatchewan Museum); Somers, Christopher
(University of Regina, Regina, SK, Canada); Poulin, Ray (Royal Saskatchewan Museum, Regina, SK,
Canada)

Snakes on a Plain: Community ecology of 3 sympatric snake species in southwestern
Saskatchewan, Canada

The grasslands of southwestern Saskatchewan are home to a variety of snake species at the northern
extreme of their geographic range in North America, including the (Threatened) eastern yellow-bellied
racer ( Coluber constrictor flaviventris ), the (Data Deficient) bullsnake ( Pituophis catenifer sayi ), and
prairie rattlesnakes ( Crotalus viridis ), which are considered high priority for conservation status
assessment over the next few years. Lack of data about habitat use by these species is limiting the ability
of responsible jurisdictions to properly assess and develop comprehensive conservation plans for these
species. To address this knowledge gap, we used radio-telemetry and GIS to identify and compare
habitat use by racers (n=33), bullsnakes (n=16), and rattlesnakes (n=23) in and around Grasslands
National Park, Saskatchewan, Canada. Used and available macrohabitat sites were compared in order to
quantify habitat use by these species. We found that although all species hibernate in communal den
sites, during the active season they disperse into different macrohabitats across the landscape. As a




                                                                                                            236
result, home ranges were dumbbell-shaped with activity centres near hibernacula and in well-defined
summer grounds, and these centres of activity were connected by narrow corridors. Racers were found to
strongly select for riparian areas, bullsnakes tended to inhabit valley grassland habitats, and rattlesnakes
tended to be associated with prairie dog colonies. Some rattlesnakes were found to travel great distances
(over 11 km) from the dens compared to the other species (bullsnakes = 4 km; racers = 5 km), which may
be a result of their selected macrohabitat being more patchily distributed in the landscape. Our findings
will be useful in aiding designation of critical habitat for the eastern yellow-bellied racer and contribute to
assessment of bullsnakes and prairie rattlesnakes in Canada.



Gardner, James (Royal Tyrrell Museum of Palaeontology); DeMar, David (University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, United States)

Mesozoic and early Cenozoic lissamphibians in the North American Western Interior

The Mesozoic and Paleogene record of lissamphibians in North America is confined largely to the
Western Interior, from localities in southern Alberta and Saskatchewan, Canada, southwards through the
USA and into northern Mexico.           Other limitations of this fossil record include: it samples only lowland
environments (mainly floodplain and fluvial, with some swamp and lacustrine deposits); specimens
consist largely of isolated and associated bones, although some spectacular skeletons are available; it is
temporally discontinuous, especially in the Jurassic and Early Cretaceous intervals; and some
assemblages remain poorly sampled or documented.                 Nevertheless, the Western Interior contains a
number of richly fossiliferous localities that have yielded fossils that are critical for documenting and
interpreting the evolutionary history of lissamphibians, at both a continental and a global scale.           The
oldest known anuran (i.e., crown frog) and gymnophionan (i.e., stem + crown caecilians) from anywhere
date from the Early Jurassic of Arizona.         Upper Jurassic deposits in Utah and Wyoming yield a
moderate diversity of anurans and caudates (i.e., stem + crown salamanders), with one of the latter
interpreted as a basal salamandroid. Although the basal Cretaceous record is virtually absent, from the
late Aptian through the Cretaceous/Tertiary (K/T) boundary numerous occurrences are distributed
throughout the Western Interior. This represents the most stratigraphically continuous Cretaceous and
earliest Paleocene record on the planet for lissamphibians, and it contains a diversity of anurans,
urodeles (i.e., crown salamanders), and the salamander-like albanerpetontids. Most of the anurans are
of uncertain familial affinities, but the urodeles contain a mixture of extinct families that dominated through
the Cretaceous into the early Paleogene along with the earliest appearances of several extant families,
such as sirenids in the Santonian and amphiumids in the late Maastrichtian.                Several geographically
restricted areas in Montana and North Dakota contain stratigraphically and temporally constrained
dense sequences of fossiliferous localities that cross the K/T boundary.                      Ongoing work on
lissamphibians from these localities is yielding new insights into patterns of diversity, extinction, and
recovery during the ca. 3 million year interval bracketing the boundary. By the terminal Paleocene some
groups (e.g., albanerpetontids, scapherpetontid salamanders) that had been ubiquitous components of
earlier assemblages disappear, while several families with extant members (e.g., dicamptodontid,
cryptobranchid, and proteid salamanders) make their first unequivocal appearances.                From the early
Eocene onwards into the Neogene, lissamphibian assemblages become increasingly modernized with
appearances of additional salamandroids and the first unequivocal neobatrachians.




                                                                                                             237
Garner, Jocelyn (Thompson Rivers University); Larsen, Karl (Thompson Rivers University, Canada);
Packham, Roger (BC Ministry of Natural Resource Operations, Canada)

Once a spadefoot always a spadefoot? Movement and habitat-use of the Great Basin spadefoot
(Spea intermontana) at its northern range limit

The Great Basin spadefoot ( Spea intermontana ) ranges from Arizona to British Columbia (BC) in
western North America, being typically associated with arid environments. However, at the northern limit
of the species (south-central BC; 51°18'11'' N, 121°23'51'' W), the ecosystem contains only small patches
of grassland interspersed within a forested landscape, and the climate is relatively cool and wet. Due to
the threatened status of spadefoots in this region, breeding ponds have been identified, but effective
management will require broader data on habitat use away from these bodies of water. Using telemetry,
we examined movement patterns and determined habitat characteristics for these animals surrounding
diurnal retreat sites. Despite the rarity of these animals, over two years we were able to track 19
spadefoots for varying lengths of time. The telemetered spadefoots showed periodic, eruptive
movements, where single or multiple retreat sites were utilized for a period of time, prior to larger
movements that took the animal to another area (with another set of retreat sites). Often retreat sites
were used repeatedly; individuals would emerge to forage, travel to breeding ponds, and/or utilize other
sites, sometimes retracing their movement patterns over large distances. The average maximum distance
from breeding ponds was 140 m, although some individuals ventured up to 370 m from aquatic habitat.
Spadefoots selected for retreat sites with higher proportions of bare ground and rock, suggesting that
spadefoots at this location are, like conspecifics further south, still tied to habitat characteristics of arid
environments. Management strategies should account for these habitat preferences within a protected
terrestrial zone of at least 140 m from aquatic habitat.



Garner, Trenton (Institute of Zoology, ZSL); Fisher, Matthew (Imperial College, Canada); Bosch, Jaime
(Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales, CSIC, Canada); Bielby, Jon (Institute of Zoology, ZSL, Canada)

The Baby or the Bathwater: Are invasive parasites really more dangerous than unstable
host/parasite environments?

Amphibian parasites are accepted as primary causes of population declines, local extirpations and, in a
few cases, probable host extinction. Two prevailing arguments are used to explain this: 1) in an
increasingly globalized world, parasite introduction and forcing of infection cause naïve hosts to rapidly
decline, and; 2) environmental perturbations radically destabilize previously benign host/parasite
interactions. The general sentiment is that introduction is the most worrisome and possible to control, a
sentiment that guides much of how we respond to infectious diseases as conservation issues. I will argue
that the more worrying problem is the instability of host/parasite dynamics that climate change has and
will continue to provoke. While there is no denying that hosts are being exposed to novel parasites and
sharp host declines are a result, a persistently unstable environment should mean strong host genotype X
environment interactions are ubiquitous. The result will be that the rank order of host genotypes will
change along with the environmental conditions. This has clear implications for disease dynamics, and
research has shown repeatedly that optimal host genotypes do not exist. If we accept that disease
introductions are a fact of a globalized world and that quarantine of wild populations of amphibians is
predominantly impossible, conservation efforts may better spent managing infectious disease ecologically
when threatening disease emergence is detected rather than attempting to prevent disease incursion.




                                                                                                           238
Gauthier, Jacques (Yale University); Kearney, Maureen (USA National Science Foundation, Arlington,
VA, United States); Maisano, Jessica (University of Texas, Austin, Austin, TX, United States); Rieppel,
Olivier (Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, IL, United States); Behlke, Adam (Yale University,
New Haven, United States)

Assembling the Squamate Tree of Life : Perspectives from the Phenotype and the Fossil Record

We assembled a dataset consisting of 192 carefully selected species - 51 extinct and 141 extant - and
976 apomorphies distributed among 610 phenotypic characters to investigate the phylogeny of Squamata
(= ―lizards‖, including snakes and amphisbaenians). These data enabled us to infer a tree much like those
derived from previous morphological analyses, but with better support for some key clades. There are
also a number of novel elements, some of which pose striking departures from traditional ideas about
lizard evolution (e.g., that mosasaurs and polyglyphanodontians are on the scleroglossan stem, rather
than being parts of the crown, and related to varanoids and teiids, respectively). Long-bodied, limb-
reduced, ‗snake-like‘ fossorial lizards – most notably dibamids, amphisbaenians, and snakes - have been
and continue to be the chief source of character conflict in squamate morphological phylogenetics.
Carnivorous lizards - especially snakes, mosasaurs and varanoids - have proven a close second. Genetic
data - presumably less burdened by the potential for adaptive convergence related to fossoriality - were
expected to resolve these conflicts. Although recent gene phylogenies appear to do so, they also differ
radically from any phylogeny based on the phenotype, especially for the most ancient crown squamate
divergences that occured during the latter half of the Mesozoic. This result was all the more surprising as
we anticipated that heavily burdened phenotypic characters and intermediate fossils would be especially
useful for insights into deep-time phylogenetic events. Our study relied upon traditionally-prepared
specimens as well as high resolution CT scans that afforded unprecendented access to the cranial
anatomy of Squamata. This, along with the inclusion of stem fossils, provided an unparalleled sample of
the phenotype enabling us to more fully explore the extreme incongruences between molecular and
morphological topologies for the squamate Tree of Life. Despite this extensive new database, we were
unable to find morphological support for the major rearrangement of the deep divergences in Squamata
proposed by recent molecular studies. Instead, our data strongly support the same fundamental topology
suggested by most previous morphological studies - an Iguania-Scleroglossa basal split, a sister-group
relationship between Gekkota and Autarchoglossa, and the divergence between Anguimorpha and
Scincomorpha - and documents the extreme degree of morphological homoplasy required by those
molecular topologies.



Gedraite, Leonardo (UNESP); Martins, Itamar Alves (UNITAU, Taubaté - SP, Brazil)

The Role of Environmental Descriptors in Structuring a Neotropical Tadpole Assemblage

Amphibians assemblages are sensitive to environmental factors, showing a strong response to some
gradients like hydroperiod or canopy cover. Yet for many assemblages we don't know the exact effect of
some environmental descriptors in the structure of the assemblage and this knowledge is essential for
conservation programs and wildlife management. Trying to solve this question we examine the effects of
8 environmental descriptors in: i) the structure of a Neotropical Tadpole Assemblage and ii) the
abundance of each species in this assemblage. The data were collected in 20 temporary ponds randomly
selected at Grande Sertão Veredas National Park (the second biggest national park in the Brazilian
Hotspot Cerrado). In each of these ponds 10 points were haphazardly selected and surveyed for tadpoles
with the pipe sampling method. The environmental descriptors analyzed were: Margin depth (Depth),
Maximum Depth (MDepth), Perimeter of pond (Per), pH, Water Conductivity (Cond), Dissolved oxygen
(O2) and Water temperature (Temp). The data were collected during the 2010-2011 wet season, and only



                                                                                                       239
the month with the peak richness (December) was used in the analysis. To analyze influence of the
variables in the assemblage we used a CCA, tested for significance, and the influence of the
environmental descriptors in each species abundance was analyzed with a hierarchical partitioning. We
found 10 species of anurans of 4 families (Hylidae (5), Leiuperidae (2), Leptodactylidae (1) and
Mycrohylidae (2)) forming 3 groups in relation to the environment, manly organized by the variables Per,
pH and O2.. However, the proportion of variance in the tadpoles assemblage explained by the
environmental variables was low (22%) indicating that other mechanisms may be acting to shape the
assemblage, like predation, competition or neutral dynamics. Only two species abundance were
unrelated to environmental variables, besides that all the environmental variables have effect in at least
one of the other species, with some of the variables explaining until 56% of the variance in the species
abundance. The results of this work demonstrate that despite the environment little influence over the
assemblage, it affects each species abundance. In this sense, for conservation and management
practices is important to maintain a diverse array of habitats, with several environmental descriptors
forming an net of ponds where each species have an optimal place with high abundance.



Geheber, Aaron (University of Oklahoma); McMahan, Caleb (Louisiana State University, Canada)

Assessment of Phylogenetic Structure in Neotropical Cichlid Communities

Factors contributing to community organization (i.e. biotic and environmental interactions) have received
much attention in the past, however the potential underlying role that phylogenetic relatedness plays in
such interactions has often been overlooked. The aim of this study was to assess how genetic
relatedness influences community assembly of Central American Cichlids. These communities are
especially interesting due to the potential for interspecific interactions at small geographic scales (i.e.
Cichlid species richness is high at small spatial scales). Because of this high concentration of closely
related species, competition is a plausible expectation. Using collections from across the Usumacinta
Drainage, Central America, we assessed phylogenetic relatedness within and between Cichlid
communities. A maximum likelihood phylogeny based on two nuclear and three mitochondrial genes was
generated for the regional species pool of the family Cichlidae. We used Phylocom version 4.2 to
calculate mean phylogenetic distance (MPD) and mean nearest phylogenetic taxon distance (MNTD)
within all samples, and MPD and MNTD between samples. These were then compared with null model
distributions to test for significance. Additionally, local abundance data were incorporated which allowed
weighting of overly abundant species in local communities. Our results suggest that communities are non-
randomly distributed with respect to ancestral relationships. Implications for community organization and
the roles of competition and environmental filtering will be further discussed.



Geheber, Aaron (University of Oklahoma); Barkstedt, Judith; Marsh-Matthews, Edie; Matthews, Bill
(University of Oklahoma, Canada); Moody, Raymond (Tinker Air Force Base, Canada)

Effects of Urbanization on Fish Assemblage Structure in Midwest Prairie Streams

Urbanization can negatively impact aquatic ecosystems by altering fish assemblage structure and species
richness. Poor land use practices in urban areas may lead to increased erosion, introduction of pollutants,
destruction of riparian areas, and alteration of flow regimes; all of which may have detrimental effects on
stream fishes. Although the effects of urbanization on aquatic systems have often been documented,
effects on prairie stream fishes have received little attention. We examined the influence of urbanization
on fish assemblage structure in Midwest prairie streams. Within the Crutcho Creek drainage basin



                                                                                                        240
(Central Oklahoma), we collected fishes from 15 urbanized sites, including 9 sites located on Tinker Air
Force Base. Ten sites located in surrounding tributaries (i.e. less impacted by development) were
sampled for comparison. Samples were collected between November 2009 and November 2011. A total
of 24 species was collected from all sites across the study period. Overall, urban sites were generally
characterized by lower rarefied species richness. Multivariate techniques, including non-metric
multidimensional scaling and hierarchical cluster analysis, revealed distinct groupings of community
structure across sites.    Specifically, we recovered a significant difference in assemblage structure of
multiple streams within the urban area. These results indicate that the effects of urbanization may be
localized, and may differentially impact streams within developed areas. The implications of these results
will be further discussed.



Gelsleichter, Jim (University of North Florida); Grubbs, Dean (Florida State University Coastal and
Marine Laboratory, Canada); Heithaus, Michael (Florida International University, Canada); Leary,
Arianne; Piercy, Andrew (University of North Florida, Canada)

Effects of the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill on deepwater shark populations from the northeast Gulf
of Mexico.

As the largest oil spill in history in U.S.-controlled waters, the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill resulted in
extensive contamination of Gulf of Mexico waters. This poses significant health risks to numerous marine
wildlife populations, especially deepwater species residing in offshore waters within and/or adjacent to the
primary contamination zone.          Given the population-level impacts that have occurred in some wildlife
species as a result of chronic exposure to oil constituents from prior oil spills (e.g., Exxon Valdez oil spill),
it is critical to monitor the health of the Gulf‘s deepwater fauna to assess the full impacts of the Deepwater
Horizon Oil Spill on these animals.         Therefore, to address this problem, the goal of this study was to
determine if deepwater fish assemblages in the northeast Gulf of Mexico are being exposed to and are
experiencing effects of exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), the most toxic constituents
of oil.        To accomplish this, we examined 4 biomarkers of PAH exposure and effects in multiple
deepwater elasmobranch species collected from areas impacted by the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill: 1)
activity of the PAH-metabolizing Phase I biotransformation enzyme, cytochrome P450 1a1 (Cyp1a1); 2)
biliary concentrations of PAH metabolites; 3) the occurrence of covalent associations between PAH
metabolites and DNA; and 4) chromosomal abnormalities. PAH biomarkers were compared with those
measured in deepwater sharks collected from unimpacted reference locations on the west Florida shelf.
Cyp1a1 activity was significantly greater in sharks from oil-impacted locations compared with those from
reference sites, suggesting that deepwater sharks are exhibiting physiological effects of oil exposure.
However, evidence for cell- and organ-level effects was minimal, perhaps indicating that heighted oil
exposure and metabolism is still below the threshold necessary to elicit higher level responses.




                                                                                                             241
Geraghty, Pascal (Macquarie University); Macbeth, William (NSW Department of Primary Industries,
Sydney, N, Australia); Williamson, Jane (Macquarie University, Sydney, N, Australia); Wintner, Sabine
(KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board, Umhlanga, South Africa); Johnson, Grant (Department of Resources,
Darwin, NT, Australia); Ovenden, Jennifer (Molecular Fisheries Laboratory, Brisbane, Q, Australia);
Gillings, Michael (Macquarie University, Sydney, N, Australia)

Contrasting population structures suggest different evolutionary histories for three large, coastal
shark species off eastern Australia

Commercial catches of large sharks in eastern Australian waters are dominated by three species:
Carcharhinus plumbeus (sandbar shark), C. obscurus (dusky shark) and C. brevipinna (spinner shark).
Life-history traits render these species highly vulnerable to over-exploitation. Despite significant
management and conservation concerns currently surrounding the targeting of these sharks, very little is
known of their biology in local waters. This study examined the genetic diversity and population structure
of these three species off the east coast of Australia, as well as over a broader spatial scale for C.
brevipinna, using a mitochondrial gene marker [857 base pairs of NADH dehydrogenase subunit 4
(ND4)]. Sequence data for 442 C. plumbeus, 428 C. obscurus and 430 C. brevipinna revealed contrasting
haplotype networks, suggesting that present-day populations of these species off eastern Australia have
been shaped by dramatically different evolutionary histories. Spatial genetic-homogeneity was observed
for both C. plumbeus and C. obscurus populations despite the presence of distinct clades. We
hypothesise that discrete, closely-related lineages, having evolved in isolation following a temporary
barrier to gene-flow within a previously mixed population, have subsequently become re-integrated within
the study area. In contrast, C. brevipinna appears to have undergone a significant population expansion
event, and exhibits evidence for restricted maternal gene-flow over both intermediate and broad spatial
scales. Such differing population structures suggest that sustainable management requires assessment
at a species level.



Germano, Jennifer M. (Institute for Conservation Research, San Diego Zoo Global); Field, Kimberleigh
(US Fish and Wildlife Service, Reno, NV, United States); Walsh, Allyson (Insitute for Conservation
Research, San Diego Zoo Global, Escondido, CA, United States); Sheppard, James (Institute for
Conservation Research, San Diego Zoo Global, Escondido, CA, United States); Madill, Simon (N/A, Las
Vegas, NV, United States); Swaisgood, Ron (Institute for Conservation Research, San Diego Zoo Global,
Escondido, CA, United States)

Differences in release area habitat affect post-translocation movement: a case study on desert
tortoises (Gopherus agassizii)

The Mojave desert tortoise ( Gopherus agassizii ) occupies a variety of habitats, within which soil burrows
and caves are used as shelter. In particular, caliche caves, which are found in higher densities within
desert wash systems, are an easily mapped, long-lasting habitat feature that provide refuge from
predators and thermal extremes. Tortoises that occupy flats and sloping bajadas commonly rely on more
ephemeral soil burrows, both pre-existing or newly constructed. The goal of this study was to determine if
releasing tortoises into washes with high densities of caliche caves would influence the movement of
these repatriated tortoises. Eighteen tortoises were released into washes and 18 were released into flats
located 1-1.5 km away. Movements were monitored using radio telemetry over the following year. No
significant difference was found between animals released in washes versus flats in total distance moved
during the first ten days or in distance between the location of the tortoises on day 10 and the release
site. After five weeks post-translocation however, tortoises released in washes were found significantly
closer to their release site than those released on the flats. This trend continued and over the 9 months
post-release, wash-released tortoise remained significantly closer to their release sites than flat-released



                                                                                                        242
animals. Space use (100% MCP) estimated for flat-released tortoises was significantly greater than wash-
released animals during the first 9 months post-release. Area used by wash-released animals was not
significantly different from residents. Survival also appears to be higher in animals living in and near
deeply incised washes containing caliche caves than those living on the flats and utilizing soil burrows.



Germano, Jennifer M. (Memphis Zoo); Arregui, Lucia (Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain);
Kouba, Andy (Memphis zoo, Memphis, TN, United States)

Effect of aeration and antibiotic on short-term storage of amphibian sperm

The importance of developing assisted reproductive technologies (ART) for captive assurance colonies of
threatened amphibians is increasing as ex situ management of amphibians has been challenged due to
low reproductive output. One hurdle to developing ART in amphibians is the short-term storage of
gametes for in vitro fertilization. We aimed to test whether the addition of antibacterial solutions to, or
aeration of, spermic urine would improve the longevity and quality of non-invasively collected sperm
samples using hormone therapy. Spermic urine samples were collected non-invasively from Fowler‘s
toads (Bufo fowleri) and either left alone, aerated for 30 minutes a day, or treated with penicillin-
streptomycin. All samples were refrigerated at 4 C. Sperm motility declined within each treatment group
over time; however, aerated samples retained greater motility (70%) during the first 24 hours after
collection than samples in both the control (57%) and antibacterial group (51%; p = 0.036). The addition
of penicillin-streptomycin solution to spermic urine had a negative effect on viability, with significantly
fewer sperm still alive 2-4 days post collection (p < 0.05). Sperm viability was highly correlated with
motility on all days and with forward progression 1-4 days post collection. Our results show that aerating
amphibian spermic urine samples may provide a simple and low-cost method to improve sperm storage
that could be used for in vitro fertilization and ex situ management of threatened amphibians. Antibiotics
appeared to have a negative effect on sperm viability, suggesting that further research on bacterial
contamination and antibiotics and doses is necessary.



Gerson, Marina (California State University, Stanislaus); Reeves IV, Garrison (California State
University, Stanislaus, Turlock, California, United States)

Design, construction, programming, and use of an affordable camera system for surveying
burrows

Because underground habitats are difficult to study, fossorial species are little understood. Furthermore,
the biodiversity represented by fossorial communities is not well documented. Some fossorial taxa take
advantage of burrow systems created by other organisms, and these burrow systems present an
interface through which researchers can more easily survey the world below the surface. Technological
advances have led to flexible fiber optic systems being used in the surveying of burrows, but
commercially available versions can be beyond the means of researchers with severe budgetary
constraints. We present the design, method of construction, and programming that we used to build a
very inexpensive fiber optic-like camera system for use in the survey of burrow communities. All supplies
used are readily available through reliable online retailers. Our design is waterproof and rugged, with field
applications in mind. With a combination or infrared and white light-emitting diodes (LEDs), our design
provides the ability to switch on-the-fly between minimal disturbance infrared or greater illumination with
white light when needed. Humidity and temperature probes are incorporated with the camera, in order to
link microhabitat data directly to the video recordings stored for each geographic locality (geographic



                                                                                                         243
positioning system points are recorded). We programmed a custom user interface (in C and C++) to
operate the camera and collect field data. The software (available by request, free of charge) can be run
on any computer runing Windows XP and meeting the minimum hardware requirements (i.e., 1.6Ghz
CPU, 1 GB RAM, 4 GB hard drive, and USB 2.0). Finally, we present the results of our field testing, which
document the abilities and limitations of our system. Our system‘s strengths for field use included: a
rugged, waterproof design, the ability to switch easily between infrared and visible illumination,
incorporation of temperature and humidity data, and ease of video capture sufficient to identify most taxa
encountered. Limitations included: relatively short focal range, limited ability to navigate very convoluted
burrows, and relatively low resolution of image capture. Overall, this is an extremely affordable,
adaptable, and serviceable system with wide application for below ground surveys.



Gharzi, Ahmad (Lorestan University); Feili, Nasrin (Lorestan University, Canada); Rastegar-pouyani,
Eskandar (Sabzevar University, Canada)

Genetic variation in keeled rock gecko Cyrtopodion scabrum in Iranian plateau

Cyrtopodion scabrum is a gecko that is widely distributed in south west of Asia and northern Africa . In
Iran, this species is frequently found in most of the country and commonly known as the house lizard. In
this study we aimed to see whether there is any variation between different distinct populations of this
taxon in terms of mitochondrial cytochrome b gene. To evaluate this, we collected 35 specimens of this
taxon from six different geographically separated provinces of the country. DNA was extracted from heart,
liver and muscle tissues, then processed for electrophoresis and after developing a primer the PCR and
sequencing was performed. The data were analyzed using Mega 5 software to determine genetic
distances among specimens and phylogenetic relations were provided by PAUP software. Our results
showed that different populations of this taxon display a homology in respect to mitochondrial cytochrome
b gene, so that the average variation among these specimens was negligible, ranged from 0 to 0.6%.
That is an interesting finding indicating a recent anthropogenic introduction of the clade in Iran and
having a strong gene flow among various populations of this taxon in this country.



Ghedotti, Michael (Regis University); Davis, Matthew (The Field Museum of Natural History, Canada)

Cephalic sensory variation within the deep sea ipnopid fishes (Teleostei, Aulopiformes).

The family Ipnopidae (Teleostei, Aulopiformes) includes the deep-sea grideye fishes, tripodfishes, and
spiderfishes in the genera Ipnops, Bathymicrops, Bathytyphlops, and Bathypterois. All are or are
assumed to be sit-and-wait benthic predators with distributions from 250m to 5900m, however little is still
known regarding their feeding strategies and life history. Ipnopids have either reduced or greatly modified
eyes and likely rely upon senses other than sight to identify potential prey. The species of Bathypterois
(the tripodfishes and spiderfishes) vary in their position with respect to the substrate based on the length
of the anterior pelvic-fin rays and the ventral caudal-fin lobe, which support the fish above the substrate
and in some species may be longer than the standard length. In this study we investigate the morphology
of cephalic sensory structures within the family Ipnopidae using gross anatomical and histological
techniques. We compare the morphology of the cranial sensory system with the depth of occurrence,
and their position in the water column where they are presumed to be feeding. We find that the
development of free surface lateralis neuromasts varies substantially within the family Ipnopidae and may
play a significant role in their life history.




                                                                                                        244
Gholamifard, Ali (Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Razi University); Rastegar-Pouyani,
Nasrullah (Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Razi University, Kermanshah, Iran)

Herpetodiversity and its conservation in Iran

Iran is considered as a center for the origin of numerous species. The wide ranges of geographical and
geological conditions coupled with the climatologically diverse environments provide this enormous
diversity. The northern and western Iran is considered as a part of the Irano-Anatolian biodiversity hot
spot which contains centers of local endemism. This paper presents diversity of the Iranian reptiles,
including endemics, the threats for this diversity and the status of reptile conservation in Iran. This paper
has been compiled from examination of herpetological collections in Iran and Sweden as well as
extensive field expeditions from 1990-2011. The herpetofauna of Iran comprise of about 239 reptile
species belonging to 86 genera, 24 families and           three orders found in 13 different physiographic
regions. Among them, the Squamata with 218 species in 76 genera and 17 families is the most
specious order in Iran encompassing about 95 percent of the Herpetofauna. The most diverse family is
the Colubridae with 44 species, followed by the Lacertidae and the Gekkonidae with 43 and 40
species, respectively. Fourteen families have between 2-18 species and seven other families each with
one species. Thirty-six endemic species in 7 families and 17 genera are listed here.              At present,
numerous factors, including habitat destruction via increased agricultural use of the natural habitats as
well as firing, climate changes and increasing risks of desertification have made an intensive impact on
various ecosystems. Further, introduction of exotic species, increasing trend to use of reptiles and their
natural parts and products in traditional medicine and food webs, pollutions, as well as inadequate
conservation policies are affecting this diversity. Establishment of protected areas, participation of
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in conservation programs and research on endemic reptiles are
the major efforts towards the reptile conservation in Iran. In summary, due to having a special
zoogeographic status, Iran is a country highly rich in herpetodiversity with high level of endemicity and a
part of biodiversity hot spot, hence its biodiversity conservation is highly recommended.



Ghosh Dastidar, Dalia (University of Northern Colorado); Mackessy, Stephen (University of Northern
Colorado, Greeley, CO, United States)

Body condition of overwintering Prairie Rattlesnakes (Crotalus viridis viridis) in northeastern
Colorado inferred from a 9-year field study

The Crotalus viridis species complex has been the subject of many behavioral and ecological studies, in
part because it is broadly distributed throughout much of the Great Plains and western half of the United
States and because it shows a proclivity for denning communally, whereby large numbers of snakes can
be collected during spring and fall near the entrances to hibernacula. However, temporal variation in
phenotypic attributes of Prairie Rattlesnakes based on long-term mark-recapture studies is poorly
understood. From 2002-2011, in spring and fall, we captured Prairie Rattlesnakes from a communal
hibernaculum in Weld Co., Colorado; snakes were extracted of venom, PIT tagged, measured and
weighed before release at the den. Body condition (mass, adjusted for snout-vent length) was examined
using an ANCOVA model to determine if differences in relative mass exist between sexes following
hibernation. The total number of snakes captured over 9 years was 1080, but the current analysis is
conducted on 805 captures and does not include recaptures or gravid females. In this data set, 52.3%
were males and 47.7% were females. Captured snakes ranged in snout-vent length (SVL) from 225 to
1160 mm (x=573.6, SD=209.0) and in mass from 6.9 to 1255 g (x=170.7, SD=156.0). Log-transformed
values of mass and SVL were used in statistical analyses. The results showed that 81.9% of the variance
in mass was explained by sex and season (holding SVL constant). The geometric mean for male mass



                                                                                                         245
was found to be 127.1 g, whereas for females it was 95.3 g. Season was found to be a significant factor
influencing body condition (F (1,707) = 13.54, P<0.01) and sex was also significant (F (1,707) = 32.76,
P<0.01). The capture data showed skewness, as 30.6% were considered as juveniles and sub-adults
(mass less than 50 g, SVL 225-400 mm). Therefore we expanded the analysis to a generalized linear
model using a negative binomial distribution. We found this could be a more suitable model due to the
statistical distribution of the counts of snakes being generally skewed, with an over-dispersion of the
variance. The results of ANOVA showed that there was a general decline in body condition following
hibernation for both the sexes, and females showed a lower decline than did the males. Reasons for the
observed sex bias are unclear, but better body condition at egress could contribute to greater
reproductive success for female snakes. Relative body mass may be an important index to understand
better the cost of reproduction and growth in C. v. viridis, and long-term studies will significantly contribute
towards further insight into population dynamics and conservation of this species.



Gielens, Andrea (Oregon Spotted Frog Recovery Team); Govindarajulu, Purnima (Ministry of
Environment, Canada); Pallen, Wendy; Kissel, Amanda (SFU, Canada); McKibbin, Rene; Bishop,
Christine (Canadian Wildlife Service, Canada)

Influence of Densiy and Feeing Regime on Rearing Success of Oregon Spotted Frogs (Rana
pretiosa) for Population Recovery

The Oregon Spotted Frog has been reduced to three isolated populations of approximately 50 breeding
females each in the Fraser Valley British Columbia, Canada. To conserve this species the BC Recovery
Team uses head-starting, the captive rearing of wild eggs to juvenile frogs for release, to supplement
existing populations and to create new populations, increasing the number of distinct sites where this
species is found.

The goals of the rearing program are to maximize survival of the wild collected eggs, to decrease time to
metamorphosis and release, and to increase size at release of the juvenile frogs, all of which have been
shown to have positive effects on post-metamorphic survival and population growth rates.          Our study
addresses the need for optimization of the rearing strategy by evaluating the effects of density and diet on
survival and weight/length at release of captive reared individuals. The study was conducted over two
years in 1100 litre tanks that served as mesocosms. In 2008, three density treatments (50, 100, 150
tadpoles per tank) was crossed with two diet treatments (high protein vs. standard vegetable diet) and
each treatment replicated five times. In 2009, there were two densities, 50 and 75 tadpoles per tank and
all tanks received the high protein diet. Survival to release, proportion of the

tadpoles that did not complete metamorphosis at the time of release, and size (weight and length) at
release were measured. Temperature and water quality was monitored in all tanks. Results were similar
across both years. Higher density tanks in general had lower survival and smaller post-metamorphic frogs
at time of release. High densities also resulted in a larger proportion of the tadpoles not completing
metamorphosis by the time for release. In 2008, counter to expectation increased protein in the diet did
not increase survival or size at release, although this might be because the protein supplementation may
have been started too late in the developmental trajectory and may have been too little supplementation
for the number of tadpoles per tank. Comparing across years, a larger proportion of the tadpoles
completed metamorphosis earlier in the season in 2009 compared to 2008. However, we cannot
determine if this effects are due to slightly warmer seasonal temperature in 2009 compared to 2008,
lower densities per tank, or due to increase protein supplementation. Rearing density seemed to be the
largest contributing factor to overall optimization of the rearing program.   As a result of this study we




                                                                                                            246
have determined that rearing frogs at a density of below 50 tadpoles/tank results in over 90% survival,
early metamorphosis and larger size, with a small decrease in all these factors up to about 75 tadpoles
per tank. Densities over 80 tadpoles per tank resulted in decreased survival, larger proportion of tadpoles
not completing metamorphosis and smaller sizes of juvenile frogs. Density around 60 tadpoles per tank
should produce frogs of approximately 4.5g and 32mm in length with an expected average survival of 70-
85%. Increasing the amount of protein-enriched diet in future will be needed to further address the
implications of diet type in the head-starting process.



Gienger, Chris (Austin Peay State University); Tracy, Christopher (University of Melbourne, Canada);
Brien, Matthew; Manolis, Charlie; Webb, Grahame (Wildlife Management International and Crocodylus
Park, Canada); Seymour, Roger (University of Adelaide, Canada); Christian, Keith (Charles Darwin
University, Canada)

Resting Metabolism of Really Big Reptiles: Comparison of Standard Metabolic Rate in
Crocodilians

The energetic requirements of exceptionally large reptiles are largely unknown. Because of the
considerable logistics involved, measurements of large reptile metabolism have been primarily limited to
individuals with a body mass of ~10 kg or less. Here we report on the resting metabolism (oxygen
consumption) of adults of three species of large crocodilians; Crocodylus porosus , Crocodylus johnsoni,
and Alligator mississippiensis . We also compare rates of resting metabolism across the ontogenetic
range of body sizes for both species of Crocodylus , and discuss differences in the allometric scaling of
resting metabolism with body size.



Giermakowski, J Tomasz (University of New Mexico); Nowak, Erika (Northern Arizona University,
Flagstaff, AZ, United States)

Future Ranges of ocal Reptiles in the Southwestern United States.

Downscaled models of climate forecast substantial changes in temperature and precipitation in
southwestern USA and these changes are likely to affect distributions of many reptiles. To provide
spatially-explicit products useful for conservation and management at coarse scales, we built models that
predict current and future extents of occurrence for several species of reptiles. To model current
distributions, for each species we identified variables that serve as proxies for demographic variables.
Using the maximum entropy algorithm, we then related values of these variables to localities where each
species has been confirmed present. Data on presence were gathered from a variety of sources,
including natural history museums, state wildlife agencies, and federal monitoring efforts. Using
downscaled global circulation models of future climates, we then projected species‘ ranges at different
time intervals, as far as year 2099. For most species our results indicate considerable changes in future
distributions, regardless of assumptions about dispersal capacities. Given that species responses vary
spatially, management and conservation must be based on detailed understanding of changes in
distribution and it is especially important in the US Southwest because of the region‘s high reptile
diversity.




                                                                                                       247
Gifford, Matthew (University of Arkansas at Little Rock); Clay, Timothy (University of Arkansas at Little
Rock, Canada); Peterman, Bill (University of Missouri, Canada)

Temperature and activity influence the scaling of metabolic rate in a lungless salamander

The scaling of metabolic rate with body mass holds substantial predictive power as many biological
processes depend on energy.           A significant body of theory has been developed based on the
assumption that metabolic rate scales with body mass as a power function with an exponent of 0.75, and
that this scaling relationship is independent of temperature. Here we test this hypothesis at the
intraspecific level in a lungless salamander using data on both standard and maximal metabolic rates.
We also address a recently proposed alternative explanation that predicts systematic variation in this
mass-scaling exponent, the metabolic level boundaries hypothesis (MLB). Contrary to predictions of the
metabolic theory of ecology the mass-scaling of standard and maximal metabolic rates were variable and
dependent on temperature. Further, our data provide mixed support for MLB. Mass-scaling exponents
for maximal metabolic rate generally exceed those for standard metabolic rate; however, we find that the
mass-scaling of standard metabolic rate is positively related to temperature, contrary to predictions of
MLB. We conclude that there is no universal mass-scaling exponent and that this exponent is dependent
on temperature and activity.      In addition, we explore possible implications of our findings for studies
integrating metabolic theories into ecological modeling.



Gillis, Gary (Mount Holyoke College); Kuo, Chi-Yun; Irschick, Duncan (University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, Amherst, MA, United States)

The impact of tail loss on locomotor stability during jumping

 Tails are functionally versatile appendages serving in roles ranging from display to locomotion. Thus it is
intriguing to consider the case of caudal autotomy in many lizards, where tails, or parts of tails, are shed
voluntarily by an animal, presumably leading to some subsequent loss of function. We have been
studying functional consequences of tail loss in the context of jumping in the green anole, Anolis
carolinensis . Manipulative experiments demonstrate the importance of tails in this species for in-air
stability during jumping. For example, lizards, on average, exhibit significantly more posterior rotation
(pitch) during jumping after loss of 75% of the tail, although individual variation is prominent (and
intriguing). Indeed, very recent work from another lab with agamid lizards, as well as a tailed robot,
confirm the importance of the tail in pitch control during in-flight behaviors. Our work on this issue has
been continuing along two fronts. First, we are studying the relationship between the degree of tail loss
and in-air instabilities. Preliminary data suggest that green anoles must lose 50% of their tail or more to
incur notable consequences for pitch control during jumping. We are following up these studies with
experiments exploring the tail‘s role in controlling in-air yaw and long-axis rotation. Second, we are
examining how long deficits in mid-air stability last and whether animals with more experience jumping
after caudal autotomy improve performance faster than animals lacking such experience. We saw no
improvement in pitch control in animals given more opportunities to jump after autotomy. These findings
suggest that loss of substantial portions of the tail can lead to long-term impairment of locomotor stability
in the context of jumping in green anoles. Field studies of natural populations will help inform this work,
and could elucidate behavioral mechanisms that help animals compensate for such impairments (e.g.,
animals with missing tails may jump less).




                                                                                                         248
Girard, Philippe (Université de Montréal); Parrott, Lael (Université de Montréal, Montreal, PQ, Canada);
Green, David M. (McGill University, Montreal, PQ, Canada)

The contribution of pattern-based modelling for hybrid ecological models: the example of stream
salamanders viability in changing hydrological regimes

During the last decade, hybrid ecological models (HEM) combining individual-based models (IBM) and
landscape processes-based models have emerged as powerful tools in conservation, management and
planning. By considering individual variations, entire life cycles, interactions among individuals and those
between individuals and their immediate environment, a proper HEM allows accurate predictions about
local viability of species in response to land use change or modification of landscape-scale environmental
processes. However, this potential comes with the cost of complexity; IBM need wide and precise
biological knowledge about individual behaviours and life cycles that remains often insufficient for several
biological taxa. Nevertheless, if biological patterns are available, a pattern-based modelling approach can
be used to build IBM that will capture the essence of a species' ecology and result in accurate viability
predictions even if precise biological knowledge is lacking.

In this presentation, we present an IBM of stream salamanders that was developed to explore the effects
of changing hydrological regimes on population viability. The problem of data lacking is especially
relevant for amphibians in general and salamanders in particular, for which knowledge about their
complex life cycle and general behaviours in nature is often anecdotal or incomplete. Nonetheless, using
a pattern-based approach, we were able to build an IBM realistic enough to reproduce the life cycle, the
demographic dynamics and the distribution patterns of stream salamanders given the availability of
landscape temperature and hydrological data. This model provides a good example of the contribution of
pattern-based modelling for HEM to improve both our understanding and our predictions of the viability of
endangered and not well-known species over landscapes subject to complex, cross-scale disturbances.



Giresi, Melissa (Texas A&M University); Renshaw, Mark; Portnoy, David; Gold, John (Texas A&M
University, Canada)

Molecular Identification of Smooth-hound Sharks in the Gulf of Mexico

The morphological similarity of sharks in the family Triakidae (the smooth-hound sharks) has led to
considerable taxonomic confusion and problems in species identification. The lack of clear and accurate
identification methods for smooth-hound sharks prevents reliable species-specific landing estimates and
obscures the ability to accurately assess species composition. Within the Gulf of Mexico, there are four
nominal species in the genus Mustelus: M. canis, M. higmani, M. norrisi, and M. sinusmexicanus. While
there are a multitude of studies that utilize microsatellites to elucidate population structure of a single
species, the fact that microsatellites often amplify in closely related species is under-utilized. In this study,
multiplex microsatellite PCR reactions are presented, which can be utilized to reliably distinguish between
the four Mustelus species inhabiting the Gulf of Mexico. Elucidating the spatial distribution patterns of
smooth-hound shark resources in the Gulf of Mexico is a critical first step to species management.




                                                                                                             249
Godwin, James (Environmental Institute);

Return of the Eastern Indigo Snake (Drymarchon couperi) to Alabama: Initial Success through
Partnership and Collaboration

Return of the Eastern Indigo Snake (Drymarchon couperi) to Alabama: Initial Success through
Partnership and Collaboration James Godwin1, Craig Guyer1, Mark Sasser2, Chris Jenkins3, and Brad
Lock4 1Auburn University 2Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources 3The Orianne
Society 4Zoo Atlanta The eastern indigo snake (Drymarchon couperi), inhabits the longleaf pine
ecosystem of the SE US, and has been extirpated from Alabama for approximately 6 decades. Habitat
loss, alteration, and fragmentation of the longleaf pine ecosystem coupled with range-wide decline of the
gopher tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus) are thought to be underlying factors leading to extirpations of the
snake. A reintroduction of the eastern indigo snake in Alabama was attempted during the mid-1970s to
80s. Surveys of the release sites from 2004-2006 found no evidence of indigo snakes suggesting these
releases were failures. In 2006 ADCNR approached Auburn University (AU) regarding a second
reintroduction of the eastern indigo snake. To date 3 State Wildlife Grants have funded the reintroduction
project, an initial feasibility study and two grants for implementation. With the second State Wildlife Grant
The Orianne Society (TOS) joined ADCNR-AU as a third partner, bringing private funds and expertise into
the project. D. couperi is a federally threatened species with lead responsibility and recovery for the
residing in the Jackson, MS office. The Daphne, AL office works closely with ADCNR on in-state SWG
projects. During the feasibility study Conecuh National Forest was deemed the best location for the
release of snakes, thus bringing the US Forest Service into the project as a second federal collaborator.
Snakes used for releases have come from southeastern Georgia as permitted by the Georgia Department
of Natural Resources. Young are hatched in captivity and reared for approximately 2 years to attain a
size sufficient for radio transmitter implantation. The first snake cohort (2008) remained at Auburn, but
subsequent cohorts (2009-2011) have been reared at Zoo Atlanta. A minimum of one snake from each
clutch has been deposited at TOS‘s Orianne Center for Indigo Conservation. These snakes, upon
reaching maturity, will serve as brood stock to supply young snakes for release efforts post-2012. A 10-
year life span of the project has been planned with an average of 30 snakes/year to be released. To date
3 releases have taken place and snakes and funding are available for two additional releases.



Goetz, Scott (Auburn University); Romagosa, Christina (Auburn University, Canada); Snow, Ray
(National Park Service, Canada); Guyer, Craig (Auburn University, Canada)

Response to the chemical cues of a nonnative anuran (Cuban treefrog; Osteopilus
septentrionalis) by a native anuran eating snake (eastern garter snake; Thamnophis sirtalis
sirtalis)

The success of invasive species establishment and dispersal may be aided by a variety of factors
including predator nativity and novel serous products. The Cuban treefrog ( Osteopilus septentrionalis )
is an abundant nonnative species in Florida. The noxious secretions of this treefrog have been suggested
to function primarily as a defense against mammalian predation. However, evidence for this assertion is
lacking beyond the painful reaction caused by contact with human eyes, lips and nasal membranes. It
has also been suggested that Cuban treefrog secretions serve to dissuade Ophidian predators. In
Florida, native snakes have been anecdotally reported to consume Cuban treefrogs, and may represent a
greater predation risk to the invasive treefrogs than mammals. We examined the chemosensory response
of eastern garter snakes ( Thamnophis sirtalis sirtalis ), a native anuran eating snake, to the chemical
cues of Cuban treefrogs to determine if prey novelty or noxious secretions reduced response strength.




                                                                                                         250
Garter snakes from areas both sympatric and allopatric to the established invasive range of the treefrogs
were compared to determine if experience or genetic differences among populations affected response.
Palatability was also examined to determine if the secretions of the Cuban treefrogs resulted in post-strike
rejection by snakes. The Cuban treefrog has continuously expanded its range since its introduction to
mainland Florida and is now found throughout much of the peninsula. Reduced predatory response by
Ophidian predators may increase the Cuban treefrog abundance in established areas and facilitate
colonization of new areas.



Goldberg, Caren (University of Idaho); Pilliod, David (USGS, Boise, ID, United States); Arkle, Robert
(USGS, Canada); Waits, Lisette (University of Idaho, Moscow, ID, United States)

Detection of stream-breeding amphibians using environmental DNA

Detection of aquatic vertebrates using environmental DNA (eDNA) in water samples is a promising new
method for documenting the presence of native and invasive species. This method had been recently
proven effective in wetland and canal systems, but it was unknown whether eDNA would be detectable
from vertebrates in fast-moving streams.         To test the efficacy of this method for detecting stream
vertebrates, we designed molecular (PCR) assays for two low-density, lotic amphibians (Idaho Giant
Salamanders, Dicamptodon aterrimus ; Rocky Mountain Tailed Frogs, Ascaphus montanus ) in north-
central Idaho. In the field, we first filtered 5 -10 L of stream water from five streams over two seasons
and estimated density for the target species using kick-sampling. After protocol testing and development,
we successfully detected both species from these filter samples in streams with densities as low as 0.01
and 0.10 individuals per m 2 for salamanders and frogs, respectively. Detection probability was lower for
Rocky Mountain Tailed Frogs in spring than in early fall and was unrelated to field-measured densities.
We found gains in efficiency of eDNA over field methods to be 20x for Idaho Giant Salamanders and 11x
for Rocky Mountain Tailed Frogs. In follow-up work, we found that sampling 1 L of stream water led to
far lower detection probabilities than sampling 5 L. Additionally, we found that our original conventional
PCR methods occasionally produced spurious results that were indistinguishable from the real product for
both species. We therefore converted our protocols to apply quantitative PCR, which uses a probe that
provides additional specificity. Along with other collaborators at the University of Idaho, we are continuing
to develop multi-species eDNA tests and methodology for monitoring amphibians and fishes across
systems. More work is required to test the limitations of eDNA applications; however, this technique has
the potential to be a highly sensitive and cost-efficient tool for the detection and monitoring of both native
and invasive species across aquatic systems.



Goldenberg, Julianne (San Diego State University); Reeder, Tod (San Diego State University, Canada)

Phylogenetic Inference and Species Delimitation Within the Crotalus viridis Species Complex
using Multilocus Data

Rattlesnakes ( Crotalus and Sistrurus : Viperidae) are a group of New World pit vipers named for the
unifying presence of a caudal rattle. The rattlesnakes of the Crotalus viridis complex have the most
extensive distribution of any venomous snake in North America, ranging from southern Canada to
northern Mexico and from the mid-western United States to the Pacific Coast. Presently, three species
and nine subspecies are recognized within this extremely polytypic species complex. Attempts to resolve
phylogenetic relationships among recognized taxa using morphological and/or mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) data have resulted in controversial taxonomic recommendations, and a well-supported



                                                                                                          251
phylogeny of the group is still needed. Three mtDNA-based studies are currently cited as the authoritative
representations of the species-level phylogeny of this complex. This is problematic because the
matrilineal history of the mitochondrion may differ from the history of a species as a whole, and because a
single-locus gene tree can be dramatically discordant from the underlying species tree of a group. The
objectives of our study are to use multiple independent nuclear loci and coalescent-based methods to
concomitantly resolve species limits and infer the species tree for the C. viridis complex. Using genetic
data from five introns of independent nuclear loci, we infer the species tree of the C. viridis complex
under multiple competing hypotheses of species delimitation within a coalescent-based Bayesian
framework, and we compare the fit of each of these hypotheses to the data using Bayes factor analysis.
Though the results of our study are at present preliminary, we are finding significant statistical evidence
that the Arizona Black rattlesnake ( C. cerberus ) may be nested within C. oreganus , and that the
currently recognized taxonomy of the C. viridis complex may be an overrepresentation of its true
species-level diversity.



Gomes, Fernando (USP - Universidade de São Paulo);

Immunological responses in anurans: implications to bioenergetics and biogeography

Most of the anurans are seasonal breeders, with males presenting circulating peaks of testosterone (T)
and corticosterone (CORT) during the breeding season. Although the maintenance of high levels of T and
CORT are necessary to express and maintain calling behavior, these steroid hormones have
immunosuppressive effects. In this way, during the breeding season, there may be an important tradeoff
between reproductive effort and resistance to parasite infection. Data from our laboratory has shown that
intensity of different parasites correlates with several aspects of anuran behavior and physiology during
the mating season. In tree frogs (Hypsiboas prasinus), dynamic properties of calling behavior are
associated to individual variation in parasite intensity, with males that call at higher rates showing lower
total and small intestine parasite intensity. Additionally, males of H. prasinus displaying longer calls have
lower small intestine parasite intensity during summer. Male toads (Rhinella icterica) with higher total
intensity of parasites show lower standard metabolic rates, while the intensity of lung parasites correlates
negatively with locomotor performance. Males of R. icterica with higher intensity of intestinal parasites
also show lower total leucocytes counts, with more neutrophils and a higher ratio between neutrophils
and lymphocytes. When males of R. icterica are exposed to a standardized stress protocol during the
reproductive season, they show elevated CORT levels and concomitant decreased plasma bactericidal
capacity. We have also shown that T and CORT plasma levels, leucocyte counts and profile, and the
relationship between these variables vary drastically in male anurans along three different periods: (1) dry
season, when males are aestivating or foraging, (2) during rainfall, when males are calling, and (3) the
period between rainfalls, when the males are foraging within the reproductive season. Finally, the
relationship between basal and post-stress CORT plasma levels, as well as between basal plasma CORT
levels and bactericidal capacity during the breeding season also vary between species of toads. This
interspecific variation may be associated to differences in broadness of geographical distribution and
sensitivity to environmental changes.




                                                                                                         252
Gomez Trejo Perez, Raúl (UNAM);

Importance and symbolisms of amphibians and reptiles in Mexican pre-Hispanic cultures

The beginnings of the Mexican pre-Hispanic cultures started during the archaic period (7,000-2,000
b.C.) When nomad groups of hunters and gatherers from North America arrived to Mexico. The great
amount of resources and the fertility of the lands helped them to eventually learn to cultivate plants
animals and settle in Mexican territory.

By the end of the archaic period and beginnings or the pre-classic, this groups of people started having a
more complex and mature social organization with religious cults, forming the bases for the future
cultures. Some of the principle cultures that developed like this in México where the Olmec (1800 b.C.-
200b.C), the Maya (600b.C-1500a.C), the Toltec (800-1200a.C), the Teotihuacana (200b.C-1200a.C) and
the Aztec (1250-1521a.C). In all this cultures, the animals had a special place in the magic religious
symbolisms, stimulating the imagination of this people for having caracteristics men did not have. This
created a very close link between men and nature, especially with reptiles and amphibians. This
enigmatic animals fascinated the people of this cultures and where of great importance for them. Inspiring
to create deities and temples, others were used to create musical instruments, tools, or where consumed
as food. Images of these animals can be seen in ancient ceramics, architecture, drawings, codes and
other works of art. And they can often be seen as gods or accompanying priests. They also symbolized
parts of the human body, the sky, the world, diseases, hope, death, agriculture, fire etcetera. Surprisingly,
some animals had exactly the same symbolic meaning in different cultures, like fertility or greatness.

This work looked to identify all the utilitarian and ideological aspects in which amphibians and reptiles
intervened     in a significant way in some cultures dispersed in the Mexican territory. Making an
iconographic analysis of the evidences, with the purpose of understanding the origin of the reptilian
symbols and following their stylistic evolution through pre-Hispanic history.



Gomez-Mestre, Ivan (EBD-CSIC); Pyron, Alexander (The George Washington University, Canada);
Wiens, John (Stony Brook University, Canada)

Phylogenetic analysis of the evolution of reproductive modes in frogs

Anurans (frogs and toads) are often thought of as having a complex life cycle, with aquatic early life
stages (eggs, larvae) that transform into terrestrial juveniles after metamorphosis. However, anurans
exhibit a remarkable diversity of reproductive modes that is unique among terrestrial vertebrates,
including species with direct development (terrestrial egg, no larvae) and those with placement of eggs
and larvae in a bewildering diversity of locations.      Although there are many hypotheses about the
evolutionary relationships among these diverse modes (and their life history and climatic correlates),
these hypotheses have yet to be tested in broad-scale phylogenetic context. We analyzed the evolution
of reproductive modes in anurans, applying a phylogeny and matched life-history database for 720
species that includes most families and modes. We confirmed that the ancestral estate for anurans is
that of aquatic eggs with exotrophic larvae (feeding outside the egg), and tested hypotheses about the
sequence of evolution of derived reproductive modes (such as direct development). As expected, modes
with terrestrial eggs and aquatic larvae often preceded the evolution of direct development (terrestrial
egg, no tadpole stage), but surprisingly, direct development evolved directly from aquatic breeding nearly
as often. Surprisingly, modes with primitive exotrophic larvae frequently gave rise to direct developers,
whereas those with seemingly intermediate, non-feeding larvae (endotrophic) did not. Similarly, modes
with eggs and larvae placed in locations protected from aquatic predators evolve frequently but rarely



                                                                                                         253
give rise to direct developers. Thus, frogs frequently bypass many seemingly intermediate stages in the
evolution of direct development.     We also tested for relationships (and possible trade-offs) between
female size, egg diameter, and clutch size, using phylogenetic comparative methods.           We found
significant associations between terrestrial reproduction and reduced clutch size, larger egg size, and
reduced adult size.       Moreover, we found strong associations between terrestrial reproduction and
parental care and occurrence in regions with wetter and warmer climates.        These associations and
trade-offs may help explain the widespread retention of aquatic eggs and larvae, and the overall diversity
of anuran reproductive modes.



Gómez-Rodríguez, Jessica (Universidad Michoacana de San Nicolás de Hidalgo); Huacuz-Elías,
Dolores del Carmen; Pérez-Arteaga, Jorge Alejandro (Universidad Michoacana de San Nicolás de
Hidalgo, Morelia, Mexico)

State of Conservation from Ambystoma andersoni in Zacapu Lake Michoacán

The latest studies performed with the genus Ambystoma, in various lines of research how breeding,
feeding, population dynamics, physiology, biochemistry, taxonomy and systematics, population genetics
among others, and work to determine the state of conservation of species of the genus Ambystoma are
scarce and even more for endemic species as Ambystoma andersoni, who only lives in the Laguna de
Zacapu located north of Michoacan state, Mexico, makes it more susceptible to factors affecting decline
of amphibians, this leads us to develop a work designed to show its current condition. We reviewed 134
individuals of Ambystoma andersoni collected from May 2011 to January 2012, we measured them; a)
weight, b) length muzzle-cloaca, c) long tail, d) length of forelegs, e) subsequent f) gills , and we took a
blood sample for blood smears. The results we obtained through a qualitative analysis showed that
72.57% have a good physical condition (the individual is observed in good general condition and not
presente signs of disease or parasites), 13.27% present in regular (individual shows signs of disease ,
parasites or is maimed) and 14.16% in unfavorable condition (seen deterioration in the individual to such
a degree that threatens their physical integrity, or dead), fluctuating asymmetry was determined and
found no statistically significant differences, the Index of body condition showed positive values denoting
a good body condition and are being reviewed to see some smear singuíneos hematological parameters
of the species that allow for a background to know the health of these individuals. Ambystoma andersoni
is one of the two larger species of Mexicans Ambystoma, has been exploited for therapeutic purposes
and for food since prehispanic times to the present what is depleting the population and is considered
critically endangered (CR) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.



Gonçalo, M. Rosa (Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology); Laurentino, Telma (Centro de Biologia
Ambiental, Departamento de Biologia Animal, FCUL, Canada); Bosch, Jaime (Museo Nacional de
Ciencias Naturales, CSIC, Canada); Griffiths, Richard (Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology,
Canada); Duarte, Ana; Tavares, Luis (Centro de Investigação Interdisciplinar em Sanidade Animal,
Canada); Rebelo, Rui (Centro de Biologia Ambiental, Departamento de Biologia Animal, FCUL, Canada)

Influence of the Ranavirus on the age structure of Bosca's newts

Ranavirus is one of five genera of viruses within the family Iridoviridae, and have been implicated as a
contributing factor in extinctions and global decline of amphibian populations. Its impact has been
compared to the chytrid fungus. Amphibians of different life stages may vary in their susceptibility to
Ranavirus infections and this knowledge is particularly poor among the urodeles.




                                                                                                        254
Recently in Serra da Estrela (Portugal) an outbreak of Ranavirus was recorded in adult Bosca‘s newts
(Lissotriton boscai). To assess the prevalence of Ranavirus across the different age classes of L. boscai,
we used skeletochronological analysis to estimate individual age in two populations of this newt and
expect to find a relation between age and infection that helps to better understand the dynamics of the
disease.



Gonzalez, Paulette (University of Kansas Biodiversity Institute); Diesmos, Arvin (National Museum of the
Philippines, Manila, Philippines, Canada); Brown, Rafe (University of Kansas Biodiversity Institute,
Lawrence, KS, United States)

Common mechanisms of diversification in codistributed tree frogs (genus Rhacophorus) of the
eastern Philippines?

We studied phylogeography, patterns of geographical structure, timing of divergence, and historical
demography of two codistributed tree frog lineages ( Rhacophorus appendiculatus and R. bimaculatus )
spanning five hypothesized barriers to dispersal and gene flow along the eastern arc of the Philippine
archipelago. Results of phylogenetic, population genetic, and coalescent analyses differ between the two
species, as do divergence time estimation results—suggesting that each has responded to the
geographic template in a unique manner. Our study joins a nascent body of work emphasizing lineage-
specific, dispersal-driven, patterns of diversification in this complex island archipelago.



Gonzalez-Jurado, Dom (UCLA);

Anatomical, Histological, and Molecular Characterization of the Venom of Squalus acanthias and
Heterodontus francisci

Chondrichthyian fishes are now known to include many venomous taxa, but most of what is known about
the venom molecules and delivery apparatuses in this group comes from studies of the batoids. The
distribution pattern and content of venoms found in either the chimaeras or sharks have never been
documented and remains poorly understood. Within sharks the taxonomic families Squalidae,
Etmopteridae, and Heterodontidae are known to possess fin spines that could be potentially venomous.
Here, histological examination of fin spine tissues and basic biochemical and toxicological analyses of fin
spine extracts from several specimens of Squalus acanthias and Heterodontus francisci are used to
both confirm the presence of and provide a basic description of the venom in these groups.



Goode, Matt (University of Arizona); Parker, Mickey; Albert, Kristin (University of Arizona, Canada)

Effects of Urban Development on Tiger Rattlesnake Spatial Ecology: A 10-Year Study

We used radiotelemetry to examine potential effects of urban development on the spatial ecology of Tiger
Rattlesnakes ( Crotalus tigris ) near Tucson, Arizona, USA. We located 34 male and 38 female Tiger
Rattlesnakes over 8,200 times. We radiotracked the majority of snakes for several years, including two
individuals for the entire 10-year study. The long-term nature of our data set allowed for quantification of
changes in movement patterns and home range size as the surrounding development continued to
expand. We documented shifts in home range locations that likely resulted from anthropogenic changes
to the environment.        Some snakes continued to use their original pre-development home ranges,



                                                                                                        255
concentrating their activities in undeveloped habitat patches.         Other snakes expanded their original
home ranges to include previously unoccupied habitat. A small number of snakes shifted their winter
shelter sites to avoid newly constructed houses and roads. Interestingly, Tiger Rattlesnakes in general
appeared to increase their reproductive output in response to increased prey availability, which was
apparently brought on by an increase in productivity resulting from a huge input of water, in the form of
irrigated vegetation in yards and along a golf course. However, we also documented increased mortality
compared to natural sites where we have studied populations of Tiger Rattlesnakes. It will require an
even longer-term data set to determine if increased productivity can offset elevated levels of mortality.
From an ecological standpoint, our goal is to use this unique situation to gain a better understanding of
the mechanisms leading to increased reproduction and apparent rapid changes in life history traits, such
as body size and growth. From a conservation perspective, our goal is to better understand factors
leading to coexistence of snakes and humans and to use this information in a management context.
Ultimately, we plan to continue to use what we‘ve learned in an effort to educate a diverse audience,
including local residents, students of all levels, land and wildlife managers, and developers.



Goodman, Brett (University of Adelaide); Seymour, Roger (University of Adelaide, Canada)

Going underground: a comparison of the energetics of limbed versus limbless locomotion in
fossorial lizards

Animals with a fossorial (burrowing) life-style face many functional and physiological challenges, in
particular, the need for locomotion through variable fluid media. In reptiles, the evolution of a fossorial life-
style has occurred in nearly all Squamate lineages world-wide, and is typically associated with the
evolutionary reduction or complete loss of limbs and an increase in body length. Thus, an unexplored
question in the evolution of fossorial lizards is whether limb-reduction and body elongation per se
provides an adaptive benefit via a functional, and / or, energetic advantage for fossorial locomotion.
Moreover, while most fossorial lizards display a reduction in limb length and an increase in body length, a
small number of species have retained the ancestral terrestrial lizard body-form and possess well-
developed limbs and typical terrestrial lizard short body from. These species provide a rare opportunity to
examine the putative adaptive benefits of limb reduction and body elongation for fossorial locomotion.
This paper quantifies the energetics of burrowing and terrestrial locomotion, and sprint and endurance
locomotion using representatives of both limbed and limbless fossorial lizards. The results of this work are
discussed with reference to the repeated evolution of fossoriality in lizards of the family Scincidae.



Gorsuch, John (University of Cincinnati); Owen, Patrick (University of Cincinnati, Blue Ash, OH, United
States)

Palatability and vulnerability of an invasive earthworm to the Seal Salamander

The present study examines the palatability and vulnerability of a destructive, non-indigenous
megascoelecid earthworm ( Amynthas agrestis ) to the Seal Salamander ( Desmognathus monticola ). A
series of choice and no-choice laboratory feeding trials were conducted to determine whether the unique
defensive repertoire of A. agrestis provides it a competitive advantage over lumbricid earthworms in
escaping predation by D. monticola . Results from no-choice trials indicated that A. agrestis escaped
attacks by D. monticola significantly more often than did lumbricid earthworms through a variety of
defensive mechanisms, including thrashing, distaste, defensive secretions, and autotomization. Results
from choice trials suggested that D. monticola was unable to differentiate between megascoelecid and



                                                                                                             256
lumbricid prey before striking, and showed that the salamanders were significantly more likely to attack an
arthropod prey item than an earthworm when given the choice. Both sets of data support the hypothesis
that predation by D. monticola is unlikely to meaningfully counter the expansion of A. agrestis along
invasion fronts, and that A. agrestis is unlikely to serve as a suitable replacement for the invertebrate
prey species that it may outcompete in forest food webs. Should these competitive advantages extend to
escaping from other native herpetofaunal predators, such adaptations could positively contribute to the
long-term success of A. agrestis populations in North America.



Gosling, Jessica (Thompson Rivers University); Larsen, Karl (Thompson Rivers University, Canada)

Multi-scale thermal influences on summer habitat use by Northern Pacific Rattlesnakes (Crotalus
oreganus oreganus) in British Columbia

Understanding habitat selection on multiple scales is fundamental in the conservation and management
of wildlife species. Selection of habitat based on thermal attributes may be of particular importance for
ectothermic species, including snakes. In British Columbia, Northern Pacific Rattlesnakes (Crotalus
oreganus oreganus) range from the US border to Kamloops. While commonly associated with low-
elevation grassland and open Ponderosa pine habitats, recent studies on these snakes have uncovered
use of higher-elevation Interior Douglas-fir forest. A potential driver of alternative habitat selection
(especially at their northern range periphery) is the thermoregulatory requirements of the animals. The
goal of our research was to understand the prevalence of this habitat use and how it affects
thermoregulation on multiple scales and to produce a thermal-landscape Geographic-Information-
Systems (GIS) model with which to predict rattlesnake migrations using solar insolation. Over two years,
we radio-tracked 35 snakes from 10 hibernacula during summer migrations. Habitat and thermal data on
multiple-scales were collected enabling a hierarchical analysis of resource selection. Thermoregulatory
‗profiles‘ were created for each snake based on body temperatures measured with implanted iButtons™,
and thermoregulatory behaviour patterns. The use of IDF habitat was present at 60% of dens. Straight-
line one-way migrations ranged from 373 m to 3.9 km, and ―forest‖ snakes travelled significantly further
than snakes using open habitats. On a landscape scale, snakes from 6 of the 10 hibernacula utilized
habitat significantly warmer than the other available areas, generally higher-elevation slopes with south-
western exposure. Threshold thermal values were determined and used to create maps of thermally
preferable habitat. Our study suggests that ―forest‖ snakes appear to have a fitness advantage, despite
lengthier migrations, potentially due to having more time for non-thermoregulatory aspects of life history,
reflected in the snakes‘ observed thermoregulatory behaviour. Knowledge of behavioural differences
between neighbouring rattlesnake populations will allow managers to tailor management strategies to
specific dens. Not only that, these local and landscape scale patterns have obvious repercussions for
snakes using forest habitats in the event of shifting ecosystem boundaries and thermal regimes under
various climate change scenarios.




                                                                                                       257
Gottscho, Andrew (San Diego State University); Jennings, Bryan (Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Museu Nacional, Departamento de Vertebrados, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil); Marks, Sharyn
(Humboldt State University, Arcata, CA, United States)

Statistical phylogeography of fringe-toed lizards (Uma): inferring modes of speciation from multi-
locus data

Analyzing multiple nuclear loci with coalescent-based models is a statistically powerful method to test
hypotheses regarding the timing and mode of speciation and subsequent demographic history. This
approach was used to infer the evolutionary history of the Mojave Fringe-toed Lizard, Uma scoparia, a
sand dune specialist endemic to the deserts of southwestern North America. We analyzed fifteen nuclear
loci representing 24 localities of U. scoparia and the U. notata species complex, its southern sister
lineage. We found that U. scoparia has low genetic diversity relative to U. notata, among the lowest yet
measured in vertebrates; within U. scoparia, the southernmost population has the highest genetic
diversity. Clustering analyses (Geneland, Structurama) did not find distinct populations within U. scoparia.
Using an Isolation-with-Migration model, we estimated that U. scoparia and U. notata diverged in the
Pleistocene epoch without post-divergence gene flow, estimates that are robust to violations of the no-
recombination assumption. Estimates of the splitting parameter suggest that < 1% of the ancestral
population founded U. scoparia. These results corroborate earlier hypotheses that U. scoparia originated
when a small number of individuals from the ancestral U. notata complex dispersed north along the
Colorado River to colonize the Mojave Desert, and that northern populations in the Mojave and Amargosa
River basins are the result of a late Pleistocene/Holocene range expansion from a southern refuge. We
will also present preliminary results regarding speciation within the U. notata species complex in the U.S.
and Mexico, including the endangered Coachella Valley Fringe-toed Lizard.



Govender, Yogani (Center for Applied Tropical Ecology and Conservation, University of Puerto Rico,);
Puente-Rolón, Alberto R. (Universidad Interamericana en Arecibo, Arecibo, PR, United States); Muñoz,
Marcia C.; Ramirez Camejo, Luis A. (Department of Biology, Univeisity of Puerto Rico, Canada); Cuevas,
Elvira (Center for Applied Tropical Ecology and Conservation, University of Puerto Rico, Canada);
Sternberg, Leonard (Department of Biology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, Canada)

An isotopic study of diet and muscles of the Green Iguana (Iguana iguana) in Puerto Rico

The non-native green iguana, Iguana iguana over the years in Puerto Rico has increased in population
numbers and has proliferated throughout the island. Reports on the diet in their native habitat indicate
exclusive herbivoroy but contradicting observations on their diet in their non native habitat have been
reported by several authors. The aim of our study was to determine the diet and establish trophic position
of I. iguana in its new range of distribution, using gut content and isotopic analysis of (tongue and leg)
muscle tissue. We found significant differences in the isotopic signature of muscles tissue which may be
due to how I. iguana allocates nutrients during muscle formation. Although we found the physical
evidence of snails and crabs in gut content, the isotopic analysis of δ15 N and δ13C showed little
enrichment of both muscle tissues from that of their diet, therefore we conclude that I. iguana is a
herbivore. The δ13C values of muscle tissues indicate plants eaten are C3 plants and gut content
showed diet consisted of primarily black mangrove, Avicennia germinans leaves. The impact of
defoliation on this species warrants further investigation. Another plant species of interest found in the gut
is Brazilian pepper, S. terebinthifolius. We suspect that I.iguana maybe the disperser of this highly
aggressive invasive plant in Puerto Rico.Our study of both gut content and isotopic analysis of muscle
tissue, the first to be carried out for I. iguana, indicates that I. iguana impacts the native flora and fauna in




                                                                                                             258
Puerto Rico, and their ecological role in their new found habitats warrants further investigation for more
stringent management.



Govindarajulu, Purnima (BC Ministry of Environment);

Insights from standardized threat assessments for herpetofauna in British Columbia, Canada

In British Columbia, 55% of native amphibian species (11/20) and 66% of native reptile species (8/12) are
of conservation concern at the provincial or national level, or both. The threat classification system
developed by the World Conservation Union and Conservation Measures Partnership (IUCN-CMP)
provides a standardized way of classifying threats facing these species. Threats are classified into 11
categories, such as urban and residential development, transportation corridors, and climate change. The
impact of each threat is estimated by the interaction between the scope (proportion of the species
expected to be affected by the threat within 10 years), and the severity of the threat within the scope
(degree of population reduction in 10 years or three generations). Impact is measured as a proportion of
total population reduction within the range. When the IUCN-CMP threat classification system is applied to
amphibians of conservation concern in B.C., invasive species have a high or very high impact (40% -75%
declines) on 5/11 species, transportation corridors have a medium to high impact (15% - 40% declines)
on 8/11 species, and agriculture, biological resource use (logging), pollution, and climate change have a
medium impact (15% declines) on greater than half of the species. The very high impact of invasive
species is due to the potentially catastrophic effects of chytridiomycosis infection. While Bd presence in
pervasive in B.C., factors that lead to mortality from chytridiomycosis are not well understood. The threat
assessment highlights this significant knowledge gap in the management and conservation of amphibians
in B.C. When the standardized threat classification is applied to the reptiles of conservation concern in B.
C., transportation corridors have a high to medium impact (15% - 40% declines) on 7/9 species, followed
by residential and agricultural developments which have a medium impact (15%) on greater than half the
listed species. Again the threat assessment highlights a significant knowledge gap as methods for
mitigation of road mortality on herpetofauna are not well understood and have not been widely tested for
effectiveness. The IUCN-CMP threat classification while useful should be applied with caution as much of
the quantification of impact is based on expert opinion and not on scientifically collected population trend
data. The lack of basic population information, quantification of threat impacts, and monitoring of
conservation actions remain significant barriers to the effective management of herpetofauna in B.C.



Govindarajulu, Purnima (BC Ministry of Environment); Bishop, Christine; McKibbin, Rene (Canadian
Wildlife Service, Canada); Welstead, Kym (Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations,
Canada); Kissel, Amanda; Palen, Wendy (Simon Fraser University, Canada); Gielens, Andrea (Royal
Roads University, Canada); Thoney, Dennis (Vancouver Aquarium, Canada); Houston, Barb (Fish and
Wildlife Compensation Program, Canada); Beaucher, Marc-Andre (Creston Valley Wildlife Management
Area, Canada); Adama, Doug (BC Hydro, Canada)

Successful captive rearing and reintroduction efforts for two Ranid Frogs in British Columbia: The
Oregon Spotted Frog and the Northern Leopard Frog

In British Columbia, the Oregon Spotted Frog has been reduced to four isolated populations of less than
150 breeding females in total, and the Northern Leopard Frog has been reduced to one isolated
population of less than 15 breeding females. Captive breeding and rearing have been used to augment
extant populations and to establish new populations to prevent extirpation.




                                                                                                        259
Since 2001, a "Head-Start" program that rears wild collected eggs for release as post-metamorphic
juvenile frogs has been used to augment two populations of Oregon Spotted Frogs. Although one of
these augmented populations has declined below detection levels, the other population persists at stable
levels. The extent to which augmentation contributed to population persistence remains unclear. Juvenile
frogs from the "Head-Start" program were also used to establish a new population of Oregon Spotted
Frog at a restored site within migration distance of an extant population (Maria Slough). Although a few
egg masses have been observed at this site in some years, the persistence of this population is currently
unclear. A captive assurance population was established for the Oregon Spotted Frog in 2008. In 2010, a
few of these two year old frogs bred for the first time in captivity. Many more egg masses were produced
in 2011 and nearly 3000 captive bred hatchling tadpoles were released into the wild. Captive bred
tadpoles retained in field enclosures had similar survival and growth to metamorphosis as wild collected
tadpoles in similar enclosures. We will continue releasing captive bred tadpoles at this site in 2012 and
2013. The results of these release efforts will not be known until 2013 when the frogs from the first
release are expected to reach breeding condition.

Between 2000 and 2005, a Head Start program was also carried out for the only remaining population of
Northern Leopard Frogs. This population remains at less than 10 egg masses in most years even with
these augmentation efforts. Frogs from the Head-Start program were also released at a historic site in
Bummers Flats about 100 km from the extant site. This introduction has been successful in establishing a
small breeding population and small numbers of juveniles frogs have been detected at this site since
2010. A captive assurance population was established for the Northern Leopard Frogs in 2010, and we
expect these animals to come into breeding condition in 2012. If successful these captive bred tadpoles
will be released to augment the incipient population at Bummers Flats.

Captive rearing and captive breeding remains an important and ongoing part of population recovery
efforts for these two species in British Columbia.



Grafe, Ulmar (Universiti Brunei Darussalam); Konopik, Oliver (University of Wurzburg, Wurzburg,
Germany); Ahmad, Norhayati (Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Gadong, Malaysia); Art, Borkent (Royal
British Columbia Museum, Victoria, BC, Canada)

Calling in the face of eavesdroppers: selective pressures on anuran advertisement calling in the
presence of frog-biting midges

The advertisement calls of anurans are subject to eavesdropping by illegitimate receivers such as
competitors, predators, and parasites. Here we report on the selective pressures that act on anuran
advertisement calls and calling behaviour from frog-biting midges (Diptera: Corethrellidae) from northern
Borneo. Flies were present on males of twenty species of frogs rom six families (Bufonidae,
Ceratobatrachidae, Dicroglossidae, Megophryidae,          Microhylidae, Ranidae, and Rhacophoridae).
Traps broadcasting frog advertisement calls and pure tones were used as lures to capture flies in lowland
dipterocarp rainforest and peatswamp forest in Brunei Darussalam and Sarawak, Malaysia. We identified
eight different species of frog-biting midges. Attraction to sound was not specific to host species,
suggesting that additional short range cues induce biting. However, host specificity was high when
sampling midges that had obtained a blood meal on their frog host. Frog-biting midges were attracted
only to acoustic lures below 4 kHz with peak sensitivity to 2 kHz. Surveys of parasite prevalence on 28
frog species revealed that no species with advertisement calls above 4 kHz was parasitised, suggesting a
significant selective pressure on male frogs to call below 4 kHz. In addition, 100ms tone bursts were more
attractive to frog-biting midges than continuous sound. Furthermore, heavily parasitised species such as




                                                                                                      260
Hylarana baramica and H. glandulosa start calling in the early evening when frog-biting midges are
inactive, suggesting that these species may have shifted their pattern of calling to avoid being parasitised.



Graham, Sean (Penn State); Freidenfelds, Nicole (Rice University, Houston, TX, United States);
McCormick, Gail; Langkilde, Tracy (Penn State, University Park, PA, United States)

The impacts of invaders: Basal and acute stress glucocorticoid profiles and immune function in
native lizards threatened by invasive ants.

As anthropogenic stressors multiply exponentially in the coming decades, native vertebrates will likely
face increasing threats from these novel challenges. The success or failure of the primary physiological
mediator of these stressors—the HPA axis—will likely involve numerous and chaotic outcomes. Among
the most challenging of these new threats are invasive species. These have the capacity to
simultaneously challenge the HPA axis and the immune system since they are often associated with, or
the cause of, emerging infectious diseases, and energetic tradeoffs with the HPA response can have
immunosuppressive effects. To determine the effects of invasive species on the vertebrate GC response
to a novel stressor and immunity, we examined the effects of invasive fire ants on native fence lizards,
comparing lizards from sites with long histories with fire ants to those outside the invasion zone. We
demonstrated higher baseline and acute stress (captive restraint) CORT levels in lizards from within fire
ant invaded areas; females are more strongly affected than males, suggesting context-specific effects of
invasion. We found no effect of fire ant invasion on the immune parameters we measured (complement
bacterial lysis, antibody hemagglutination) with the exception of ectoparasite infestation. Mites were far
less prevalent on lizards within fire ant invaded sites, suggesting fire ants may actually benefit lizards in
this regard. This study suggests that invasive species may impose physiological stress on native
vertebrates, but that the consequences of this stress may be complicated and unpredictable.



Grammer, Paul O. (University of Southern Mississippi); Mickle, Paul F.; Havrylkoff, Jeanne-Marie
(University of Southern Mississippi, Canada); Slack, William T. (US Army ERDC, Canada); Peterson,
Mark S. (University of Southern Mississippi, Canada)

Investigating migratory cues and movement patterns of Gulf sturgeon (Acipenser oxyrinchus
desotoi) in the lower Pascagoula River

Recent work in the Pascagoula River, MS has helped elucidate patterns in the movements of threatened
Gulf sturgeon, Acipenser oxyrinchus desotoi during their fall outmigration to the Mississippi Sound and
the northern Gulf of Mexico. There is a general understanding of the cues that initiate the downstream
fall migration within the coastal drainages throughout their range in the northern Gulf of Mexico. Work by
Heise et al. (2005) in the Pascagoula River showed Gulf sturgeon migration was initiated by decreasing
day length and decreasing temperatures, coupled with increases in river discharge. During periods of low
river discharge, sturgeon were shown to spend time between rkm 24 and 38 after beginning their
downstream migrations. Our latest work took place in an area within this portion of the river, between rkm
30 and 34 which serves as our fall census site. Gulf sturgeon were collected in the fall of 2010 (Oct.-Nov.)
and 2011 (Sept.-Nov.), after presumably beginning their migration downstream. Sturgeon catch data were
compiled with physical water quality data, time of day, lunar phase, barometric pressure, river discharge
and tidal stage in order to identify specific periods of increased Gulf sturgeon movement. Movement was
assumed to have increased when fish were captured in anchored gillnets set in our fall census sampling
site. At the fall census site extensive fishing efforts were made during day and night under relatively low



                                                                                                         261
flow conditions. Initial analysis using Akaike information criterion (AIC c ) to test model strength indicated
lunar phase had a significant influence on the movement of Gulf sturgeon along with other secondary
factors such as time of day and barometric pressure. Principle component analysis is also employed to
more thoroughly explore which metrics were correlated with increased movements of Gulf sturgeon
during the fall migration period. Expanding on our current examination of sturgeon movements as they
leave the river, we plan to further explore patterns of Gulf sturgeon movement as they enter the
Pascagoula River estuary using acoustically tagged fish with a multi-receiver fixed acoustic array.



Grande, Terry (Loyola University Chicago); Borden, Calvin (Loyola University Chicago, Canada); Wilson,
Mark (University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada)

Osteology and myology of the suspensorium in basal Neoteleostei

Among the results from the NSF-funded Euteleost Tree of Life (EToL) project is a revised phylogeny of
basal acanthomorphs and their close relatives among primitive neoteleosts. The revised phylogenetic tree
allows us to ask novel questions concerning the evolution of the bones and muscles of the suspensorium
(the functional unit of the fish skull that includes the palatine, ectopterygoid, endopterygoid,
metapterygoid, quadrate, symplectic, hyomandibular, and preopercular bones) and to generate new
hypotheses and evaluate existing ones concerning jaw mechanics in these fishes. Osteological
descriptions are based on new observations of cleared and stained specimens, while myological
descriptions are based on original dissections. Building on earlier studies of basal euteleosts by authors
such as Diogo, Sanford, and Williams, we describe the osteology and myology of the suspensorium in
members of the Stomiiformes, Aulopiformes, Myctophiformes, Polymixiiformes, Paracanthopterygii,
Lampriformes, Beryciformes, and Percomorpha. Results allow tests of earlier ideas, such as those of
Rosen and Patterson about the evolution of jaws and suspensoria, in light of our revised understanding of
the membership and relationships of major groups of Neoteleostei. Based on examination of Recent
fishes, we make predictions about the morphology and possible function of early fossil neoteleosts and
test those ideas by direct observation of well-preserved fossil forms.



Grant, Evan (USGS - ARMI);

Using Monitoring Data to make Decisions about Amphibian Conservation

Concern for natural resources, especially in protected areas like National Parks in the United States, have
resulted in a general call for monitoring data on the status of animal populations at broad scales. More
rarely are these monitoring programs designed to directly inform resource management decisions. In
contrast to many natural resource monitoring programs, explicit in the goals of the ARMI program is to
provide information useful to improve US protected areas management. The development of a monitoring
program is a key step in assessing the current status of species‘ occurrences and distributions, examining
population trends over time, and identifying suitable targets for management to halt or reverse declining
trends. One monitoring program detected declining trends in occupancy of a community of wetland-
breeding amphibian populations in one US National Park. This triggered a need to identify suitable
management actions to halt or reverse the decline. I demonstrate how monitoring data may be used in a
formal decision analysis through the following steps: 1) Collect monitoring data; 2) Fit model to data,
including estimation of trend and covariate effects; 3) Identify management alternatives; 4) Identify
optimal management strategies.




                                                                                                          262
Grant, Tandora (San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research); Burton, Frederic (Blue Iguana
Recovery Program, Canada)

Studbook and Population Management Analysis Software Applied to Reintroduction Programs for
Caribbean Iguanas

Rock iguanas are the largest native land vertebrate endemic to islands in the Greater Antilles. They are
among the world‘s most endangered lizards primarily because most of their habitat has been severely
degraded by human development and invasive alien species. The populations of Jamaican, Anegada,
and Grand Cayman iguanas became critically low in the 1990s with fewer than 100 animals estimated to
remain in the wild. Headstarting began as a key recovery strategy for these species, by collecting
hatchlings upon emergence from the nest and raising them in captive facilities in situ until large enough to
deter predation by feral cats and mongoose. In Grand Cayman, captive breeding was also employed to
generate large numbers of iguanas for release. To manage this aspect, an electronic studbook was
created from disjunct records at the National Trust for the Cayman Islands and US zoos, where a limited
amount of breeding had occurred with wild-caught and F1 individuals.                Since then, breeding
recommendations have been generated every year using population management analysis software
designed for fostering sustainability within cooperatively managed zoo captive populations.

Breeding pairs of Grand Cayman iguanas are formed with two objectives: to preserve the proximity to the
founder genotype for as long as possible in captivity, and secondarily to generate large numbers of
variable and diverse offspring for release. Iguanas are paired based on their mean kinship within the total
captive and three released populations, with the aim of increasing the contribution from under-
represented founders in all release locations. Ideally, linking rare and common lineages is avoided,
however individual iguana health and behavior has affected mate choices throughout the years of the
program. Initially iguanas are released in large numbers of similar aged juveniles to instigate a rapid
growth rate that promotes wild mating closer to random, minimizes inbreeding, and loss of genetic
diversity over time.

Future work intends to compare the assumptions, models, and outcomes of using a pedigree-based
management strategy with DNA analysis, which can potentially refine the knowledge of the population‘s
composition and guide future management decisions.



Grant, Taran (Universidade de São Paulo); Rada, Marco (Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio
Grande do Sul, Canada); Rueda, Vicente (Colombia en Hechos, Canada)

A trans-Andean test of the monophyly of Anomaloglossus (Dendrobatoidea: Aromobatidae)

Grant et al. (1997) discovered the median lingual process (MLP) in a several dendrobatoid frogs from
northern South America. Insofar as an MLP also occurs in several groups of Old World ranoids, including
the potential dendrobatoid sister groups Phrynobatrachidae and Petropedetidae (e.g., Ford and
Cannatella, 1993), Grant et al. (1997) considered the structures to be homologous and the occurrence in
dendrobatoids to be symplesiomorphic. Later, Frost et al. (2006) provided decisive evidence that
dendrobatoids are not closely related to any MLP-possessing ranoids and Grant et al. (2006) found that
all MLP-possessing dendrobatoids that were analyzed formed an exclusive clade. To recognize the
monophyly of this MLP-possessing group, Grant et al. (2006) proposed the genus name Anomaloglossus
within the family Aromobatidae. Since 1997 the number of dendrobatoid species known to have the MLP
has grown to 24, all of which are currently referred to Anomaloglossus. Most species occur on the
Guayana Shield north of the Amazon, but three species occur west of the Andes, including A. confusus



                                                                                                        263
from northwestern Ecuador and A. atopoglossus and A. lacrimosus from western Colombia. The 20 cis-
Andean species exhibit remarkable diversity for such a small group, including phytotelm breeders with
oophagous tadpoles and maternal provisioning (Bourne et al., 2001; Grant et al. 2006), endotrophic
larvae with reduced mouth parts, with or without dorsal transport (Juncá et al., 1994; Lescure and Marty,
2000), and distributions at elevations as low as 50 m in the Amazon (A. stepheni) are as high as 2700 m
atop tepuis (A. roraima). Grant et al. (2006) also included representatives from across this diversity,
further strengthening the test of Anomalogossus monophyly. Nevertheless, due to lack of material Grant
et al. (2006) did not include any of the trans-Andean species in their phylogenetic analysis, and they
placed those species in Anomalogossus based solely on the shared occurrence of the MLP. As such,
several persistent questions remain to be addressed: (1) Are the trans-Andean species part of
Anomaloglossus or do they represent an independent radiation? (2) Is the MLP of the cis- and trans-
Andean taxa homologous or did the MLP evolve multiple times within dendrobatoids, as it did among
anurans generally? (3) If Anomaloglossus is indeed monophyletic, do the robust, extensively webbed
species from both sides of the Andes form a clade, or are these morphologies independently derived?
Recently collected material of an undescribed species allows these questions to be addressed.



Grant, Tyler (Iowa State University); David, Otis; Rolf, Koford (Iowa Cooperative Fish and Wildlife
Research Unit, Ames, IA, United States)

Evaluating Amphibian Response to Missouri River Flooding Using Novel Occupancy Modeling

Restoration of the Missouri River ecosystem has been ongoing since the Water Resources Development
Act of 1986. We began in 2009 an assessment of the ecological functionality of mitigation properties in
Iowa using the anuran community as ecological indicators. In 2011, the Missouri River experienced
record flooding. Annual runoff was 75 km3, substantially more than the next highest estimated runoff of
61.7 km3 in 1881. The mitigation properties were inundated with >4 meters of water for over a month in
July and August. Some breeding ponds were >1 kilometer away from the flood boundary. The 2011
flood offered a unique opportunity to assess the response and resiliency of anuran species to extensive
flooding at 125 sample sites distributed along a 19 km floodplain corridor. We used a novel occupancy
model that relaxed the closure assumption to demonstrate that anuran species rapidly colonized new
shallow wetlands as the river stage rose. The probability of occupancy at sites with 30 cm of water was
nearly 100% for Pseudacris maculata, Lithobates pipiens, and L. blairi, but decreased to 0% with
increasing depths. Phenologically, L. pipiens, Anaxyrus woodhousii, Hyla versicolor/chrysocelis, and P.
maculata began metamorphosing at dates comparable to 2010. Conversely, L. blairi, L. catesbeianus,
and Acris blanchardi metmorphosed 3-5 weeks later than in 2010. These three species breed later than
other species and flooding likely hindered reproduction. L. pipiens and A. woodhousii appeared to have
successful reproduction despite the flooding, judging from the number of observed metamorphs at 81
post-flood survey points. H. versicolor/chrysocelis complex and P. maculata produced a moderate
number of tadpoles. L. blairi and A. blanchardi produced few metamorphs. The data indicate that
species that breed later in the season metamorphosed later and in smaller numbers. We will present
data from the spring and summer of 2012 to document longer-term response of these species to the
flooding, including rates of recolonization of flooded areas. The resiliency of these species and the
habitat on which they depend may prove important under future climate change scenarios which predict
more climate extremes. We suggest that a elevational gradient of habitats is necessary to provide
useable habitat over a wide range of potential river stages.




                                                                                                      264
Grassmann, Michael (aquarium of the bay); Natanson, Lisa (NOAA Fisheries, Narragansett, RI, United
States); Slager, Christina; Herbert, Keith (Aquarium of the Bay, San Francisco, CA, United States)

Observations of Growth and Demography in Captive-Born Pacific Angel Sharks (Squatina
californica), at Aquarium of the Bay

In May of 2009, seven Pacific angel shark ( Squatina californica ) pups were born in the Aquarium of the
Bay in San Francisco, California. This is the first reported case of successful captive-breeding for the
species. The data collected on these specimens offer a unique opportunity to closely observe the early
stages of age-related growth in Pacific angel sharks. Over two and a half years data were regularly
collected on each shark‘s length, weight, average consumption, and the percentage body weight
consumed.        Based on these length data, three variations of von Bertalanffy were generated. Small
sample size and rapid early growth in the population produced highly variable data with low confidence
values in the first two trials. The third trial incorporated additional data from wild adult Pacific angel
sharks that were previously tagged or collected by Aquarium of the Bay. This growth curve was
compared to the previous trials and showed juvenile growth falling on approximately the same curve as
adults. The parameters obtained in the final trial were also consistent with those derived from previously
published data on the growth of Pacific angel sharks, despite the differences in some life history traits and
highly variable growth rates of this specific population.    Continued observation will help determine if
these parameters change with further development, and if the initial variation in life history characteristics
will influence other traits as the sharks reach maturity.



Gray, Teagen (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA and Guy Harvey Research Institute, Nova
Southeastern University, FL USA 33004); Bernard, Andrea (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA and Guy
Harvey Research Institute, Nova Southeastern University, FL USA 33004, Canada); Clarke, S. (Oceanic
Fisheries Programme, Secretariat of the Pacific Community, BPD5 CEDEX, Noumea 98848, New
Caledonia, Canada); Chapman, D. (School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, Stony Brook University,
NY, USA, Canada); McAuley, R. (Department of Fisheries, Government of Western Australia, Hillarys,
WA, Australia, Canada); Shivji, M.S. (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA and Guy Harvey Research
Institute, Nova Southeastern University, FL USA 33004, Canada)

Global phylogeography of the dusky shark (Carcharinus obscurus) based on nuclear
microsatellite DNA analysis: delineation of genetic stocks and the geographic sourcing of shark
fins from commercial markets.

The dusky shark, Carcharinus obscurus , is a globally distributed, coastal- pelagic species subject to an
apparent high level of exploitation. The International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) lists
this species as ―Vulnerable‖ globally, and ―Endangered‖ within western North Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico
waters due to an over 80% decline in this region, with no evidence of population recovery. The extensive
exploitation of dusky sharks may partly be attributed to the high market value of its fins, but the
contribution of individual dusky shark stocks to the fin markets is unknown. This knowledge would be
helpful to detect if specific stocks are experiencing disproportionate levels of exploitation. Due to its
susceptibility to overfishing, current dire conservation status and need for additional information on its
population dynamics, we analyzed the genetic population structure and genetic diversity of the dusky
shark (n = 301) across 10 globally distributed locations utilizing 10 nuclear microsatellite loci.

Surprisingly, dusky sharks showed similar allelic richness and gene diversity (A=10.5-11.4; H e = 0.64-
0.66) across all populations despite the more severe IUCN classification and a history of severe
population decline in the western North Atlantic. The microsatellite marker analyses support previously
published mtDNA work, identifying a strong divergence among Atlantic and Indo-Pacific samples ( F ST



                                                                                                          265
= 0.01-0.15; P <0.05). Overall, microsatellite marker results indicate the presence of three genetically
discrete management units for dusky sharks, due to the significant genetic differentiation found between
the western North Atlantic, South African, and Australian collections and the low frequency of migrant
exchange between these populations.

Additionally, these nuclear microsatellite-defined, discrete management units provide a method for the
assignment of market derived fins to their population of origin with the use of genetic assignment
techniques, including Bayesian multi-clustering methods (Structure) and principal coordinate analysis.
Using these sourcing techniques, 15 of 21 market fins analyzed were found to have likely originated from
the highly endangered western North Atlantic dusky shark population, supporting the need for more
urgent conservation measures within this region.



Grayson, Kristine (Victoria University of Wellington); Mitchell, Nicola (University of Western Australia,
Crawley, Australia); Hoare, Joanne (NZ Department of Conservation, Christchurch, New Zealand); Keall,
Susan; Wilson, Joanna; Nelson, Nicola (Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand)

Sex ratio bias drives an extinction vortex in an island population of tuatara (Sphenodon
punctatus)

Despite the vast number of endangered species, quantitative data on the drivers of extinction events are
lacking. In the process of population extinction, positive feedbacks among a range of stressors can
hasten the process of population collapse and create an ‗extinction vortex,‘ particularly in small, isolated
populations. Here we show the positive feedbacks from a male-biased sex ratio creating conditions for
extinction in a population of tuatara ( Sphenodon punctatus ). Over the last decade, the percentage of
adult females on North Brother Island has abruptly declined by 30%. Our monitoring reveals that the
male-biased sex ratio has compounding impacts on female fitness through reductions in female body
condition, fecundity, and survival. Additionally, we find current nest temperatures result in more male
offspring owing to the pattern of temperature-dependent sex determination in tuatara where males hatch
at warmer temperatures. Climate change could be the final nail in the coffin for this isolated population, as
temperature increases predicted for New Zealand over the next century will further skew the offspring sex
ratio towards males. While individuals may persist for many decades due to the longevity of tuatara, our
viability models predict that without an evolutionary response, the population will be functionally extinct
and entirely composed of males in 144 years (3.5 – 4.5 generations in tuatara). Sex ratio bias is an
underappreciated threat to population viability, particularly in populations that appear numerically stable.
Understanding the mechanisms underlying population declines is critical for identifying appropriate
conservation measures and assuring the persistence of endangered populations.



Green, David (McGill University and Redpath Museum); Yagi, Katharine (Redpath Museum, McGill
University, Montreal, PQ, Canada)

Movements and habitat use by Fowler's Toads (Anaxyrus fowleri) at Long Point, Ontario

Eleven adult Fowler‘s toads were radio-tagged and tracked along the Hahn Beach of the Big Creek
NWA at the western base of Long Point, Ontario, from Aug 30 th – Sept 8 th , 2008 in order to assay
habitat use by the animals. Small radio transmitters were fitted to the toads with a harness of made from
fine, surgical plastic tubing around the body behind the front limbs. The toads‘ behaviour is not
significantly affected by the presence of the transmitters, nor did the attachment harnesses significantly



                                                                                                         266
hamper or injure the toads. Toads were tracked every morning and evening and their precise locations
were recorded using GPS and mapping software. During the day, the toads resided on the upper beach
or in the dunes. They may or may not dig completely under the sand and may facultatively make use of
objects, such as driftwood, as hiding places. In the evening, the toads generally may move close to the
water line when active. Although most toads remained within a constrained area of shore, some animals
moved over 70 m along the beach in a single night. The onset of cooler weather coincided with the
movement of some animals further away from the water line, curtailment of the nightly activity and deeper
retreat in the sand. The behaviour of the toads indicate that at this time of year for this life stage, the
toads require a) beaches for evening activity, b) sparsely vegetated foredunes for day-time retreats, and
c) dunes and backdunes as retreats for long-term dormancy. These must also be in proximity to still,
shallow, open water that the toads use as breeding sites in the spring. The conditions exist, or have
existed, at approximately seven general locations at Long Point that can be identified on high definition
maps.



Green, David M. (McGill University);

Canadian endangered species legislation: How effective is it for herpetofauna?

The Canadian Species at Risk Act ( SARA ) is complex legislation that aims to offer protection to
endangered and threatened wildlife and plants in Canada. The long and difficult political process that
culminated in its proclamation into law in 2003 resulted in a bill with tangible strengths, abundant
compromises and many weaknesses. SARA has three primary components. One is the assessment and
legal listing of wildlife species at status, the second is effecting the recovery is listed species, and the third
deals with prohibitions, penalties and compliance measures. Assessment of species by COSEWIC is
highly effective and proactive. To date, virtually all species of amphibians and reptiles in Canada that
might be at some risk have been assessed at least once. Formulation of remediation measures, however,
has been slow and implementation of recovery strategies for amphibians and reptiles has been even
slower. Prohibitions and compliance measures are ineffective. In large measure, this is because SARA
applies mainly to federal lands and waters and is unable to override numerous other statutes, including
aboriginal land claims agreements.              SARA      is a classic Canadian compromise, relying on
federal/provincial/territorial co-operation and good will. That is its great strength, and great vulnerability.



Green, David M. (Redpath Museum, McGill University);

Ecological implications of temporal variation in body size.

Animal body size has intrinsically significant ecological and evolutionary importance and is well known to
a reasonably consistent predictor of overall abundance. Exactly why this should be true has long been
disputed since the relationship between body size and abundance is almost always clouded by
considerable variance. At the scale of individuals, variation in body size may be related to such factors as
lifespan, age at maturity, access to resources and fecundity and therefore may have implications for
fitness, mate-choice and survival. Many animal populations, including populations of pond-breeding
amphibians, may fluctuate in abundance considerably from year to year but there is little documentation
of body size variation at the same time.

Over more than two decades, the average body size in a population of Fowler‘s toad, a common
amphibian throughout much of eastern North America, has fluctuated considerably from year to year in



                                                                                                              267
inverse proportion to abundance. Such temporal variation means that determining a species‘ average
body size depends on when a population is sampled, as well as where. Furthermore, since average body
size cannot be treated as a population constant, there are implications for ecology ranging from the
incidence of size-assortative mating to the applicability of Bergmann‘s rule.



Green, Sarah (Southeastern Louisiana University); Crother, Brian (Southeastern Louisiana University,
Canada)

Which method is best? Comparing geometric morphometric techniques on snake head shapes

Geometric morphometric techniques have come a long way in the past twenty years. Despite the
advances in methodology, this type of analysis has rarely been used on snakes. It has proven quite
successful in other taxa. But despite this success it remains underutilized. The purpose of this project is
to test three geometric morphometric methods on several species of snakes. The species that will be
used will be the four species of the genus Regina , as well as Lampropeltis getula and Lampropeltis
nigra. The analyses will include testing the viability of scales as homologous landmarks, testing an
outlining method, and a novel grid method. The results will be compared against true homologous
landmark analysis as well as traditional morphometric techniques. This information will be gathered using
skulls and performing a literature review. It is expected that scales will make poor landmarks because
scales do not represent underlying structures in snakes. It is also expected that outlining will have the
greatest congruence with homologous landmarks as well as traditional morphometric techniques. There is
concern as to whether the outlining method will be able to pick up on small scale shape differences. The
grid method is expected to produce results similar to the outlining method.



Green, Stephen (Operation Wallacea); Kundu, Samit (Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology,
Canterbury, United Kingdom); Montgomery, Chad (Truman State University, Kirksville, United States);
Boback, Scott (Dickinson College, Carlisle, United States); Frazier, Julius (California Polytechnic State
University, San Luis Obispo, United States); Reed, Robert (USGS, Fort Collins, United States); Griffiths,
Richard; Groombridge, Jim (Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology, Canterbury, United Kingdom)

Population structure and gene flow of the Hog Island Boa (Boa constrictor imperator) in the Cayos
Cochinos and Bay Islands, Honduras

Recent phylogenetic analysis has identified insular populations of Boa constrictor imperator in the Cayos
Cochinos and Bay Island archipelagos, Honduras as a probable Evolutionary Significant Unit (ESU).
These populations have likely been on a separate evolutionary trajectory to mainland populations for
approximately 2 million years. However, dwarfed phenotypes displayed in the Cayos Cochinos
populations are suspected to have evolved rapidly since the islands were last isolated from the mainland
by rising sea levels at the end of the last ice age, approximately 10,000 years ago. This study investigates
the level of population structure and gene flow between the islands and mainland and specifically
between the dwarfed phenotypes of the Cayos Cochinos and the larger phenotypes of the Bay Islands
and continental mainland. It is concluded that the dwarfed boas of the Cayos Cochinos were isolated
approximately 5,000 years ago and that dwarfism has evolved in the absence of substantial gene flow
from the surrounding populations since this time. Thus, dwarfism is likely to be an adaptive response to
local environmental conditions in the Cayos Cochinos, rather than as a result of phenotypic plasticity for
body size within the island system. In contrast to previous studies of gene flow in mainland populations of




                                                                                                        268
B. constrictor, gene flow appears to be low over relatively short distances, highlighting the substantial
barrier to gene flow presented by the relatively small expanses of water between the islands.



Green, Stephen (Operation Wallacea);

Using short-term student projects to build long-term herpetological monitoring datasets

University and high school students with an interest in the biological sciences and conservation represent
a valuable resource to researchers wishing to carry out ambitious, large-scale research projects. By
utilising students to carry out biodiversity monitoring as part of annual research expeditions, it is possible
to collect large spatial and temporal data sets whilst simultaneously broadening the opportunities
available to students to gain valuable practical experience in biodiversity monitoring techniques.

Operation Wallacea is a UK founded conservation organisation and network of academics from European
and North American universities, who design and implement biodiversity and conservation management
research programmes utilising student volunteers. Operation Wallacea biodiversity monitoring
programmes are now being implemented across 25 study sites in 11 countries, spanning both the
terrestrial and marine environments. By funding these research projects directly through fees paid by
student volunteers, rather than through traditional funding routes, researchers are not constrained in their
study design to produce short-term results, but can instead look to build the types of long-term datasets
desperately needed for appropriate conservation management planning.

Of paramount importance to any volunteer based survey work is having clearly defined objectives and
standardised, unambiguous methodologies. However, the inclusion of modern, more complex, techniques
in survey design should not necessarily be overlooked as a way of augmenting more traditional field data
sets, as has been successfully demonstrated by the integration of a pop-up genetic laboratory at our
Cloud Forest research site in Honduras. Advances in DNA extraction and PCR technologies are allowing,
for example, in situ Chytrid infection tests to be conducted in the field, as well as population genetic
studies using ISSR markers, giving instant access to information previously unobtainable in a remote field
site.

This talk will examine key examples of the long-term herpetological data sets that have been compiled
using Operation Wallacea volunteers. The vast benefits, but also the difficulties encountered in using this
‗paying volunteer‘ conservation model will be discussed, including how to reconcile rigorous
methodological design and implementation with providing an exciting, attractive experience that
represents good value for money to the customer.



Greenbaum, Eli (University of Texas at El Paso); Conkey, Nancy (University of Texas at El Paso, El
Paso, TX, United States); Pramuk, Jennifer (Bronx Zoo/Wildlife Conservation Society, Bronx, NY, United
States); Carr, John (University of Louisiana at Monroe, Monroe, LA, United States); Rödel, Mark-Oliver;
Penner, Johannes (Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and Biodiversity at the Humboldt
University Berlin, Berlin, Germany)

Systematics of Congo Basin True Toads (Anura: Bufonidae: Amietophrynus) Reveals Widespread
Cryptic Speciation

Two competing hypotheses have been proposed to explain speciation patterns in the Congo Basin of
Central Africa: (1) the Refuge Hypothesis states that contemporary areas of rainforest endemism in the



                                                                                                          269
Congo Basin were not affected by past climatic fluctuations, and these stable areas (i.e., forest refugia)
led to allopatric speciation in forest-adapted taxa; whereas (2) the Montane Speciation Hypothesis
focuses on montane regions of Central Africa (i.e., Cameroonian Highlands and Albertine Rift) as stable
forest refugia where allopatric speciation occurred, with the inference that the Congo Basin served as a
―museum‖ where some species persisted since the Miocene with little subsequent diversification. A
testable prediction of the latter hypothesis is that there is limited or no geographic structure in the genetic
diversity of widespread Congo Basin species. We tested these hypotheses by examining phylogenetic
patterns and divergence timing of two widespread, lowland species ( Amietophrynus camerunensis and
A . gracilipes ) in the Congo Basin, with sampling of multiple populations from all ecoregions.            We
sequenced approximately 4 kb of combined mitochondrial (12S–16S) and nuclear (CXCR4, POMC, and
RAG1) genes from over 30 samples of Amietophrynus, and several outgroups. These data were
analyzed with maximum parsimony, maximum-likelihood and Bayesian inference with the programs
PAUP, RAxML and MrBayes v.3.1, respectively, after appropriate models of nucleotide substitution were
identified in the program jModelTest. Our phylogeny identified widespread cryptic speciation among our
toad samples from the Congo Basin, which supports the Refuge Hypothesis.                     Our findings are
consistent with recent phylogenetic analyses of birds and rodents.            One of the new toad species is
restricted to the forests that transition into the Itombwe Plateau, a region of paramount conservation
importance that is renowned for its amphibian endemism and diversity.



Greenberg, Dan (Redpath Museum & McGill University); Green, David M. (Redpath Museum, Montreal,
PQ, Canada)

Population regulation structures the natural dynamics of amphibians: Evidence from a long-term
study of a declining population

The apparent global decline of amphibian populations has generated a need for effective methods for
identifying true declines in abundance from natural fluctuations. Since amphibian populations experience
high levels of annual variation in recruitment, understanding long-term population dynamics is essential to
separate true declines from normal decreases. Evidence from a 23 year study of a population of Fowler‘s
Toad ( Anaxyrus fowleri ) in Long Point, Ontario, Canada, indicates substantial fluctuations in abundance
and evidence of decline over the last 9 years. This decline in abundance is coincident with the spread of
an invasive marsh plant, the Common Reed ( Phragmites australis ), throughout the toads‘ breeding sites.
Using an information theoretic approach, we compared models of population growth that included both
intrinsic (density dependence) and stochastic extrinsic factors (weather), as well as the deterministic
factor of P. australis expansion in breeding marshes. From 1989 through 2001, prior to the major
expansion of P. australis in the study area, population growth of the toads conformed best to a model of
Gompertz population regulation and winter severity affecting overwintering mortality. These factors
declined in importance over the latter 10 years of the study, 2002 - 2011, and the variable for growth of
P. australis explained an increasingly significant degree of the variation in population growth of the toads.
We interpret this as evidence of habitat loss due to an invasive plant species causing the decline of an
amphibian population. Furthermore, we advocate the use of multi-model inference for long-term time-
series to identify changes in population dynamics coincident with population decline.



Greenwald, Katherine (Eastern Michigan University); Gibbs, H. Lisle (Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH, United States)




                                                                                                           270
Abundance, Distribution, and Habitat Associations of Unisexual Mole Salamanders (Ambystoma)
in Ohio

Unisexual salamanders in the genus Ambystoma are an abundant yet difficult to identify component of
amphibian biodiversity in the Great Lakes region. These all-female salamanders reproduce in a unique
way that involves "stealing" genomes from the sexual species that they coexist with. To date, unisexuals
have been documented incorporating genomes from five different sexual species. This phenomenon,
along with the fact that the unisexuals are frequently polyploid (having more than two copies of the
genome), means that there are a large number of possible genome combinations (biotypes) in these
salamanders. In many cases the unisexuals closely resemble the sexual species whose genomes they
have incorporated, making morphological identification problematic. We have developed and used a
genetic method to identify unisexual biotypes for over 2000 salamanders from over 60 sites across Ohio.
Analysis of locality data reveals a strong latitudinal gradient in the frequency of unisexuals, with frequency
decreasing from north to south. Furthermore, habitat data collected at each site suggest that there is
niche partitioning among the various species and biotypes found in Ohio. Comparisons of Jefferson
salamanders ( A. jeffersonianum ) and their associated unisexuals (LJJ) revealed that the sexual species
is found in higher quality habitat than the unisexual biotype; however, the reverse is true for smallmouth
salamanders ( A. texanum ) and their associated unisexuals (LTT). Overall, these data will be used to
explore the ecological and evolutionary factors that determine the range, abundance and habitat usage of
sexual species and unisexual biotypes throughout Ohio.



Gregory, Patrick (University of Victoria);

Once Bitten, Twice Shy: Does Previous Experience Influence Behavioural Decisions in
Encounters with Predators?

Injuries are common in animals of diverse taxa and are usually attributed to encounters with predators.
Although often non-lethal, injuries nevertheless represent indirect effects of predators that can have
negative consequences for demography and fitness (e.g. reproductive costs). However, encounters with
predators also represent experience through which animals can learn and positively adapt their future
behaviour, potentially mitigating, at least partly, the negative effects of prior exposure to predators. I
predicted that injured grass snakes (Natrix natrix) would be more likely to move before capture than
uninjured snakes, especially if they had scars or other injuries on the body or tail, indicating significant
previous handling by a predator. This prediction was borne out, but another kind of injury (stumped tails)
had no effect on predator-evasion behaviour. A similar test of whether previous capture affected such
behaviour showed a much weaker effect than that of injury, Humans typically are used as proxies for
real predators in studies of anti-predator behaviour in snakes, but these results provide somewhat
equivocal support for this approach.




                                                                                                          271
Grieneisen, Michael (University of California, Davis); Zhang, Minghua (University of California, Davis,
Canada); Hassapakis, Craig (Amphibian and Reptile Conservation (journal), Canada); Browne, Robert
(Royal Zoological Society of Antwerp, Belgium, Canada)

Global Herpetology Thesis Portal - A wellspring of unpublished data relevant to herpetological
science & conservation

Dissertations and theses document a substantial investment of resources in training the next-generation
of researchers, and are important literature resources for herpetological research. For example, of 1471
articles published in Herpetologica or J Herpetol from 2001-2010, 38% cited at least one thesis. Despite
offering considerable research results of scientific significance, many theses never yield peer-reviewed
publications, often due simply to time demands placed on recent grads. The "electronic thesis and
dissertation" movement has prompted 1000s of universities worldwide to establish open-access thesis
repositories, that greatly improve the accessibility of theses. However, a global thesis catalogue is
lacking, given the large gaps in the geographic coverage of resources such as WorldCat and Dissertation
Abstracts.

From numerous university library catalogues & national thesis repositories (e.g., China, Egypt, India,
Kenya) a database of thousands of theses referencing reptiles or amphibians in some manner has been
compiled. The GHT Portal is hosted on the Amphibian and Reptile Conservation journal website:
http://redlist-arc.org/GHTPortal.htm. Each record includes basic bibliographic data, links to online
abstracts/full-text (when available), and controlled-vocabulary term lists which allow users to quickly find
all theses for geographic, taxonomic or general topics, e.g., "USA, Pennsylvania," "Cryptobranchidae,"
"conservation," or their combinations. About 40% of the theses concern herpetology, with most of the
remainder using herpetofauna as model organisms/systems for physiological or molecular studies.

Due to the limitations of our linguistic skills and the geographic coverage of electronic databases, we are
very interested in collaborating with herpetologists from regions with poor coverage in the current GHT
Portal. The presentation will demonstrate the breadth of information that herpetological theses have to
offer using "conservation" as a basic search term.



Griffith, Oliver (The University of Sydney); Belov, Katherine (The University of Sydney, Sydney, N,
Australia); Ujvari, Beata; Thompson, Michael (The University of Sydney, Sydney, N, Australia)

Lipoprotein lipase expression increases in the uterus of a pregnant skink

In placentotrophic animals, mothers transport nutrients across a placenta to nourish their developing
embryos. The Australian skink, Pseudemoia entrecasteauxii , provides approximately 60% of the lipid
for embryonic growth and metabolism to embryos across the placenta. Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) is an
important enzyme in lipid transport in vertebrates. We examined patterns of LPL gene expression in the
uterus of pregnant P. entrecasteauxii to identify its role in placentotrophy in this species. We used
reverse transcription quantitative real time PCR to measure the expression of the lipoprotein lipase gene
in the uterine tissue of four periods in the reproductive cycle and compared uterine LPL expression in
chorioallantoic and yolk sac placenta. Expression of the LPL gene is five fold higher in the uterus of late
pregnant compared to non-pregnant and early pregnant P. entrecasteauxii, indicating a greater capacity
for lipid transport towards the end of pregnancy. This result correlates with the time that developing
embryos are undergoing the greatest growth and have the highest metabolic rate. LPL gene expression is
10 fold higher in the uterine tissue of the yolk sac placenta than the chorioallantoic placenta, suggesting
the yolk sac placenta is the primary site of lipid transport in pregnant P. entrecasteauxii.




                                                                                                        272
Griffiths, Richard (Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology);

How many newts in how many populations? Modelling the viability of amphibian metapopulations
in fragmented landscapes

Population Viability Analysis (PVA) has become a widely-used tool within species conservation. The basis
of a PVA model is usually a matrix of survival-fecundity schedules. These are used to make population
projections under different environmental or management scenarios, such that the risk of extinction can
be estimated within a defined timescale. Although PVA has strong potential for informing the
management of threatened species, the reality is that such species often have poorly understood life
histories that yield weakly parameterized and unreliable models. The species best suited for PVA are
therefore well-studied species, but these are often widespread, of little conservation concern, and not in
need of viability analyses. The great crested newt ( Triturus cristatus ) is unusual in that it is widespread
and has a well-documented life history, but is of considerable conservation interest because of the
frequency with which it comes into conflict with development in the UK. This leads to questions
concerning the minimum levels of population size and population connectivity required to maintain viable
populations in the face of fragmentation. We used RAMAS metapop to examine compromises between
‗more ponds with fewer newts‘ or ‗fewer ponds with more newts‘ in a fragmented landscape. Isolated
populations comprising 50 newts are predicted to go extinct within a few decades. Connectivity and
dispersal reduces the extinction risk. As subpopulation size and number of subpopulations increases,
extinction risk declines. Long-term, viable metapopulations require at least 16 subpopulations of 50
newts, or 4-8 populations of at least 100 newts. On the basis of these predictions, current actions to
mitigate development impacts in the UK may be insufficient to ensure sustainable populations. Although
the predictions of PVA need interpreting with caution, model outputs can serve to identify gaps in
information and inform evidence-based management decisions.



Griffiths, Richard (Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology); Clemons, Jan (Amphibian and Reptile
Groups UK, Bournemouth, United Kingdom)

Introduction: A historical perspective, and evolution of a national recording scheme in the UK

Early herpetologists were citizen scientists, who pursued their scientific interests alongside such
professions as physicians, lawyers or members of the clergy. The professional herpetologist is therefore a
comparatively recent development, and has been driven by rapid advances in science and technology.
Rather than making the citizen scientist redundant, the demands of conservation decision-making tools
mean that data are now required on spatial and temporal scales that are beyond the capacity and
resources of even the largest team of professional researchers. The past two decades have therefore
seen renewed initiatives to harness the considerable manpower available within the citizen scientist
community. This drive has been assisted by the rapid and widespread adoption of hand-held devices that
now carry communication, photographic, GPS, database and environmental-measuring capabilities. The
UK has a long tradition of citizen scientist involvement with natural history recording. The first national
distribution maps for amphibians and reptiles were published 64 years ago, and precipitated a series of
subsequent recording initiatives, all of which were of relatively short duration and involved incomplete
coverage of the country. These schemes have evolved into the present-day National Amphibian and
Reptile Recording Scheme (NARRS), which uses volunteers to collect data in targeted survey areas. A
very active network of local amphibian and reptile groups also now exists, while specific projects, such as
‗Make the Adder Count‘ and the ‗Million Ponds Project‘ target specific taxa or conservation issues.
Paradoxically, economic exigencies frequently increase the demands for training and relevant




                                                                                                         273
experience, so increased citizen scientist capacity may well be a by-product of the global financial
downturn. Nevertheless, there remain significant issues to be addressed if citizen scientists are to be
deployed effectively. Checks and balances need to be in place to ensure that data are collected reliably
and in accordance with rigorous research designs. At the international scale, issues arise over whether
conservation is better served in developing countries by building local capacity, or by using fee-paying
volunteers from developed countries that provide incomes for local communities. This symposium
explores these issues, and examines the current and future role of the citizen scientist in herpetological
surveys and conservation.



Grismer, Lee (La Sierra University); Wood, Perry (Brigham Young University, Provo, United States);
Quah, Evan (Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang, Malaysia); Anuar, Shahrul; Muin, Mohd. (Universiti Sains
Malaysia, Pulau Pinang, Malaysia); Sumontha, Montri (Ranong Marine Fisheries Station, Ranong,
Thailand); Ahmad, Norhayati (Universiti Kebansaan Malaysia, Bangi, Canada); Bauer, Aaron (Villanova
University, Villanova, Canada)

Phylogenetic relationships within the Cyrtodactylus pulchellus complex: an example of the hidden
diversity of lizards on the Malay Peninsula

Morphological data from 116 individuals and genetic data from 1497 base pairs of the mitochondrial ND2
gene from 68 individuals of both species of the Cyrtodactylus pulchellus complex (C. pulchellus and C.
macrotberculatus) were gathered from lizards throughout nearly their entire range along the Thai-Malay
Peninsula. These data indicate that this complex is composed of nine species as opposed to two.
Percent sequence divergence estimates between species show deep divergences ranging from 5.9–
18.8% and are supported in all cases by discrete morphological differences. In most cases, each newly
recovered species is restricted to a particular geographic feature (i.e. mountain top, island, etc.) and the
estimated divergence dates of cladogenic events separating lineages coincide with geological dates of
the emergence of such features. The genetic data indicate that speciation within this complex has taken
place over the last 6–8 million years and that once isolated, little to no genetic admixture occurred
between populations during episodes of putative secondary contact following glacial-interglacial habitat
fluctuations. This is in contrast to the closely related and completely sympatric C. quadrivirgatus that
shows less than 4% sequence divergence in the same gene throughout its entire range with speciation
only occurring in peripherally isolated, swampy habitats. These data indicate that some of the more
widely ranging species of Cyrtodactylus may be species complexes and that phylogenetic analyses may
be an additional source of increasing the diversity within this rapidly growing genus.



Groenhout, Elze (University of Amsterdam, IBED, RAVON);

Population structure and landscape genetics of the grass snake (Natrix natrix) in the Netherlands
analysed using microsatellite data.

Most reptiles in the suburban landscape are restricted to nature reserves. In the densely populated
western part of the Netherlands, only the Grass snake, Natrix natrix , is able to maintain populations
outside these nature reserves making use of anthropogenic landscape elements for migration and
habitation. On the other hand, other anthropological landscapes can represent obstacles like highways,
railroads, canals and buildings and may have profound effects on their metapopulation structure,
demography and reproduction. Population genetic analysis can provide information about the genetic
connectivity between, and genetic diversity within populations that inhabit natural reserves and




                                                                                                        274
anthropogenic areas and allowed us to identify important barriers and migration routes. We therefore
sampled more than 400 individuals from key-area‘s in the Netherlands and genotyped each individual for
5 microsatellite loci. Our data show gene flow between most of the populations, but relatively low genetic
diversity in some of the larger populations indicating genetic isolation due to habitat fragmentation or
illegal introduction of a small number of snakes by humans. We will use these data to optimize
conservation measures such as the rearrangement of the landscape with the creation of artificial breeding
and hibernation sites, transplantation and reintroduction of snakes. Finally population genetic data will
provide basic biological information about the migratory and reproductive behaviour of the grass snake. It
will allow us to test where recruits at hibernation sites come from: are they related -- site fidelity
hypothesis – or unrelated – random dispersal hypothesis -- to residing individuals?



Gross, Iwo (Eastern Illinois University); Durso, Andrew (Department of Biology, Logan, UT, United
States); Lennon, Corissa; Mullin, Stephen (Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, IL, United States)

Why did the Brownsnake cross the road? Understanding how snake populations are impacted by
vehicle access within a state park

Roads are among several anthropogenic structures that can have negative impacts within a habitat.
Even though the presence of roads might expand ecotone habitats, negative impacts might include
increased fragmentation and risk of predation. Where roads occur between habitats used for hibernation
and those occupied during the activity season, animals moving between habitats incur greater mortality
from cars travelling along the road surface. Midland Brownsnakes ( Storeria dekayi wrightorum ) in an
Illinois state park biannually cross a 2.7-km stretch of road that separates over-wintering sites from
activity season habitat. The road surface and shoulders provide the snakes with opportunities to
thermoregulate, but crossing or basking on the road increases the chances of mortality. Since October
2010, we have collected live and recently-killed snakes at this site using a combination of visual
encounter surveys and a 900-m drift fence-pitfall trap array. We collected morphometric, behavioral, and
life-history data for all snakes, and uniquely marked all live individuals before releasing them at site of
capture. The road was closed to all traffic for a 9-week period during the 2011 activity season, producing
a 20 % improvement in snake survivorship over the previous year. Within and between years, female
snakes appear to experience greater survivorship than males. Limiting vehicular access to park road
during the second half of October, or adding culvert structures, would further improve survivorship for this
brownsnake population.



Grözinger, Franziska (Museum für Naturkunde, Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and
Biodiversity at the Humboldt University Berlin); Thein, Jürgen (Büro für Faunistik und Umweltbildung,
Haßfurt, Germany); Feldhaar, Heike (University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany); Rödel, Mark-Oliver
(Museum für Naturkunde Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and Biodiversity at the Humboldt
University Berlin, Berlin, Germany)

Specialist on local scale? Differences in developmental traits within a population of a generalist
amphibian species in southern Germany (Ranidae: Rana temporaria)

The common frog ( Rana temporaria ) can be regarded as a generalist amphibian species in Europe. Due
to its wide distribution and broad range of used breeding habitats, it should be able to cope with different
environments. Our studies of one population in a forested area in southern Germany (Steigerwald,
Bavaria, monitored since 2005) revealed a strong preferences for particular reproduction sites (repeatable




                                                                                                        275
throughout seven years), which were not related to pond parameters or the presence of predators
(newts). Furthermore, we found extreme phenotypic plasticity in developmental traits among breeding
ponds: e.g. metamorphic weight differed up to factor 10 among studied ponds (0.07 and 0.70g, 2007).
Neither pond parameters, nor predation or larval density could account for the developmental differences
(development time, metamorphic weight). Since the observed philopatry and differences in developmental
traits could not be explained by extrinsic factors (biotic and abiotic parameters), we conducted transplant-
experiments in order to test, if intrinsic factor such as local specialisation might shed light on our findings.
Therefore, clutches of different ponds were taken and hatched tadpoles raised in mesh cages in natal and
non-natal ponds in the study area. Preliminary results show that a) tadpoles of the same clutch are highly
plastic in developmental traits when confronted with different environments, and b) tadpoles originating
from different ponds do not show uniform response to a common environment. These results indicate that
this generalist species might be a specialist on local scale.



Grubbs, Dean (Florida State University); Gelsleichter, James (University of North Florida, Jacksonville,
FL, United States); Heithaus, Michael; Kirk, Gastrich (Florida International University, Miami, FL, United
States); Charles, Cotton (Virginia Institute of Marine Science, Gloucester Point, United States)

Demersal Elasmobranch Assemblages associated with Desoto Canyon and the Continental Slope
of the Eastern Gulf of Mexico relative to the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill

Edge habitats typically have high biodiversity and biomass regardless of ecosystem, but such deep-sea
habitats (e.g. continental slopes, submarine canyons, seamounts) remain relatively unexplored and little
information on community structure exist. DeSoto Canyon and adjacent continental slope habitats of the
eastern Gulf of Mexico were the first affected by the Deepwater Horizon oil spill (DwH). Deep-water
fishes, especially the elasmobranchs, have slow life histories and are among the most sensitive taxa to
environmental perturbations yet in the Gulf of Mexico these taxa are poorly documented, many species
are taxonomically unresolved and new species undoubtedly exist. We developed a fishery-independent
survey employing longlines and traps in concert to describe the deep-water assemblages of large
demersal fishes in this region. During 2011-2012, three research cruises were completed and stations
from 199m to 2,014 m deep were sampled offshore of the Mississippi Delta, through the DeSoto Canyon
(including the DwH site), and offshore of St. Petersburg, Florida. More than 1,000 fishes were captured
including at least two species of hagfishes, more than 15 species of elasmobranchs and more than 20
species of teleosts. Sharks ranging in size from 20 cm TL ( Galeus area ) to 500 cm TL ( Hexanchus
griseus ) were captured using these methods. We will present a cluster analyses describing distinct fish
assemblages mediated by depth (85% were captured <600 m deep), temperature and bottom type.
Regional comparisons of community structure, species richness, and relative abundances will be
presented and related to the DwH oil spill.



Grummer, Jared (University of Washington); Bryson, Jr., Rob (University of Nevada, Las Vegas,
Canada); Reeder, Tod (San Diego State University, Canada)

Species delimitation using Bayes factors applied to the Sceloporus scalaris species group
(Squamata: Phrynosomatidae)

The development of new coalescent-based techniques for phylogenetic reconstruction using multi-locus
sequence data has enabled researchers to statistically investigate species limits and evaluate alternative
speciation models within a group. Whereas the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and likelihood ratio



                                                                                                            276
tests (LRTs) have been utilized as model selection tools in species delimitation, these tools are not
without issues when applied to phylogenetic problems. Here, we examined the efficacy of Bayes factors
in delimiting species in the Sceloporus scalaris species group with a dataset consisting of six nuclear
loci and 34 individuals. We compared species delimitation results from Bayes factor testing with two other
available methods, BPP (utilizing reversible jump MCMC) and SpeDeSTEM (which uses the AIC
criterion). Bayes factor testing and BPP methods both support the recognition of two new species in the
group, whereas SpeDeSTEM appears to be more of a ―lumper‖ and does not recognize these new
species. We also emphasize the importance of correctly estimating the marginal likelihood of competing
species delimitation models when computing Bayes factors. As many currently available programs to
species tree reconstruction use Bayesian phylogenetic inference, it is intuitive that Bayes factors receive
more attention as a preferred model selection tool in statistical species delimitation.



Gubler, Jenny (Central Michigan University); Karrick, Megan; Nicholson, Kirsten (Central Michigan
University, Mount Pleasant, United States)

Investigation of the Evolutionary Relationships Among Species of the Anolis cupreus Complex

The phylogenetic relationships among mainland Anolis lizards are still not completely resolved and new
species continue to be described every year. Widespread species in Central America have recently been
split up and subpopulations elevated to species level. All of these recent descriptions have been on the
basis of morphological data, but no phylogenetic analyses have been conducted to explore how these
species are related. Here we report on the molecular genetic variation and relationships among
populations of Anolis cupreus throughout its range, including one purportedly closely related species ( A.
villai ), and two new species that have been recently split from A. cupreus . We also analyzed these data
to infer the phylogenetic relationships of these species in the context of all mainland Norops clade
species. We found no molecular support for A. villai . As of this writing the placement of A. macrophallus,
A. yoroensis, and A. dollfusianus have not been completed but will be added by presentation time.



Guidugli, Michelle (Eastern Kentucky University); MacGregor, John (Kentucky Department of Fish and
Wildlife Resources, Frankfort, KY, United States); Richter, Stephen; Brown, David (Eastern Kentucky
University, Richmond, KY, United States)

Developing a Rapid Assessment Method and Amphibian Index of Biotic Integrity for Kentucky's
Wetlands

In Kentucky, at least 80% of wetlands have been lost or degraded; however, the amount of impact is
likely underestimated. Unfortunately, no statewide program has been adopted to assess the quality of
wetlands to aid in establishing mitigation levels or long-term monitoring. To address these needs, the
Kentucky Division of Water, Eastern Kentucky University (EKU), and various state and United States
federal agencies are in the process of developing the Kentucky Wetland Rapid Assessment Method (i.e.,
KY-WRAM). In an effort to validate the KY-WRAM‘s ability to reflect wetland condition, more intensive
assessments of wetland condition such as amphibian, vegetation, macroinvertebrate, chlorophyll a, and
water quality surveys are being conducted. These rapid assessment data and intensive bio-assessment
data will be compared for each wetland where both assessments occurred. To make these comparisons
possible with the amphibian survey data, EKU and John MacGregor (Kentucky Department of Fish and
Wildlife Resources) have begun developing an Amphibian Index of Biotic Integrity (Amphibian IBI), which
will be just one of several tools used for KY-WRAM validation and assessment and as a tool to monitor



                                                                                                        277
amphibian communities throughout Kentucky. In this presentation, we discuss the process we are using
to develop the KY-WRAM and Amphibian IBI, which are based upon the methods established by Ohio
EPA‘s Wetland Ecology Group, and some preliminary results. These topics include a description of
Coefficients of Conservatism, an Amphibian Quality Assessment Index, other amphibian community
metrics, and our approach to developing these for Kentucky.



Gunn, Theresa (Florida Atlantic University); Cave, Eloise; Bedore, Christine (Florida Atlantic University,
Canada); Kerstetter, David (Nova Southeastern University, Canada); Kajiura, Stephen (Florida Atlantic
University, Canada)

Sexual Dimorphism in the Dentition of Basal Vertebrates

Elasmobranch fishes are among a small group of vertebrates that use their mouth to bite their mate
during courtship and copulation. Because the teeth of males are under selective pressure to facilitate
both feeding and grasping of the females, there exists the potential for conflicting selective demands on
the tooth morphology, where the tooth shape optimal for one behavior may be suboptimal for the other.
Various elasmobranch species have been documented to exhibit sexual dimorphisms in tooth
morphology with males typically possessing more cuspidate teeth, presumably to facilitate grasping the
female during mating. Male Atlantic stingrays ( Dasyatis sabina ) demonstrate seasonally dynamic
changes in dentition, from molariform teeth during the non-mating season to cuspidate teeth during the
mating season. Thisseasonal change in tooth shape is documented for only a single species so it
remains unknown whether this is a widespread phenomenon. Pelagic stingrays ( Pteroplatytrygon
violacea ) are in the same family (Dasyatidae) as Atlantic stingrays but feed on teleost and squid prey
which present similar demands on the male tooth morphology as the slippery body of their female mates.
If the tooth morphology of pelagic stingrays is sexually dynamic and males undergo a seasonal change in
tooth shape, it suggests that dynamic teeth are likely widespread throughout the batoids. Pelagic stingray
jaws were collected monthly from commercial fisherman for a full year. the number of tooth files and rows
did not differ between the sexes and ranged from 20-35 tooth rows and 5-10 tooth files in both upper and
lower jaws. Upper jaw symphyseal teeth were extracted for shape analysis, Qualitative differences in
tooth shape were observed between males and females throughout the year, and males demonstrated
different tooth shapes between mating and non-mating seasons. male Pelagic stingray teeth were more
strongly cuspidate than female teeth especially late in the mating season (April) when the teeth have
rotated to the outermost functional position. Male Teeth fromthe non-mating season (November) showed
a more rounded triangular shape. a Procrustes superimposition with relative warp analysis was
employed to quantify the differences between the sexes and between mating and non-mating seasons.
The observation that male tooth morphology changes seasonally, even in a piscivorous species, indicates
that this is a widespread phenomenon.



Guo, Ce (Institute of bio-inspired structure and surface engineering,Nanjing University of Aeronautics and
Astonautics);

Biomechanism of adhesion in gecko setae

The study of the adhesion of millions of setae on the toes of geckos has been advanced in recent years
with the emergence of new technology and measurement methods. The theory of the mechanism of
adhesion by van der Waals forces is now accepted and broadly understood. However, this paper
presents limitations of this theory and gives a new hypothesis of the biomechanism of gecko adhesion.



                                                                                                       278
The findings are obtained through measurements of the magnitude of the adhesion of setae under three
different conditions, to show the close relationship between adhesion and status of the setae. They are
reinforced by demonstrating two setal structures, follicle cells and hair, the former making the setae
capable of producing bioelectrical charges, which play an important role in attachment and detachment
processes. It is shown that the abundant muscular tissues at the base of the setae cells, which are
controlled by peripheral nerves, are instrumental in producing the foot movement involved in attachment
and detachment. Our study will further uncover the adhesion mechanism of geckos, and provide new
ideas for designing and fabricating synthetic setae.



Guttridge, Tristan (Bimini Biological Field Station Foundation); Brown, Culum (Macquarie University,
Sydney, Australia)

Learning and memory of port jackson sharks, heterodontus portusjacksoni

Basic understanding of the fundamental principles and mechanisms involved in learning are extremely
lacking for cartilaginous fishes. Our aim in this study was to experimentally investigate the learning and
memory capacity of juvenile Port Jackson sharks, Heterondontus portusjacksoni . Sharks (N = 30) were
conditioned over a 19-day period to associate an underwater LED light or stream of air bubbles
(conditioned stimulus, CS) with a food reward (unconditioned stimulus, US), in three procedures (delay,
trace and control) . During experiments the CS signaled at a random time between 180 and 300s for
30s. For delay (US overlapped in time with CS), for trace (US delivered 10s after CS) and for control
(US delivered random time between 180 and 300s after CS). H.portusjacksoni trained in all procedures
improved consistently in their time to obtain food, indicative of learning. Importantly the number of sharks
in the feeding area 5s prior to the CS signaling did not change over time for any procedures. However,
significantly more sharks were present 5s during CS signaling for delay (air bubble) and trace (light).
Sharks trained in the delay and trace procedures (air bubble CS) also displayed significantly more
anticipatory behaviors, such as turning towards the CS and biting. Sharks trained with the light CS did not
exhibit any biting behaviors however trace procedural sharks did show a significant improvement in
turning towards the CS at its onset. At 40 and 20 days after the end of the conditioning experiments some
sharks were presented the CS without reward. Two sharks trained in the delay procedure (air bubble CS)
exhibited movement and biting behaviors. This study demonstrates that H.portusjacksoni have the
capacity to learn a classical conditioning procedure relatively quickly (some in <5 days), associate two
time-separated events and retention of learnt associations for up to 40 days.



Guzy, Jackie (Davidson College);

An assessment of the spatial configuration of greenspace and aquatic habitats on semi-aquatic
turtle occupancy and species richness in a suburban landscape

Within urban areas, the importance of greenspaces for supporting wildlife has been widely investigated
for some species, but studies of reptiles have generally been neglected. To assess the importance of the
amount, spatial distribution, and composition of greenspaces, we examined semi-aquatic turtle species
richness in urbanized areas. In this study, we sampled turtles from 2010-2011 at 20 suburban ponds
classified as rural, urban, or golf. We used a hierarchical Bayesian species-richness model to estimate
species richness and species-specific responses to four landscape measurements of greenspace,
generated in FRAGSTATS (Euclidean nearest neighbor, interspersion juxtaposition index, percent of
landscape, and connectance). We found no effects of pond type (rural, urban, or golf) on turtle



                                                                                                        279
occupancy or estimated species richness. We found that occupancy of four species, Kinosternon
subrubrum , Trachemys scripta , Chelydra serpentina , and Pseudemys concinna increased
substantially with an increase in connectance of greenspace within 500 m of each pond. Our results
indicate that in suburban areas, semi-aquatic turtles benefit from increased connectivity of greenspace.
As land-cover becomes increasingly urbanized, it is important to understand mechanisms which promote
biodiversity and conservation in these systems.



Hagerty, Bridgette (York College of Pennsylvania); Tracy, C. Richard (University of Nevada, Reno,
Canada); Tracy, Christopher R. (University of Melbourne, Canada); Snyder, Sarah J.; Wakeling,
Stephanie R.; Sandmeier, Franziska C.; Maloney, Nichole (University of Nevada, Reno, Canada)

Dissecting the genetic structure of the chuckwalla (Sauromalus ater) at two spatial scales

Anecdotally, chuckwallas ( Sauromalus ater ) are rarely found more than a few meters away from the
rocky outcrops that these lizards require for predator avoidance, thermoregulation, and hibernacula.
Rocky desert habitat is naturally heterogeneous, so the close association between chuckwallas and their
rock piles has the potential to limit dispersal ability and isolate populations. Additionally, male chuckwallas
are highly territorial, appear to defend resources or females, and generally do not have overlapping home
ranges. These characteristics lead to the hypotheses that 1) chuckwalla dispersal might be limited at a
local scale and 2) males are more likely to be the dispersing sex. We used six microsatellite markers to
investigate the spatial genetic structure of chuckwallas in the Mojave Desert of the southwestern United
States (Nevada and California), and to test hypotheses related to dispersal. At the spatial scale of the
Mojave Desert, sampled chuckwalla populations showed high levels of genetic differentiation and clear
spatial structure that aligned closely with geography. Genetic differentiation among individuals did not
correlate strongly to geographic distance, which is consistent with our first hypothesis. Within the
Newberry Mountain range, we sampled at a finer scale and found the highest level of spatial
autocorrelation at intermediate distance classes, greater than 1km but less than 5km. Surprisingly, we did
not find genetic evidence for sex-biased dispersal at either spatial scale using assignment tests. We
discuss our results as a springboard for additional research on the external and internal factors that
influence chuckwalla dispersal.



Hagey, Travis (University of Idaho); Puthoff, Jonathan; Autumn, Kellar (Lewis and Clark College,
Canada); Harmon, Luke (University of Idaho, Canada)

Using the Weibull Distribution to Quantify Adhesion across Geckos

Adaptation is a major process in the diversification of life on earth. Studies of adaptation often rely on
patterns of correlated morphology, performance, and habitat preferences. Gecko lizards are an excellent
system to study these patterns of adaptation, as they are a species rich group with highly variable
morphology. Well known for their climbing ability, geckos have unique adhesive toe pads. The shape and
size of these adhesive pads vary across genera. Unfortunately, statistical measurements of geckos‘
adhesive capabilities can be difficult. To estimate and compare adhesion between species, we suggest
using a failure analysis technique relying on the Weibull distribution. The generation of adhesion relies on
the amount of friction a gecko‘s toe pad generates, and measuring the angle of toe detachment is a proxy
for the efficiency with which a gecko can translate frictional forces into adhesion. We can estimate the
most likely angle of toe detachment with the Weibull analysis. Using this method, we have evaluated the
adhesive capabilities of nearly 40 species, sampling across the gecko phylogeny. Establishing standard




                                                                                                           280
methods to quantify performance and significant variation between and within species is a valuable first
step in examining how geckos have adapted to a wide array of habitat types across the globe.



Hagman, Mattias (Stockholm University); Elmberg, Johan (Kristianstad University, Kristianstad, Sweden)

'Museum mining' - a method for investigating population trends

The general lack of long-term population data for amphibians and reptiles is a major problem in ecology
and conservation. This is particularly evident in the light of recent negative changes such as habitat loss,
climate change, invasive species and emerging infectious diseases. In the cases where data are
available they rarely embrace more than a decade or two, and are often restricted to a single population
monitored for some time by a researcher. Consequently, there is an alarming lack of essential long-term
population data required to make informed decisions. In this presentation we argue that ‗museum mining‘
– the use of museum data – can overcome this deficiency and provide a useful tool in ecology and
conservation. We will outline the concept and illustrate it with data on widespread species in the
European herpetofauna, of which some are presently of conservation concern. The method should be
useful in many countries and we will list the conditions under which it is applicable.



Hagman, Mattias (James Cook University); Alford, Ross (James Cook University, Townsville, Q,
Australia)

Patterns of Bd (Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis) transmission between tadpoles in a rainforest
stream

The fungal pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) has been implicated in worldwide amphibian
population declines and is widely seen as a major threat to amphibian biodiversity. Streams and other
water bodies are central habitats in the ecology of the disease, particularly in rainforests where they may
transport and transmit the pathogen and harbor infected tadpoles that serve as reservoir hosts. To
examine how the fungus is transmitted between tadpoles in stream habitats and whether infection affects
their growth, we conducted an experiment using semi-natural streamside channels in a rainforest in
tropical Australia. The results showed that transmission could occur downstream in flowing water with no
contact between individuals, and that infected tadpoles grew at reduced rates. Recently infected tadpoles
showed substantial loss of mouthparts, but individuals with longstanding infections did not, suggesting
that mouthparts may re-grow following initial loss. These findings may have implications for the
management of Bd in stream habitats.



Haines, Maggie (University of Melbourne/Museum Victoria); Moussalli, Adnan (Museum Victoria,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia); Clemann, Nick (Arthur Rylah Institute, Department of Sustainability and
Environment, Heidelberg, VIC, Australia); Stuart-Fox, Devi (University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC,
Australia); Melville, Jane (Museum Victoria, Melbourne, VIC, Australia)

Unravelling the complex evolutionary history of southeastern Australian alpine skinks using a
phylogeographic approach

Species endemic to the sub-alpine regions of Australia are among the most threatened by climate
change. To predict how these species will respond to changes in climate, it is important to understand




                                                                                                        281
their evolutionary history. The genus Pseudemoia contains six species, including generalists and sub-
alpine specialists such as the endangered alpine bog skink Pseudemoia cryodroma. It has been
hypothesised that this species arose from hybridisation between P. entrecasteauxii and P. pagenstecheri.
All three of these species have overlapping distributions in the sub-alpine areas of Victoria and they are
syntopic in at least one location. We reconstructed the phylogeny of Pseudomoia, in part to address this
hypothesis and determine whether there is any current hybridisation. We sequenced one mitochondrial
gene (ND4) and one nuclear gene (Rhodopsin) from all six Pseudemoia species across their geographic
range. Preliminary results indicate that admixture may have occurred between P. cryodroma, P.
entrecasteauxii, and P. pagenstecheri. The mtDNA data indicates that P. cryodroma is part of the P.
pagenstecheri complex. However, the nuclear data, which has limited resolution, suggest that P.
pagenstecheri is monophyletic. The molecular data also suggests the existence of cryptic species within
this genus. Data from additional nuclear genes are required to confirm these patterns and provide
additional phylogenetic resolution. We also present analyses of microsatellite data to shed further light
on possible hybridisation and determine genetic diversity and connectivity for sub-alpine populations of P.
cryodroma, P. entrecasteauxii, and P. pagenstecheri.



Hall, Alex (The University of Texas at Arlington); Pierce, Benjamin A. (Southwestern University,
Georgetown, TX, United States)

Call Latency in Anuran Breeding Call Surveys in Central Texas

Concern over global amphibian declines has increased the use of amphibian monitoring programs such
as the North American Amphibian Monitoring Program (NAAMP). The NAAMP protocol has been widely
used to determine anuran (i.e., frog and toad) species distribution and relative abundance using
volunteer-based auditory surveys of male breeding calls. The goals of this study were to monitor anuran
breeding habitats in central Texas using the NAAMP protocol and to investigate the utility of a new
measure of anuran calling behavior, call latency, the latency of a species to call after the beginning of a
call survey. Four routes with ten listening sites per route were surveyed once a month between February
and July from 2007 to 2010. Nine species of anurans were heard across all surveys and for six species,
annual percent site occupancy changed significantly between years. Call latency and call index (a
measure of calling intensity) varied significantly across species. For seven of the nine species, higher call
index was associated with shorter call latency. Neither call latency nor call index differed significantly
between surveys with low road noise and surveys with high road noise. Call index was not associated
with wind velocity, but for two species, call latency was longer in surveys conducted under high-wind
conditions than surveys conducted under low-wind conditions. Call latency is more reliably quantified than
call index and is a simple measure that can be incorporated into the NAAMP call survey protocol.



Halpern, Bálint (MME BirdLife Hungary); Péchy, Tamás (MME BridLife Hungary, Canada)

Hungarian meadow viper conservation program

Remaining Hungarian meadow viper ( Vipera ursinii rakosiensis ) population was estimated below 500
individuals, with three major occurrences in Hungary and one in Romania. The reasons behind the
decline are habitat loss and unvafourable management due to intensive agriculture. A complex
conservation program was started in 2004, supported by the EU LIFE-Nature fund. Viper Conservation
and Breeding Centre was started with 10 adult individuals, collected from 4 different subpopulations, and
after eight successful breeding periods by 2011 number of captive bred vipers exceeded 1000. First



                                                                                                         282
reintroduction took place in March 2010, releasing 30 snakes into a reconstructed habitat in Kiskunság
National Park. Later 70 snakes were released to the same site in 2011, and 50 more to a new site in
2012. Snakes were released at the end of the hibernation period, by removing them together with their
artificial burrows, a tool developed by the program. During regular monitoring we checked these burrows
by using pipe-camera and their surroundings visually. Other amphibian and reptile species started to use
these burrows as well. We recorded Triturus dobrogicus, Bombina bombina, Pelobates fuscus, Podarcis
tauricus, Lacerta viridis, Natrix natrix and Coronella austriaca . In 2010 we recorded vipers 54 times
during these visits, 44 times in or around these burrows. Altogether 9 individuals were identified by
photos. In 2010 4 of them , while in 2011 7 females were gravid at the time of observation. For the future
plan to continue release of snakes in new sites from 2012, some equipped with VHF-transmitters that are
tested recently.



Halstead, Brian (U.S. Geological Survey); Valcarcel, Patricia (Oregon State University, Canada); Wylie,
Glenn; Coates, Peter; Casazza, Michael (U.S. Geological Survey, Canada)

Hierarchical case-control logistic regression reveals multiple patterns in giant gartersnake habitat
selection

The giant gartersnake ( Thamnophis gigas ) is listed as threatened by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
and the State of California because of extensive habitat loss within its restricted range. Little is known,
however, about how the giant gartersnake selects habitat at small spatial scales. We examined
microhabitat selection of the giant gartersnake to help guide habitat restoration and management efforts
for this rare species. We used a case-control design, whereby we recorded the percent cover of several
habitat types (open water, emergent vegetation, submerged vegetation, bare ground, litter (dead
vegetation), and terrestrial vegetation) and vegetation categories (aquatic = hardstem bulrush (tule;
Schoenoplectus acutus ), cattail ( Typha spp.), duckweed ( Lemna spp.), water primrose ( Ludwigia
peploides ), mosquitofern ( Azolla spp.), algae, and rice ( Oryza sativa ); terrestrial = grasses (Poaceae),
weedy dicots, rushes (Juncaceae), and woody shrubs and vines) within a 0.5 m radius of an individual
snake‘s location and at a paired random point within 50 m of the individual‘s location during the active
season (April – September, 2009 and 2010). We used Bayesian hierarchical paired logistic regression to
estimate the odds of use based upon microhabitat conditions. Emergent vegetation, terrestrial vegetation,
litter, and submerged vegetation were positively selected. Bare ground and open water were neither
positively nor negatively selected. Rice was negatively selected by the population, but individuals were
highly variable in their selection of rice habitat. Only one aquatic plant, hardstem bulrush, was positively
selected. Water primrose, duckweed, and cattails were neither positively nor negatively selected.
Mosquitofern, algae, and rice were all negatively selected. Rushes were the only positively selected
terrestrial vegetation; all other terrestrial vegetation was used in proportion to its availability. Hierarchical
case-control logistic regression provided inference to the population, quantified variability among
individuals in the selection of microhabitats, and allowed an examination of selection by individual snakes
in a single analysis. Our results suggest that restoration and management activities that promote
abundant cover of aquatic and terrestrial vegetation and litter, while maintaining microhabitat
heterogeneity, will likely improve habitat conditions for the giant gartersnake. Restoration of native tule
marsh habitat, in particular, will likely benefit giant gartersnake populations.




                                                                                                             283
Halstead, Brian (U.S. Geological Survey); Wylie, Glenn; Coates, Peter; Casazza, Michael (U.S.
Geological Survey, Canada)

Robust Estimation of Giant Gartersnake Density in Linear Habitats using Spatial Capture-mark-
recapture Models

The estimation of animal densities is essential for comparing abundances among habitat types or
locations. Estimating the effective sampled area, however, can be a difficult task. Spatial capture-mark-
recapture (CMR) models (Royle and Young, 2008) offer a highly effective solution to this problem by
estimating the latent activity center location of both captured and unobserved individuals. Estimation of
density then proceeds by calculating the number of individual activity centers that occur within the
sampled area. For organisms that occur in linear habitats, expression of density as a function of distance,
rather than area, is often appropriate. We used a simplification of the Royle and Young (2008) model to
calculate robust linear densities of the giant gartersnake ( Thamnophis gigas ) from spatially-referenced
captures on trap transects in a canal system. Closed CMR models indicated a positive effect of water
temperature on capture probability of the giant gartersnake at our site, so in addition to spatial effects, we
included effects of water temperature in our spatial CMR model. We captured 23 individuals 37 times in
traps from 2 June – 8 July 2011. Our estimate of abundance from model-averaged closed CMR models
was 44 (95% CI = 28 – 75) individuals. The corresponding density of the giant gartersnake in the sampled
canal was 43 (28 – 68) individuals/km. Spatial CMR models are an effective solution to calculating
herpetofaunal densities in a number of sampling situations, and can be easily modified to calculate
densities in linear habitats.



Hamady, Li Ling (MIT/Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution); Natanson, Lisa (National Marine
Fisheries Service, NOAA, Canada); Skomal, Gregory (Massachusetts Division of Marine Fisheries,
Canada); Thorrold, Simon (Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Canada)

Testing white shark, basking shark, and dusky shark age estimation techniques using bomb
radiocarbon validation

Accurate age estimation is critical to population assessment and conservation strategies for sharks and
rays as it allows for the calculation of important demographic information including longevity, growth rate,
and age at sexual maturity; m anagement decisions based on under aging can inadvertently lead to
overexploitation . The primary method for estimating age of sharks relies on counting pair-bands that are
assumed to be annual in vertebrae. While it is widely acknowledged that the assumption of annual
deposition should be tested by an independent method, most shark species lack this validation. White
sharks (Carcharodon carcharias) , basking sharks ( Cetorhinus maximus ), and dusky sharks (
Carcharhinus obscurus ) are listed as vulnerable on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species due to a
history of overfishing, and all three currently lack age validation. We present new radiocarbon data taken
from analyses of shark vertebrae and compare and contrast the different results from the three species.
We hope that this work will inform and assist with conservation efforts for all three species.



Hanken, James (Harvard Museum of Comparative Zoology);

The Encyclopedia of Life and the Biodiversity Heritage Library

The Encyclopedia of Life (EOL) is a global biodiversity informatics initiative that launched officially in May
2007. Its fundamental goal is deceptively simple: provide a homepage for every species of living



                                                                                                          284
organism. In reality, EOL is an ambitious, even audacious project that seeks to readily make available
online and at no cost to the user as much biological information regarding a given species as can be
obtained legally and in digital form.         In addition to its two core activities, bioinformatics/IT and
construction of species pages, key components include biodiversity synthesis, learning and education,
and scanning and digitization of the primary literature of comparative biology and taxonomy since
Linnaeus. The latter activity is performed by the Biodiversity Heritage Library (BHL), an affiliated
consortium of many of the world‘s largest natural history libraries. The Encyclopedia of Life is not a
taxonomic activity per se, but it has the potential to tremendously enhance the work of practicing
taxonomists and systematists, especially those in developing countries, and thereby facilitate the
discovery, naming and classification of Earth‘s biological diversity. As of March 2012, EOL was delivering
online pages with content for nearly 900,000 of the estimated 1.9 million living, named species. At the
same time BHL had scanned and was making available nearly 38 million pages of scientific literature,
representing more than 38,000 titles and 100,000 separate volumes.          EOL requires—and seeks—the
active participation and involvement by the professional scientific community in order to succeed and
achieve its full potential as a reliable and up-to-date source of information for scientists, educators,
conservationists, environmental planners, government policymakers, students, laypeople, and other
―consumers‖ of biological data worldwide. Several of its most important and active participants to date
come from ichthyology and herpetology; among the most prominent content partners, for example, are
FishBase, AmphibiaWeb and The Reptile Database. Encyclopedia of Life and Biodiversity Heritage
Library are two of several current projects that together may soon realize the grand vision of a seamless
global biodiversity informatics infrastructure for use by science and society. Launch of EOL and BHL was
enabled by financial support from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation and the Alfred P.
Sloan Foundation.



Hargarten, Heidi (University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point);

Testing the Lepisosteus oculatus and L. platyrhincus species boundary in the Florida Panhandle
using molecular techniques.

The Spotted Gar (Lepisosteus oculatus) and the Florida Gar (Lepisosteus platyrhincus) have potentially
overlapping distributions in the panhandle of Florida. Previous studies (Swift et al. 1977) defined that the
respective ranges met at the watershed boundary between the Apalachicola and Ochlockonee Rivers.
Florida and Spotted gar are sister species (Grande 2010, Sipiorski 2011) and display remarkably similar
morphologies. Until recently, it has been assumed that there has been no genetic mixing between these
two species at the contact zone and that there is no overlap to the species‘ ranges. However, each
species has similar habitat and feeding preferences and there is no fundamental observable break in the
type of habitat found there. Recently, studies based on mitochondrial DNA haplotypes show that there
may be evidence of ongoing migration across the contact zone and/or that the two species may hybridize
in the vicinity (Sipiorski 2011). By including DNA from more individual gars of both species we expand
upon previous results to preliminarily test both the proposed migration and hybridization hypotheses.




                                                                                                        285
Harrington, Sean (John Carroll University); Harrison, Luke (Redpath Museum, McGill University,
Canada); Sheil, Christopher (John Carroll University, Canada)

A Comprehensive Study of Heterochrony Among Amphibians Using Parsimov-based Genetic
Inference (PGi)

Studies of the relative timing of formation and ossification of skeletal elements have shed light on the
developmental and evolutionary origins of various aspects of the tetrapod skeleton. Recently, software
has been developed that automates the process of inferring ancestral sequences of developmental
events, thereby facilitating the study of sequence heterochrony. Parsimov-based genetic inference (PGi)
is one such program, and it differs from similar algorithms (e.g., Parsimov, event-pair cracking) in that it
analyzes entire sequences of events simultaneously, rather than relying on paired comparisons of
ossification events. Additionally, an updated version of PGi allows for results of multiple computational
runs to be combined into a single consensus solution and improves visualization. Ossification sequence
data were collected from representatives of families within Anura, Gymnophiona, and Caudata to
reconstruct ancestral sequences for internal nodes within a user-defined constraint tree for relationships
among extant and fossil amphibians.         Instances of acceleration and deceleration (i.e., early and late
shifts) in the relative timing of appearance of bones within various structural units, as well as across all
structural units of the skeleton, were identified.

Bones of the jaws and palate were inferred to ossify early in the common ancestor of Amphibia, with the
vomer (a dentigerous palatal bone) shifting early in this clade relative to the common ancestor of
[Amphibia + Actinopterygii]. These bones were then identified as shifting late in the ancestor of Anura;
elements of the hind limb and pelvic girdle also shifted early in this clade.      These shifts may be
explained by the relatively radical metamorphosis that anurans undergo, and the developmental and
functional constraints that this process confers.



Harris, Lindsay (Florida Atlantic University); Bedore, Christine; Kajiura, Stephen (Florida Atlantic
University, Canada)

Bioelectric fields of elasmobranch prey

All aquatic organisms produce minute yet complex electric fields around their body as a result of internal
ion concentrations that differ from those in the environment. Ion leakage across mucous membranes
results in greater electric field strengths around the mouth and gills where they are modulated by
opercular movements during respiration. The divergent electrical properties of freshwater and saltwater
present different challenges for electroreceptive predators like elasmobranch fishes (sharks, skates, and
rays) that detect the bioelectric fields of their prey. This study employed an electrophysiological technique
to measure the voltage and frequency of electric fields produced by various elasmobranch prey items in
both fresh and saltwater. Three marine invertebrates, eight marine fishes, and three freshwater fishes
representing a broad taxonomic range and lifestyle were c hosen for this study. Overall, the fishes
produced a greater average voltage than the invertebrates (marine fishes 134.15 μV; freshwater fishes
849.59 μV; invertebrates 16.8 μV). All fishes generated the greatest voltage near the mouth and gills (
marine average 113.0 μV, freshwater average 765.18 μV) and the smallest voltage along the trunk and
caudal peduncle ( marine average 13.76 μV, freshwater average 41.18 μV) . The amplitude of the
bioelectric potential did not correlate with size or mass of the prey items. The frequency component
ranged from 0.61 Hz at the mouth of the freshwater tiger oscar Astronotus ocellatus to 11.1 Hz at the
swimmerets of the marine shrimp Penaeus spp. These frequencies fall within the range of detection for
elasmobranchs (<20 Hz). Decay of the electric field with distance was also measured, and bioelectric



                                                                                                         286
potentials could be measured up to 5 cm away from the mouth of the freshwater fishes, and 15 cm from
the mouth of the marine fishes. From these voltage data, the electric field gradient (μV/cm) was modeled
to estimate from how far an elasmobranch could detect the electric potential of a prey item. Marine
elasmobranchs should be able to detect a teleost prey item from 32-75 cm away based on an average
electrosensitivity of 35 nV/cm. Sensitivity data are lacking for freshwater elasmobranchs so detection
distances of freshwater prey remain unknown, but are the subject of ongoing research.



Harrison, Alexis (Harvard University); Revell, Liam (University of Massachusetts, Boston, Canada);
Losos, Jonathan (Harvard University, Canada)

Correlated evolution of microhabitat, morphology, and behavior in West Indian Anolis lizards: A
test of the ecomorph hypothesis

Ecology, morphology, and behavior are known evolve together in many taxa, producing species with
convergent sets of traits known as "ecomorphs". Though many studies have examined the correlated
evolution of morphological and ecological traits, behavioral traits have often been neglected. This is
unfortunate because behavior has been alternately proposed as a driver of evolution, and as a force that
could inhibit adaptation; in either case behavior is thought to be central to the evolutionary process. We
examined the role of behavior in the correlated evolution of Anolis ecomorphs, a classic system for the
study of convergent evolution, using data on the locomotor behavior, morphology, and microhabitat use of
30 species from the Greater Antilles using phylogenetic canonical correlation analysis. We found that the
morphology of anoles was correlated with both locomotor behavior and microhabitat utilization, but
different aspects of morphology are correlated in each case. By contrast, locomotor behavior was not
correlated with microhabitat use. This suggests that ecomorph evolution is more complex in Anolis than
was previously thought.



Harrison, Lucy (IUCN Shark Specialist Group); Dulvy, Nick (IUCN Shark Specialist Group, Burnaby, BC,
Canada)

Towards a Species Conservation Strategy for Sawfish

 All seven species of sawfish are globally listed as Critically Endangered by the IUCN Red List and are
listed on CITES; both the smalltooth and largetooth sawfishes are listed on the US Endangered Species
Act. Sawfishes were formerly widespread in tropical and subtropical coastal waters, with some species
extending into freshwater. However, their distribution is now severely fragmented, and some sawfish are
thought to be locally extinct from large parts of their former range, for example in the Gulf of Mexico, West
Africa and the Indo-Pacific. Because of this, and their k-selected life history, there is a very real risk that
this ecologically unique and evolutionarily distinct lineage will vanish in our lifetime due to an intrinsic
vulnerability to extinction. The IUCN Shark Specialist Group develops Species Conservation Strategies
(SCS) for species that would benefit from immediate conservation action, i.e. sawfishes. Here, we
describe the Species Conservation Strategy process and review the current status of sawfishes,
summarize current conservation activities and provide priority recommendations for further action.




                                                                                                           287
Hart, Kristen (United States Geological Survey); Cherkiss, Michael (USGS Southeast Ecological Science
Center, Canada); Mazzotti, Frank; Fujisaki, Ikuko (University of Florida, Canada); Snow, Raymond (U.S.
National Park Service, Canada); Dorcas, Michael (Davidson College, Canada)

Home range, habitat use, and movement patterns of non-native Burmese pythons in Everglades
National Park, Florida

Knowledge of the spatial ecology of invasive species is important because it allows for identification of
key habitats occupied and provides insight into which native species may be at risk. To understand the
spatial ecology non-native Burmese pythons ( Python molurus bivittatus ), now established in Everglades
National Park (ENP) in south Florida, we radiotracked16 wild-caught adult pythons from 2006-2009. Our
goal was to identify individual core-use areas and quantify home ranges, as well as to explore
correlations of individual movement parameters with environmental factors such as presence of surface
water. Tracking periods for individual pythons ranged from 87 to 697 days, with a total of 5,119 tracking
days (mean + 1 SD = 319.9 + 184.3 d). We observed mean individual home ranges of 22.5 km 2 .
Although all home ranges were within ENP boundary, not all pythons exhibited high site-fidelity. . Python
core-use areas included slough and coastal habitat types, and we delineated 18 common-use areas (i.e.,
areas where individual core-use areas spatially overlapped). Tree islands appeared to be a principal
feature of common-use areas, even if they were not the predominant habitat type. Average movement
rates of pythons were greater with the presence of surface water, however, the longest movements
occurred during both wet and dry seasons. Our results potentially provide a starting point for planning
targeted control efforts as well as information that can help in further studies of python impacts on native
fauna.



Hartson, Carissa A. (Edinboro University of Pennsylvania); Ilgen, Emily L.; Zaleski, Olivia S.; Lindeman,
Peter V. (Edinboro University of Pennsylvania, Edinboro, PA, United States)

Channelization Impacts on Sabine Map Turtle Habitat in the Mermentau River, Louisiana: Use of
Original vs. New Channels

Graptemys sabinensis (the Sabine map turtle) occurs in the Sabine, Calcasieu, and Mermentau rivers. In
the 1970‘s, the Mermentau was altered by construction of seven cut-offs between the town of Mermentau
and Lake Arthur, Louisiana. There are also several cut-offs on the river‘s largest tributary, Bayou
Plaquemine Brule. We surveyed basking turtles on lower Plaquemine Brule and the Mermentau to
determine if the new channels are used to the same extent as original channels. Original channels had
nonsignificantly higher numbers of Sabine map turtles and total turtles basking than new channels, but
there were significantly more Sabine map turtles and total turtles per kilometer (higher densities) on new
channels than original channels. Dredging created a bypass for excess water on the river, allowing higher
flow on the new channel, which is thought to be preferred by map turtles. There was no significant
difference in Sabine map turtle density between inner and outer banks of Mermentau original channels,
presumably because dredging made the depths along the inner and outer banks similar. New channels
divert the flow of water, which may maintain the homogenized condition of the original channels.




                                                                                                        288
Harvey, Emily (Sonoma State University); Minarik, Kellianne; Crocker, Dan; Girman, Derek (Sonoma
State University, Canada)

Female Mate Choice and Species Recognition via Repellent Chemical Cues in Rough Skin Newts
(Taricha granulosa)

Species recognition during mate choice plays a key role in maintaining reproductive isolation between
closely related sympatric species. Here, we examine female mate choice and species recognition via
chemical cues in the rough skin newt, Taricha granulosa, in both pond and creek habitats. To simulate
mate choice decisions in nature as closely as possible, we chose to conduct our behavioral experiments
in the field using a Y-maze apparatus. Mate choice was analyzed using a generalized linear model to
control for environmental variables. We found that females were not attracted to conspecific males over a
water control or conspecific females, with mate choice decisions being nearly random. However, females
significantly preferred the conspecific male over both heterospecific male species. Our results suggest
that female rough skin newts are repelled by heterospecific male chemical cues, and that a repellent
chemical cue may function to prevent heterospecific pairings between these species.



Hasan, Mahmudul (Inst. for Amphibian Biology, Graduate School of Science); Sumida, Masayuki (Inst.
for Amphibian Biology, Graduate School of Science, Higashihiroshima, 40, Japan)

A new species of genus Hoplobatrachus (Anura, Dicroglossidae) from the coastal belt of
Bangladesh

A new cryptic species of the genus Hoplobatrachus from Cox‘s Bazar district of Bangladesh is described
and compared with its relevant congeners both in morphology and mitochondrial gene sequences. The
new species differs from its close relative H . tigerinus in having a distinct broad black band from the
eye, through the nostrils, to the anterior edge of the upper jaw, another black band along the lateral
margin of the upper jaw, and a narrow inter-orbital distance relative to eyelid width and inter-nostril
distance. Advertisement calls of the new species are similar to those of H. tigerinus but differ in
dominant frequency and number of pulses. Based on mitochondrial DNA sequence data, this species was
proved to genetically divergent from H . tigerinus at 3.2% for the 16S rRNA gene and 14.2% for the
Cytb gene. The known distribution range of the new species is restricted to the southeastern corner of
Bangladesh and it seems to be endemic in this coastal belt.



Hathaway, Anna (University of South Florida); McCoy, Earl (University of South Florida, Tampa, FL,
United States); Mushinsky, Henry (University of South Florida, Canada)

Relocating Gopher Tortoises to a Cattle Ranch. How Does Reproductive Output Vary Between
Years and Resident and Relocated Females?

 As part of a state-funded Gopher Tortoise ( Gopherus polyphemus Daudin) translocation project, we are
monitoring actively grazed improved pastures to determine if they can serve as suitable recipient sites for
the threatened Gopher Tortoise as it is displaced by human development. For cattle ranches to be
considered suitable recipient sites, numerous requirements must be met: two critical requirements are
that females are able to acquire sufficient energy to produce a clutch of viable eggs and that sufficient
high quality vegetation is available to support juvenile recruitment into the population. Vegetation surveys
were conducted at a working cattle ranch in Pasco County, Florida, to determine the composition and
frequency of plant species, especially those containing high amounts of nutrients, specifically nitrogen.



                                                                                                        289
We radiographed resident and relocated females during the 2010 and 2011 nesting seasons (May –
June) for the presence of shelled eggs. We were able to determine clutch size and egg diameter for both
relocated and resident gravid females. The average clutch size for all gravid females across both years
was 9.2 +/- 3.0 SD (n = 77). Average clutch sizes were not significantly different between years.

Resident females had larger average clutch sizes than relocated females in both years, significantly so in
2011, suggesting a period of stress and adjustment for relocated females. Egg diameters were
significantly larger by an average of 3 mm in 2010 for both resident and relocated females compared to
2011. Three females were recaptured in both years and exhibited the same trend of similar clutch sizes
between years but significantly smaller eggs in 2011. Burrow surveys indicate that at least some
hatchlings are able to successfully leave the nest by the presence of hatchling size burrows scattered
throughout the fields, but the ratio of juveniles to eggs laid is especially low. Survivorship of eggs,
hatchlings and juveniles may be too low to support a sustainable Gopher Tortoise population in improved
pasture possibly due to burrow compaction by cows, lack of available natural shelter material for
protection from desiccation, and the reduced ability of movement in thick pasture grasses, especially by
hatchling and yearling tortoises.



Hauswaldt, J.Susanne (TU Braunschweig);

Comparative Phylogeography of two species of brown frogs in Europe, Rana temporaria and Rana
dalmatina

We compared genetic diversity and structure of two species of European brown frog, the common frog (
Rana temporaria ) and the agile frog ( R. dalmatina ) across their ranges. While R. temporaria is one of
the most widespread Eurasian amphibians, ranging from the Pyrenees to the Ural Mountains and West
Siberia, the range of R. dalmatina is much smaller. It is patchily distributed or even absent from many
northern and eastern European countries, but it extends further south into southern Italy, southern
Greece and Turkey. We analyzed animals from 115 populations of R. temporaria and from 63
populations of R. dalmatina and used one or more of the following set of markers: cytochrome b, RAG-1,
and 8 microsatellite loci. While in R. temporaria we found substantial level of variation in the
mitochondrial and nuclear markers, in particular in the western part of its range, in R. dalmatina a single
mitochondrial and nuclear haplotype were found to dominate across its range, only in southern Italy a
divergent mitochondrial lineage was found. We are discussing how the contrasting patterns of the two
species reflect the differences in glacial refugia and postglacial expansion routes as well as demographic
histories.



Havrylkoff, Jeanne-Marie (University of Southern Mississippi); Grammer, Paul O.; Mickle, Paul F.;
Peterson, Mark S. (University of Southern Mississippi, Canada); Slack, W. Todd (US Army ERDC,
Canada)

Inter-drainage Gulf sturgeon (Acipenser oxyrinchus desotoi) occupancy of Ship Island habitats
during marine migrations.

The ecological integrity and productivity of the Mississippi coastal marshes and Mississippi Sound are
protected from damaging storm surges and saltwater intrusion by barrier islands. The Mississippi Coastal
Improvement Program is tasked with restoring, improving and stabilizing both the coastal marshes and
barrier islands. As part of this project, the breach and subsequent erosion of Ship Island, formed by




                                                                                                       290
Hurricane Camille and greatly extended by Katrina, will be restored to pre-Camille conditions.
Historically, threatened Gulf sturgeon have been acoustically tagged and manually relocated during
periods of marine residency, with the greatest number of relocations occurring in the barrier island passes
where they are presumed to be foraging (Ross et al. 2009). Recently, a gulfwide sturgeon monitoring
program and the use of a fine-scale automated telemetry array have allowed for a more critical
examination of Ship Island occupancy. Twenty-one VR2Ws were deployed around Ship Island, with 4 on
each lateral tip of East and West Ship, and 13 positioned to monitor usage of Camille Cut. Currently,
acoustically tagged Gulf sturgeon (n = 14) have been detected in the array, originating from five distinct
populations: Pearl (n = 4), Pascagoula (n = 4), Escambia (n = 1), Yellow (n = 1), and Blackwater (n = 4)
Rivers. Of the two nearest populations, Pearl River fish have been detected more heavily using those
areas monitored by the array, contributing to 40% of total detections compared to Pascagoula‘s 8.5%.
The three eastern populations, Escambia, Yellow, and Blackwater, account for 12.8%, 18.7%, and 19.8%
of total detections, respectively. The use of the array varied greatly between fish from the same drainage
as well as between different drainages. This project will provide fine-scale pre- and post-restoration data
on barrier island habitat use by a wide range of distinct Gulf sturgeon populations, compare size-
dependent behaviors among Gulf sturgeon, and expand Ship Island habitat use patterns relative to earlier
data in Ross et al. (2009).



Hawk, Holly (California State University);

The genetic variability and evolutionary history of the overfished Giant Sea Bass, Stereolepis
gigas

This study addresses the evolutionary history and genetic diversity of the critically endangered giant sea
bass, Stereolepis gigas. Accurately defining how lineages evolve aids in understanding how it has
historically responded to natural as well as anthropogenic pressures. The giant sea bass is the largest,
reef-associated, bony fish found off the coast of California, with populations concentrated south of Point
Conception. Commercial landings peaked in 1932 in the United States and then steadily declined.
Mexican landings remained high until 1964, when commercial landings fell below 200,000 pounds. Giant
sea bass stocks have been depleted to the point that a moratorium from fishing was declared in 1982.
Although they are restricted from being targeted, commercial vessels may legally retain giant sea bass as
incidental catch. Following the severe decline in the abundance of S. gigas, we predict the current gene
frequencies will reflect a loss in genetic variability in the remaining population.

S. gigas currently resides in the family Polyprionidae, due to shared morphological characteristics with
wreckfishes. Nuclear and mitochondrial DNA are being sequenced to provide a molecular foundation to
its most recent taxonomic placement. Samples were collected from the Natural History Museum of Los
Angeles, Scripps Oceanographic Institute and through collaborative efforts with local fish landings.
Determining an accurate phylogeny of S. gigas and its allied taxa will not only clarify the evolution of a top
carnivore but will also inform us as to the genetic impact of overexploitation and allow for the predicted
response of potential pressures.




                                                                                                          291
Hawkes, Virgil (LGL Limited); Gregory, Patrick (University of Victoria, Canada)

Temporal changes in the relative abundance of amphibians relative to riparian buffer width in
western Washington, USA

In certain regions of Canada and the United States, amphibians have been shown to be sensitive to
forest management and the short-term adverse effects of timber harvesting on terrestrial amphibians
have been well documented in the literature. However, the effects of silvicultural treatments on
amphibians may not be realized until many years after treatment. Manipulative forest management
experiments with pre- and post-treatment data, random assignment of replicates to treatments, and
analyses over a large spatial scale are rare in the literature. Furthermore, even studies with pre- and post-
treatment data can be affected by ecological time lags; the longevity of some species may mean that it
could take several years to observe a treatment effect.

Riparian areas in forested landscapes of the Pacific Northwest have been recognized for high species
richness of amphibians yet little is known about the persistence of amphibians in mature forest fragments
such as unharvested riparian buffers surrounded by clearcuts. Our study investigated the efficacy, 2 and
10 years post-logging, of two different riparian management zone prescriptions established around third-
and fourth-order streams in western Washington to mitigate the effects of upland timber harvest on
amphibians.       Our findings suggest that there is no global response by terrestrial amphibians to logging
or to the retention of riparian management zones. Rather, species showed individual responses that
varied over time and between treatments and transects. Specifically Coastal Tailed Frogs ( Ascaphus
truei ) declined in clearcut upland habitats 2- and 10-years following logging while Western Red-backed
Salamander ( Plethodon vehiculum ) and Ensatina ( Ensatina eschscholtzii ) appear to benefit from the
recommended riparian management zone width. The influence of site effects was evident for some
species, whereas for others there is some suggestion of treatment effects, but the analyses were
confounded by patterns of natural population change at both local and regional scales, which were
evident two years following logging. Our results exemplify the need for longer-term studies to ensure that
potentially confounding factors, such as natural population fluctuation, are considered when interpreting
the results of time series data.



Hawlitschek, Oliver (Zoologische Staatssammlung); Rösner, René; Guggenbichler, Daniel; Glaw, Frank
(Zoologische Staatssammlung, Canada)

SmartHerper Comoros, a free field guide to the herpetofauna of the Comoro archipelago as a
mobile application.

We present SmartHerper Comoros, a free field guide to the reptiles and amphibians of the Comoros as a
mobile application for smartphones. SmartHerper Comoros fulfills every function of a traditional printed
field guide. It includes an introduction to the Comoran environment and herpetofauna, an interactive key,
and species accounts. The species accounts include text information, a photograph gallery, sounds of
frog calls, and a map with localities that can be viewed in a GoogleMaps window and are available for
navigation via the GPS function of the smartphone. An interactive glossary provides explanations of
specific terminology in popup windows. Weblinks connect to the related Reptile Database, AmphibiaWeb
and IUCN Red List entries via the browser of the smartphone. The app enables users to contribute
photographs and locality data of the species included. This data is directly uploaded to the database for
inspection by the administrator and will be made available to the user community in regular updates. The
app is freely available for download at the website of the Zoologische Staatssammlung München
(http://www.zsm.mwn.de/). It was programmed using Java and is currently available for the Android



                                                                                                         292
operating system. We chose Android because all software necessary for the development is open-
source, and because many smartphones use this operating system. The development of versions runnig
on iOS and Microsoft Windows Mobile is planned. The application targets scientists working in
biodiversity research, taxonomy, ecology, and conservation planning, as well as non-professional
naturalists visiting or resident of the focus region. In addition to the current English version, editions in
other languages are planned. Since SmartHerper Comoros and planned future SmartHerpers are free,
easily available and easy to use, we hope that they will contribute to the dissemination and generation of
knowledge on biodiversity of their focus regions and thus stimulate interest in the observation and
conservation of regional biodiversity in visitors, e.g., ecotourists, and residents alike. The structure of
SmartHerper allows for easy modification to create field guides of other organism groups and regions.



Hayes, Marc P (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife); McIntrye, Aimee P (Washington
Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada); Jones, Jay E (Weyerhaeuser NR, Canada); Lund, Eric M
(Washington Department of FIsh and Wildlife, Canada); Waterstrat, Frithioff T (The Evergreen State
College, Canada); Giovanini, Jack N; Duke, Steven D (Weyerhaeuser NR, Canada); Quinn, Timothy
(Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada); Kroll, Andrew J (Weyerhaeuser NR, Canada)

Evaluating N-mixture abundance estimators for unmarked individuals of cryptic taxa

Sentinel taxa are used as indicator species due to their perceived sensitivity to environmental change.
Estimates of population size based on count data uncorrected for spatial and temporal variation in
detection probability can lead to erroneous conclusions about impacts from environmental or
anthropogenic disturbances.        Traditional tools for estimating population size, such as mark-recapture
estimators, may be impractical for sentinel taxa, many of which are cryptic and occur at low population
densities. We used simulated and empirical data and a binomial mixture model for unmarked individuals
to estimate detection probabilities and abundance for two amphibian genera, giant Dicamptodon and
torrent Rhyacotriton salamanders.          In our simulation, we assessed model sensitivity to changes in
animal density (5 and 15), number of plots (50 – 150), detection probabilities (0.05 – 0.5), and number of
sampling visits (2 – 4). We evaluated the effects of stream temperature and stream order on detection
probability using field data collected from forested streams in Washington, USA.

Simulation results indicated that precision of detection probability estimates improved as the number of
sites and sampling occasions increased. Variability of estimated population sizes decreased with higher
detection probability, although species abundance had little effect on the precision of detection probability
estimates.Results from empirical field data indicated that detection probability estimates ranged from
0.07-0.65 for giant salamanders and 0.06-0.67 for torrent salamanders. Giant salamander detection
probability was positively associated with stream temperature regardless of stream order, and was higher
in second- and third- order streams than first-order streams. Detection probability for torrent salamanders
varied with stream temperature, order, and the interaction of those covariates, with detection increasing
with temperature for second- and third-order streams but showing a flat or decreasing trend for first-order
streams. Taken together, our results indicate that the use of binomial mixture models for unmarked
individuals is a feasible alternative to traditional mark-recapture techniques for estimating detection
probability and abundance for taxa that are cryptic or occur at low densities. These models, paired with
careful consideration of study design alternatives, can provide researchers with robust estimates of
important quantities and obviate the traditional reliance on ad hoc indices of relative abundance for many
rare and sensitive taxa.




                                                                                                         293
Hayes, Marc P (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife); Abrahamse, Allison E (Northwest Trek
Wildlife Park, Canada); Anderson, Marko J (Cedar Creek Corrections Center, Canada); Aubrey, Dennis
A; Bush, Kelli M B (Sustainability in Prisons Project, Canada); Cole, Douglas O (Cedar Creek Corrections
Center, Canada); Clouse, David C (Joint Base Lewis McChord, Canada); Ellis, David E (Northwest Trek
Wildlife Park, Canada); Goodrowe Beck, Karen (Point Defiance Zoo and Aquarium, Canada); Hallock,
Lisa A (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada); Hash, Steven W (Oregon Zoo, Canada);
Hicks, Tiffany L (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada); Konecny, Lelani J (Woodland
Park Zoo, Canada); LeRoy, Carri J (Sustainability in Prisons Project, Canada); Lynch, James J (Joint
Base Lewis McChord, Canada); Tidwell, Kyle S (Oregon Zoo, Canada); Martin, Andrea S (Sustainability
in Prisons Project, Canada); McAllister, Kelly A (Washington Department of Transportation, Canada);
Meadows, David S; Milner, Jacklyn A (Northwest Trek Wildlife Park, Canada); Mukobi, Asaba C (Oregon
Zoo, Canada); Mullett, Tina M (Woodland Park Zoo, Canada); Nadkarni, Nalini M (University of Utah,
Canada); Neitman, Keith E (Woodland Park Zoo, Canada); Pacholke, Dan J (Washington State
Department of Corrections, Canada); Pramuk, Jennifer B. (Woodland Park Zoo, Canada); Richardson,
John F (Joint Base Lewis McChord, Canada); Ridgway, Ryan A; Rojas, Christina M (Northwest Trek
Wildlife Park, Canada); Sartor, Richard L (Phoenix Zoo, Canada); Schmidt, Tamara A (Washington
Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada); Shepherdson, David J (Oregon Zoo, Canada); Stewart, Karen
L (Woodland Park Zoo, Canada); Tirhi, Michelle J (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada);
Weber, Sarah R (Sustainability in Prisons Project, Canada)

The Successful Translocation Trajectory of Oregon Spotted Frogs (Rana pretiosa) on Joint Base
Lewis McChord: A Remarkable Partnership of Prisons, Zoos, Students and Scientists

The Oregon Spotted Frog (OSF - Rana pretiosa ), an at-risk endemic to the Pacific Northwest, is the
focus of recovery efforts over its geographic range. One such effort is a pilot translocation the Washington
(State) OSF Working Group initiated in 2008. The Group includes a coterie of stakeholders dedicated to
conservation assembled to address OSF recovery in Washington State in 2007. In this effort, the
Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW) leads; four partners (Northwest Trek, Oregon Zoo
[OZ], Sustainable Prisons Project [SPP – an Evergreen State College-based collaboration with the
Department of Corrections that involves the Cedar Creek Corrections Center], and Woodland Park Zoo
[WPZ]) rear frogs; the Fish and Wildlife Program at Joint Base Lewis McChord (JBLM) manages the
recipient site; Port Blakely Tree Farms, WDFW, and the US Fish and Wildlife Service manage donor sites
and provide logistic support; and with all partners, the Point Defiance Zoo and Aquarium, the Nature
Conservancy, and the Washington Department of Transportation help advise.

In 2007, the Working Group viewed engaging in a pilot translocation as prudent because such efforts,
often problematic, had never been tried with OSF. We first evaluated potential recipient sites for habitat
suitability, exotic predators and disease. After initial site screening and applying this evaluation more
thoroughly to the three top choices, we chose Dailman Lake on JBLM. We weighed the tradeoff between
releasing mortality-prone early life stages and predator experience-limited later life stages, opting to
release post-metamorphic frogs grown to the largest possible size prior to a release date safely in
advance of overwintering. We chose two donor sites based on advice that founders should be both locally
adapted and diverse, and that genetic mixing was not the problem historically believed. Our locally
adapted choice was the Black River population complex in Thurston County; the diverse choice was the
Conboy Lake population in Klickitat County.

Northwest Trek and OZ began rearing frogs in 2008, and SPP and WPZ added to that effort in 2009.
Each year, eggs obtained in Feb-Mar from donor sites were reared through metamorphosis up to the
release size in Sept-Oct. Survival among institutions and years has been variable, averaging about 50%
(0-84%). Frogs released annually have increased from ca. 500 the first year to >1,200 in 2010 -11. Size
of released frogs also varies, in part because SPP can consistently rear frogs to adult size each year, a
situation not possible at other institutions due to less time available for husbandry. In 2011, we recorded



                                                                                                        294
the first in situ reproduction. The 2012 season is the five-year mark, the point at which the Working
Group will decide whether translocation to this site should continue. Our presentation will include lessons
learned on site evaluation, rearing, anti-predator behavior and discuss the future.



Hayes, Tyrone (Univ. California);

“The” Cause of Amphibian Decline

As much as 70% of all amphibians globally are in decline. Numerous causes have been proposed for
explaining amphibian declines including emergent diseases, habitat loss, invasive species, climate
change and chemical contaminants. My laboratory‘s work has focused on the role of chemical
contaminants, especially endocrine disrupting chemicals in the environment. To date, our largest
research efforts have focused on the herbicide atrazine which demasculinizes and feminizes males, and
also inhibits immune function. In addition, these effects have been documented in all vertebrate classes
and are also correlated with compromised reproductive health in humans. We propose that atrazine and
other environmental chemical contaminants interacts with other factors and are a major culprit in
amphibian declines.



Hazard, Lisa (Montclair State University);

Do ecological factors drive physiological control of a unique ion-secreting tissue, the lizard salt
gland?

Salt glands are used by an ecologically diverse range of lizard species to excrete excess dietary salts; the
salts secreted vary with diet. I am investigating whether the physiological mechanisms controlling ion
secretion by lizard salt glands are similar across taxa (indicating phylogenetic constraint on physiology) or
vary according to diet (indicating diet-related natural selection on the regulatory mechanism), using a
comparative approach toevaluate species that have evolved nasal salt glands independently but use
them under similar ecological circumstances. Specifically, I predicted that secretion would be initiated by
potassium in herbivorous species (due to the high potassium content of plants), by sodium or general
osmotic loads in marine species (due to the high and constant sodium chloride content of marine diets),
and by chloride in water-limited species regardless of diet (because unlike the cations, chloride cannot be
coupled with insoluble urate). Thus far, data on four lizard species (two herbivores and two insectivores)
provide support for this idea. Responses of salt glands to different combinations of cations (sodium,
potassium, and histidine control) and anions (chloride and acetate control) were assessed. Lizards were
given ion treatment or controls (saline and sham injected) daily for 4 days; secreted salt was collected
and analyzed for sodium, potassium, and chloride content. The herbivorous desert iguana (Dipsosaurus
dorsalis, Iguanidae) secreted only in response to potassium and/or chloride loads, not sodium or other
osmotic loads. The ecologically similar but distantly related Uromastyx dispar (Agamidae) required the
presence of both potassium and chloride to achieve high rates of secretion. The insectivorous green
anole (Anolis carolinensis, Polychrotidae) and Schneider‘s skink (Eumeces schneideri, Scincidae)
secreted only in response to chloride, regardless of the accompanying cation, though the skink secreted
at lower rates when sodium was present. Dietary factors initiating secretion were those most ecologically
relevant to each species, suggesting that lizard salt glands show evolutionary flexibility in response to
ecological pressures. The combination of simplicity and variability of secretion, coupled with interspecific
variation in an environmental stressor, dietary salinity, makes lizard salt glands ideal models for the study
of the evolution of osmoregulatory systems in vertebrates.



                                                                                                         295
Hazard, Lisa (Montclair State University); Kwasek, Kristen; Koelmel, Erika; Gonzalez-Abreu, Madelyn;
Gerges, Sherif (Montclair State University, Montclair, NJ, United States)

Variation in salinity aversion of temperate forest amphibian species may influence response to
anthropogenic salinization

Evolutionary theory predicts that there should be a link between the physiological tolerance of an animal
for an environmental stressor and the behavioral tolerance for that stressor; animals should seek to avoid
stressful environments. However, if animals have no prior exposure to a stressor (and thus no selection
pressure to evolve avoidance behaviors), sudden environmental shifts may result in a mismatch between
physiological and behavioral tolerances. Global climate change may lead to increased salinization of
freshwater habitats through local changes in winter snowfall (and therefore application of road de-icers),
as well as increased seawater incursions into freshwater habitats. Salts may contaminate local
watersheds to levels high enough to potentially impact amphibian populations. Selection of inappropriate
breeding and oviposition sites by adults could greatly decrease egg and larval survival, since larval
amphibians are often sensitive to even modest salinity increases. We tested adults of several amphibian
species from the northeastern United States (wood frogs, Lithobates sylvaticus; green frogs, Lithobates
clamitans; bullfrogs, Lithobates catesbeianus; northern leopard frogs, Lithobates pipiens; spotted
salamanders, Ambystoma maculatum; eastern newts, Notophthalmus viridescens) to determine whether
they showed behavioral aversion to increased salinity, and if so, at what threshold concentration. Animals
were individually placed in a two-compartment test chamber containing aged tap water on one side and
salt solutions ranging from 0 to 500 mM (approximately equivalent to sea water) on the other side.
Location and behaviors were recorded during a 10-minute trial. Species differences in threshold aversion
concentrations were observed; some species (e.g. spotted salamanders) showed strong aversion to even
low concentrations while others (wood frogs) showed no aversion to salinities as high as sea water.
Species with higher behavioral thresholds may attempt to breed in habitats unsuitable for successful egg
and larval development. Tests of adult physiological tolerance are underway. These results will help
predict current and future impacts of increased habitat salinity on amphibian communities.



Hazin, Fabio (UFRPE); Afonso, Andre (UFRPE, Recife, Brazil); Cerqueira Ferreira, Lucianna (Canada)

Shark Monitoring Program off Recife, Brazil

Shark attacks on humans have prompted the implementation of shark control programs aiming at
reducing local populations of dangerous species using gillnets. However, shark meshing inflicts severe
mortality to both target and harmless species and produces significant ecological disturbances. A different
methodological approach to mitigate shark peril off Recife, Brazil, combines bottom longline gear and
drumline gear equipped with circle hooks with great efficiency. Four longline sets have been
systematically conducted at two fishing sites on a weekly basis. Longlines are deployed at about 1.5-3 km
from shore, while 23 drumlines are deployed at about 0.5-1 km from shore. This spatial arrangement
aimed at intercepting approaching sharks before they enter into the area of peril by imposing two "shields"
with decreasing fishing effort shorewardly. Following the capture of a potentially aggressive shark, the
animal is hauled into the vessel, accommodated in a wet tank assembled on the deck, and then
transported towards the continental slope for tagging and release. A total of 1,121 individuals were caught
in 280,079 baited hooks deployed between May 2004 and December 2011. The catch composition
evidenced high selectivity for sharks and comprised fish species and a few turtles only. Eight potentially
aggressive sharks were caught, corresponding to large carcharhinids and sphyrnids. Tiger, bull, and
blacktip sharks exhibited higher catch rates in decreasing order and are believed to be responsible for
most of the attacks. The global fishing mortality was reasonably low (about 20%) and protected species



                                                                                                       296
such as goliath groupers, nurse sharks, and turtles showed ~100% survival. The littoral of Recife
accounts for 55 confirmed shark attack incidents corresponding to 20 fatalities since 1992. Yet, since the
creation of the shark monitoring program of Recife, the shark attack rate diminished about 97% while
fishing operations were being conducted (W = 1108.5, P < 0.001), with >90% of the attacks occurring
when the program was paused for funding renewal. Overall, the shark monitoring program of Recife
produced little impacts on caught species and raised essential information for the management of shark p



Healas, Sara (Central Washington University); Irwin, Dr. Jason (Central Washington University, Canada)

Geographic variation of freeze tolerance in the Pacific Chorus frog, Pseudacris regilla

Pacific Chorus frogs have the ability to survive extensive tissue freezing during the winter months.
Survival of freezing requires that the frogs produce massive amounts of cryoprotective glucose and
glycerol from stored liver glycogen. We hypothesized that where winters are longer and/or colder, frogs
will produce more cryoprotectants and, therefore, store more liver glycogen. We collected frogs in the
spring from coastal (Seattle area), inland (central Washington State) and high elevation (Cascade
Mountains) sites and housed them outside until the fall when they had naturally developed their cold
tolerance. In early November, the frogs were moved inside to an incubator set at 2°C. In January and
early February the frogs were frozen in a cooling bath down to -2.5°C. Once frozen, the frogs were
dissected and liver and thigh were removed and frozen at -80°C. We used a colorimetric assay to
measure glucose and glycogen concentrations. Glucose significantly increased with freezing in both
inland and high-elevation frogs (F = 28.64, p < 0.001; data for coastal frogs pending). The amount of
glucose produced upon freezing was not significantly different between these two populations, but the
high-elevation frogs had 14% more glycogen stored in their livers (t= 2.34, p = 0.05). These data will then
be compared to inland populations.



Healey, Michael (University of British Columbia);

The Potential for Adaptation to Climate Change in Pacific Salmon

Rapid climate change will have a broad range of effects on the ecology and developmental biology of
Pacific salmon species throughout their range. Pacific salmon have shown considerable capacity to adapt
and even to thrive in the face of environmental change, including the dramatic changes in climate that
occurred through recent glacial periods. It remains an open question, however, how well salmon can
adapt to the present day rapid changes in climate resulting from human technology. In this paper I will
focus primarily on the likely effects of climate warming on life stage transitions and the feeding ecology of
salmon. Pacific salmon may be considered transient species in all the major habitats that they occupy.
Their transitions between life stages and habitats are timed to take advantage of favourable conditions for
growth and survival in each of the successive habitats they occupy. Movements within habitats are
designed and timed to ensure that the salmon are properly positioned to make the transition to their next
habitat. Within habitats, salmon appear to take advantage of particular food web dynamics to maximize
growth and survival. Recent studies have revealed changes in the timing of life stage and habitat
transitions that appear maladaptive. Other studies have shown that the food web structure and dynamics
of freshwater and marine habitats are changing in ways that are unfavourable to salmon. The capacity of
salmon to adapt rapidly both phenotypically and genotypically should modulate the effects of rapid climate
change in the near term. Over the medium to long term, however, the prognosis is not good for salmon




                                                                                                         297
populations in the southern parts of their range and some consequences of rapid climate change, like
ocean acidification, will adversely affect anadromous salmon throughout their range.



Hecnar, Darlene (Lakehead University); Brazeau, Daniel (Lakehead University, Thunder Bay, ON,
Canada); Auger, Brett; Hecnar, Stephen (Lakehead University, Canada); Casper, Gary (Great Lakes
Ecological Services, Canada)

Filling in the Blanks: The Distribution of Northern Ontario¿s Herpetofauna and the Wallacean
Shortfall

As biodiversity continues to decline, conservationists face two fundamental problems. First, species are
going extinct faster than we can discover them ¾ the Linnean Shortfall. Second, species and their
populations are going extinct before we can even map their distributions ¾ the Wallacean Shortfall. This
second problem in turn creates a fundamental dilemma for resource managers ¾ how can you conserve
what you don‘t know you have? This is one of the most important problems facing government and non-
governmental organizations having mandates to manage, protect or conserve biodiversity. Although both
Canadian and United States national parks now have certified lists of species for their properties, most
provincial and state natural resource agencies or protected areas lack this basic information. Atlas
projects exist in several states and provinces but meagre support results in incomplete distribution maps.
Locality records are especially sparse for the northern portions of Canadian provinces resulting in poorly
defined distribution patterns and northern range limits for many species. Northern Ontario is largely
unexplored for its herpetofaunal diversity because of its extensive and rugged wilderness, lack of access,
and lack of basic searches. As part of our efforts to promoting development of a Binational Lake Superior
Herpetofaunal Monitoring Program we surveyed over 100 locations in the northeastern basin of Lake
Superior where gap analysis indicated a paucity of records for both amphibians and reptiles. We used
visual encounter surveys, frog call surveys, aquatic funnel trapping, and baited hoop traps for turtles to
determine if the apparent ‗herpetofaunal gap‘ on the northeastern shore is real or simply an artifact of
insufficient sampling. We spent 43 person/days in the field and detected 9 species at numerous locations
between Marathon and Wawa.          Most of our observations represent new locality records. Other novel
finds include detection of western-midland intergrade painted turtles as far north as White River. Our
efforts in one year cover little of the area, but suggest that the gap is at least partially a product of
insufficient sampling and highlights the need for agencies responsible for managing natural resources to
conduct or sponsor basic species inventories.



Hecnar, Stephen (Lakehead University);

Spatial and Temporal Dynamics of Amphibians: From Populations and Metapopulations to
Metacommunities

Considerable progress has been made since alarms were sounded about global amphibian declines over
two decades ago. We now better understand the magnitude of decline and some of its causes. Advances
in ecology provide us with a better appreciation of the importance of scale in determining status of
amphibians. However, serious gaps of knowledge still exist that hamper our efforts to understand the
spatial and temporal dynamics of amphibian populations and communities and to accurately assess
species status. Abundance is inherently variable in populations making trend detection difficult, but
presence-absence studies can reveal the underlying dynamics and spatial structure of populations at
larger scales. Application of the metapopulation concept to amphibians has been questioned, or its



                                                                                                      298
usefulness remains untested. I used intensive surveys to examine the dynamics of 13 species at 39 sites
over 20 years in Southern Ontario. Site characteristics and stochastic events influence species turnover,
but asynchrony among sites at larger scales buffers trends in incidence as theory predicts. However, 20
years of study reveals subtle but significant trends in incidence. Overall, species richness is slowly
increasing with 4 species declining, 3 increasing and 3 showing no trend in incidence. My results and
those of others demonstrate the efficacy of using metapopulation approaches to describe amphibian
spatial and temporal dynamics. Although few long-term studies exist, sufficient evidence indicates that a
broad definition of the metapopulation incorporating a variety of spatial structures describes how
amphibian populations function at landscape and regional scales. Likewise, because species interact, the
more recent application of the metacommunity concept to amphibian faunas provides an appropriate and
useful framework for studying regional amphibian dynamics. Metacommunity paradigms such as
metapopulation, mass-effect, and filtering appear to successfully categorize amphibian dynamics. Despite
our conceptual advances, numerous gaps of knowledge remain for most species (dispersal, natural
history, distribution). Long-term large-scale studies remain rare and existing monitoring programs lack
sufficient power to discern trends.



Hedges, S. Blair (Pennsylvania State University); Conn, Caitlin (Pennsylvania State University, Canada)

A new skink fauna from Caribbean islands

About 600 species of squamate reptiles are endemic to Caribbean islands. Among the largest radiations
of lizards are the anoles, sphaeros, ameivas, galliwasps, rock iguanas, and leios. Until recently, skinks
have been a minor component, with only six species recognized in the region. Our initial molecular
phylogenetic results indicated a much greater diversity, which led us to a morphological revision of the
available material. We recognize 38 species of skinks endemic to Caribbean islands, including nine
resurrected names and 24 new names. We found that the higher-level taxonomy of skinks was in need of
restructuring to facilitate revisionary work. We recognize seven families of skinks, instead of one, and
place the New World species in the subfamily Mabuyinae of the family Mabuyidae. Within the Mabuyinae,
we recognize 16 genera instead of a single genus Mabuya . A molecular timetree shows that mabuines
dispersed from Africa to South America in the Miocene (~18 million years ago). The Caribbean islands
were colonized by skinks from South America, floating on flotsam, at least six times in the last 10 million
years, each time leading to a different genus. The largest of those genera is Spondylurus , with 17
species distributed mostly in the northern Caribbean. Sympatric species of Caribbean skinks usually differ
in body size, and we recognize several ecomorphs based on associations of ecology and morphology. All
of the 38 endemic Caribbean island species are threatened with extinction and most (27 species) are
Critically Endangered. Sixteen of the Critically Endangered species are extinct, or possibly extinct,
because of human activities during the last two centuries. Surviving species are in need of immediate
protection. Analysis of collection records indicates that the decline or loss of 14 skink species can be
attributed to predation by the Small Indian Mongoose. That invasive predator was introduced as a
biological control of rats in sugar cane fields in the late nineteenth century (1872–1900), immediately
resulting in a mass extinction of skinks and other reptiles. The ground-dwelling and diurnal habits of
skinks have made them particularly susceptible to mongoose predation.




                                                                                                       299
Hedges, S. Blair (Pennsylvania State University);

CaribHerp: Caribbean Herpetology online

With color images and distribution maps, caribherp.org functions as a checklist and quick identification
guide to the ~800 species of amphibians and reptiles of the West Indies. Sounds and video are included,
when available. An initial list of species accounts is first generated by the user, for all species or only
those on one island, or those having a search term in their account. The list may be further sorted in
many different ways (taxonomy, common name, author, etc.). A new journal, Caribbean Herpetology ,
is integrated with the database. An online form may be used to submit short articles in the journal,
reporting new and significant information on distribution, behavior, and other categories. After review and
acceptance, these articles are published online and the information is integrated with the database.
Photos, video, and sounds (frog calls) may accompany article submissions. As the journal develops,
longer articles will be published. Two other related Caribbean web resources have been released as well:
caribmap.org and caribnature.org . CaribMap is a resource for exploring historical map images of the
Caribbean, now numbering more than 800 maps dating back to the early 1500s. Map images are fully
sortable and searchable. Each map is scanned at high resolution so that small toponyms may be
resolved. CaribNature is a conservation site that presents multimedia essays on the natural history of the
islands and difficulties facing the biodiversity, starting with Haiti. The mediography is mostly from the work
of professional videographers and photographers. The site is available in English, Spanish, and French.



Heinicke, Matthew (Villanova University); Greenbaum, Eli (University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX,
United States); Jackman, Todd; Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University, Villanova, PA, United States)

Evolutionary history of Southeast Asian gliding geckos: phylogenetic, geographic, and temporal
patterns.

Gliding morphologies appear in diverse vertebrate lineages, including in the gecko genera Hemidactylus
(Cosymbotus), Luperosaurus , and Ptychozoon . Species in each of these genera are arboreal rainforest
dwellers exhibiting dorsoventral flattening of bodies, interdigital webbing, lateral skin flaps, and flattened
tails with lateral projections. It has been hypothesized that the repeated development of gliding in Asian
rainforest vertebrates, including these geckos, is related to the dominance of tropical Asian tree floras by
dipterocarps. For dipterocarps to have influenced the evolution of gliding in Southeast Asian geckos,
gliding geckos must have Eocene or later origins. However, many gecko genera are known or thought to
be older. We performed phylogenetic and molecular clock analyses incorporating exemplars of
Cosymbotus , Luperosaurus , and Ptychozoon plus putative relatives to investigate the evolutionary
relationships, timing of origin, and biogeographic patterns. Sampled Luperosaurus and Ptychozoon are
not closely related; they are phylogenetically nested within Lepidodactylus and Gekko , respectively.
The divergences of Luperosaurus , Ptychozoon , and Cosymbotus from their closest relatives occurred
during the time period when dipterocarps came to dominate Asian tropical forests. Further, development
of gliding morphologies quickly followed colonization of Southeast Asia from other geographic areas by
the ancestors of Cosymbotus and Luperosaurus. These results therefore support the viability of a
gliding/dipterocarp correlation, and underscore the importance of not assuming early origins for
morphologically aberrant reptiles.




                                                                                                          300
Heinz, Heather (San Diego State University); Reeder, Tod (San Diego State University, San Diego, CA,
United States)

A Species-level Tree of the Iguanian LIzards

Iguanian lizards comprise a diverse group of squamate reptiles (i.e., lizards and snakes) exhibiting great
morphological, ecological, and taxonomic diversity. They are well-studied in evolutionary research and
have been the focus of comparative studies on a wide variety of subjects, including adaptive radiations,
diversification rates, ecomorphology, and the evolution of viviparity, of herbivory, and of the mitochondrial
genome. Despite the dependence of such studies on phylogenetic information, many of the inter-familial
relationships of the Iguania are just now coming to light. This study presents the most taxonomically well-
sampled phylogenetic hypothesis of the Iguania to date. A supermatrix over 26,000 basepairs in length
was constructed by concatenating sequences of multiple mitochondrial genes with a recently published
29-gene nuclear dataset. Because mitochondrial gene sequences are available for manyfold more taxa
than nuclear gene sequences, taxonomic sampling is increased over the nuclear datset to more than 800
individuals. Despite high levels of missing data for most nuclear genes, overlapping sequence data from
multiple, shared mitochondrial genes form a well-sampled backbone that places taxa with little or no
nuclear data into families with high support and with largely congruent relationships to previous studies.
As with previous studies, iguanian lizards are split into two deeply divergent clades (i.e., the Old World
Acrodonts and the predominantly New World Pleurodonts), with most families well-resolved.
Relationships among families, particularly within the Pleurodont radiation, are less well-supported.
Despite the known, artificial grouping of ingroup agamids with outgroup snakes as a result of long-branch
attraction between rapidly-evolving mitochondrial DNA sequences, removing snakes from the
mitochondrial plus nuclear dataset had little significant impact on topology or support, suggesting that
nuclear gene signal is strong. This study reaffirms the ability of a ―backbone‖ approach of overlapping
sequence data to successfully overcome large proportions of missing data in supermatrices. The inferred
phylogeny is the most fully-populated to date, ready to be employed for the study of character evolution
and diversification rates in iguanian lizards.



Heithaus, Michael (Florida International University); Cindy, Bessey (Florida International University,
North Miami, United States); Burkholder, Derek (North Miami, North Miami, United States); Fourqurean,
James (Florida International University, North Miami, United States)

Do tiger sharks influence seagrass ecosystems through multiple indirect pathways?

The importance of large-bodied herbivores in structuring seagrass ecosystems in undisturbed seagrass
communities has begun to receive considerable attention. Less appreciated is the possibility that the
structuring role of these herbivores was driven by top-down impacts of large predators (e.g. sharks) that
also have undergone dramatic declines in many regions. The potential for large predators to modify the
spatiotemporal pattern and intensity of herbivory is further complicated by their broad diets and the
possibility that they might indirectly influence seagrass communities through multiple pathways that could
serve to amplify or attenuate the strength of top-down effects. We used the relatively pristine seagrass
ecosystem of Shark Bay, Western Australia as a model system for investigating top-down effects of
grazers and top predators in the absence of major anthropogenic impacts. Using a combination of nested
exclosures and seagrass transplant experiments, as well as surveys of habitat use and abundance of
tiger sharks (top predators), megagrazers (turtles, sea cows), piscivores, and mesograzers (teleosts) we
investigated potential shark-induced trophic cascades through multiple pathways. Both pathways appear
to have the potential to mediate indirect effects of tiger sharks on seagrasses and likely work in concert to
amplify top-down impacts. Combined with other studies showing the potential of grazers at high



                                                                                                         301
population densities to heavily impact seagrass beds, our results suggest that the loss of top predators
could have important consequences for the structure and stability of seagrass ecosystems.



Hekkala, Evon (Fordham University); Shirley, Matthew (University of Florida, Canada)

Cryptic Diversity in Nile Crocodiles supports prior taxonomic hypotheses and revised
conservation status

We have taken a total evidence approach involving phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial and nuclear
markers as well as karyotype analysis of chromosome number and structure to assess the monophyletic
status of the Nile crocodile.      Samples were collected from throughout Africa, covering all major
bioregions. We also utilized specimens from museum collections, including mummified crocodiles from
the ancient Egyptian temples at Thebes and the Grottes de Samoun, to reconstruct the genetic profiles of
extirpated populations. Our analyses reveal a cryptic evolutionary lineage within the Nile crocodile that
elucidates the biogeographic history of the genus and clarifies long-standing arguments over the species‘
taxonomic identity and conservation status. An examination of crocodile mummy haplotypes indicates
that the cryptic lineage corresponds to an earlier description of C. suchus and suggests that both African
Crocodylus lineages historically inhabited the Nile River. Recent survey efforts indicate that C. suchus is
declining or extirpated throughout much of its distribution. Without proper recognition of this cryptic
species, current sustainable use-based management policies for the Nile crocodile may do more harm
than good.



Herman, Tom (Acadia University);

Dynamics on the edge: turtles, trials and tribulations

Despite their long evolutionary history and ability to survive past cataclysmic environmental change,
turtles today are at tremendous risk worldwide. As a group turtles are characterized by long generation
time, high adult survival, low but variable juvenile survival, high spatial discrimination and strong site
affinities for reproduction and/or overwintering/aestivation. Populations are vulnerable to slight shifts in
adult survival. Because of considerable time lags associated with extreme longevity and late maturation,
changes in vital rates may go unnoticed until it is too late; logistic and funding constraints further
confound our ability to detect these changes.

In Canada all turtle species exist at or near their northern range limits; coincidentally these species
ranges are largely congruent with areas of highest human population density and growth, greatest degree
of landscape degradation from agricultural, industrial and residential development, and transportation
networks associated with all of the above. Conventional wisdom holds that edge-of-range populations
tend to be small, fragmented and constrained in ability to disperse successfully. Although these
populations may support reduced genetic variation, they may be able to respond more rapidly to
environmental change than centre-of-range populations. Under present climate change scenarios, with
isotherms and ranges advancing northward, dispersers should be at selective advantage, and Canadian
populations should expand.

However, continuing fragmentation and degradation of habitats that accompany these changes in climate
will likely continue to compromise Canadian turtle populations. Existing data from nearly all Canadian




                                                                                                        302
turtle species point to significant declines in both absolute numbers and numbers of populations. In
addition, genetic structuring in some species, on fairly fine spatial scales, has recently been documented.

New analytical tools allow us to reconstruct population histories, source/sink dynamics and responses to
past environmental change; these may help to guide us in modeling and managing future population
dynamics.



Hernández Díaz, José Alfredo (Universidad de los Andes); Amézquita, Adolfo (Universidad de los
Andes, Canada)

Beauty does not always denote danger: Aposematic syndrome in the polymorphic poison frog
Dendrobates auratus

Warning signals modify predators foraging behavior by promoting the association between bright colors,
smells or certain behaviors, and prey‘s unpalatability. This ecological strategy, named aposematism, is
better studied as a phenotypic syndrome because it involves several covarying traits. Among dendrobatid
frogs, aposematism hasindependently evolved in several lineages. They are highly polymorphic in their
coloration patterns both among and within species which renders them excellent study systems to
understand the evolutionary mechanisms underlying aposematism. Dendrobates auratus                     is a
dendrobatid species with an outstanding coloration polymorphism. In this study we aimed to test the
hypothesis that aposematic polymorphism among frogs from different localities could be related to
variation in the other traits defining the aposematic syndrome. We visited nine localities in Panama where
we collected 7-13 individuals and measured: color conspicuousness, body size, jumping performance,
diet specialization and toxicity. We sought for relationships between measured traits conducting
Pearson‘s correlations and linear regressions. We found geographic variation in frogs‘ conspicuousness,
body size and toxicity; but not in diet specialization or jumping performance. Body size was positively
correlated with conspicuousness among localities and all individuals but not within each locality. Jumping
performance was positively correlated with conspicuousness among all individuals and within each
locality, but not among localities. Toxicity was not correlated with conspicuousness, but when excluding
frogs from locality CP6 (10 times more toxic than frogs from other localities), we found a negative
correlation between conspicuousness and toxicity. According to our results, traits defining aposematic
syndrome at the intra-specific level do not follow the same correlations at the inter-specific comparisons.
This pattern could reflect initial steps of evolutionary divergence, with high toxicity arising in non
conspicuous animals, probably stimulating predator learning by a strong stimulus. However, it is still
necessary to test how effective this aposematic polymorphism is on protecting frogs from predation and
how the warning signals and toxicity influence predator learning. This knowledge could help us to
understand the outstanding polymorphism among and within species.



Hernandez, Sandra E (The University of Queensland); Sernia, Conrad (The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Australia); Reynoso, Victor H (Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico City,
Mexico); Bradley, Adrian J (The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia)

Life lessons from an invasive species. the cane toad.

Geographical characteristics, and the species genetic variation, are important for surviving, establishing
and dispersing in the species, but the first strategy that a living organism employs in adapting to its
environment involves adjustment to the physiological and cellular responses that it already possesses. To




                                                                                                        303
know to what extent these responses differ in an invasive species, the general health, immune
competence and the endocrine status of male cane toads ( Rhinella marina ) from three locations (Mexico
(MX) [native], Queensland Australia (QL) [introduced and established], Western Australia (WA) [migration
front line]) were determined during the wet season. The major findings were that dispersing animals (WA),
had the lowest incidence of parasitism and the best body condition compared with the native populations
(MX), or with the introduced and established populations (QL). No differences were found between
populations in the levels of plasma free fatty acids (FFA), an indicator of available energy reserves. When
endocrine status was investigated, dispersing animals showed the lowest levels of testosterone and
lowest corticosterone levels. No differences in plasma corticosterone levels were found between
established (QL) and native populations (MX). Finally significant differences were found between
populations in variables related to immune competence. The animals from the dispersing population (WA)
had the best index of delayed hypersensitivity (DHI) after 24h, compared with the other two populations.
In conclusion dispersing animals are undergoing significant adjustments in endocrine and immune
function during adaptation but once they are established, no differences can be observed in endocrine
and immune variables when compared with those for native populations.



Hernández-Ríos, Alfonso (UNAM); Mendez de la Cruz, Fausto R. (Instituto de Biologia UNAM, Canada)

Thermal ecology of a Horned Lizard on highlands: Assessing global warming vulnerability.

The elevational specialization would account for the striking diversity of restricted endemic species in
temperate mountains areas at the tropics, which are isolated by expanses of warmer lowland habitat. It
has been suggested that, if global temperatures rise more than 2 - 3 °C in coming decades, high-
elevation specialists in the tropics could be among the most imperiled species on Earth. The Mexican
Short Horned Lizard ( Phrynosoma braconnieri ) it‘s a rare and Mexican endemic species that inhabits on
tropical mountains and desert scrubs, and is the southernmost viviparous species within the genus.
Therefore is particularly vulnerable species to global warming. During last year we search for individuals
of this species on the highlands of Sierra Juárez, Oaxaca, México. We evaluate the thermal ecology
aspects on three different seasons (rainy, post-rainy and dry season) following the protocol proposed by
Hertz et al. (1993). The results show that the habitat present low thermal quality, whereas the individuals
reach high efficiency and precision on thermoregulation during all studied seasons. We have observed a
relatively narrow activity daily period, apparently limited by the low environmental temperatures, this
period would increase in response to higher temperatures. These results suggest a high thermoregulation
capacity and a low vulnerability to global warming. Nevertheless, these species could face other threats in
the near future, like the constant habitat loss and the competition with other species that reach their
habitat on their move to more suitable areas. The desert scrub populations of this species could face a
different scenario under global warming; the temperatures on these places are about 4 °C higher than the
mobserved in temperate zones and the precipitation is lower, so thermic stress is higher and the risk of
extinction could increase in the future.



Hero, Jean-Marc (Environmental Futures Centre, Griffith University); Kindermann, Christina; Graham,
Clara; McCallum, Hamish; Narayan, Edward (Environmental Futures Centre, Griffith University, Canada)

Stress and disease at high elevation: implications for understanding resilience to climate change

Globally, enigmatic amphibian population declines have been concentrated at high elevations,
independent of latitude. Explanations have been linked to climate change and the pathogenic fungus



                                                                                                        304
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ( Bd ), however the links between these two factors are poorly
understood. Climate change threatens amphibians restricted to mountain tops, as the cooler
environmental conditions at high elevation are optimal for the growth and development of mountain-top
endemic frog species, hence they are vulnerable to increasing temperatures. Cooler montane
environments are also optimal for the growth of the pathogenic fungus Bd. Here we present the first
physiological evidence suggesting 1) frogs with high intensity of Bd have higher baseline stress hormone
levels, and 2) frog populations at higher elevation have increased stress levels (elevated baseline
corticosterone levels in urine) compared to their lowland counterparts. Prevalence of Bd zoospores from
frog skin swabs was quantified using a real-time quantitative PCR technique. Individual male frogs that
were identified as positive for Bd infection had significantly higher baseline urinary corticosterone
concentrations in comparison to Bd negative male frogs. Baseline urinary corticosterone concentrations
were also significantly higher at high altitude sites (P<0.001). These results, suggest frogs at higher
elevation are stressed and hence more susceptible to the impacts of Bd than their lowland counterparts.
So which factor is responsible for the extinction of frogs at high elevation ? and, who came first - the
stress or the disease?



Herrel, Anthony (CNRS); Measey, John (Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University, Porth Elisabeth,
South Africa)

Does substrate usage constrain locomotor and feeding function in caecilians?

Although it is often assumed that the body and head morphology in caecilians has evolved in response to
their subterranean life style, surprisingly little is known about the functioning of the locomotor and feeding
system. Moreover, how and to what degree a subterranean life style and subsurface locomotion may
constrain the function and evolution of both functional systems remains unknown. Here we provide data
on the kinematics of underground feeding and locomotion using both X-ray and external video recordings.
Moreover, we present data on bite and burrowing forces of animals derived from populations with known
variation in substrate characteristics and prey availability. Our data show how both locomotion and
feeding are characterized by unique kinematic patterns that appear shaped by the constraints of a
subterranean life-style. Moreover, burrowing and bite forces vary considerably across species yet appear,
at first sight, unrelated to diet or substrate compactness. Whereas bite forces may evolve under selection
for intra-specific competition (e.g. male-male combat) in some species, the variation in burrowing forces
may only be the consequence of selection on related traits such as body length or diameter.



Herrel, Anthony (CNRS); James, Rob (Coventry University, Coventry, United Kingdom); Tallis, Jason
(Coventry University, Coventry, Canada); Measey, John (Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University, Port
Elizabeth, South Africa); Tolley, Krystal (SANBI, Cape Town, South Africa); Tadic, Zoran (University of
Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia); Vanhooydonck, Bieke (University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium)

Performance trade-offs in lizards: are speed-endurance trade-offs driven by variation in muscle
physiology?

Phenotypic diversification has been suggested to be constrained by trade-offs in the development or
expression of phenotypic traits. Performance trade-offs are often thought of as imposing limits on
phenotypic divergence and occur when different and conflicting functional demands are imposed on the
same phenotypic trait. For example, in lacertid lizards, selection on burst locomotion capacity has been
shown to trade off with endurance capacity. Such a tradeoff could be caused by conflicting demands on




                                                                                                          305
the locomotor muscles to express either fast, or slow, muscle fiber types, yet this remains untested. Here
we provide physiological data for the knee extensor using work-loop experiments in ten species of lacertid
lizards. Additionally we measured sprint performance, acceleration, and endurance capacity for
locomotion on a horizontal substrate. Although our data demonstrate significant trade-offs between sprint
speed and endurance capacity at the organismal level, this is not reflected in a trade-off at the muscular
level. Indeed, no correlation between peak power output and the decrease in power output during fatigue
runs was observed. These data suggest that either trade-offs are caused by other muscles than the knee
extensor (e.g. swing phase muscles) or that trade-offs reside in the cardiovascular system rather than at
the level of the locomotor muscles.



Hertz, Andreas (Senckenberg Research Institute);

Composition and conservation status of amphibian assemblages in western Panama

In view of its relatively small size, Panama supports one of the most diverse amphibian faunas in the
world. On only a thirteenth of the territory of British Columbia more than 200 species of amphibians have
been detected so far. However, herpetological inventory is still far from being completed and even
baseline studies have not been realized in some parts of the country. While certain areas in central
Panama have been well studied for more than a century and are now among the best known tropical
habitats, the mountain ranges in the eastern and western portion are still largely unexplored.

In the years 2008- 2010, I conducted field surveys at different sites along an approximately 200 km long
and 15 to 20 km broad transect, covering the central mountain range of western Panama. In total, I
collected specimens of more than 80 amphibian species belonging to all three orders. For many of these I
achieved new distribution, ecology and natural history data. Additionally, I found rare amphibian species
that have not been seen for decades. At various sites within the transect presence of the amphibian
chytrid fungus (Bd) could be confirmed. In order to reveal actual diversity among the collected amphibian
specimens, an approach of combined methods consisting of morphometrics, molecular data and
bioacoustics has been applied, that led to several taxonomic novelties.

Highest amphibian species diversity within the transect occurred in large protected forested areas like
Parque Nacional Santa Fé and Parque Internacional La Amistad, which are situated at the eastern and
western extremities of the transect, respectively. Additional, I discovered high amphibian species diversity
in the Cerro Colorado region, which is part of the autonomous territory of the Ngöbe-Buglé, the largest
indigenous ethnic group in Central America. This is the more remarkable as the area is completely
unprotected and still only little investigated. It is probably the last considerable remainder of intact
mountain rain forest in this part of the central mountain system, called Serranía de Tabasará. The Cerro
Colorado area is threatened by large international mining projects and thus of major conservation
concern.



Heupel, Michelle (Australian Institute of Marine Science); Mapleston, Amos; Simpfendorfer, Colin
(Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries and Aquaculture, Townsville, Q, Australia)

Going over the wall: fate of stocked barramundi

Barramundi are known to use both marine and freshwater habitats. As a popular, commercially and
recreationally fished species multiple management actions are in place including temporal closures and
restocking programs. Stocking programs deposit fingerlings into freshwater impoundments including weirs
along the Ross River in north Queensland. Although the intention of stocking is to provide fish within the
weir system, during the wet season individuals are known to escape from weirs with flood waters. The
contribution these freshwater individuals make to the local population is unknown. Here we examined the



                                                                                                        306
presence and mortality of freshwater stocked and wild caught marine barramundi to examine the role
each plays in the local system. A total of 26 barramundi were collected from Aplins Weir on the Ross
River, fitted with acoustic transmitters and released down river of the weir structure. An additional 12
barramundi were caught at the mouth of the river, fitted with acoustic transmitters and released. Acoustic
monitoring was used to examine presence and mortality rates within the two groups using Kaplan-Meier
estimates. No natural mortality was observed in either sample but both populations were subject to fishing
mortality. Individuals captured at the river mouth had a mortality rate of 0.30 while individuals captured in
the river had a mortality rate of 0.36. Approximately 30% of all released individuals were removed by
fishers with removals almost exclusively by recreational fishers. Fishing pressure was heaviest within the
river with the first removal there occurring 3 weeks after release of individuals, while the first removal of a
marine individual was 40 weeks after release. These results suggest the recreational fishery targeting
river habitats directly benefits from barramundi river populations and stocked individuals.



Hews, Diana (Indiana State University); Abell Baniki, Allison (Indiana State University, Canada)

Acute stress and plasma concentrations of corticosterone and androgens in male and female
striped plateau lizards (Sceloporus virgatus)

Glucocorticoids play a variety of key roles in behavior. Glucocorticoids enhance energy mobilization
supporting increased behaviors associated with courtship (e.g., calling behavior) and with male-male
contests (e.g., territory patrolling, territorial display). Acute glucocorticoid elevation can be an adaptation
to short-term stressors, and can support anti-predator behaviors, and also learning and memory related to
novel stressors. Factors explaining species differences in stress reactivity are less well understood, and
need examination to better understand hormone- behavior relationships. Wingfield‘s breeding-season
hypothesis predicts that glucocorticoid responsiveness to acute stressors in populations or species with
short breeding seasons should be muted, compared to those with longer breeding seasons. The striped
plateau lizard ( Sceloporus virgatus , Phrynosomatidae) has a short breeding season in Arizona, and
females are single-clutching within each breeding season. We measured plasma corticosterone and
androgen levels (dihydrotestosterone and testosterone) following one of four stress handling treatments
(0, 10, 60, or 180 min in captivity) over a 10-day period in the peak of mating activity. Adults of both
sexes subjected to longer captivity durations had higher corticosterone (CORT), and females had higher
levels than males at all time points. Peak CORT elevation after handling stress in this single-clutching
species was of comparable magnitude to responses documented in field studies on related multi-
clutching lizard species (other Sceloporus species; other species in Urosaurus and Uta lizard genera).
Total androgens did not vary significantly with stress duration, in either sex. Combining treatments,
plasma androgens correlated positively with plasma CORT in females but not in males. Plasma CORT
and body-mass residuals were negatively correlated, suggesting males in poor body condition and
females not investing heavily in reproduction (e.g. follicle mass) had higher CORT responses to this acute
handling stressor.



Hibbitts, Toby (TCWC, Texas A&M University);

Microhabitat use of an extreme habitat specialist and the effect of habitat fragmentation

Habitat specialization presumably gives a species an advantage over competitors that are habitat
generalists. But specialization comes with costs, such as an inability to utilize habitats which the
specialist species is not adapted. These costs have become intensified with habitat alteration and



                                                                                                           307
degradation. The Dunes Sagebrush Lizard is a habitat specialist that lives in the Mescalero and
Monahans Sands of southeastern New Mexico and western Texas. Within this ecosystem it specifically
uses the shinnery oak dunes with open depressions called blowouts. Recent work has shown that the
species declines in areas where habitat has been fragmented by caliche roads and oil well pads. Here, I
quantified the available microhabitat across fragmented and unfragmented sites within a shinnery dunes
ecosystem in Andrews County, Texas where Dunes Sagebrush Lizards were present.                    Each
unfragmented study site was paired with a fragmented site (average well pad density of 50 per hectare
with connecting roads). Three pairs of fragmented and unfragmented sites were used. I determined the
microhabitat preferences of the lizard at unfragmented sites and compared the availability of those
microhabitats across both fragmented and unfragmented sites.



Hickerson, Cari-Ann (John Carroll University); Anthony, Carl (John Carroll University, Canada); Walton,
Mike (Cleveland State University, Canada); Meszaros, George (John Carroll University, Canada)

The regulatory role of Plethodon cinereus in a temperate forest detrital food web

Predators can play important regulatory roles in ecosystems by initiating trophic cascades, which occur
when predation causes changes in abundance, biomass, diversity, or ecological function across two or
more links within food webs. However, ecological theory suggests that predator effects should weaken
with high species diversity, and that multiple trophic channels should attenuate top-down effects. Yet
predators can exert significant influence within the detritus-based food web of the temperate forest-floor,
a system described as possessing characteristics that attenuate predator-mediated effects. Terrestrial
salamanders, Plethodon cinereus , can achieve remarkably high densities within temperate forests of
eastern North America, where they play an important role in regulating invertebrates and may mediate
rates of leaf litter decomposition. As part of a larger field study on the role of predators within the forest-
floor food web, we sought to assess the potential for salamander-mediated effects to cascade to bacteria
and fungi – the trophic level linking invertebrate microbe-detritivores to decomposition. Through a four-
year predator removal study, we explored how the manipulation of predator densities affected the
arthropod and microbial communities in replicated, open field plots. Treatments were established from
which either P. cinereus , centipedes, or all major predators were removed during repeated plot surveys.
We used Berlese extraction and counts from beneath artificial cover objects to sample leaf litter
arthropods. Phospholipid fatty acid analysis (PLFA) was used to quantify soil microbes and all of these
organisms were compared among treatments and control plots. Bacteria were significantly suppressed in
plots with the most salamanders (centipede removal plots), but diplopods, isopods, gastropods and
predatory mites increased. Full resolution of mechanism(s) responsible for our findings was beyond the
scope of this study. However, our results contribute importantly to a growing body of evidence indicating
that P. cinereus , which are constrained to spatially fixed microhabitats, can be strong regulators of guild
members and lower trophic levels. Our results also indicate the importance of top-down, predator
mediated, regulation of species composition in a forest-floor, detrital food web, a system that is commonly
thought to be regulated primarily though bottom-up effects.




                                                                                                           308
Higham, Timothy (University of California, Riverside); Russell, Anthony (University of Calgary, Calgary,
AB, Canada)

Controlled chaos? Behavior, physiology and energetics of the autotomized tail of gekkotans

Autotomy, the voluntary loss of an appendage in response to mechanical or visual stimulation, is of
widespread occurrence among vertebrates and invertebrates. The lizard tail, when released, exhibits
movement patterns that do not occur prior to detachment, indicating that behavior of the severed
appendage is functionally adapted to prevailing circumstances. Extensive research has demonstrated
that tail loss and the ensuing tail movement are important for distracting predators, presumably by
providing a visual stimulus, but little attention has been paid to what the tail actually does, and thus why
its movements may be effective. Here we examine tail function after autotomy in gekkotans, with
emphasis on the leopard gecko, and report on three-dimensional kinematics, in vivo muscle activity
patterns, histochemistry and functional morphology. We review what is known, add new data, and
broaden the comparative framework within the Gekkota, which can then be extended to all lizards that
have the ability to autotomize their tail.

Released tails exhibit vigorous, complex post–autotomic movements that range from rhythmic swinging to
explosive acrobatic maneuvers, this variation resulting from differential patterns of motor unit recruitment.
Such complex behaviors are likely the outcome of selection related to the appetitive behavior of particular
predators, although little is known of the details of predator response, especially in nature. Recruitment of
suites of muscle fibers (fast vs. slow twitch) appears to be implicated in the varying actions of the tail, as
deduced from investigation of electromyographic patterns and muscle histochemistry. The neural circuitry
remains unexplored. Examination of movement patterns allows insight into the energetics of the
autotomized tail. Documentation of variation in the frequency, amplitude and magnitude of movements
provides insights into the role of differing behavior patterns following release, and how tail behavior may
be related to the ecology and morphology of particular gekkotan taxa.

Recent work has provided a solid platform for investigating various phenomena associated with tail
behavior after release, and we indicate directions for future research, including the potential for
restoration in regenerated tails of the complex behavior manifested by the original; ontogenetic shifts in
the behavior of released tails; how caudal muscle functions under ischemic conditions; and how
movements of the released tail are controlled.



Hiler, Waylon (Missouri Valley College); Wheeler, Benjamin (University of Arkansas Community College
Batesville, Batesville, AR, United States); Trauth, Stanley (Arkansas State University, State University,
AR, United States); Irwin, Kelly (Arkansas Game and Fish Commission, Benton, AR, United States)

Decline of the Ozark Hellbender (Cryptobranchus alleganiensis bishopi) in Arkansas

The Ozark Hellbender, Cryptobranchus alleganiensis bishopi, is an obligate cool-water salamander that is
dependent upon stable benthic conditions. The range of hellbender populations within Arkansas is
essentially limited to the primary stems of two watersheds, the Eleven Point and Spring rivers. Although
both of these rivers are spring fed, rocky bottomed, rural rivers, they have different within-river habitat
characteristics and surrounding land use practices. Since the early 1980's the Ozark Hellbender has
undergone a decline throughout its entire range; however, the Spring River population has declined
almost to the point of extirpation, whereas the Eleven Point River population still shows signs of sporadic
recruitment. Both populations exhibit a proportional increase in the abundance of larger individuals and
an increase in the number and types of abnormalities; yet, anthropogenic perturbations appear to have



                                                                                                          309
had more of an impact on the Spring River population. These temporal changes in demography are
thought to be due, in part, to catastrophic flood events, legal and illegal collection pressures, land-use
practices, and recreational use of the rivers.



Hilton, Eric J. (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Dillman, Casey (Virginia Institue of Marine Science,
Canada); Paraschiv, Marian; Suciu, Radu (Danube Delta National Institute, Canada)

The skull and pectoral girdle and fin of the stellate sturgeon, Acipenser stellatus, with
comparisons to other sturgeons (Acipenseridae)

Extant members of the family Acipenseridae are currently classified in four genera: Scaphirhynchus
(North America), Pseudoscaphirhynchus (Aral Sea), Huso (Eurasia), and the widely-recognized
paraphyletic ― Acipenser ‖ (North America, Eurasia). Advances have been made in understanding the
systematic relationships among sturgeons based on both morphological and molecular data. One
significant advance relates to the position of          Pseudoscphirhynchus       relative to the genus
Scaphirhynchus . Historically, the two genera were widely regarded as being each other‘s closest
relatives (as Scaphirhynchinae or Scaphirhynchini in different classifications). Analysis of mitochondrial
DNA data, however, suggested that Pseudoscaphirhynchus is better regarded as nested within ―
Acipenser ‖, specifically as sister-group to the Stellate Sturgeon, A. stellatus , from the Black and
Caspian seas. Recent morphological analyses also recovered this relationship, supported by a number of
osteological synapomorphies (e.g., horizontal arm of the jugal undercuts the nasal capsule, absence of a
distinct median process of the jugal, spines on bones of the dermal skull roof, and branching of the trunk,
occipital, and supratemporal sensory canals), although these results were based on few and relatively
small individuals. In this presentation, we describe the anatomy of the skull and pectoral girdle of A.
stellatus based on newly prepared skeletal specimens of adult individuals, as well as examination of a
large number of preserved individuals representing a broad range of ontogenetic stages. We will present
new anatomical data from all regions of the skull (dermatocranium, neurocranium, jaws, and gill arches)
and pectoral girdle and offer interpretations of these and other characters. In particular, we will describe
the allometry of the snout in A. stellatus , which undergoes substantial elongation relative to other
sturgeons. Comparisons of both qualitative and quantitative data will be made to other members of the
family.



Hinderle, Danna (San Diego State University); Lewison, Rebecca (San Diego State University, San
Dieog, United States); Walde, Andrew (Andrew Walde, Atascadero, United States); Boarman, William
(Conservation Science Research & Consulting, Spring Valley, United States); Deutschman, Douglas (San
Diego State University, San Diego, United States)

Desert tortoises (Gopherus agassizii) and translocation: Homing, habitat, behavior and
temperature experiments

Translocation of threatened or vulnerable species is a tool increasingly used for conservation and
management. The behavioral and physiological responses to translocation may undermine the success of
translocation efforts in some species. For the federally protected desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii),
translocation is a strategy used to manage declining populations, yet post-translocation responses in this
species are poorly understood. Here, we radio-tracked 40 tortoises in Fall 2009 and 40 tortoises in Spring
2010 to explore homing ability and movement patterns. We also considered differences in behavior and
habitat use between translocated and non-translocated tortoises, and assessed how these differences




                                                                                                        310
affected carapace temperatures. Tortoises were randomly assigned to one of two treatment groups:
translocated (displaced 2, 5, or 8 km from their source location), or control. After translocation, twenty
percent of the translocated tortoises were able to navigate back to their source location, and translocation
distance had an effect on their ability to navigate home. We found 44 % of tortoises in the 2 km
translocated group returned home, whereas no tortoises in the 8 km translocated group did. We also
found that translocated tortoises moved more than the control groups, with some individuals moving > 10
km from the translocation site. Furthermore, we found that translocated tortoises exhibited different
placement, position, and activity patterns within their habitat when compared to control tortoises. Although
there were no significant carapace temperature differences between translocated and control tortoises
across all ambient temperatures, we found translocated tortoises had significantly higher carapace
temperatures when the ambient temperature was >29°C. By identifying homing behaviors, quantifying
movement patterns, and investigating behavior and habitat associations in desert tortoises, this in-situ
experiment addresses key data gaps that may have limited the efficacy of tortoise translocation efforts.



Hinojosa, Silvia (UNAM);

Genetic Differences between Giant Manta ray (Manta birostris) and the Yucatan Giant Manta ray.
Ma

Based on coloration and morfological differences, the existence of a possible third species for the genus
Manta has been suggested in previous studies. At least two morphotypes with variations in mouth, ventral
and dorsal colorations as well as in some key morphological features has been observed in the giant
manta of the Mexican Carribean. In order to test the hypothesis about whether those differences are
produced by environment or have a genetic basis we used several mitochondrial DNA markers both
nuclear (RAG1) and mitocondrial (ND5, COI, 12S and 16S), to determine if there are enough
differentiation levels to further contribute to the definition of the possible third manta ray species
previously reported. In addition samples of M. birostris and Manta sp .were sent to be analyzed by new
generation sequencing techniques to create a genomic library and to look for otrher possible differences
in the complete mitocondrial genome. This work reveals our primary findings using ND5 and COI genes.
The DNA from 30 samples collected at Holbox Mexico and Revillagigedo Islands, were amplifyed ,
sequenced, aligned and compared to determine if it exists enough genetic variation between the Mexican
populations and the previously reported species ( Manta birostris ). The sequences for each mtDNA
region, are being compared with those of Pacific in order to estimate the mean genetic divergence and
their correlation with isolation processes.



Hipolito, Marcio (Instituto Biológico); Ferreira, Claudia M.; Dias, Danielle C.; Baldi, Ludmila C. (Instituto
de Pesca, Canada)

Histopathogical aspect of tumoral formation in bullfrog Lithobates catesbeianus (Rana
catesbeiana Shaw, 1802), Brazil.

The authors describe the histopathological aspect of tumor from adult animal, female, bullfrog (
Lithobates catesbeianus, Shaw, 1802), breeding from a frogfarm near Sorocaba city, São Paulo state,
Brazil, with five years of age, since a decrease of their reproductive function, placed in an aquarium for
exhibition, where he lived for about 1 month. During this short period, it had revealed apathy, increase of
the ventral region, anorexy and die. In the necropsy it was observed an aggregate formation to the liver
and ovary, having been collected 2 distinct and separated portions from the tumor, settled in neutral



                                                                                                         311
formalin solution 20% buffered and prepared for the histopathology with the hematoxylin and eosin stain.
In an portion, the tumor showed cystic formation, adhered to the liver and involved for conjunctive tissue
capsule. Some fibrocytes with hypertrophic nucleus and others with pycnotic nuclei, also presence of
areas in necrosis and areas with cellular remaining portions and focal areas with an increased number of
linfocytes and melanomacrophages. It is observed, in parenchyma, a nodule, well circumscribed with
conjunctive tissue and more linfocytes and melanomacrophages. Adhered to the capsule, was observed
innumerables oocytes in different stages of development and in this area is presented several blood
vessels congested. In the another portion, presence of squamous epithelium with many hypertrophics
cells or hypertrophics nucleus and nucleolus evident of unknown origin for optic microscopy and areas
where we can observe numerous glands spread in epithelial tissue. Also innumerables blood vessels
congested or with hyaline material in the lumen of blood vessels. Some areas in necrosis and an
accented number of melanomacrophages is also observed. This formation can be characterized as a
benign neoplasm tumor of unknown origin. No similar cases were observed in commercial frogfarm
where these animals came. Regardless of the cause of death, in all animals necropsied,
tumor formations are sought, since it is believed that there is no known occurrence.



Hipolito, Marcio (Instituto Biológico); Martins, Ana M. Cristina R.P.F. (Instituto Biologico, São Paulo,
Brazil); Ferreira, Claudia M. (Instituto de Pesca, São Paulo, Brazil); Antonucci, Antonio M. (Universidade
Estadual de Maringá, Maringá, Brazil)

Report of congenital anomalies with malformations in bullfrogs Lithobates catesbeianus (Rana
catesbeiana, Shaw, 1802) in São Paulo, Brazil.

The occurrence of four different types of malformation, after metamorphosis, in bullfrogs (Lithobates
catesbeianus) from commercial frogfarm of the region middle valley of the River Paraíba do Sul, Sao
Paulo State, Brazil, are reported. All these occurrences were observed in the course of two years and
they have never been concurrent. They affected several batches at different times. The number of
animals with deformities ranged from only a few to hundreds. It was observed, ordered in increasing
number of malformations: complete additional limbs, both front and rear, one by animal and the extra
formations derived from the initial portion of the original limbs, with a small number of frogs. The second
type of malformation found was the occurrence of cases of malformation in the ocular region and eyes,
found in tens of bullfrogs, varying from complete agenesis of this organ to the formation of large globular
structures and in some animals the eyes were complete, in others they were only partially formed, the
malformation being bilateral, either symmetrical or asymmetrical. The third occurrence, found in hundreds
of bullfrogs, was no formation of the hind limbs, yet showing bilateral symmetry, the cases varying from
complete agenesis to the complete formation of the legs, but with no fingers or some of them missing.
The last and most frequent occurrence, in hundreds of animals, was a malformation of the spine, with the
presence of kyphosis, lordosis and scoliosis. As soon as those anomalies were found, the affected
animals were removed and sacrificed, because of the difficulty they met in moving and getting food. The
others, that didn't show any malformations immediately after metamorphosis, went through a normal
development. Most likely the cause of these anomalies is congenital, as there was a high rate of
inbreeding in this squad. The observations were made in the years 2008 and 2009, and in the next year
this frogfarm was closed, because the property was sold. At present there is no report of anomalies that
serious, due to the care given at frogfarms, where inbreeding is avoided. Previous reports of congenital
anomalies were found, all due to inbreeding as well. The bullfrogs bred in Brazil are all descended from
30 couples, imported several decades ago, and not renewed so far, due to the legal difficulties in the
importation of new animals. The inbreeding is controlled to some extent, by the current Brazilian farmers,




                                                                                                       312
through the choice of the animals for mating from other frogfarms, preferably as far away as northern and
southern Brazil.



Hippe, Scott (Gonzaga University); Propper, Cathy (Northern Arizona University, Canada); Staub, Nancy
(Gonzaga University, Spokane, WA, United States)

The presence of sexually dimorphic submandibular glands in Taricha granulosa, the Rough-
Skinned Newt (Salamandridae)

We test the hypothesis that the salamandrid Taricha granulosa , the rough-skinned newt, possesses
pheromone-producing courtship glands in the submandibular dermis. This hypothesis repeatedly appears
in the literature based on courtship behavior in which males press their chins on females‘ nares and on a
small histological study. We identify a sexually dimorphic granular gland in the submandibular region of
male newts. Its secretion was granular and PAS-positive, in contrast to the PAS-negative secretion of
typical granular glands. The gland was found only in males and only in the anterior submandibular region.
Compared to glands evaluated from non-breeding males, the glands from animals collected in the
breeding season were hypertrophied. This sexually dimorphic granular gland is distinct from the mental
gland found in plethodontid salamanders; the plethodontid mental gland is an aggregate of individual
glands whereas the granular glands in Taricha granulosa are not clustered together. Our results support
the hypothesis that males are secreting pheromones from submandibular glands during courtship in T.
granulosa.



Hipsley, Christy (Museum für Naturkunde Berlin); Müller, Johannes (Museum für Naturkunde Berlin,
Canada)

Evolutionary consequences of Cenozoic climate change on African lacertid lizards (Squamata:
Lacertidae)

The Lacertidae is a large family of Old World lizards with considerable variation in clade size, morphology
and ecology. In contrast to the global pattern of increasing biodiversity towards the tropics, African
lacertids are most diverse in deserts north and south of the equator, despite being spread throughout the
continent. This disparity in species richness is particularly surprising given that desert lacertids are
thought to be evolutionarily younger than their mesic relatives, suggesting increased speciation rates in
arid habitats. To identify the environmental and evolutionary factors underlying this pattern, we used a
combination of phylogenetic, morphological, and ecological approaches to estimate timing and rates of
diversification for the main lineages, and to test if historical shifts in ecology, morphology, and rates of
diversification coincide with paleoclimatic events.

A time-calibrated phylogeny for Lacertidae was constructed based on 1012 bp of the nuclear gene RAG1
and 3 fossil-calibrated nodes with hard minimum and soft maximum bounds. Our results suggest that
lacertids arose in the early Cenozoic and entered Africa about 45 million years ago, with the majority of
their African radiation occurring in the Eocene and Oligocene.

Based on the above branch lengths, rates of diversification were estimated for the main clades. The
African radiation as a whole shows higher rates of diversification than their Palearctic sister clade
throughout the Oligocene to mid-Miocene. Within the African radiation, desert-dwelling taxa also show
higher diversification rates early in their evolutionary histories than equatorial African and temperate
groups. Colonization of independent deserts is also accompanied by similar derived morphologies,



                                                                                                        313
including an overall decrease in ossification and fusion of cranial bones. Geometric morphometric
analysis of 3-D Computed Tomography scans shows that these taxa achieve convergent cranial
morphologies via enlarged orbits, lengthening and narrowing of the snout and frontals, and shortening of
the postorbital region. Ancestral state reconstruction of morphology and habitat suggests that these traits
evolved with the onset of aridification in Africa. These results emphasize the importance of deserts as
centers of reptile evolution and provide comparative climate impact data for terrestrial vertebrates.



Hirschfeld, Mareike (Museum fuer Naturkunde, Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and
Biodiversity at the Humboldt University Berlin); Roedel, Mark-Oliver (Museum fuer Naturkunde, Leibniz
Institute for Research on Evolution and Biodiversity at the Humboldt University Berlin, Berlin, Canada)

Life history traits and adaptation ability to changing environments? - Leaf-litter frogs in the
Cameroonian highlands.

Globally many species are negatively affected by fragmentation and alteration of the climate. In particular
species living in tropical highlands suffer from these environmental changes as dispersal from
disappearing to appropriate habitats is limited. The respective species thus are captured on their
mountain ‘islands‗. However, the susceptibility of different species to the same environmental changes
may vary due to differences in their resilience to these changes. Such variation may depend on a variety
of different species-specific ‘ecological properties‗; like e.g. dispersal ability, mean maximum age,
reproductive strategy and investment, trophic niche, physiological constraints and in sum their habitat
preferences. Most tropical leaf-litter frogs occur in forested habitats. Although belonging to different
taxonomic groups, their environmental requirements often seem similar. However, it is apparent that
some species may tolerate forest degradation to partly huge extends, whereas others are exclusively
found in primary tropical forest with closed canopy. We herein ask if this variation of mountainous frog
species in adaptability to forest degradation is related to their particular sets of ecological properties.

The study is conducted on the Mount Manengouba, a peak of the volcanic chain in southwestern
Cameroon. Apart from the altitudinal gradient (up to 2411 m asl) there are horizontal and vertical
gradients of habitats ranging from pristine forest to farmbush. This mountainous region is exceptional
concerning amphibian species richness (> 100 species), including a high diversity of leaf-litter frogs
belonging to different genera (e.g. Cardioglossa, Phrynobatrachus ). First results revealed high variation
in adaptability of species to environmental changes even within one genus. For instance, Cardioglossa
species vary not only in their altitudinal ranges, but as well in their occurrences along different degraded
habitat types. We investigate species distributions in correlation to species specific ecological traits, using
different leaf-litter frogs (related and non-related genera) on the Mount Manengouba as example.



Hitchmough, Rod (New Zealand Department of Conservation); Bauer, Aaron; Nielsen, Stuart (Villanova
University, Canada)

Alpha taxonomy of the New Zealand gecko radiation

Proposed changes to alpha taxonomy of New Zealand geckos are presented. Nielsen et al. (2011)
presented a robust phylogeny for the New Zealand gecko radiation and a comprehensive range of
outgroups in the Diplodactylidae. In this paper they also revised the generic taxonomy, increasing the
number of recognised genera from two to seven. They listed both named and proposed, un-named
species in each genus. Since then, formal descriptions have been prepared for the previously un-named
species, and a monograph will soon be submitted for publication. This work is summarised in this poster,



                                                                                                           314
and some taxonomic issues are discussed. In the genera Woodworthia and Dactylocnemis , species
recognised here are deeply divergent, and sympatry or at least marginal overlap of sister species is
common. Woodworthia may remain under-split; within species some monophyletic geographic clusters
of populations are diagnosable genetically and morphologically. In Naultinus , and Mokopirirakau ,
sympatry is very rare and many sister species pairs have much lower levels of divergence; however,
species are mostly morphologically easily diagnosable and have abutting, non-overlapping ranges.
Tukutuku, Toropuku and Hoplodactylus are each monophyletic, but the latter two genera each have
widely allopatric northern and southern clades which are divergent in DNA sequence and morphology at
levels comparable to those between sister species in Naultinus and Mokopirirakau . However, the
geographic gaps in the distributions of these genera are known or suspected to be recent and human-
induced – an understanding of the pre-human distribution of variation in these gaps is required before a
robust taxonomy can be proposed.



Hleihel, Walid (Holy Spirit University of Kaslik); Hraoui-Bloquet, Souad (Faculty of Sciences II, Lebanese
University,, Fanar, Lebanon); Ziad Fajloun, Ziad (Azm Center for the Research in Biotechnology and its
Applications Lebanese University, Tripoli, Canada); Sadek, Riyad (Biology Department, American
University of Beirut, Beirut, Beirut)

Effects and characterisation of the venom of Montevipera bornmuelleri on a murine model

In the present study, we have evaluated the lethal, hemorrhagic and necrotic activities of Montevipera
bornmuelleri fresh venom. Our results indicated that the venom of this snake species had an important
lethal activity and average hemorrhagic and necrotic activities (in the area of subcutaneous injection of
venom into mice) with good correlation between the venom doses and these toxic effects. The
intramuscular median lethal dose was estimated at 12.19 mg/kg. The minimum hemorrhagic and necrotic
doses of Montevipera bornmuelleri venom were evaluated at 225 μg and 180 μg respectively. Histological
observations of the brain, cardiac, pulmonary, hepatic, renal and muscle tissue, after intramuscular
injection into mice of different doses of the venom of Montevipera bornmuelleri haven‘t showed any deep
hemorrhage or necrosis.



Hoare, Jo (New Zealand Department of Conservation); Lettink, Marieke (Fauna Finders, Christchurch,
New Zealand); Batson, William; O'Donnell, Colin (Department of Conservation, Christchurch, New
Zealand)

Developing monitoring techniques for cryptic lizard taxa in New Zealand

Robust monitoring is essential to evaluating the effectiveness of conservation management. For many
cryptic taxa, including herpetofauna, reliable, standardised techniques do not exist. In New Zealand, no
established monitoring technique exists for many threatened lizard species. Recent developments of
novel techniques for reptiles, particularly the use of various artificial retreats and footprint tracking tunnels,
show considerable promise. However, to gain confidence in novel techniques, research is required to: (1)
develop optimal protocols that minimise variability, (2) evaluate assumptions and (3) assess whether
indices of abundance from monitoring retreats reflect population size estimates obtained through an
independent method. We used a high density population of common skinks, Oligosoma polychroma, in
Fiordland National Park, New Zealand to evaluate and develop standardised protocols for the use of
artificial retreats for monitoring cryptic lizards in New Zealand. At this site, skink sightings beneath
retreats were most consistent at intermediate temperatures of 12-18 degrees Celsius and in dry
conditions. Permanent placement of artificial retreats influenced demographic composition and frequency



                                                                                                              315
of skinks using retreats, but not their body condition, relative to temporarily placed retreats. Skink counts
from artificial retreats provided a reasonably accurate and highly precise index of population size
(obtained from capture-mark-recapture pitfall trapping), when sampling was conducted under optimal
weather conditions. We believe that artificial retreats represent a reliable, cost-effective alternative to
other monitoring techniques for cryptic lizards and recommend that index counts from retreats be
calibrated against population size estimates for other habitats and species.



Hocking, Daniel (University of New Hampshire); Babbitt, Kimberly (University of New Hampshire,
Durham, NH, United States)

Comparison of models for analyzing seasonal salamander activity from longitudinal count data

Accurate modeling of animal activity patterns is important for biological assessment surveys,
management plans, and fundamental understanding of how organisms respond to environmental and
climatic conditions. Often for logistic reasons, researchers collect activity data of animals repeatedly from
the same sites. The resulting longitudinal data has the added benefit of being able to distinguish between
―cohort‖ and ―age‖ effects. When analyzing longitudinal data it is important to account for the correlation
associated with repeated sampling of the same sites to avoid pseudoreplication and violations of model
assumptions. This is often accomplished using subject-specific mixed-effects models. If the specific sites
are not of interest, generalized estimating equations (GEE) are computationally simpler and provide
population-level estimates. We compare GEE and mixed models for estimating seasonal activity of red-
backed salamanders ( Plethodon cinereus ). We obtained counts of salamanders from nighttime visual
encounter surveys throughout their activity season over four years. We used two modeling approaches to
evaluate these data. First, we used the same fixed effects in all models to compare salamander
responses to meteorological conditions. Second, we conducted independent model selection to
determine the best predictive model of salamander surface activity for mixed and GEE models. The first
approaches produced estimates that were in the same direction and similar rank order for all mixed-effect
and GEE models. Soil temperature had a significant quadratic effect with peak activity around 15 C.
Rainfall amount and relative humidity had positive effects on salamander surface activity and
salamanders were most active in the spring. At higher temperatures rainfall had less effect on activity and
wind speed has less effect on humid nights. However, the magnitude of the effects and the associated
error differed among models. Linear mixed models (LME) on log-transformed count data and GEE
resulted in similar estimates of the fixed effects. Generalized linear mixed models (GLMM) estimated
steeper slopes (positive and negative) for nearly all variables compared with GEE and LME models. The
second approach resulted in different models of salamander activity. All models included temperature,
rainfall, relative humidity, and windspeed as important variables. Despite differences, the overall
predictions of the models were somewhat similar.



Hödl, Walter (University of Vienna, Austria);

From simple field observations to a model species. Confessions of a taxon-oriented field
biologist.

An unexpected rapid phonotactic approach of a male Allobates (= Phyllobates , = Dendrobates , =
Epipedobates ) femoralis to a control replay of its recording in the Yubineto region, Northern Peru, in
1978 started my curiosity-driven research on the bioacoustics of this species. Due to its stereotypic
phonotactic response to playbacks of conspecific (Hödl, 1982) and a large variety of synthetic (Hödl,



                                                                                                         316
1987) calls I introduced     A. femoralis as a ―handy fellow‖ to the herpetological and bioacoustic
community at various scientific meetings. Rapidly ―my‖ handy fellow became the main focus of an
international research team forming a cohesive group out of a diverse collection of individual scientists.
Important inputs from Adolfo Amézquita (evolutionary aspects), Peter Narins (robotics and sensory
physiology), Albertina Lima and Pedro Ivo Simões (biogeography) as well as Eva and Max Ringler
(population biology) clearly show that taxon-centered research can be a self accelerating process. The
valuable integration of various aspects have led to more fruitful insights than would have been possible
with a pure hypothesis-based approach, which sometimes may narrow the angle of view on a given
research question. In 30 years of trying to understand a living organism in the field I have gained
increasing confidence in my scientific approach to let organisms rather than hypotheses lead me to the
important questions. And last but not least: Taxon-centered research is simply more fun!



Hoen, Danielle (University of Hawaii Manoa); Drazen, Jeffrey; Popp, Brian; Condon, Nicole (University of
Hawaii Manoa, Canada)

Does elasmobranch trophic position increase with depth? Interpreting bulk isotope data with
compound-specific isotope analysis of amino acids

Increasing fishing pressure and the threat of climate change make understanding the trophic biology of
poorly studied deep water chondrichthyans critical. Increasingly, bulk isotope analyses are utilized to
determine trophic relationships among these organisms. However, there is much uncertainty when
interpreting bulk isotope data in an ecological context. For instance, changes in baseline isotopic
composition and possible fractionation differences among organisms complicate bulk isotope analyses. It
was recently found that chondrichthyan 15N enrichment increases with depth, suggesting an apparent
increase in trophic position (TP) with depth. It has been hypothesized the production of urea by these
species may be lowering nitrogen isotope fractionation. If this is the case, decreasing urea content with
depth would drive a subsequent increase in nitrogen isotope fractionation, leading to the apparent
increase in TP indicated by bulk isotope data. We analyzed the livers of two species of skate, Raja rhina
and Amblyraja badia (median depth of occurrence: 539 m and 1585 m respectively), caught from a depth
gradient ranging over 1500 m using compound specific isotope analysis of amino acids in addition to
glutamate dehydrogenase and glutamine synthetase enzyme assays to determine if this trend was a
product of baseline δ15N changes, a change in nitrogen isotope fractionation, or an actual increase in TP.
Phenylalanine δ15N values varied little over this depth range, indicating no change in baseline δ15N
values. Rather the apparent trend may be driven by changes in fractionation due to urea retention. These
results serve to caution researchers and fisheries managers when making assumptions about ecosystem
dynamics in the deep sea based on bulk isotope data.



Hoffman, Daniel (San Francisco State University);

Fuctional Divergence Amoung HOX gene Paralogs

Functional divergence of Hox gene paralogs in zebrafish. Ray-finned fishes are the most diverse
vertebrate group, with over 27,000 species. The extraordinary success of this group has been attributed
to a whole genome duplication that occurred in the stem lineage of the teleosts, a subset of ray-finned
fishes. Hox genes are associated with body plan features, and are expressed during A-P axis formation.
In addition, many of the duplicated Hox genes have been retained in zebrafish and fugu. Using Micro




                                                                                                      317
injection techniques we found evidence for functional divergence between paralogs for HoxA11 and
HoxA13 in zebrafsh, furthering the evidence of significance behind paralog retention.



Holbrook, Aaron (The University of Southern Mississippi); Jawor, Jodie; Qualls, Carl (The University of
Southern Mississippi, Canada)

Stress response and digestive efficiency in hatchling gopher tortoises

Federally threatened in Mississippi, the gopher tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus) populations there have
strongly variable recruitment and are generally in decline. Hatching success is significantly lower in
Mississippi than in any other part of the species‘ range and most hatchlings die within the first year.
Behavioral and physiological differences negatively affecting hatchling survival could be linked to altered
levels of corticosterone, a hormone that influences both energy availability and behavior and is released
in elevated levels during stressful events. One way corticosterone conserves energy is by inhibiting
digestion and in chronically stressed individuals this results in decreased digestive efficiency and growth.
We determined baseline and stress-induced corticosterone levels via restraint stress in hatchlings and we
will compare these to growth rates, gut passage time, and fecal caloric content of hatchlings housed in a
common garden environment. Restraint stress successfully increased corticosterone in a short time
period and we suggest that in reptiles a unique stressor is needed to quickly elevate corticosterone.



Holcomb, Kerry (Central Washington University); Beck, Daniel (Dept. of Biological Sciences, Central
Washington University, Ellensburg, WA, United States); Oliván Pliego, Jesús Eduardo (Facultad de
Ciencias Biológicas de la UAEM (Morelos), San Patricio, Jalisco, Canada); Kiester, Ross (Turtle
Conservancy, New York, NY, United States); García Aguayo, Andrés (Instituto de Biología, U.N.A.M.,
San Patricio, Jalisco, Mexico)

To Conform or Regulate, are These the Only Options? Thermal Biology of the Mexican Beaded
Lizard (Heloderma horridum) in a Tropical Dry Forest

Microhabitat choice directly influences the immediate body temperature (Tb) of a terrestrial reptile.
Relative homeothermy can, therefore, be achieved by many small reptiles (<100g), by intently shuttling
from one thermal patch to the next. Nevertheless, the drastically-different thermal dynamics of medium to
large reptiles (>500g) make active thermoregulation physically challenging and ecologically expensive,
many times prohibitively so. Thermally homogenous systems, e.g. dense closed canopy forests, further
exacerbate both the physical and ecological challenges associated with active thermoregulation. As a
result, many medium to large tropical reptiles are incapable of active thermoregulation. We contrasted, in
situ, how the Mexican Beaded lizard (Heloderma horridum horridum) manages body temperature during
the thermally-diverse dry-season (sample period, May 18 to June 20) with the thermally-homogeneous
wet-season (sample period, July 1 to August 3), of a tropical drought deciduous forest in Chamela,
Jalisco, Mexico. Specifically, we used spectral analysis to compare individual Tb time series with twelve
environmental temperature (Te) time series—Te was measured using biophysical models. We used
implantable radiotransmitters (IMP-200L, Telonics, Mesa, Arizona) to spatially track lizards and ground-
truth our temperature based refuge use estimation as well as collect burrow temperature data.
Thermocron ibuttonTM (DS1922L, 0.5°C accuracy, Maxim, Dallas, TX) temperature dataloggers were
used to record body temperatures at 15 minute intervals (n = 6 lizards). Body mass varied between a
dry-season average of 1088g to a wet-season average of 1275g, The body temperature of active beaded
lizards did not differ significantly from concurrent shaded air temperature, in both the dry and wet




                                                                                                        318
seasons, indicating a conformist strategy to thermoregulation. Yet, shelters used by beaded lizards
showed temperatures closer to beaded lizards‘ thermal set point than did shelters that were available, yet
unoccupied. Thermal selectivity in refuge choice, as well as temporal patterns of refuge use, enable
beaded lizards to regulate Tbs tightly. For instance, 54.4 percent of dry-season and 30.4 percent of wet-
season Tbs fell between 27.1 and 29.9?C, body temperatures that agree with a Set-point temperature
range (Tset—i.e. preferred body temperature)—of 27.5?C to 31.25?C (n=5 lizards). Rather than active
behavioral thermoregulation, beaded lizards seem to regulate body temperature more by choosing
refuges offering an appropriate thermal environment. Furthermore, homeothermy achieved using this
strategy can be held for many days, a level of thermal stability that is impossible to maintain through
active behavioral thermoregulation.



Holding, Matthew (Ohio State University); Frazier, Julius (Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo, United States);
Dorr, Scott (California Polytechnic State U, San Luis Obispo, United States); Pollack, Nicholas (Rutgers
University, New Brunswick, United States); Muelleman, PJ (U. Louisiana Lafeyette, Lafayette, United
States); Branske, Amber (Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo, United States); Henningsen, Sloane (None,
Columbus, United States); Montgomery, Chad (Truman State U., Kirksville, Canada); Taylor, Emily
(California Polytechnic State U, San Luis Obispo, United States)

Snakes Living the Island Life: Hormone Profiles and Stress Reactivity of the Hog Island Boa (Boa
constrictor imperator)

Field studies that broaden the comparative framework for inference into the evolutionary and ecological
factors shaping organismal physiology are extremely important, often leading to novel physiological
insight and discovering new model systems for future work. We explored factors associated with the
circulating sex steroid hormone concentrations and adrenocortical response to acute capture and
handling stress in the Hog Island boa (Boa constrictor imperator), which inhabits the Cayos Cochinos
Archipelago of Honduras. This is a novel system, in both a phylogenetic and geographic sense, for work
in field endocrinology because no previous description of hormone profiles in basal Alethinophidian
snakes is available and because these snakes have been isolated from mainland populations since the
last glacial maximum. Plasma steroid concentrations in these snakes were notably low in comparison to
other snakes. We report a number of seasonal and sex differences in hormone concentrations. Notably,
we observed high testosterone concentrations in males and high testosterone, estradiol, and
corticosterone concentrations in females during the wet season that are likely indicative of breeding
activities and vitellogenesis during this time. The Hog Island boa displayed an average four-fold increase
in plasma corticosterone concentrations due to our acute capture and handling stressor, a rise that was
not impacted by whether or not a snake had been captured and handled during previous years. More
work is required to determine whether these snakes display ‗island tameness‘ in their physiology or
behavior. The adrenocortical stress response was larger in males and positively related to both body
condition and body temperature. A positive relationship between body condition and the adrenocortical
response to acute stress is contrary to the bulk of previous reports and we discuss potential determinants
of this relationship. We suggest that this system is one that merits future inquiries into its physiology and
behavior, especially as a model for studying insular impacts on diverse life history characters. Such
efforts, when combined with outreach, may prove important for the conservation of island populations of
B. constrictor spp.




                                                                                                         319
Hollensead, Lisa (Florida State University); Carlson, John; Bethea, Dana (NOAA NMFS Panama City
Laboratory, Panama City, FL, United States); Grubbs, R. Dean (Florida State Coast Marine Laboratory,
St. Teresa, FL, United States)

Monitoring movement patterns of juvenile smalltooth sawfish (Pristis pectinata) using acoustic
monitoring and tracking in a nursery habitat in southwest Florida

Historically, the U.S. range of smalltooth sawfish stretched from North Carolina to Texas including the
Gulf of Mexico. Due to fisheries bycatch, habitat loss, and a low productivity, the US population has
declined leading to their inclusion on the U.S. Endangered Species Act in 2003. Necessary to their
recovery is a description of critical habitat, mandated in the Smalltooth Sawfish Recovery Plan. Using
passive acoustic telemetry and active tracking, precise delineation of smalltooth sawfish activity space
and patterns of habitat use can be determined. Juvenile smalltooth sawfish less than 1.5 meter total
length were fitted with two Vemco acoustic tags. An R coded tag was used to passively monitor
movements with an array of 32 VR2w receivers in Everglades National Park and 3 VR2w receivers in
Faka Union Bay, Florida. A continuous tag was used for active tracking using a VR100 hydrophone. In
2011, 24 animals were captured and fitted with acoustic transmitters. Residency time was found to be
longer than previously hypothesized with animals remaining in the system through out the winter months.
Seven animals were actively tracked for a minimum of 4 hours and a maximum of 32 hours. Benthic
samples and mangrove habitat properties were measured in an effort to create a habitat selectivity model.
For the benthic samples, percent sand, silt, clay and organic content were measured. Mangrove habitat
was measured throughout the two study sites and was categorized by branch overhang, prop root
density, and rhizome density. Other abiotic factors (temp, depth etc) were also measured.



Holmes, Bonnie (University of Queensland);

Long-term movement patterns of satellite tagged tiger sharks (Galeocerdo cuvier) in south
eastern Australia

The tiger shark (Galeocerdo cuvier) is one of the highest trophic order predators in Australia‘s coastal
marine waters. Described as a tropical species, G. cuvier movements into southern sub-tropical and
warm temperate waters have previously been assumed to occur seasonally in the austral summer.
Determining movement patterns and habitat use is vital for better understanding the role of tiger sharks in
structuring coastal communities. As a species potentially dangerous to bathers, it is also important to
understand when and where interactions with humans are likely to occur. Pop-up archival (PAT) and
Smart Positioning or Temperature Transmitting (SPOT) satellite tags were used to investigate seasonal
movement and site fidelity of tiger sharks in southern Queensland and northern New South Wales. A total
of 12 tiger sharks were tagged between 2007–2011 across a range of sizes, sexes and seasons.
Preliminary results indicate that some large and small tiger sharks of both sexes will remain in southern
Queensland waters during the cooler winter months. Depth profiles obtained from PAT tags indicated
maximum depths of over 1760 m, deeper than previously reported for the species, with water
temperatures as low as 5.9 degrees celsius. The greatest distance travelled was ≈1800 km, from Botany
Bay NSW to New Caledonian waters after 48 days at liberty. Notwithstanding this, the majority of
individuals maintained some fidelity to the coastal zone highlighting the importance of near-shore habitat.
We hypothesise that habitat utilisation is driven predominantly by prey availability.




                                                                                                       320
Holmes, Nick (Island Conservation); Butchart, Stuart (Birdlife International, Cambridge, United Kingdom);
Croll, Donald (Coastal and Conservation Action Lab, University of California at Santa Cruz, Canada);
Kiett, Brad (Island Conservation, Canada); McCreless, Erin; Newton, Kelly; Spatz, Dena; Tershy, Bernie
(Coastal and Conservation Action Lab, University of California at Santa Cruz, Canada)

Preventing reptile extinctions on islands: Assessing removal of invasive vertebrates at a global
scale

Islands make up only 5% of the earth‘s land area, but 64% of known species extinctions since ~1600
have taken place on islands and 37% of IUCN Critically Endangered species currently inhabit them.
Invasive vertebrates are the primary cause of insular extinctions, and the second greatest contributor to
endangerment of insular species today. Invasive vertebrates have been successfully eradicated from
>700 islands worldwide. These eradication efforts should be directed to islands and archipelagos that
offer the greatest biodiversity benefits. We have developed a database of the world‘s insular IUCN
Critically Endangered (CR) and Endangered (EN) vertebrates, using the IUCN Red List, UNEP Global
Island Database, Global Invasive Species Database, published and gray literature, and expert opinion.
Excluding sea turtles, we identified 169 CR or EN insular-breeding reptile species with populations on 433
islands. The Caribbean has a rich concentration of endemic and threatened insular reptile populations
where eradicating invasive vertebrates is technologically feasible (<30,000 ha and <1,000 people). Mona
island (Puerto Rico), with 4 CR/EN species, is a particularly important Caribbean island for insular
reptiles. This database can help facilitate eradication of invasive vertebrates from islands to benefit
threatened species.



Hölting, Monique (Museum of Zoology, Senckenberg Natural History Collections); Ernst, Raffael
(Senckenberg Natural History Collections, Dresden, Germany)

Logging AND Frogging? Exploration of Amphibian Diversity in the Selectively Logged Tropical
Forests of Guyana

Guyana is one of the most intensely forested tropical countries, where forest resources cover more than
three quarters of its land area. Even though in the past Guyana has had one of the lowest deforestation
rates of the world, timber value has long been recognized and 13.5 of its approximately 15 million ha of
rainforest is classified as state forest and thus potentially open to logging. Only little is known about the
actual consequences of logging for complex forest ecosystems and the question is, whether or not
sustainable forestry can be an adequate strategy to mitigate possible negative impacts. Our study aims to
fill that gap by resolving interactions between different levels of biodiversity and ecosystem functioning in
a region that is subject to selective sustainable silviculture. We use amphibian communities as a suitable
and sensitive organismic model. The main study is being conducted within a controlled polycyclic timber
harvesting scheme implemented by our project partner Iwokrama International Centre for Rainforest
Conservation and Development under the auspices of Forest Stewardship Council (FSC). First results
covering data for three consecutive years of investigation in the Iwokrama forest illustrate, that actual
changes in amphibian diversity between ‗pristine‘ and reduced impact logging areas are quite complex.
Both extreme climatic events and logging activities seem to affect amphibian diversity. There are
―winners‖ and ―losers‖, and while some species disappear, others recolonize. The challenge will be to
disentangle the various components leading to these changes, and resolving the underlying mechanisms.
This will not only be important to guarantee the long-term viability of particular species at risk, but also to
maintain the key feature of Guyana‘s forest, its biodiversity.




                                                                                                           321
Honda, Masanao (University of Tsukuba); Kurita, Takaki (University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan);
Toda, Mamoru (University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Canada); Ota, Hidetoshi (Institute of Natural and
Environmental Sciences and Museum of Nature and Human Activities, University of Hyogo, Hyogo,
Japan)

Phylogenetic relationships, genetic divergence and biogeography of Goniurosaurus kuroiwae
(Squamata: Eublepharidae) from the Central Ryukyus, Japan

The Kuroiwa's eyelid gecko Goniurosaurus kuroiwae is an endangered eublepharid species endemic to
the Central Ryukyus, Janan, and includes five recognized subspecies. Since there are considerable
geographical and morphological gaps between this species and the other congeners, all from
southeastern Continental China including Hainan Island and several off-shore islets, the former is
considered to be in an extremely relict state as a result of initial continental-insular vicariance and
subsequent extinction of related populations that had once occurred in the eastern part of the continent,
Taiwan, and the Southern Ryukyus. Also, subspecific diversification of G. kuroiwae has been considered
as a result of temporal changes in land configuration around the current Central Ryukyus. In the present
study, we examined phylogenetic relationships among the five subspecies of G. kuroiwae by analyzing
approximately 1,200 base positions of mitochondrial 12S and 16S rRNAs, and cytochrome b genes. Our
purposes are to test the currently prevailing morphology-based phylogenetic hypothesis for these
subspecies, and to discuss their genetic divergence and biogeography. Results of the analyses confirm
monophyly of populations representing the five subspecies of G. kuroiwae against the continental
congeners, and show a considerable genetic divergence of the former from the latter. However, our
results do not support the relationships hypothesized on the morphological ground in that the present
results strongly suggest 1) the primary dichotomy, with substantial genetic divergence, between G. k.
splendens from the Amami Island Group and the remaining subspecies, all from the Okinawa Island
Group, and 2) the presence of at least six independent lineages within the latter assemblage , indicating
non-monophylies of G. k. kuroiwae and G. k. orientalis. The prominent genetic divergence in G.
kuroiwae populations between the two island groups of the Central Ryukyus seems to have initiated in
the Miocene, i.e., prior to formations of those straits that have consistently been separating these island
groups since the late Pliocene or early Pleistocene. It is probable that the strong preference by G.
kuroiwae of subtropical karst limestone areas covered with humid vegetations, such as primary or well
recovered secondary forests, might have played a crucial role in isolating its populations on an apparently
single Central Ryukyu land mass. On the other hand, divergences within the Okinawa Island Group may
reflect almost concurrent vicariances involved by the Pleistocene sea level changes. It is noteworthy that
each of the samples from a few small islets have lost their genetic diversities completely or almost
completely in sequences examined. This result, along with recent reduction of suitable habitats on most
of those islets, strongly suggests an urgent necessity of effective conservation measures there.



Hopkins, Brittney (Virginia Tech); Hopkins, William; Jones, Devin; Willson, John (Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, United States)

Maternal Mercury Exposure Has Negative Consequences on Turtle Reproduction

In addition to the suite of beneficial resources (e.g. antibodies, hormones, and nutrients) that females
allocate to their offspring, research has demonstrated that females can maternally transfer a wide variety
of harmful contaminants. For example, the maternal transfer of mercury (Hg), a common and highly toxic
environmental contaminant, has been shown to negatively influence several reproductive parameters in
birds, fish and amphibians. Additionally, Hg can bioaccumulate and biomagnify within food webs,
exposing long-lived apex predators to high concentrations of Hg. Based on these observations, we



                                                                                                       322
evaluated the consequences maternally transferred Hg on a long-lived aquatic omnivore. We collected
eggs and tissues from gravid female snapping turtles (Chelydra serpentina) at various locations along an
Hg contaminated gradient at a historically contaminated river and at various nearby reference sites. We
incubated eggs in the laboratory, quantified embryonic morality, infertility, and hatching success of each
clutch, and assessed all hatchlings and dead embryos for gross morphological malformations. As
predicted, female turtles inhabiting contaminated areas accumulated high levels of Hg in their tissues,
and female Hg concentrations were strongly and positively correlated with Hg levels in their eggs. We
found that egg Hg was negatively correlated with hatching success and that decreased hatching success
was mediated through increased egg infertility and embryonic mortality. However, we found no effect of
egg Hg on malformation frequency, clutch size, or egg mass. This is the first study to demonstrate
relationships between maternally transferred Hg on hatchling survival in turtles. Ultimately, the lethal
effects of Hg on offspring could affect turtle population viability and may serve as a source of undesirable
phenotypic variation within turtle populations inhabiting Hg contaminated areas.



Hopkins, Gareth (Department of Biology, Utah State University); Susannah, French; Edmund, Brodie
(Department of Biology, Utah State University, Logan, UT, United States)

Embryonic survival in salt among Rough-skinned Newt (Taricha granulosa) families

Osmotic balance is a constant physiological challenge for amphibians, having highly permeable skin, and
as such, tolerance to salt is rare in this group of animals. High concentrations of salt are, however, often
ubiquitous in amphibian breeding habitats, originating either from natural (e.g., estuarine water) or
anthropogenic sources (e.g., road de-icing salt). While much work has been conducted on the responses
of larval and adult amphibians to salt, considerably less is known about the responses of earlier life-
history stages. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effects of two common road salts, NaCl and
MgCl2 on the embryonic survival and development of Rough-skinned Newt (Taricha granulosa) eggs.
We raised eggs from 16 different females separately in three different randomly assigned concentrations
of each salt as well as in a control solution and measured egg survival, time to hatching, and
developmental stage and size at hatching. Treatment, female, and the interaction of treatment and
female all had significant effects on survival, time to hatching and stage and size at hatching. While
increased salt concentration caused higher egg mortality, quicker hatching timing, and lessened
embryonic development at hatching, it also caused the variation in effects among different female‘s
offspring to increase significantly. Broad-sense heritability calculations also revealed that the variation
among females in the hatching timing and embryonic development of their offspring is genetically
heritable in nature. This significant heritable variation in embryonic survival and development in salt
water among the offspring of different females from a single inland population appears to provide the raw
material upon which natural selection may act for the evolution of salt tolerance in this amphibian species.
Our results have important implications both for the conservation biology of early amphibian life-history
stages as well as the evolution of tolerance to stressful and novel environments in this osmotically
sensitive group of animals.




                                                                                                        323
Hoskins, Tyler (Miami University); Boone, Michelle (Miami University, Canada)

Fine-tuning mesocosms: effects of shallow water access on the metamorphic response of two
Anuran species

Aquatic mesocosms are widely utilized in amphibian ecology because they offer a hybrid approach
between tightly controlled laboratory experiments and realistic field experiments, but the realism of
findings from mesocosm experiments has been repeatedly questioned. If the goal of mesocosm design is
to mimic natural breeding ponds, then current designs may be lacking easily emulated features that could
increase the realism of mesocosm experiments. One such feature is the presence of shallow water;
observations of tadpoles in the field indicate that some species, such as toads, preferentially utilize
shallow areas at the pond margin, but many mesocosm designs lack this feature. In order to test whether
access to shallow regions affects the metamorphic response of Anuran larvae in experimental
mesocosms, we raised American toads ( Bufo americanus ) and Northern leopard frogs ( Rana pipiens
pipiens ) together in mesocosms with shallow platforms, a sloped bottom providing access to shallow
water, or with no shallow refuge. We measured survival, time to metamorphosis, and mass at
metamorphosis, with the prediction that the metamorphic response of B. americanus would be affected
by access to shallow water, but that R. pipiens pipiens would not respond to access to shallow regions.
We also tested whether the presence of a crawfish predator ( Procambarus clarkii ) affects metamorphic
response differentially depending on access to shallow regions. We predicted that shallow water would
serve as a spatial refuge from predation for both Anuran species, and that survival for both species would
be higher in mesocosms providing shallow refugia.



Hossack, Blake (Univeristy of Montana); Lowe, Winsor (University of Montana, Canada); Corn, Stephen
(US Geological Survey, Canada)

Interactive effects of wildfire, forest management, and isolation on amphibian and parasite
abundance

Projected increases in wildfire and other climate-driven disturbances will affect populations and
communities worldwide, including host–parasite relationships. These effects may be magnified by
interactions with human disturbances, including forest management that fragments habitats and alters
microclimates. Research in temperate forests has documented that wildfire can negatively affect
amphibians, but this research has occurred primarily in protected landscapes. Parasites represent a large
component of biodiversity and can affect host fitness and population dynamics, yet they are rarely
included in studies of how vertebrate hosts respond to disturbance. Furthermore, how changes in host
populations and habitat affect directly-transmitted amphibian parasites is unknown. To determine how
wildfire affects amphibians and their parasites, and whether effects differ between protected and
managed landscapes, we compared population sizes of 2 amphibians and 2 nematodes relative to
wildfire extent and severity around wetlands in neighboring protected and managed forests (Montana,
USA). Population sizes of long-toed salamanders ( Ambystoma macrodactylum ) decreased with
increased burn severity, with stronger negative effects on isolated populations and in managed forests. In
contrast, population sizes of Columbia spotted frogs ( Rana luteiventris ) increased with burn extent in
both protected and managed protected forests. Path analysis showed that the same factors that affected
amphibian abundance also affected parasite abundance. Burn severity directly and indirectly reduced
abundance of Cosmocercoides variabilis in adult salamanders, and burn extent indirectly increased
abundance of Gyrinicola batrachiensis in spotted frog larvae. These results show that effects of wildfire
on amphibians depend upon burn extent and severity, isolation, and prior land use. Through subsequent




                                                                                                       324
effects on the abundance of amphibian parasites, our results also reveal how changes in disturbance
regimes can affect communities across trophic levels.



Houlahan, Jeff (UNB Saint John); Edge, Christopher (UNB Saint John, Canada); Thompson, Dean
(Canadian Forest Service, Canada)

Barriers to predicting pesticide effects: An amphibian perspective.

One important objective of pesticide research is identifying what application rate results in unacceptable
risk to non-target species. A common component of              risk assessment involves comparing predicted
worst case environmental exposure concentrations to median toxicity values (e.g. LC50) derived from
laboratory and mesocosm studies. These median toxicity values provide useful bench posts for setting
water quality guidelines. However, LC50 and LD 50 estimates can vary widely for the same pesticide due
to i) differences among formulations, ii) interspecific differences in sensitivity, iii) among-population
differences, iv) individual-level differences in sensitivity, v) exposure history, and vi) experimental venue
(i.e. laboratory, mesocosm, and field).      We will present a review of amphibian toxicity studies with an
emphasis on glyphosate-based herbicides, and attempt to partition variability in estimated LC 50‘s among
these potential sources. We will discuss how this variability is potentially relevant to water quality
guidelines.



Hoverman, Jason (University of Colorado); Johnson, Pieter (University of Colorado, Canada); Blaustein,
Andrew (Oregon State University, Canada); Briggs, Cherie (University of California, Santa Barbara,
Canada); Rohr, Jason (University of South Florida, Canada)

Beyond single pathogens: significance of co-infections and pathogen communities for amphibian
conservation

In nature, animal hosts are exposed to a ‗cocktail‘ of different pathogens that ultimately form a dynamic
community within the host. While research has traditionally focused on interactions between single hosts
and single pathogens, growing evidence suggests that coinfections can fundamentally alter disease
patterns in humans and wildlife. A central question therefore concerns how interactions between co-
occurring pathogens affect disease severity and pathogen transmission in host communities. However,
one of the persistent challenges in coinfection research is predicting when and how pathogens are likely
to interact. A promising approach for understanding pathogen interactions involves applying the principles
of community ecology to within-host pathogen communities. We will discuss recent attempts to apply
community ecology theory to intra-host dynamics, including the roles of both ‗bottom-up‘ (e.g.,
competition for host resources) and ‗top-down‘ effects (e.g., effects mediated through host immunity).
Based on this conceptual framework, we also discuss a research program directed towards expanding
our understanding of coinfection within amphibian communities. Emerging infectious diseases are one of
the most important causes of amphibian population declines and extinctions, yet few studies have
examined the contributing role(s) of pathogen interactions in driving these effects. In North America, the
chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), ranaviruses, and trematodes ( Ribeiroia ondatrae
and Echinostoma spp.) are highly virulent pathogens known to infect amphibians.

Field surveillance in the East Bay region of California, USA, for example, has revealed that these
pathogens commonly co-occur within wetlands and within individual hosts, with 68% of sites supporting
≥2 pathogens and 36% with ≥3 of these pathogens. Using information from this system and




                                                                                                         325
epidemiological theory, we explore the conditions in which coinfections are likely to influence disease
outcomes, either positively or negatively, including the role of dispersal, host immunity, pathogen
virulence, and parasite life history. We conclude that, in light of the extensive opportunities for interactions
among amphibian pathogens in nature, future work in both the empirical and conceptual realms is needed
to investigate how changes in complex ecological communities – including both hosts and pathogens –
interact to influence disease risk and conservation priorities.



Howard, Katie (Arthur Rylah Institute, Department of Sustainability and Environment); Beesley, Leah
(Arthur Rylah Institute, Department of Sustainability and Environment, Canada); Joachim, Lee (Yorta
Yorta Nation Aboriginal Corporation, Canada)

Cultural conservation of freshwater turtles in Australia: an aboriginal and scientific collaboration
to assist ecosystem management

Environmental values in floodplain ecosystems in south-eastern Australia are typically managed for fish,
birds and vegetation. Although turtles can act as indicators of ecosystem health, they are often
overlooked, as is local indigenous knowledge. In south-eastern Australia, three species of turtle occupy
the Murray River and its associated wetlands. One species, the Broad-shelled Turtle (Bayadherra,
Chelodina expansa) is classified as threatened in Victoria but has historically been overlooked in
management plans. It is also the totem species for the Yorta Yorta people, who traditionally occupied the
Barmah-Millewa Forest region. The Broad-shelled Turtle is associated with their dreamtime stories, being
their protector and provider. Barmah-Millewa Forest is an internationally recognised (RAMSAR)
floodplain wetland complex. The Forest historically experienced regular winter and spring flooding, but
now receives relatively little water, often at un-natural times of the year. This reduction in flow into the
Forest, coupled with a long term drought, led Yorta Yorta to raise concerns for turtle health.

YortaYorta knowledge has directed the research aims and goals of this project. The current research will
build on historical cultural mapping of nesting sites. Three years of scientific research have spanned the
shift from drought to flood within the Forest. During drought, turtles were found in relatively high
abundance in refuge habitats and displayed poor body condition; species occupying ephemeral habitats
showed evidence of high mortality. After flooding, turtle abundance fell as species dispersed, body
condition improved, and there was evidence of increased nesting. The findings of this study highlight the
importance of flooding for the health of turtle populations. It is recommended that environmental and
cultural water allocations be used to sustain ephemeral habitats during drought. This project has married
both scientific and local indigenous knowledge and facilitated a‗reconnection to country‘ for the Yorta
Yorta people. The research recommendations will guide on-ground management by Yorta Yorta Rangers.



Howey, Christopher (Ohio University); Roosenburg, Willem (Ohio University, Athens, OH, United States)

The Effects of Prescribed Burning on the Landscape and Reptile Abundance

Prescribed burning has become a popular management tool throughout North America; a tool that
creates a landscape representing an earlier successional forest. Typically, prescribed burning has
resulted in more open landscapes with warmer ambient temperatures. However, little is known regarding
how reptile abundances may respond to these landscape changes. Over the past two years (2010 and
2011), we measured habitat characteristics and the abundance of reptiles in four burned plots and four
control/unburned plots at the Land-Between-The-Lakes National Recreational Area, Kentucky. Burned




                                                                                                            326
plots were subjected to prescribed fire twice in the recent past; once in 2007 and after the first field
season in September 2010. We compared habitat characteristics and reptile abundances within plots
between years and among plots within years using nonmetric multidimensional scaling and ANOSIM. We
determined that habitat characteristics differed both within plots between years and among plots within
years (P < 0.001). There was a reduction in leaf litter depth between years, which may be attributed to
increased rainfall prior to the 2011 field season. Burn plots had an increased percentage of grasses and
forbs and less canopy cover than control plots. There was no difference in reptile abundance among
treatments (burn vs. unburned; P > 0.05). Despite this lack of a difference, some reptile species were
more abundant in certain plots regardless of treatment, and these abundances were correlated to the
habitat characteristics of those plots. As abundance of leaf litter and percent canopy cover increased in a
plot, abundance of Agkistrodon contortrix , Thamnophis sirtalis , Pantherophis spiloides , and Scincella
lateralis increased. Additionally, as percent canopy cover and vegetation density decreased and percent
grass, percent bare ground, and ground temperatures increased, abundance of Diadophis punctatus ,
Storeria dekayi , and Sceloporus undulatus increased. We suggest that reptiles may not respond to
whether a forest was burned or unburned, but to the habitat characteristics present within the landscape.
In the future, if prescribed burning is to be used as a management tool, then wildlife biologists must
understand how the quality of the landscape is altered in order to understand how wildlife may be affected
by these habitat altering techniques.



Howey, Christopher (Ohio University); Roosenburg, Willem (Ohio University, Athens, OH, United States)

The Effects of Prescribed Burning on the Thermal Landscape

Prescribed burning has become a popular management tool throughout North America; a tool that
typically creates a landscape with more open canopy cover and warmer ambient temperatures. This
warmer environment has been suggested to be more favorable for ectothermic species; however, it is
unknown how warm body temperatures may become in burned sites. To understand what body
temperatures an ectothermic species could achieve, we measured operative body temperatures (T e ) of
the Black Racer ( Coluber constrictor ) using biophysical models that represent the width and reflectivity
of an average adult Black Racer. Biophysical models were deployed in four burned plots and four
adjacent control plots. Models recorded T e every 15 minutes from May to August of 2011; one year
following a prescribed burn. T e ‘s in each site were compared to a range of preferred body temperatures
(T set = 28 - 32°C) to determine the thermal quality of each site. T set was determined in the lab by
measuring the preferred body temperature of Black Racers in a thermal gradient. We averaged T e for
each site for every hour to determine the thermal quality of each site throughout the day. Additionally,
model temperatures were used along with interpolation methods in ARC GIS 9.0 to determine spatially
the thermal quality of each site. Early in the year, both burn and control sites provided favorable thermal
conditions spatially and throughout the day, but T e ‗s in burn plots were within T set ranges more often
than in control sites. During early July, burn sites typically exceeded T set and approached maximum
voluntary temperatures of the Black Racer; these sites were not only spatially limiting but Black Racers
would have to exhibit a bimodal activity pattern in order to avoid poor quality thermal habitat. During late
July and early August, T e ‘s in both burn and control sites exceeded maximum voluntary temperatures
and T e ‘s in burn plots were warmer and exceeded critical thermal maximum temperatures more often
than T e ‘s in control plots. Based on these data, burn sites may be more thermally favorable earlier in the
summer, but will typically become much warmer than control sites which could lead to increased spatial
and time constraints for the Black Racer if it were to avoid thermally unfavorable sites.




                                                                                                        327
Howey-Jordan, Lucy (Microwave Telemetry, Inc.); Brooks, Edward (Cape Eleuthera Institute, Ft.
Lauderdale, United States); Brooks, Annabelle (Cape Eleuthera Institute, Canada); Abercrombie, Debra
(Abercrombie and Fish, Canada); Williams, Sean (Stuart Cove, Canada); Jordan, Lance (Microwave
Telemetry, Inc., Canada); Chapman, Demian (Stony Brook University, Canada)

Time well spent: Substantial use of the Bahamas shark sanctuary by mature female oceanic
whitetip sharks revealed by pop-off satellite archival tags

Once considered among the most abundant pelagic predators, the oceanic whitetip shark (Carcharhinus
longimanus) has drastically declined in the last few decades due to overexploitation. This species is
especially impacted in the western Atlantic Ocean, where it is currently listed as ―Critically Endangered‖
by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN). Cat Island in The Commonwealth of
The Bahamas is one of the few places where this species is regularly observed. After banning longline
fishing in the mid-1990s, The Bahamas recently prohibited commercial shark fishing in its 630,000 km 2
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). The goals of our study were to: 1) quantify the time oceanic whitetips
spend within this EEZ, 2) determine long-term movements of individuals as they moved away from The
Bahamas, and 3) characterize the vertical and thermal habitat use of this understudied pelagic species.
We deployed pop-up satellite archival tags on 11 adult female sharks near Cat Island in May 2011 as a
pilot effort to achieve these goals. Another female shark was opportunistically tagged 420 km south of
Cape Hatteras, USA. Eleven tags reported, collecting a total of 1,563 days of tracking data. Four tags
were physically recovered, adding greater resolution to the dataset – 1,146,959 depth and temperature
records combined. Mean depth used by tracked sharks was 43.9 m (± 10.34 SD) and the mean
temperature encountered was 26.1 °C (± 0.55 SD). The deepest dive observed was 1081.9 m and the
coolest temperature experienced was 7.75 °C. Reconstructed tracks revealed that tagged individuals
moved long distances (some more than 1,000 km from tagging site) over a wide area but spent
substantial amounts of time (approximately 58 % of days tracked) within the Bahamian EEZ. It therefore
appears likely that the Bahamas longline ban and newly implemented shark sanctuary has and may
continue to provide a significant refuge for this threatened species.



Hoyos, Julio Mario (Pontificia Universidad Javeriana);

Phylogenetic analysis whithin the Pristimantis unistrigatus (Anura, Starbomantidae) group from
Colombia based on hand and foot muscles and external characters

We present a phylogenetic analysis within the Pritimantis unistrigatus group (Anura, Strabomantidae) of
Colombia. Characters from the superficial muscles of the hands and feet as well as external characters
were taken for analysis. Muscle characters were observed directly and taken from the literature. The
external ones were taken mainly from the original descriptions . Two matrices were constructed: one
based on Lynch and Duellman (1997) unistrigatus group (LD), and a second one based on Hedges et al.
(2008) unistrigatus group (HEA). We found three potential synapomorphies inside the group but not for
the group: two inside the LD unistrigatus group ( First finger shorter than second and the origin of the m.
adductor policis is not covered by the aponeurosis palmaris) and one inside the HEA unistrigatus group (
Origin of the tendo superficialis hallucis from the aponeurosis plantaris including some fibers of the m.
lumbricalis brevis hallucis). These results lead us to conclude that the group is not monophyletic, although
there are some relationships that are worth to survey because they are kept in the very last cladograms
obtained for both proposals. It is suggested that these last relationships should be explored in particular,
and the overall group in general, increasing the number of characters and taxa belonging to the P.
unistrigatus group. An open question we left: Is it actually worth to keep these informal taxonomic
hierarchy called group within the genera of anurans?



                                                                                                        328
Hraoui-Bloquet, Souad (Faculty of Sciences II, Lebanese University,); Sadek, Riyad (Biology
Department, American University of Beirut, P.O.Box 11-0236, Riad El Solh 1107 2020, Beirut, Lebanon;,
Canada); Hleihel, Walid (Faculty of Science, University of Holy Spirit, Kaslik-Jounnieh, Lebanon;
(walidhleihel@usek.edu.lb), Canada); Fajloun, Ziad (Azm Center for the Research in Biotechnology and
its Applications, Doctoral School for Sciences and Technology, Lebanese University, Tripoli, Lebanon.,
Canada)

Biogeography and ecology of the Lebanon Viper Montivipera bornmuelleri with some notes on its
venom.

Montivipera bornmuelleri is one of three viper species in Lebanon along with. Daboia palaestinae and
Macrovipera lebetina.The latter two species are widely distributed in a variety of habitats excluding high
altitudes. M. bornmuelleri is endemic to the Lebanese mountains and found only at altitudes above
1800m (Hraoui-Bloquet et al. 2002). It is a relatively small viper with an SVL around 60 cm. It is viviparous
delivering a maximum of 6 live young.

M. bornmuelleri is found in high-altitude rocky terrain characterized by sparse montane thorny and
cushion plants. In Oyoun Al Simane area in the Sannine mountainin theMount Lebanonchain, M.
bornmuelleri exists in association with two endemic lacertid lizards, Phoenicolacerta kulzeri and
Parvilacerta fraasi and the bridled skink, Trachylepis vittata. No other snake species was observed in that
area. In the other Mount Lebanon study site, the Bcharre Makmel mountain it is associated with other
snake species (such as Platyceps najadum and Hemorrhois ravergieri) in addition to Phoenicolacerta
kulzeri, Parvilacerta fraasi and T. vittata.

Preliminary analysis of the viper‘s venom was conducted for characterization of bioactive molecules,
using Liquid Chromatography coupled to Electrospray Ionisation Mass Spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS). A
physiological study on the venom was also conducted to evaluate lethal dose, hemorrhagic and necrotic
activities



Hua, Jessica (University of Pittsburgh); Relyea, Rick (University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United
States)

It's a complicated world: A community ecotoxicology perspective on pesticides and amphibian
declines.

Understanding the contribution of anthropogenic chemicals to declining amphibian populations is a
pressing concern in need of attention. Amphibian sensitivity has traditionally been determined using
simplified single-species lab tests. While this reductionist approach has been paramount in determining
the direct effects of pesticides on amphibians, it overlooks much of the complexity found in natural
amphibian habitats. For instance, amphibian habitats are often exposed to complex mixtures of pesticides
that lead to unanticipated interactions. Further, pesticides can interact with community-level processes
(i.e. predation and competition) to indirectly shape amphibian abundance and diversity. Surprisingly, our
understanding of how pesticides shape amphibian populations in community scenarios is
underdeveloped. Critical next steps are to (1) develop generalizations about different pesticides and their
mixtures on different amphibian species and (2) incorporate realistic community-level interactions in
studies of amphibian susceptibility.

We examined the effect of insecticides on aquatic communities using two mesocosm experiments. In the
first, we tracked the long-term (3-yrs) direct and indirect consequences of four commonly used



                                                                                                         329
insecticides and a mixture on six amphibian species (Lithobates sylvatica, L. pipiens, L. clamitans,
Pseudacris crucifer, Hyla versicolor, and Anaxyrus americanus). The consequences of individual
insecticide applications were not generalizable across the six species of amphibians and the mixtures
were significantly more lethal compared to insecticides applied individually. Insecticides had both positive
and negative effects on amphibians and this pattern was largely driven by oviposition phenology. In the
second study, we investigated whether insecticides with similar versus different modes of action were
generalizable across three amphibians (L. pipiens, L. clamitans, and H. versicolor) living in communities
with 17 species. Amphibian susceptibility was generalizable across insecticides with similar modes of
action but not across different modes of action. Finally, the insecticide, malathion, interacted with
predation threat to facilitate amphibian survival. These studies indicate that the effects of insecticides on
amphibians are more complicated than would be detected in simplified lab studies and incorporating
community-level interactions is critical to understanding of the contribution of pesticides to amphibian
declines.



Hudson, Cameron (University of Guelph);

Reproductive behaviour and male combat in the Emei Moustache Toad (Leptobrachium boringii)

We describe the natural history and reproductive behaviour of the Emei Moustache Toad (Leptobrachium
boringii) with an emphasis on male combat. Between February and March of 2011 and 2012, L. boringii
specimens from Mount Emei UNESCO World Heritage Site, Sichuan, China, were observed throughout
the breeding season. This species exhibits male-biased sexual size dimorphism (SSD) with limited
evidence of paternal care (nest guarding by males). Prior to the breeding season males grow 10 – 16
keratinized spines on their upper lip which are used for aggressive interactions. Throughout the breeding
season males construct and defend aquatic nests where they produce advertisement calls to attract
females. Territory take-overs are frequent, and egg masses from multiple fathers are present in nests. We
are currently investigating the factors which influence male victory, and the implications of different
breeding strategies. Our evidence for male competition and aggression, along with observed paternal
care are potential mechanisms to explain the evolution of male-biased SSD observed in this species.



Huey, Raymond (University of Washington); Sinervo, Barry (University of California Santa Cruz, Canada)

Lizard extinctions and climate change: physiological vulnerability and additive role of vegetation
dieback

Climate models forecast distributional shifts or extinctions of many ectotherms in upcoming decades [1-3].
Some recent models predict that tropical species in particular will suffer elevated extinctions [2, 4].
However, tropical models remain un-validated, focus only on single-species, and ignore vegetational
context of climate changes. We review models predicting tropical extinctions, present data validating
aspects of those models, and argue that climate-induced dieback of vegetation will exacerbate
physiological stress in many habitats, not just in tropical forests. The prediction tropical forest ectotherms
are vulnerable to warming might seem surprising because rates of climate warming are relatively low in
the tropics [5]. However, tropical forest species are vulnerable because many are thermal specialists and
sensitive to temperature change, have low heat tolerance, already live in environments that are
physiologically warm for them, and have limited behavioral options [4, 5]. Evaluating extinction models
requires integrating behavior, thermal performance curves, operative temperatures, and climate models.
We test and validate extinction models with newly observed extinctions of temperate zone lizards in North



                                                                                                          330
America and Europe. We then extend a prior model [3] by incorporating ecosystem impacts of climate
change on plants. In some areas, recent heat waves have caused tree death and branch die-back, which
in turn increased operative temperatures and was associated with observed lizard extinctions. If climate
warming often triggers tree death and branch die-back events, these ecosystem level changes will
exacerbate the direct physiological challenges (heat and water stress) of warming and in turn challenge
the persistence of lizards and other ectotherms around world, particularly those dependent on vegetation.
1. Dunham, A.E. 1993. In Biotic Interactions and Global Change , P.M. Kareiva, J.G. Kingsolver, and
R.B. Huey, Eds. Sinauer Assoc.: Sunderland, MA. p. 95-119. 2. Kearney, M., R. Shine, & W.P. Porter.
2009. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106:3835-3840. 3. Sinervo, B., et al. 2010. Science 328:894-899. 4.
Huey, R.B., C.A. Deutsch, J.J. Tewksbury, L.J. Vitt, P.E. Hertz, & H.J. Álvarez. 2009. Why tropical forest
lizards are vulnerable to climate warming. Proc Roy Soc B 276:1939-1948. 5. Dillon, M.E., G. Wang, &
R.B. Huey. 2010. Global metabolic impacts of recent climate warming. Nature 467:704-706.



Hulsey, Darrin (University of Tennessee);

Transcriptome Sequencing of 150 Nuclear Loci Reveals Ages for Cichlid Radiations

Using Illumina sequencing of the pharyngeal jaw transcriptome of the Texas cichlid, Herichthys
cyanoguttatus, as well as published data from other model cichlid species, I examined molecular-clock
based age estimates of several cichlid radiations. After creating alignments of 83 million paired-end 125
base pair sequence reads using the program Trinity, I obtained contigged sequences of over 4000
protein-coding loci. For this analysis, these loci were narrowed to 150 protein-coding sequences. Each of
these 150 nuclear loci were at least 600 base pairs in length and all could be confidently aligned and
annotated in all of the species examined. Using a well-established fossil date, I determined the
divergence times for the African Great Lakes cichlid radiations as well as the biogeographic divergence
between South America and Africa.



Hunter, David (NSW Office of Environment and Heritage); Marantelli, Gerry (Amphibian Research
Center, Canada); Scheele, Ben (NSW Office of Environment and Heritage, Canada); Marantelli, Erica
(Amphibian Research Center, Canada); Scroggie, Michael (Arthur Rylah Institute for Environmental
Research, Canada); Gillespie, Graeme (University of Melbourne, Canada)

Can captive breeding and reintroduction be used to re-establish frog populations following
extinction caused by chytridiomycosis? The case of the spotted tree frog (Litoria spenceri) in
south-eastern Australia.

Ex situ intervention has been touted as a key tool in addressing amphibian declines. However, the
feasibility of using ex situ intervention to successfully re-establish populations extirpated by the amphibian
chytrid fungus (Bd) has not been investigated. We attempted to re-establish a population of the spotted
tree frog ( Litoria spenceri ), an obligate stream-dwelling species from south-eastern Australia, which
rapidly declined to extinction as a result of a sudden outbreak of chytridiomycosis. We hypothesised that
selection for increased immunity and reduced pathogen transmission may allow population
establishment, as the founder stock for the captive breeding colony were from streams with endemic Bd,
and the population was being re-established at a relatively low density. We released one and two-year-
old captive bred frogs (750 frogs in total) over a four year period to a section of stream which historically
supported a large population of L. spenceri . Despite the continued presence of Bd, a post-release mark-
recapture study initially documented relatively high survivorship to sexual maturity, with successful



                                                                                                          331
breeding and recruitment occurring in the wild. However, seven years after the first re-introduction, the re-
established population declined rapidly to a few individuals following a chytrid outbreak, which coincided
with a particularly cool/wet season. The results suggest that the successful re-establishment of self-
sustaining frog populations may require actively mitigating chytridiomycosis, rather than passively
assuming selection for resistance will occur in the short to medium term.



Hutchinson, Mark (South Australian Museum); Lee, Michael (University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA,
Australia)

Bharatagama: acrodont lizard or rhynchocephalian?

The early fossil history of the Squamata, especially the highly diverse terrestrial clades, is patchy, both in
the comparatively small number of localities and the mostly fragmentary specimens. Inevitably there is a
large component of uncertainty concerning the relationships of all but the most complete finds. Thus,
molecular approaches for dating the evolutionary radiation of living Squamata (≥10 000 species) still rely
on relatively few, and often poorly supported, calibration points. In the process, the ambiguities that
surround the paleontological data are often overlooked. A significant example of this is the repeated use
of a Jurassic fossil, Bharatagama rebbanensis, as a calibration point for the origin of the Acrodonta, the
living Agamidae and Chamaeleonidae. We review the identification of this, one of the earliest putative
squamate fossils, through the first formal phylogenetic analysis of Bharatagama among all Lepidosauria
(squamates plus rhynchocephalians). We especially revisit the uncertainty expressed at the time of its
description concerning its precise relationship to the acrodont squamates and whether it might be better
placed within Rhynchocephalia. We combine morphological and molecular data and analyse the data
using parsimony and likelihood methods. At the time of its description the precise relationships of
Bharatagama were not specified beyond membership of the Acrodonta. Our reassessment shows that
even this cautious stance is unlikely to be correct.



Hutchinson, Melanie (University of Hawaii); Anderson, James (University of Hawaii, Canada);
O'Sullivan, John (Monterey Bay Aquarium, Canada); Holland, Kim (Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology,
Canada)

A multiple instrument approach to elucidate the movement and dive behavior of scalloped
hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna lewini) in Hawaii

Hammerhead sharks, Sphyrna lewini, use coastal embayments such as Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii, as nursery
grounds. Although considerable insights have been gained into the behavioral ecology of the pups in
these nursery areas, little is known about the behavior of the adults after they leave the bay or the extent
of the ‗catchment area‘ from which these adults come. To elucidate the behavior and dispersal of these
seasonal visitors to Kaneohe Bay we fitted seven adult male hammerhead sharks with electronic tags;
four with archiving pop-up (PAT) tags, four with position only (SPOT) satellite transmitters and one double
tagged with both a PAT and a SPOT. All seven fish were also implanted with acoustic transmitters.
Results from the PATs show offshore vertical ranges exceeding depths of at least 1250 m, which are
previously un-documented for this species. Vertical profiles showed very clear diel dive activity. Tagged
hammerheads also exhibited previously unrecorded thermal tolerances to at least 3°C, spending an
average 34.7% of their time in temperature ranges from 3° - 6° C. Horizontal movement data suggest
that these adults stay close to the Hawaiian Islands – an interpretation supported by the acoustic tag data
which revealed repeated visits to Kaneohe Bay over an extended period of time. However, these data




                                                                                                          332
are not yet extensive and are limited to males. Nevertheless, these early results reveal an unexpectedly
large vertical range for this species in the offshore waters of Hawaii and indicate that hammerheads have
a wide ecological niche that probably includes deep water prey.



Hutter, Carl (Stony Brook University); Esobar-Lasso, Sergio; Rojas-Morales, Julían Andrés; Gutiérrez-
Cárdenas, Paul David Alfonso (Universidad de Caldas, Canada); Imba, Henry (Reserva Las Gralarias,
Canada); Guayasamin, Juan (Universidad Tecnológica Indoamérica, Canada)

Territoriality of the Red-Spotted Glassfrog, Nymphargus grandisonae (Cochran & Goin, 1970)
(Anura: Centrolenidae)

Resource-defense mating systems in anurans are hypothesized to have arisen in response to limited
availability of resources for reproduction. In many anuran species, males will actively defend a territory.
This defense may be associated with direct male-to-male conflict and aggressive calling behavior. In
many species of Centrolenidae, territoriality has been hastily hypothesized, utilizing only anecdotal
observations. Herein, we provide substantial evidence that the stream-breeding species Nymphargus
grandisonae is territorial. We confirm and describe important components of territoriality — the combat
behavior, use of vocalizations in aggression, and quantify the degree of site fidelity within this species.
Three unreported variations in Centrolenid combat are described; indicating combat behavior is much
more varied than previously hypothesized.         Additionally, we show quantitative temporal and spectral
differences (call duration, dominant frequency, and frequency modulation) between various aggressive
call types and their usage in male-to-male aggression before, during, and after combat. Finally, we
utilized a novel non-destructive method for anuran mark-recapture, where we photographed the
individualized red-spotted pattern on the species‘ dorsum for identification. We marked their locations
nightly, measured distance travelled and reconstructed their three-dimensional territory size based on
these movements. We found that males demonstrated high site fidelity, with many remaining at the same
site for the three-month duration of the study. We also observed that females frequently moved between
these sites and reproduced with the male territory holders. Additionally, territory-possessing males met
invading males with aggression. In addition to combat behavior and aggressive vocalizations, the high
site fidelity, reproduction within these sites, and the display of aggression towards transient con-specific
males support our hypothesis that N. grandisonae is a territorial species.



Hykin, Sarah (University of California, Berkeley);

Morphology of cardiac ontogeny in Dermophis mexicanus (Amphibia: Gymnophiona:
Dermophiidae), with emphasis on a transient spiral valve and perforation of the interatrial septum

Caecilians are an understudied clade of elongate, limbless, often fossorial amphibians restricted to
tropical regions around the globe. Evolutionary modifications of the caecilian body-plan associated with
fossoriality include various degrees of lung reduction and loss. This, in conjunction with the structure of
the heart, including elaborate semilunar valves in the conus arteriosus and highly variable interatrial
septation across the order, raises questions about the extent of separation of oxygenated and
deoxygenated blood within the caecilian heart. Heart development and function have been much
speculated on but little explored, and the ontogeny of only a few caecilian species has been studied. To
assess aspects of the dominant respiratory mode, development, and evolution of this clade, I examined
histological sections of the heart in an ontogenetic series of Dermophis mexicanus . D. mexicanus is
viviparous and has an 11-month gestation period. Adults have a fully functional right lung, a much



                                                                                                        333
reduced left lung, and a perforated interatrial septum. To study heart development and possible
mechanisms of blood separation, I examined individuals at three embryonic stages, four fetal stages, one
newborn and several mature adults. My study establishes that the heart loops in a counterclockwise
direction approximately one month into the 11-month gestation period. The interatrial septum commences
development shortly after heart-tube looping completes. Once established, this septum remains complete
through much of the gestation period. No evidence of vestigial interventricular septum development is
seen, but it is noteworthy that a spiral valve in the conus arteriosus, resembling that seen in anurans,
appears during early development of the semilunar valves. The development of a complete interatrial
septum and then its perforation, and of the transitory spiral valve, indicate that caecilian heart
development shares many elements of a common amphibian developmental pattern. The functional
attributes of the highly modified caecilian heart, however, remain unknown. The question of how much
blood separation occurs requires further study, and the atrioventricular funnel, semilunar valves and/or
flow pressure remain possible mechanisms of blood separation.



Ibrahim, Adel (Suez Canal University);

The Herpetology of the Suez Canal Zone, Egypt

Banks of the Suez Canal (east and west) were surveyed for herpetofauna between 1999 and 2009. Study
site was comprised of (1) western bank of Suez Canal from Port Saïd to Suez (168 km) and within a
range of five km westward (occasionally up to 10 km) from the canal, covering a minimum total area of
1000 km2, and (2) the eastern bank of Canal from Port Fuad to Ash-Shatt (opposite Suez city) including
the old city Al-Qantara East and newly established villages. Observations on the west bank included
seven roads and highways and all possible habitats were surveyed. The survey revealed 34
herpetofaunal species from the west bank (three amphibians, 20 lizards, 10 snakes, and one sea turtle),
and 22 east bank species (three amphibians, 13 lizards, and six snakes), with several new records
documented in the Suez Canal zone―one amphibian, Pelophylax bedriagae; and four reptiles, Tarentola
annularis, Psammophis sibilans, Ramphotyphlops braminus, and Chelonia mydas. Several species were
recorded for the first time from each of the Suez Canal provinces―two species, Chalcides ocellatus and
Natrix tessellata reported in Port Saïd; six species in Ismailia, Acanthodactylus boskianus, Cyrtopodion
scabrum, Hemidactylus flaviviridis, Malpolon monspessulana, Cerastes cerastes and C. vipera; and three
species in Suez, Trachylepis quinquetaeniata and Trapelus pallidus and Natrix tessellata. On the eastern
bank, all species were recorded for the first time except for Cerastes cerastes, C. vipera; Varanus
griseus, and Acathodactylus scutellatus. Natrix tessellata, inhabiting freshwater canals east of Bitter
Lakes, represents the first record for the Sinai Peninsula. Additional new records for amphibians and
reptiles of the Suez Canal area, especially on the east bank, are apparently a result of recent major
changes to reptile habitat (urban expansion and land cultivation with Nile freshwater supply). In some
cases these new environmental changes have resulted in more invasive herpetofaunal taxa expanding
their ranges into new territories over the past three decades. The number of species occurring on the
west bank was greater than on the east bank presumably due to greater variety of habitat, increased
urbanization and huge web of irrigation canals which have allowed several species to move from the
River Nile to the Canal zone. This study suggests the Suez Canal acts as passage for herpetofauna from
west to east, but in parallel with the creation of new suitable habitat on the east side for invasive species.
Several species such as A. regularis, P. mascareniensis, H. flaviviridis, and N. tessellata were transported
via the Suez Canal and colonized on the east bank. On the west bank, the subspecies of chameleon was
Chamaeleo chamaeleon chamaeleon, whereas on the east bank, Chamaeleo chamaeleon musae.
Trapelus savignyi recorded on the west bank with smooth ventrals was not previously known for the
species.



                                                                                                          334
Iizuka, Koji (Takashima 2nd Junior High School); Sessions, Stanley (Department of biology, Hartwick
College, Canada); Poyarkov, Nikolay (Department of Vertebrate Zoology, Biological faculty, Lomonosov
Moscow State University, Canada); Koishi, Hiroyuki (Housei University Daini Junior High School, Canada)

Comparative study of limb development in hynobiid salamanders (Developmental evolution of
limbs, Hynobiidae)

A comparative study of limb development was performed among Japanese hynobiid salamanders
including both those with pond-type larvae (Hynobius lichenatus, H. nigrescens, H. tokyoensis) and those
with stream-type larvae (H. kimurae, Onychodactylus japonicus). Early limb development of H. lichenatus
with pond-type larva is characterized by the transient formation of a prominent, pointed interdigital
membrane (IM) which is resorbed as the limb completes its development. Stream-type Hynobius and
Onychodactylus have a vestigial IM (vIM) and/or an interdigital web (IW). A phylogenetic analysis, using
our information along with that available for other hynobiid and non-hynobiid salamanders, leads us to
conclude that 1) an IM is probably characteristic of cryptobranchoid salamanders, 2) the IM probably has
some functional significance in pond larva habitat, a function that is absent in stream larva habitat, and 3)
the IM has been reorganized or reduced two or three times independently in cryptobranchoid lineages.
Evolutionary developmental implications of the IM within the cryptobranchoid salamanders is also
discussed, especially in regard to cytogenetics.



Ilgen, Emily L. (Department of Biology, Edinboro University of Pennsylvania); Hartson, Carissa A.;
Zaleski, Olivia S. (Department of Biology, Edinboro University of Pennsylvannia, Same, United States);
Lindeman, Peter V. (Edinboro University of Pennsylvania, Edinboro, PA, United States)

Map Turtles of the Mermentau: Status Surveys of Forgotten Populations

The Mermentau River drainage in Louisiana has been largely ignored by turtle biologists. In particular,
very little is known about the range and distribution of the Sabine map turtle (Graptemys sabinensis) in
the drainage. Specimens were collected from the upper Mermentau in 1893-94, but the species has not
been studied in the drainage since then. We determined the basking density and relative abundance
among basking turtles for Sabine map turtles in the Mermentau drainage, including the Mermentau, Lake
Arthur, and five major tributaries bayous: Plaquemine Brule, des Cannes, Nezpique, Queue de Tortue,
and Lacassine. We recorded all turtles seen during boat surveys and in point counts from bridges and
other access points. The Mermentau and Bayou Plaquemine Brule had the highest basking densities in
boat surveys, ranging from 14.0–34.5 G. sabinensis per river kilometer. Bayous des Cannes and
Nezpique had intermediate average densities of 5.0-6.3 G. sabinensis per river kilometer. The river below
Lake Arthur and the downstream tributaries Bayou Queue de Tortue and Lacassine Bayou had the lowest
average basking densities, ranging from 0.7 to 1.4 G. sabinensis per river kilometer. Sabine map turtles
were the most abundant basking turtle on the Mermentau drainage, accounting for 74.2% of all turtles
seen. Graptemys pseudogeographica, the Mississippi map turtle, accounted for only 0.2% of all turtles
seen.




                                                                                                         335
Ilves, Katriina (Academy of Natural Sciences); Taylor, Eric (University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
BC, Canada)

Comparative Cenozoic biogeography of marine Holarctic fishes: towards an integrated
understanding of geological and climate driven divergences

Biogeographers have long searched for common processes responsible for diversification in the Holarctic
region. Terrestrial flora and fauna have been particularly well studied, with a vast literature on patterns of
diversity for taxa ranging from plants, invertebrates, land vertebrates, and freshwater fishes. Marine
organisms have also been extensively studied; however, much of this work addresses patterns and
processes occurring over a relatively recent timescale, such as the effects of the late Miocene trans-Arctic
interchange and the Pleistocene glaciations. We aim to examine questions of Cenozoic Holarctic
biogeography in a comparative context by integrating the phylogenetic histories of multiple co-distributed
groups of fishes with models of Northern Hemisphere geology and climate. We present updated
phylogenies and estimated divergence dates of the smelts (Osmeridae), salmon (Salmonidae),
sticklebacks (Gasterosteidae), sturgeon (Acipenseridae), and rockfishes (Sebastes) from available
genetic data analyzed in a species tree framework. These phylogenies formed the foundation of
subsequent biogeographic analysis. Biogeography was modeled at multiple scales: for entire phylogenies
using LAGRANGE, which integrates time-calibrated phylogenies with geographic and climatic models of
the species‘ distributions, and at particular nodes across phylogenies where sister species span a
putative biogeographic break (e.g., trans-Arctic, trans-Pacific, trans-Atlantic) using powerful approximate
Bayesian computation methods. Based on well-supported phylogenies the hypothesis-driven analysis of
congruent evolutionary patterns across co-distributed marine fishes identified geologic and climatic
processes likely to have promoted diversification in the Cenozoic Holarctic.



Ingram, Travis (Harvard University); Mahler, D. Luke (University of California: Davis, Canada); Revell,
Liam J. (University of Massachusetts - Boston, Canada); Losos, Jonathan B. (Harvard University,
Canada)

A new comparative method that does not require pre-assigned ecomorph categories confirms
exceptional morphological convergence in Caribbean anoles.

Convergent evolution is a powerful line of evidence for the efficacy of natural selection, and the replicated
evolution of habitat specialist ecomorphs in Anolis lizards is among our best-known examples of
convergence. Most statistical tests for convergence suffer from a potential circularity: species are
assigned to categories (such as ecomorphs) based of their appearance or ecology, then methods are
used to determine whether ecomorphs cluster together in phenotype space. Here, we introduce a new
comparative method that identifies cases of convergence using a phylogenetic tree and multivariate trait
dataset, without any a priori classification of species to ecomorphs. The method, called SURFACE, first
uses stepwise AIC to fit increasingly complex models assigning regions of the tree to distinct stabilizing
selection regimes. The second stage of the method assigns independent regions of the tree to shared
selective regimes until the model fit ceases to improve further. We apply this method to ecomorphological
data from 100 Greater Antillean Anolis species. SURFACE settles on a model with a large number of
evolutionary regimes, close to half of which are convergent with regimes in other parts of the tree.
Comparison with data simulated under a variety of null models indicates that the method is unlikely to
recover this degree of convergence by chance. Many, but not all, of the cases of convergence identified
by SURFACE correspond to classically recognized ecomorph designations. This finding supports the




                                                                                                          336
long-held view that natural selection has driven exceptional evolutionary convergence in the adaptive
radiation of anoles.



Islam, Mohammed Mafizul (Hiroshima University); Tokimitsu, Haruka (Hiroshima Prefectural Women's
University, Canada); Uchida, Misato (Hiroshima University, Canada); Iwanari, Miki; Fuji, Tomotsu
(Hiroshima Prefectural Women's University, Canada); Sumida, Masayuki (Hiroshima University, Canada)

Genetic divergence and postmating isolation among the brown frogs from Ryukyu Archipelago,
Japan, elucidated by allozyme and mitochondrial gene sequence analyses, crossing experiments
and cytological observations.

In order to elucidate the genetic divergence among brown frogs from the Ryukyu Archipelago, we
conducted allozyme electrophoresis using 27 loci and mitochondrial gene sequencing of 16S rRNA and
Cyt b genes using frogs from Okinawa and Kumejima Islands of Okinawa prefecture and Amami and
Tokunoshima Islands of Kagoshima prefecture. To understand postmating isolation, we did crossing
experiments between brown frogs from Okinawa and Amami Islands, and subsequently observed
histology of testes and spermatogenesis using the reciprocal male hybrids. Although brown frogs of the
Ryukyu Archipelago have been considered to be a single species Rana okinavana, Matsui (2012)
recently suggested that these frogs from Okinawa and Amami Islands should be considered as R. ulma
and R. kobai respectively. Thus we used R. ulma from Okinawa and Komejima Islands and R. kobai
from Amami and Tokonoshima Islands. Based on the allozyme data, Ryukyu‘s brown frog from Okinawa
prefecture significantly diverged from the frogs from Kagoshima prefecture by means of large genetic
distances (up to 0.43) and presence of diagnostic alleles, although some degrees of divergence was
found at populational level between frogs of Amami and Tokunoshima Islands with a genetic distance of
0.23. Molecular data also indicated significant divergence between frogs from two prefectures, while 3
population of each prefecture made a single clade, where Tokunoshima population comparatively
diverged from the other two Amami populations. Based on both allozyme and molecular data, they can
reasonably be regarded as different species. Although crossing experiments revealed that they are not
completely isolated by hybrid inviability; but the reciprocal hybrids show abnormal testes by presence of
picnotic nuclei, and abnormal spermatogenesis due to presence of higher ratio of rod shaped bivalent and
univalent chromosomes. These results conclude that although all the Ryukyu brown frogs are similar in
external morphology, the Amami and Okinawa groups are regarded as separated species as noticed by
Matsui (2012), where some populational variations are found within the species, especially between
Tokonoshima and Amami populations.



Iwai, Noriko (University of Tokyo);

Morphology and functions of the"fifth finger" in the Otton frog, Babina subaspera

The existence of an extra ―finger‖ is known in several vertebrate taxa, including anurans. Frogs and toads
normally possess four toes on the forelimbs, but ―fifth fingers‖ occur in species in some families around
the world. The extra ―finger‖ is often formed as a prepollical spine. Many functional roles have been
suggested for ―fifth fingers,‖ such as for hunting food, male-male combat, amplexus, or as an anti-
predator adaptation, but no study has closely examined the morphology and function of a ―fifth finger‖ in
any frog species. The Otton frog, Babina subaspera, endemic to the Amami Islands, south Japan,
possesses ―fifth fingers‖ which originate as pseudothumbs. I used measurements and intensive field
observations, to investigate the morphology and use of pseudothumbs in Otton frogs and compared them



                                                                                                       337
between the sexes. I found that there is sexual dimorphism: males have larger bodies with relatively
longer and thicker pseudothumbs than females. Pseudothumbs encase prepollical spines in both sexes,
and the tip of the spine sometimes emerges from the sheath; this occurred more often in males. When
something irritated the chest, some Otton frogs promptly pulled their arms toward the chest and jabbed
their spines at whatever came within their embrace, a behavior that was observed more often in males. I
suggest that this response is a reflex related to male-male combat; I observed males fighting over
females and breeding nests, and during those fights they employed the same arm movements. Males
often have scratches over their bodies, supporting the idea that males jab their spines into their
opponents in male-male combat. The pseudothumb was not used only in male-male combat; during
amplexus, males were observed to jab their pseudothumbs into females. Females had stab wounds on
their sides under the arms where they had been jabbed, which showed that males use their
pseudothumbs and associated spines for more secure coupling. I did not observe Otton frogs using their
pseudothumbs in hunting food. The results indicate that the pseudothumb of the Otton frog is used by
males in two main ways: male–male combat and amplexus. Which of the dual functions evolved first as
well as why females possess the pseudothumbs will be interesting questions for the future study.



Jackman, Todd (Villanova University); Rocha, Nicole; Bauer, Aaron; Koolpe, Rachel (Villanova
University, Canada)

Multilocus phylogeography of the Pachydactylus serval and Pachydactylus weberi complexes.

Once considered to be subspecies of Pachydactylus serval, Pachydactylus montanus and Pachydactylus
purcelli have only been recently described. Both gecko species have a relatively wide distribution,
spanning the Cape Province of South Africa up into the southern half of Namibia, with their ranges
overlapping in the northern end of the distribution of P. purcelli. Representative samples of these species
as well as all species that are members of the P. serval/weberi clade were taken from an array of
localities across their ranges. Patterns of genetic variation were analyzed by obtaining molecular data for
the mitochondrial gene ND2 as well as five nuclear protein coding loci. Results from mitochondrial DNA
data for P. purcelli showed significant geographical substructure, with northern populations being fairly
distinct from the more southern localities. P. montanus also showed a fair amount of geographical
substructure, although the correlation was not as obvious as for P. purcelli. In comparing mitochondrial
and nuclear genes, there is clear evidence of either deep coalescence or introgression between P.
carinatus and nearby and sympatric P. montanus populations. Results indicate that the Orange River
appears to present a geographical barrier, which can be seen by the division between P. montanus
populations north and south of the river and the distinctiveness of the sole P. purcelli population sampled
north of the river. Species tree approaches are compared to various concatenation configurations.



Jackson, Laura (Southeastern Louisiana University);

Investigating primordial germ cell (PGC) development using germ cell-specific genes in fish

Primordial Germ Cell (PGC) determination is one of the most important feats of vertebrate embryonic
development because it allows the continuation of life among future generations. In vertebrates, at least
two different mechanisms exist that allow species to develop cells that later form the eggs and sperm. In
the predetermined mechanism of PGC development, cells are specified by maternal determinants that
are located within the germ plasm. In the induced mechanism, cells must be induced by external
regulating factors that initiate germ cell development. Preliminary evidence suggests that different groups



                                                                                                        338
of fish may use different mechanisms of PGC development. The main objective of this project is to
determine the mechanism of germ cell development in several fish species using conserved sequences
of germ-cell genes, specifically vasa and oct-4. Focus will be on the 3‘ untranslated region of vasa for
localization signals, and eventually for localization of germ cells to the cytoplasm, which will allow the
mechanism of germ cell development to be determined. Currently, oct-4 has been identified only in the
induced mechanism of PGC development. Therefore, using phylogenetic analysis for those species that
show the expression of oct-4 can determine a common gene mechanism for germ cell development in the
presence of oct-4. The data will be used to test whether there is a correlation between body patterns,
specifically fin position, and mechanism of germ cell determination.



Jacobson, Elliott (University of Florida);

Chelonian Herpesviruses, Translocation, and the Reptile Pet Trade

Large numbers of turtles and tortoises are moved around the world as part of the pet trade and tortoises
in particular are also moved about as part of translocation projects to mitigate for displacement due to
land development. On a smaller scale, captive breeding and reintroduction projects also contribute to
these movements. While chelonians make up a relatively small component (approximately 3%) of the
total trade in pet reptiles imported into the US, when you look at ownership of reptiles, turtles and tortoise
are the most popular of all reptiles kept as pets. In the pet trade there is often a mixing of species from
different geographic locations, which often continues into private collections. Large numbers of gopher (
Gopherus polyphemus ) and Agassiz‘s desert tortoises ( Gopherus agassizii ) have been relocated or
translocated in Florida and in the Mojave Desert of California and Nevada respectively. Along with the
movement of these animals, numerous infectious agents are potentially transported with them. Of the
pathogens known to infect tortoises (and other chelonians), an extremely problematic group are the
herpesviruses (members of the family Herpesviridae).              For some unexplained reason, more
herpesviruses have been identified in chelonians than all other reptiles combined. Of chelonians,
numerous reports of herpesvirus infection exist for members of the families Testudinidae and
Cheloniidae. Herpesvirus-like particles and lesions have also been observed in tissues of dead Emydine
turtles. Where sequencing data are available, all chelonian (and other reptilian) herpesviruses belong to
the subfamily Alphaherpesvirinae. The genus Chelonivirus has been proposed to include the
monophyletic group of herpesviruses that use chelonian hosts. Using molecular sequencing technology,
four distinct genotypes of tortoise herpesviruses (THVs) are currently recognized: THV1, THV2, THV3,
and THV4. We expect new genotypes of herpesviruses to be described as different species of tortoises
from different geographic regions are examined. The first indications of a possible herpesvirus in wild
populations of desert tortoises appeared in the early 1990s, shortly after the desert tortoise was federally
listed as a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act, as amended, in California, Nevada,
Utah, and northwestern Arizona. The appearance of newly emerging diseases was one reason for the
federal listing. As a result, a multi-year research project on health and diseases of wild desert tortoises
was established in California between 1990 and 1995. Tortoises with clinical signs compatible with those
seen with herpesvirus infection were observed during this study. Serological data for desert tortoises in
the central Mojave Desert of California indicated a widespread distribution of antibodies that bind to
TeHV3 isolates. Recently, the first molecular evidence for natural herpesvirus infections in two wild
desert tortoises from the Mojave Desert of California and Nevada were reported. Because of the difficulty
in ante-mortem diagnosis of herpesvirus infection, strict protocols need to be developed that ensure that
these pathogens are not accidentally introduced into naïve populations.




                                                                                                          339
Jacoby, David (Marine Biological Association of the UK); Brooks, Edward (Cape Eleuthera Institute,
Bahamas, Canada); Croft, Darren (Centre for Research in Animal Behaviour, Exeter, United Kingdom);
Sims, David (Marine Biological Association of the UK, Plymouth, United Kingdom)

Developing a deeper understanding of shark movements and spatial dynamics through novel
application of network analyses

Understanding how and why sharks move within their environment is fundamental for the effective
management and conservation of many threatened elasmobranch species. With site fidelity and home
ranging behaviour common in sharks, there is a need to determine how fine-scale space use changes
with ontogeny, sex, phenotype and a variety of abiotic variables. For some time, passive acoustic
telemetry techniques employing static arrays have been used to gather discrete packets of data
pertaining to the presence or absence of individually tagged sharks at known receiver locations. A major
limitation of current approaches for analysing these data is that they rarely account for the
interconnectivity of these locations as the sharks move freely between them. As a result, traditional
analyses do not integrate graphically or statistically a temporal component to spatial changes. Hence, the
spatio-temporal structure of movements and habitat use is often hard to extract and compare for large
numbers of individuals using the same habitats. Here we present the novel application of network theory
to passive acoustic telemetry data which describe the movements of two very distinct species, the
Caribbean reef shark ( Carcharhinus perezi ) and the small spotted catshark ( Scyliorhinus canicula ).
This approach treats specific locations as network nodes and the movement of sharks between receivers
as network edges. Some descriptive and quantitative analyses that are possible with this new technique
are highlighted and assessed in relation to their application to enhanced management and conservation
strategies.



Jadin, Robert (University of Colorado Boulder); Campbell, Jonathan (University of Texas Arlington,
Canada)

Recognizing cryptic snake diversity in the Middle American highlands: A systematic revision of
the Montane pitvipers

Montane pitvipers of the genus Cerrophidion are endemic to highland regions of Middle America from
Mexico to Panama. Until recently, four species were allocated to this genus (i.e., C. barbouri, C.
godmani, C. petlalcalensis, and C. tzotzilorum ), all but one, C. godmani, restricted to isolated highland
regions of Mexico. We conducted a thorough systematic revision of this genus incorporating both
molecular phylogenetic analyses and morphological data. Our phylogenetic analyses consist of a
mitochondrial data set [12S, 16S, cytochrome b (cyt b), NADH dehydrogenase subunit 4 (ND4)] and used
both Bayesian and maximum parsimony criteria. We re-examined nearly all known museum specimens of
C. barbouri and the type-series of Agkistrodon browni , this name previously considered a junior
synonym of C. barbouri . Our investigations revealed that both names represent valid species and we
therefore resurrected A. browni . Additionally, our phylogenetic analysis of New World pitvipers strongly
supports a clade consisting of A. browni, C. barbouri, and Ophryacus melanurus, which has a distant
sister relationship to Ophryacus undulatus. Based on the deep phylogenetic divergences amongst these
species and distinctive morphology, we described a new genus, Mixcoatlus, to accommodate A. browni,
C. barbouri, and O. melanurus, rendering O. undulatus monotypic. Finally, our phylogenetic analyses
reveal that C. godmani as previously recognized represents three deeply divergent lineages and is
possibly paraphyletic. Our analyses reveal that these three divergent evolutionary lineages are separated
geographically. Based on our phylogenetic analyses and an examination of more than 200 specimens of
C. godmani, we recognize C. godmani sensu stricto as to the taxon occurring in Mexico and Guatemala



                                                                                                      340
and describe two additional species of      Cerrophidion from Honduras–El Salvador and Costa Rica–
Panama, respectively.



Jaeger, Collin (Northern Illinois University); King, Richard; Duvall, Melvin (Northern Illinois University,
Canada)

Initial Characterization of MHC Class IIB Variation in the Eastern Massasauga (Sistrurus catenatus
catenatus)

The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) plays a key role in the vertebrate immune system by
recognizing pathogens. Genes associated with the MHC are often highly variable due to the effects of
balancing selection, but genetic drift can also influence MHC variability within small, isolated populations.
MHC variation has been characterized in a range of species, representing most of the major vertebrate
lineages. However, the MHC of snakes remains poorly understood—no snake MHC sequences have
been published to date. The Eastern Massasauga ( Sistrurus catenatus catenatus ) is listed as threatened
or endangered throughout most of its fragmented range. As such, this species represents an ideal model
for assessing the relative effects of selection and drift in small, isolated populations. Previous genetic
analyses of S. c. catenatus have examined selectively neutral loci (i.e., microsatellites, mtDNA), yet
variation in a functional trait (i.e., pathogen resistance) may provide a more meaningful assessment of
adaptive potential and long-term population viability. We amplified, cloned, and sequenced a 166-bp
fragment (excluding primers) of exon 2 MHC Class IIB, including many of the functionally significant
antigen-binding sites. Preliminary results based on a limited number of snakes reveal as many as four
unique sequence variants per individual, suggesting the presence of at least two loci. These sequences
contain a number of conserved amino acid residues characteristic of functional MHC Class IIB molecules
and do not include any in-frame stop codons, indicating they are functional loci. Pairwise differences
among the sequences exceed 10% and 25% at the nucleotide and amino acid levels, respectively.
Further, we consider the relative roles of selection and drift in shaping MHC variation in Illinois S. c.
catenatus in comparison to seven microsatellite loci. These data represent the initial steps towards
developing an effective marker of MHC variation in S. c. catenatus. This marker may also provide useful
information for conservation efforts involving other snake species of concern and will contribute to our
understanding of MHC evolution in an under-represented lineage.



Jaime, Mario (CIBNOR); Caraveo, Javier (CIBNOR, Canada); Galvan, Felipe (CICIMAR, Canada);
Hoyos, Mauricio (Pelagios-Kakunjá, Canada)

Relative contributions of feeding in the different regions to the long-term diet of the white shark
Carcharodon carcharias from Isla Guadalupe inferred by analysis of stable isotopes d15N and
d13C

Movements of white shark in the Eastern Pacific and the link with its feeding ecology were inferred from
stable carbon and nitrogen stable isotopic analysis. Dermis and epidermis samples of white sharks that
aggregate at Isla Guadalupe were obtained to determine isotope composition. Average isotope signature
for dermis tissue of white shark were δ 13 C (–14.5‰) and δ 15 N (19.1‰). Average isotope signature for
the epidermis was δ 13 C (–14.1‰) and δ 15 N (18.3‰). Tissue samples of prey (northern elephant
seals, Guadalupe fur seals, California sea lions, and dolphin) were obtained. Isotope signatures of
probable white shark prey within its migration range were obtained from the literature (h arbor seals,
northern elephant seals, northern fur seals, harbor porpoise and fishesfrom the coast of the California,



                                                                                                         341
yellow fin tuna, bigeye tuna and albacore from Hawaii and yellow fin tuna values near the Shark Offshore
Forraging Area) We considered the marine mammals as indicators of near shore environments and tunas
as indicators of off shore environments. Guilds by regions instead of species were grouped. To compare
the definition pattern of the distribution of feasible contributions from each source to the white shark we
developed mixing models using IsoSource and MixSIR software. The isotope signature of white shark
dermis from Isla Guadalupe suggests movements of individual sharks between Isla Guadalupe and the
coast of California. Results of models indicated a greater contribution of prey from nearshore
environments than those of offshore environments.



James, Kelsey (San Diego State University); Ferretti, Francesco (Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford
University, Canada); Moore, Jeff (Southwest Fisheries Science Center, NOAA, Canada); Lewison,
Rebecca (San Diego State University, Canada); Curtis, K. Alexandra (Acadia University, Canada);
Dillingham, Peter (Clark University, Canada)

Global Chondrichthyan Catch and Bycatch: Status and Sustainability

Chondrichthyan populations are at risk from fisheries catch and bycatch worldwide. However, assessing
the impact of fishing mortality on sharks and rays is difficult given severe data limitations. As a result, few
fisheries management organizations have applied management models to identify limits or reference
points that could address chondrichthyan catch sustainability. In collaboration with colleagues, we are
addressing this challenge by creating a global catch database linking catch and bycatch data with
chondrichthyan life history, and developing reference point based models to guide management of
chondrichthyan catch. This project is a continuation of the Project GloBAL bycatch database and builds
on this foundation with ongoing work by Stanford‘s Reconstructing Shark Baselines project. Here, we will
review the structure and content of our chondrichthyan catch database and its links with demographic
information, and discuss the application of management models using these data. This collation and
synthesis of chondrichthyan catch and bycatch data will improve our ability to assess and manage the
impact fisheries are having on chondrichthyan populations.



Jañez, Julieta (Fundacion Temaiken); Zalazar, Raul; Falzone, Martin; Abraham, Carolina (Fundacion
Temaiken, Canada)

Preliminary observations on the reproductive cycle of Myliobatis goodei in captivity

Elasmobranchs can be grouped in three types of reproductive cycles. Continuous breeders are
reproductively active throughout the year, seasonal breeders are reproductively active for only a portion
of the annual cycle, and species that undergo punctuated cycles are pregnant for approximately a full
year, but an intervening year or two is spent non-pregnant. The Southern eagle ray ( Myliobatis goodei )
is widely distributed along the Atlantic east coast, from USA (36° N, South Carolina) to Argentina (36° S,
Patagonia). The mode of reproduction is aplacental viviparity (Matrotrophic-histotrophe). However the
basic reproductive parameters are yet unknown. Preliminary data of the reproductive cycle obtained from
adult females in captivity are presented. Observations in five females of M.goodei , maintained under
controlled conditions during the period 2003-2011, allowed us to determine that the elapsed time between
births is about one year. These occur in late spring-summer and copulation occurs immediately after
parturition. A minimum of 4 months gestation was estimated by ultrasound. Parturitions in consecutive
years were recorded for two reproductive females. From the ultrasound monitoring of two females that
were isolated from the rest of the specimens for one year, follicular development was observed, with a




                                                                                                           342
peak in the diameter reached in May-June (winter). Estrogen levels in blood showed a peak in early
summer and another in late spring. During the rest of the year (autumn-winter) estrogen concentration
was maintained at low levels. Testosterone showed several oscillations during the year with a marked
decrease in late summer and two peaks between late winter and spring. As for the progesterone, values
were below the detection limit of the measuring equipment (<0.1 ng/ml). Observations to date allow us to
affirm that M.goodei presents an annual reproductive cycle, and to discard the punctuated cycle as its
reproductive strategy. However, further studies are needed to determine whether the reproductive cycle
of the species is seasonal or continuous.



Jass, Christopher (Royal Alberta Museum); Gardner, James (Royal Tyrrell Museum of Palaeontology,
Drumheller, AB, Canada)

Taxonomic Stability of Amphibians and Reptiles in the Quaternary in Canada

Much of our current understanding about the response of North American Quaternary herpetofaunas to
climatic changes, glacial advance, and glacial retreat is founded on fossiliferous localities in the USA
and eastern Canada, many of which were beyond the maximum advance of the ice sheets. Localities
from regions that were covered by ice are critical for understanding the histories of herpetofaunas that
were directly impacted by glaciation. Much of western Canada was covered by ice by during the Last
Glacial Maximum, yet Quaternary herpetofaunas from that region have received scarce mention in the
published literature, likely due to a research emphasis on Quaternary mammals. Here we summarize
recent investigations on Quaternary herpetofaunas from western Canada that significantly improve our
understanding of Ice Age amphibians and reptiles from northern latitudes. We examined Quaternary
specimens from eight paleontological and archaeological localities in the provinces of British Columbia
and Alberta (British Columbia: Bear Flat; Alberta: Eagle Cave, January Cave, Rat‘s Nest Cave,
Hand/Wintering Hills, Fletcher Site, Stampede Site, and Little Fish Lake). These localities include cave
deposits in the Rocky Mountains and localities on the open prairie. Some localities contain fossils that
pre-date the Last Glacial Maximum (e.g., January Cave ), whereas others post-date that event (e.g.,
Rat‘s Nest Cave). Identified taxa include frogs (Rana sp., Bufo sp., and Anura indet.), salamanders (
Ambystoma sp.), and snakes (cf. Thamnophis sp. and cf. Pituophis sp.). With those additional records
there are now at least 26 localities known to contain Quaternary amphibian and reptile remains in
Canada, with the majority of known localities situated in the west. Taxonomic records presented in our
study reflect a morphology-based approach to identification that resulted in less taxonomic resolution than
commonly found in the literature concerning Quaternary amphibians and reptiles. Despite a lack of
species-level identifications, the resultant data set is useful for establishing a framework indicative of
taxonomic stability of late Quaternary herpetofaunas in western Canada. We hypothesize that the
observed stability likely is related to evolutionary adaptations (e.g., cold-tolerance) in specific lineages.



Jaworski, Kortney (Ohio University); Lattanzio, Matthew; Miles, Donald (Ohio University, Canada)

Effects of diet variation on body condition, color expression, and performance of ornate tree
lizards, Urosaurus ornatus

Colored patches among many lizards are often implicated as badges of intraspecific communication.
Indeed, many studies have found support for badges of varying colors and sizes as signals of status or
condition, at least among males. In the ornate tree lizard ( Urosaurus ornatus ), males possess dual
badges (throat and abdominal) which are displayed during social interactions. Throat badges exhibit



                                                                                                         343
discrete variation among males whereas abdominal badges are consistently blue in color. Furthermore,
throat color variation is concordant with variation in social behavior and dominance hierarchies in this
species. Physiologically, these different colors represent both structural (blue) and diet-derived (yellow
and orange) coloration, and as such are expected to exhibit varying degrees of condition-dependence.
Previous research investigating the information content of these badges has generated mixed results with
respect to the links between male quality or condition and variation in male color. These studies were
likely limited in their approach however by 1) not accounting for the capability of color expression to vary
quantitatively (e.g., within a particular male phenotype) and 2) not experimentally varying body condition
and monitoring its effects. In order to fully understand the condition dependence of a trait, it is necessary
to see how variation in that trait responds to phenotypic perturbation. Here we present results from a
controlled feeding experiment examining how variation in diet regime (food availability, three levels)
affects body condition, and consequently how that variation in body condition predicts quantitative
variation in color expression by tree lizards. In addition, we also measure changes in whole-organism
performance (endurance capacity) throughout the experiment. Thus far we have found that body
condition declined significantly in the low-availability treatment compared to the medium- and high-
availability treatments (P=0.002). We are currently analyzing our color and performance data. Overall we
intend to provide key insight regarding the degree to which multivariate color expression by tree lizards is
informative of male quality and locomotor capacity.



Jenkins, Chris (The Orianne Society);

The Orianne Society: A snake conservation success story

The world‘s reptile and amphibian populations are declining at an alarming rate. As more species decline
and face extinction it is important that partnerships are formed to prevent further declines. The Orianne
Society was created to conserve reptiles and amphibians in the wild. We use a science-based approach
to the range-wide conservation of our flagship species, the Eastern Indigo Snake. Our programs are
designed to form the first comprehensive effort to save a snake species in the wild. Our Conservation
Science Program provides the critical information needed to implement our applied programs and has
successfully completed or is currently conducting research on many topics including but not limited to
inventory, monitoring, spatial ecology, genetics, population modeling, habitat and modeling. Our research
programs have informed many of our applied conservation programs (e.g., Land Protection, Land
Management, Captive Breeding, Education, and Conservation Planning). Some of our conservation
successes include developing a Preserve dedicated to maintaining a viable population of indigo snake
indefinitely, reintroducing indigo snakes to Alabama and plans to expand reintroductions into Florida and
Georgia, revising the recovery plan, developing conservation plans, educating 1000s of students, and
raising general awareness of the conservation needs for the species. We will continue to strive to achieve
conservation successes, and are using our efforts with Indigo Snakes as a model to develop programs for
other species in need. We are dedicated to providing future generations the opportunity to know and
experience these amazing animals.




                                                                                                         344
Jewell, David (Stowers Institute for Medical Research); Kupronis, Rick; Schieszer, Jill; Piraquive,
Christina; Winter, Kristy; Baumann, Diana (Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Canada)

Innovative Strategies for Maintaining a Large Colony of Aspidoscelis Species

Whiptail lizards of the genus Aspidoscelis (formerly Cnemidophorus ) provide many unique
opportunities for biological research. Arguably the most fascinating aspect of their biology relates to the
fact that approximately one third of the species reproduce in the complete absence of males; a process
known as parthenogenesis. Here we describe the set-up and captive husbandry of our colony where we
house both sexual and asexual species which readily reproduce year-round. The colony is primarily used
to study the mechanism of asexual reproduction, speciation and the effects of hybridization on gene
expression pattern and development.

A number of innovative strategies have been utilized to effectively house a colony of over 600 animals.
Custom-built runs with movable dividers allow for thermoregulatory behavior, foraging, tunneling and egg
laying. UV heat bulbs are tested for intensity and output using an Ocean Optics Jaz spectrometer and
associated SpectraSuite software for radiometric analysis. Hygiene is monitored using ATP swabs which
use bioluminescence to detect residual ATP as an indicator of substrate or surface contamination.
Lunaire environmental chambers are used for egg incubation under constant temperature and humidity
levels, leading to a high hatch rate.

We employ various techniques to facilitate animal identification. All lizards are photographed at hatching
and at regular intervals throughout growth, permitting identification based on pattern recognition. For
those species without distinctive patterns, both VIE (Visible Implant Elastomer) and PIT (Passive
Integrated Transponder) tagging have been successfully utilized over a period of years. A set of
microsatellite markers is used to track identity and parentage. All colony management and research data
is tracked through an in-house database.



Jiménez Robles, Octavio (Biodiversity and Evolutionary Department, National Museum of Natural
Sciencies (CSIC)); Guayasamin, Juan M. (Centro de Investigación de la Biodiversidad y el Cambio
Climático, Universidad Tecnológica Indoamérica, Canada); Ron, Santiago R. (Museo de Zoología,
Escuela de Ciencias Biológicas, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Ecuador, Canada); De la Riva,
Ignacio J. (Biodiversity and Evolutionary Department, National Museum of Natural Sciencies (CSIC),
Canada)

Herpetofauna Assemblages of a Locality in the Slopes of the Cordillera del Cutucú, Southeast
Ecuador, with Biogeographic Comparisons with other Amazonian Rainforest Localities

The Amazon is the most extensive area of tropical rainforest and the richest in amphibians and reptiles in
the world. We present an inventory and an ecological description of the herpetofauna in the Wisui
Biological Station (WBS), in seven habitats of different disturbance levels, ranging from 600 to 1400 m of
elevation. This site, never prospected before, is located in the eastern slopes of the Cordillera del Cutucú
(Ecuador), a mountain range east of the Andes.

After several visits from 2008 to 2011, 57 species of amphibians and 43 of reptiles were recorded at
WBS, through visual encounter surveys and incidental captures. Some of these species are new to
science (e.g.: one Osteocephalus which breeds in phytotelmata and two Pristimantis ), while others
represent interesting records ( e.g. : Bolitoglossa altamazonica s.l., Pristimantis katoptroides, P.
rubicundus ). According to accumulation curves and richness estimators, there are still many species to
be registered in most of the habitats. Comparing the herpetofauna of WBS with other inventories across



                                                                                                         345
the Amazon basin, it shows higher similarity with other Ecuadorian localities (sharing around 50 and 60%
of anurans and squamates). If the diversity at WBS is as high as that described for other nearby
Amazonian communities, it would mean that species richness is high above the predictions by
mathematical estimators.

Sampling efficiency was variable within and between assemblages, and especially low for reptiles in
general. Diversities across habitats were unevenly distributed, but generally higher in lowland forests.
There was a high turnover in species composition between assemblages (30-80% between amphibians
of forest habitats and 60-100% for rest of comparisons; 65-100% and 30-100% in reptiles). These
differences might be explained through microclimate, topographical and structural features (e.g.: up to
40% of the variation between the amphibians of forest habitats is due to nested absences along the
altitude gradient). At least in amphibians, we found patterns according to life history traits such us
breeding strategies (e.g.: increasing dominance of direct developers with altitude while species breeding
in ground level water disappear).

Currently, the herpetofauna communities of WBS are threatened by the construction of a road in the
vicinity. As a consequence, land use changes may cause a reduction of the local biodiversity through loss
of primary forests and an increase of anthropogenic habitats.



Jirik, Katherine (Birch Aquarium at Scripps Institution of Oceanography);

Reconciling professional values: a foundation to improve collaboration and communication in
elasmobranch scholarship

Elasmobranch researchers participate in numerous roles within scientific and public spheres.
Researchers commonly give public lectures, serve as technical consultants, confer with managers, and
encourage community projects in addition to their scientific and institutional responsibilities. Despite
advances in technology and communication, much responsibility falls on individual researchers to
disseminate their findings and sustain a public presence. This often requires not only explaining
research, but interpreting research – a practice influenced by the values of science and society. To
what extent do elasmobranch researchers feel comfortable doing this? What types of engagement are
appropriate for ‗the objective scientist‘? As elasmobranch scholarship continues to diversify, how can the
limitations of disciplinary values be recognized, and yet, be used to complement one another in order to
solve problems? This paper revisits the object-subject debate and aims to help elasmobranch scholars
reflect on whether different professional values are needed in their scientific and public roles, and how
values may affect cross-disciplinary scholarship and collaboration. Survey results of scientists‘ attitudes
towards engagement in the public sphere will be presented.



Joger, Ulrich (State Natural History Museum); Stumpel, Nikolaus (State Natural History Museum,
Braunschweig, Germany); Zinenko, Oleksandr (Museum of Nature, Kharkiv, Russian Federation)

Speciation and species borders in palaearctic vipers.

Palaearctic viper taxa occur mainly parapatrically, or, if sympatrically on a broad scale, will be found
ecologically separated on a fine scale. Species recognition and species borders in these vipers have
been under debate until present, especially in the genera Vipera and Montivipera.




                                                                                                       346
We studied these genera using mitochondrial and nuclear gene sequences. The resulting phylogeny did
not support all nominal taxa. In Montivipera, lineage sorting appeared incomplete in several nominal
species. Some Vipera ‗species‘ or populations turned out to be composed of heterozygotes of two
accepted species. This phenomenon seems to be not uncommon in Vipera, and the morphological
distinctiveness of these putative hybrids initiates a discussion about species borders and species
constancy in Vipera.

Are there stable hybrid zones between species, or have species been formed by hybridization? How does
speciation work in Vipera when species borders break down in contact zones?



Johnson, G. David (National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution); Baldwin, Carole
(National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, Canada)

A beautiful perplexing larval fish specimen from the Florida Straits (Liopropomini?:Epinephelinae:
Serranidae)

We recently noticed an unlabeled color image of a striking larval fish in a paper on connectivity in marine
populations (Cowen et al, 1998). Superficially, this larva resembles that of the Indo-Pacific diploprionin,
epinepheline serranid, Belonoperca chabanaudi, currently known from a single specimen that we
described in 1991 from the historic ZMUC Dana Collections, sharing with it similar dorsal fin-ray counts
(IX, 11 in the new larva, usually IX,10 in B. chabanaudi) and, most notably, the extreme filamentous
extension of the majority of its dorsal fin spines. Our initial surmise that this specimen was Indo-Pacific in
origin proved wrong, when an inquiry established that it was collected in the Florida Straits. With the
specimen in hand, we have determined that it exhibits larval head spination characteristic of the tribe
Liopropomini, of which there are three recognized genera. Liopropoma is known from five Atlantic and
21 Indo-Pacific species, Bathyanthias from two Atlantic, and Rainfordia from one Indo -Pacific species.
With the exception of Bathyanthias, all known species have VIII or fewer dorsal-fin spines. Bathyanthias
has 13-15 dorsal-fin soft rays, so the dorsal fin-ray count of our specimen is unique among liopropomins.
Furthermore, all known liopropomin larvae have no more than two elongate filamentous dorsal spines,
and the unidentified larva has seven. At this writing, we suspect that this larval specimen represents an
undescribed liopropomin genus. Fortunately, our specimen was fixed in 95% ethanol, so we hope to
extract DNA and subsequently clear and stain it. Stay tuned...



Johnson, Steve (University of Florida);

Early detection of invasive reptiles in Florida

The state of Florida (USA) holds the dubious distinction as being the global capital for herpetofauna
introductions. As of early 2012, there are more than 55 species of non-native reptile and amphibian
species known to be breeding in the Sunshine State. The vast majority, which are reptiles, persist in
relatively small, localized populations with no obvious negative impacts on native species or human
quality of life. However, some have significantly expanded their ranges with negative impacts on the
state‘s ecology, economy, and the quality of life of Floridians. Prominent among this latter group are
several species of large snakes and carnivorous lizards. Specifically, these include pythons, anacondas,
monitor lizards, and tegu lizards. Although prevention is always the best policy, once a species has been
introduced outside its native range, Early Detection and Rapid Response (EDRR) becomes an important
management tool. The Introduced Reptile Early Detection and Documentation program, or ‗REDDy‘, is a



                                                                                                          347
free, online educational program to train observers to identify and report sightings of several species of
large, invasive reptiles. Thus, REDDy is the crucial Early Detection component of a growing EDRR
network of natural resource managers and concerned citizens in Florida that is targeting particular
species of invasive reptiles. I will describe the REDDy training module, provide summary statistics for
program participation, and explain how REDDy is integrated with rapid response efforts in Florida.
Production of the REDDy program was a cooperative effort among the Everglades Cooperative Invasive
Species Management Area, the National Park Service, The Nature Conservancy, and the University of
Florida‘s Cooperative Extension Service. Funding for REDDy was provided by the South Florida National
Parks Trust, the Ferris Greeney Family Foundation, and the USDA Natural Resources Extension Act. To
learn more about REDDy and to take the online training module please visit http://ufwildlife.ifas.ufl.edu/
and click the ―Are you REDDy?‖ link.



Jones, Lawrence (Southwest PARC);

Tracking changes in a lizard assemblage at an ecotone in southeastern Arizona, USA.

The lower Marijilda Canyon area near Safford, Arizona, has among the highest diversity of lizards in the
United States, with 20 species being recorded in a small area. The reason for the high diversity is due, in
part, to the study site‘s location at an ecotone between the Sonoran and Chihuahuan deserts, two
montane ecoregions, and Mexican highland grasslands. The high diversity and ecotonal setting make it
an ideal venue for tracking changes in lizard assemblages over time and testing hypotheses about effects
of climate change, weed species and other other environmental influences. This study site was
qualitatively surveyed in the late 1960‘s by previous researchers, then I conducted systematic road-
transect surveys in 2003, 2010, and 2011. A total of 59 systematic surveys were conducted along a 4.2
km stretch of road. A total of 3,884 lizards were detected, representing 14 species (the other 6 species
were opportunistic records). Detections ranged from 0 to 179 individuals/visit (mean = 65.8 lizards/visit or
14.5 detections/km). Lizards were detected year-round, with a bi- or trimodal distribution in the spring and
summer to early fall. Peak surface activity occurred after the arrival of monsoonal precipitation, although
only some species responded to these summer rains. The most commonly detected species were
Urosaurus ornatus (n = 1,560, 40%), Uta stansburiana (n = 804, 21%), Sceloporus magister complex (
S. magister / bimaculosus /hybrids; n = 611, 16%), Aspidoscelis tigris (n = 277, 7%), Crotaphytus
collaris (n = 191, 5%), Cophosaurus texanus (n = 187, 5%), S. clarkii (n = 94, 2%), and A. uniparens
(37, 1%). Detections were not evenly distributed along the transect; most detections were in the first few
kilometers of road sand near the creek, although distribution varied spatially and temporally by species.
Although these data primarily serve as a baseline for long-term monitoring, observed trends differed
between the 2003 and the 2010/2011 survey periods. For example, there was a marked increase in U.
stansburian a and decrease in Cophosaurus texanus between the 2003 and 2010/2011 survey periods.
Based on early data returns, it is likely that tracking changes in environmental, behavioral, and
phenological attributes will be critical in accounting for population shifts over time.



Jones, Marc (UCL, University College London); Meloro, Carlo (University of Hull, Canada); Humphries,
Emma; Evans, Susan (UCL, University College London, Canada)

Why the fossil record is crucial for understanding the evolutionary context of the New Zealand
tuatara (Lepidosauria: Rhynchocephalia: Sphenodon)




                                                                                                        348
Sphenodon is famed for being the only living member of Rhynchocephalia, the sister taxon of Squamata,
a phylogenetic position that makes it the best available extant outgroup taxon for comparative studies of
squamates. Moreover, Sphenodon is frequently referred to as a ―living fossil‖ and as ―unchanged for
150-250 million of years‖. This perception is closely linked to the common assumption that Sphenodon
represents a ―basal‖ or ―primitive‖ lepidosaur. Although very convenient this supposition is often made
without any reference to primary palaeontological literature or peer reviewed fossil data. Palaeontological
research over the last 30 years has shown that for much of the Mesozoic (227-90 million years ago [Ma])
Rhynchocephalia are far more diverse and ecologically important than is widely appreciated. There are
now over 50 fossil species known from all over the world and these include small robust terrestrial forms
(‗clevosaurs‘), short bodied aquatic forms (‗sapheosaurs‘), long bodied aquatic forms (Pleurosaurinae),
and large heavily built herbivores (Eilenodontinae). Thus the modern diversity of Rhynchocephalia and
taxonomic isolation of Sphenodon is a product of extinction rather than an absence of diversification or
evolution. There are some teeth and partial jaws from the Jurassic (160 Ma) that closely resemble those
of Sphenodon (Argentina, Mexico, UK) but it remains unknown as to whether these animals resembled
the modern Sphenodon in their entirety. Perhaps more importantly the most ancient and plesiomorphic
Rhynchocephalia (e.g. Gephyrosaurus, Diphydontosaurus, Triassic-Jurassic, about 205 Ma, UK) differ
from Sphenodon in a number of ways. These early forms are much smaller (skull length = 15-40 mm),
more lightly built, have relatively long limbs, long snouts, and possess a greater number of more
acuminate teeth on the dental margins and palate. The structure of their temporal region also shows that
the absence of an external ear and presence of a lower temporal bar is secondary in Sphenodon and
not primitively retained as historically supposed. Therefore, although Sphenodon is the best available
living outgroup for Squamata it should be used with caution and the morphology of fossil lepidosaurs
should also be considered to provide a more holistic total evidence approach.



Jones, Melissa (Texas State University); Vandewege, Michael (Mississippi State University, Starkville,
MS, United States); Forstner, Michael (Texas State University, San Marcos, TX, United States)

Habitat suitability and head-start efficiency and effectiveness: Tested in the endangered Houston
toad (Bufo houstonensis)

The Houston toad, endemic to the State of Texas, was first described in Houston, Texas in 1953. In 1970,
the Houston Toad was the first animal in Texas and the first amphibian federally listed as an endangered
species. Houston toad populations have remained in a continual decline consequent of multiple
stressors, including habitat fragmentation, continued urban growth of the city of Bastrop, red imported fire
ants, fertilizers and chemical run off, agricultural practices, wildfire, and drought. As consequence of
prolonged drought and habitat loss a head-starting program was developed and implemented for Bastrop
County, Texas. Since 2007, thousands of head-start tadpoles and juveniles have been released in
Bastrop County. A preliminary study in 2010 used a suite of genetic markers to test and monitor head-
start success of tadpole and juvenile Houston toads. Results from this study conclude that head-starting
does increases early life stage mortality and survivorship ship estimates are comparable to wild toad
populations. Head-starting efforts themselves will not be sufficient to achieve success in the recovery
efforts. Therefore we used mesocosom exclosures to evaluate our best options for habitat recovery
consequent of drought and catastrophic wildfire induced changes and decades of fire suppression. We
tested and compared adult survivorship within six different habitat types to gain insight on habitat
suitability for the Houston toad. As head-starting efforts continue we will use our habitat suitability results
to further implement and refine our management efforts.




                                                                                                           349
Jones, Michael (University of Massachusetts Amherst); Willey, Lisabeth (University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Canada)

Distribution and Ecology of Box Turtles (Terrapene carolina bauri) in the Ten Thousand Islands,
Florida, USA

We studied the distribution and ecology of Florida Box Turtles (Terrapene carolina bauri) in the Ten
Thousand Islands, an estuarine mangrove ecosystem encompassing 300 square km in southwestern
Florida. We surveyed fifteen islands, including both natural barrier islands and anthropogenic shell-works
islands constructed by the Calusa Indians approximately 2000 ybp. We detected 147 box turtles on seven
offshore or riverine shell-works islands. We did not detect any box turtles during cursory surveys of
natural barrier islands, suggesting that box turtles are absent from these sites or less abundant than on
the shell islands. We evaluated differences in detection rates and morphometrics across the seven shell-
works islands where box turtles were detected. We estimate population size on one 26 ha shell island to
be approximately 54 turtles (42.8– 76.3); equivalent to a density of 2.1 turtles/ha (1.7 – 3.0), lower than
estimates from islands in Tampa Bay and the Florida Keys. Our surveys suggest that density and
demography may vary significantly between the anthropogenic shell islands. Box turtle populations on
shell islands may be suppressed by raccoon depredation, collection by humans, and/or adverse
environmental conditions. Box turtle populations on the Calusa shell mounds of the Ten Thousand
Islands provide interesting examples of box turtle populations living on manmade islands and provide the
opportunity to evaluate metapopulation dynamics and density-dependent behavioral ecology in a long-
lived vertebrate.



Jones, Michael (University of Massachusetts Amherst); Willey, Lisabeth (University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Canada); Sievert, Paul (USGS Massachusetts Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit,
Canada); Akre, Thomas (Longwood University, Canada); Castellano, Christina (Orianne Society,
Canada); Erb, Lori (Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife, Canada); Grgurovic, Mark
(Swampwalkers Wetland Ecosystem Specialists, Canada); Johnson, Glenn (State University of New York
Potsdam, Canada); Koch, Stephanie (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Canada); Marchand, Michael (New
Hampshire Fish and Game, Canada); Mays, Jonathan (Maine Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Department,
Canada); Ross, Angelena (New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, Canada); Urban,
Chris (Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission, Canada); Windmiller, Bryan (Hyla Ecological Services,
Canada)

Regional Planning and Monitoring Programs for Two Rare Turtle Species in the Northeastern USA

Blanding‘s turtle ( Emydoidea blandingii ) and wood turtle ( Glyptemys insculpta ) are long-lived emydid
turtles that rely seasonally on both wetland and upland habitats, are of regional conservation concern in
the northeastern United States, and are listed as ―Endangered‖ by the IUCN. Both species are apparently
threatened by habitat loss and elevated adult mortality rates, and local population declines have been
documented for both species. To improve the effectiveness of regional conservation efforts, formal
working groups composed of land managers, state biologists, and researchers were established to
prioritize and coordinate conservation, management, and monitoring activities for both species throughout
the northeastern United States. In 2011, the Blanding‘s Turtle and Wood Turtle Working Groups received
funding through State Wildlife Grants programs (USFWS Competitive SWG, and NEAFWA Regional
Conservation Needs, respectively). Key contributors to both projects include biologists and land
managers from agencies, universities, NGOs, and private industry from 5 and 12 states, respectively. We
are identifying priority sites for conservation and management, developing management plans for priority




                                                                                                       350
sites, implementing standardized regional monitoring programs, and establishing meaningful and
productive partnerships with additional agencies, land-trusts, and managers. As part of this effort, we
have devised a two-tiered regional monitoring strategy that utilizes 1) broad-scale occupancy and
abundance sampling to detect population trends across the region, and 2) spatial mark-recapture
methods to estimate population density at key sites. We will discuss the details of these plans, as well as
preliminary results from spring 2012 sampling, and we seek critical feedback on our monitoring and site
prioritization approaches.



Jones, Peter (Northern Illinois University); King, Richard (Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL, United
States)

Integral projection modeling as a technique for the demographic analysis of species with
indeterminate growth

The commonly used matrix population projection technique depends on breaking the population of study
into discrete classes frequently based on body size. For many species, however, the divisions between
size-based classes are arbitrary given that body size is a continuous variable and this can lead to
imprecise and inaccurate population models. An alternative to matrix models that shares many of their
useful features is the integral projection model (IPM). Rather than separating individuals into discrete
classes each with its own set of vital rates, IPMs utilize continuous functions based on the state of an
individual (e.g. body size, age). These states can be continuous or discrete. Thus, IPMs are ideal for the
population modeling of species with indeterminate growth (e.g. fish, amphibians, and reptiles). IPMs
retain some useful characteristics of matrix projection models such as the projected population growth
rate from the dominant eigenvalue, stable size distribution and reproductive value from the eigenvectors,
and sensitivity and elasticity analysis. Because IPMs do not require the division of individuals into
classes, fewer data are necessary for the parameterization of an IPM compared with a matrix projection
model. Here we investigate geographic-scale variation in the demography of the Eastern Massasauga
(Sistrurus catenatus catenatus) via IPMs. We parameterized IPMs with growth functions from two
populations at opposite ends of the Eastern Massasauga‘s distribution (southern Illinois and southeastern
Ontario). Stable size distributions from the IPMs showed a greater abundance of large adults (>800 mm
SVL) in the Ontario population than the Illinois population, a pattern consistent with observed size
distributions. This difference is also reflected in the model elasticities, which showed that the highest
elasticities for the Ontario population were at a larger adult size than for the Illinois population. IPMs can
also be parameterized with different survival and fecundity functions to facilitate more complex
comparisons among populations or to explore alternative management strategies.



Jones, Susan (University of Tasmania); Awruch, Cynthia (University of Tasmania, Hobart, T, Australia)

Steroid production by maternal and embryonic tissues in a viviparous lizard

Hormones have important organisational and activational roles during embryonic development. These
hormones may have maternal or embryonic origins. In viviparous (live-bearing) vertebrates, the embryo is
exposed to maternal hormones via the placenta, which forms an interface between maternal and
embryonic endocrine systems. Environmental influences on the maternal endocrine system may therefore
be transmitted to the embryo. We examined steroid production by embryonic and maternal tissues in the
viviparous lizard Niveoscincus ocellatus. We hypothesised that patterns of steroid production would vary
between tissues, with embryonic stage, and between different temperatures in this ectothermic species.



                                                                                                          351
Females were collected in mid to late gestation and sacrificed. Embryos were removed and staged:
samples were allocated to groups according to embryo stage (Stage 30-37; Stage 39 or Stage 40 = pre-
birth). Their adrenals and gonads were incubated at 16° or 28°C (species‘ preferred body temperature)
for three hours, with or without the steroid precursor pregnenolone; for younger embryos, the entire
embryo trunk was incubated. Maternal tissues (oviduct, placenta, corpus luteum, non-luteal ovary, and
muscle = non-endocrine control tissue) were also incubated at 16° or 28°C with or without pregnenolone.
Incubation media were assayed for testosterone, progesterone, estradiol and corticosterone using
radioimmunoassay. Of the maternal tissues, the corpus luteum produced the most progesterone, with
greater production in the presence of pregnenolone (F1, 48=89.85, P<0.001). Temperature had little
effect on hormone production, contrary to expectations. Progesterone production by corpora lutea was
significantly lower at stage 40 (F2, 48=59.17, P<0.001). Placenta and uterus were also steroidogenic,
producing low levels of estradiol, and progesterone. This suggests the potential for local regulation of the
hormonal environment in which the embryos are developing. In older embryos, the adrenals produced
measurable corticosterone. Corticosterone production did not vary between incubation temperatures (16
and 28°C) but was significantly higher in the presence of pregnenolone (F1, 76=17.51, P<0.001). These
results suggest the potential for maternal-embryo endocrine signaling in a viviparous reptile.



Joyce, Walter (University of Tübingen);

New Insights from the Fossil Record into the Basal Evolution of Turtles

Turtles have an exceptional fossil record, because they typically live in aquatic habitats, are relatively
large bodied, possess a heavily ossified shell, and therefore have great potential to enter the fossil
record. Yet, surprisingly little was known as recently as 20 years ago about the early evolution of turtles,
including the origin of the turtle shell, the origin of various modern subclades and their morphological
adaptations, and basic biogeographic patterns. Although many evolutionary questions remain far from
resolved, new fossils and global approaches to phylogeny are providing first glimpses at a cohesive
evolutionary history for the group. The purpose of this contribution is to introduce some of the more
relevant fossil finds and summarize their impact on the study of turtle evolution. Points of particular
interest include: 1) conclusive evidence that the turtle shell evolved through a novel interaction of the ribs,
dorsal vertebrae, and girdles with the skin and not from the gradual fusion of osteoderms with the
underlying skeleton; 2) the conclusion that the shoulder girdles of turtles are not inside the rib cage, but
rather anterior to it, as in most basal amniotes; 3) the predominantly terrestrial ecology of the stem turtle
lineage versus the primarily aquatic habitat preferences of the turtle crown; 4) support for a global clade
of large-bodied stem turtles, Meiolaniformes, that diversified throughout the Mesozoic and only went
extinct during the Holocene; 5) the post-Triassic split of the turtle crown; 6) the possibility that the
pleurodiran jaw-closure mechanism evolved from a cryptodiran-like jaw closure mechanism; and 7) the
near-contemporaneous split of crown turtles into three primary lineages, Pleurodira, Cryptodira, and
Paracryptodira, as the result of the break-up of Pangea in the Early to Middle Jurassic.



Juneau, Véronique (University of Ottawa); Blouin-Demers, Gabriel (University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON,
Canada)

Chocolate Turtles are back: Cocoa butter injections, but not Silastic implants, of corticosterone
can be used to mimic chronic stress in a free-living ectotherm, the painted turtle




                                                                                                           352
Chronic stress typically results in an elevation of circulating levels of glucocorticoids in vertebrates, which
can affect their fitness. In this context, we want to determine how elevated GC levels affect the acute
stress response, immune function, and reproductive success in a long-lived free-ranging reptile, the
painted turtle (Chrysemys picta), by experimentally mimicking the secretion of these stress hormones. To
do so, we conducted a validation study to assess the effectiveness of two corticosterone (CORT)
administration methods at chronically elevating CORT blood levels in the painted turtle: Silastic implants
and cocoa butter injections. In a first experiment, adult turtles kept in captivity received a subcutaneous
Silastic implant (control without implant, empty implant, sealed, or with holes) and were blood-sampled
over 28 days. Compared to controls, we observed no significant difference in baseline CORT levels,
hormonal stress response, or body condition. In a second experiment, we tested an epicoelomic injection
of molten cocoa butter mixed with CORT in free-living painted turtles. Turtles were recaptured and blood-
sampled in the field over several weeks. We found that cocoa butter implants of CORT kept circulating
CORT levels elevated for up to three weeks. We conclude that cocoa butter injections, but not Silastic
implants, of CORT can be successfully used in painted turtles to mimic the typical elevation in circulating
CORT levels associated with chronic stress, and represents a promising method for other ectotherms in
temperate climate.



Juterbock, Eric (Ohio State University);

Night Shift: Activity at Both Ends of the Night for Two Species of Southern Appalachian Woodland
Salamanders, Plethodon jordani and Plethodon shermani

During an investigation of the climbing behavior of southern Appalachian plethodontid salamanders, I
have quantified aspects of the behavior of Red-cheeked Salamanders, Plethodon jordani (PJ), and Red-
legged Salamanders, Plethodon shermani (PS), as they emerge from their daytime shelters around
sunset, and retreat to shelter around dawn. Data were collected between August 2009 and September
2011. PJ were observed along a trail to Chimney Tops in Great Smoky Mountains National Park, TN,
USA, whereas PS were observed along trails in Standing Indian Recreation Area of the Nantahala
National Forest, NC, USA. Salamanders were only observed, using headlamps; time and location were
recorded for each individual observed. An Extech Instruments Easyview EA30 light meter was used to
record light levels, in lux, with the sensor placed as close to the salamander‘s position as possible.
Typically, this was within a few centimeters of the anterior of the individual; measures were taken at the
mouth of any burrow in which individuals were so located. Times were standardized relative to the sunset
or sunrise times available from Weather Underground for nearby weather stations (Knoxville, TN for PJ,
and Franklin, NC for PS). Both species typically begin to emerge about 20 minutes before sunset, with
typical levels of activity reached by about 45 minutes after sunset. For 17 observation periods, the first
PJ was observed on the surface a median of 11 (4 to 27) min before sunset; the first PS was seen a
median 9.5 min before (n=20, 18 before to 11 after). The timing of activity during retreat is essentially a
mirror image relative to sunrise of the pattern at emergence. The last PJ was observed a median 10 min
after sunrise (n=3, -2 to +16); the last PS, 7 min (n=8, -5 to +25). Relatively few salamanders are active
on the surface in microhabitats with light levels in excess of 2 lux, or after sunrise; activity before sunset is
slightly more common. Microhabitat light levels are undetectable (<0.01 lux) by approximately 30 minutes
after sunset/before sunrise. Although individuals may be found up on vegetation quite close to the time of
sunrise or sunset, it is more typical to observe the first ascents or last descents when there is no
measurable light. The circadian cycles apparent in these data do not appear to differ between the two
focal species.




                                                                                                             353
Kacev, David (SDSU); Hyde, John (Southwest Fisheries Science Center, Canada); Lewison, Rebecca;
Bohonak, Andrew (SDSU, Canada)

Using Genetics in a Mark-Recapture Framework to Estimate Population Size of Data Poor
Elasmobranchs

Accurate estimation of the size of wild populations is critical for effective management, but incredibly
difficult in pelagic ecosystems. Traditional population assessments have relied upon fisheries catch
records to generate CPUE trends, however this is difficult for non-target species where data can be very
sparse.        In this study, we developed a model using population genetic data in a mark-recapture
framework to generate a rough estimate of population size. We simulated data for 16 microsatellite loci
using average allelic richness and allele distributions drawn from a wild population of short fin mako
sharks. We then ―bred‖ these individuals by choosing two at random and randomly selecting one allele
per locus from each to create an offspring genotype. From each paring we generated one to four
offspring based on litter sizes found in the literature. We thus created an f1 generation based on 10 years
of the model run. We sampled the genotypes of the f1 generation and used these data to reconstruct the
putative parental genotypes, which could then be compared to known adults, and assigned each to its
putative parents. The first time an offspring was assigned to a putative parent, it was considered a mark
on that parent, and each subsequent assignment of an offspring to that parent was considered a
recapture. These mark-recapture data were used in a Jolly-Seber model to generate an estimate of the
putative adult population, which could then be compared to the actual adult population size to assess the
utility of this method for population size estimation. We then tested this framework using actual mako
shark population genetic data.



Kaiser, Kristine (UC Riverside); Pollinger, John (UCLA Conservation Genetics Resource Center, Los
Angeles, CA, United States)

Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis shows high genetic diversity and ecological niche specificity
among haplotypes in the Maya Mountains of Belize

The pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) has been implicated in amphibian declines around
the globe. We set out to determine the diversity of Bd haplotypes found in the Maya Mountains of Belize,
Central America and to identify which climatic factors best described the distribution of the most common
haplotypes. We collected skin swabs from 524 amphibians in the protected areas of the Maya
Mountains of Belize. We used quantitative PCR (qPCR) to test for Bd and sequenced of a portion of the
5.8s and ITS1-2 regions. We sequenced 72 samples from at least 26 species that had tested PCR-
positive for Bd at least once; 30 samples were sequence-positive for Bd. Eight unique Bd haplotypes
were identified in the Maya Mountains, five of which were previously undescribed. We incorporated
WorldClim and remotely sensed vegetation data into a Maxent model to determine the distribution of the
two most common haplotypes, KK5 and KK15. The heuristic estimates of relative contributions of each
variable to models provided by Maxent revealed that models for the two haplotypes were driven by
distinctly different climate factors. Although the primary contribution to both haplotypes came from tree
cover, the other major contributor to the distribution model for haplotype KK5 was annual mean
temperature, while KK15 was driven secondarily by precipitation of the warmest quarter. Removal of tree
cover from the model did not qualitatively change results. Other studies have shown that different strains
may differ in virulence; thus, the 5.8s - ITS1-2 region diversity found in this study suggests that there may
be substantial differences among populations or haplotypes. Future work should focus on whether
diversity in for other genomic regions and possibly pathogenicity can be associated with haplotypes at




                                                                                                         354
this locus, as well as the integration of molecular tools with other, ecological tools to elucidate the ecology
and pathogenicity of Bd.



Kajiura, Stephen (Florida Atlantic University); Tellman, Shari (Florida Atlantic University, Canada)

Quantification of massive seasonal shark aggregations

South Florida witnesses an enormous migration of marine apex predators each year as massive
aggregations of blacktip ( Carcharhinus limbatus ) and spinner sharks ( C. brevipinna ) move through the
area. The close proximity of the Gulf Stream to the Palm Beach County (PBC) shoreline may constrain
the sharks to the coastal environment with tens of thousands of individuals congregated in the shallow,
nearshore waters. This natural bottleneck in PBC provides a unique opportunity to estimate abundance
of the southeastern US population of these important apex predators during their annual migration. Over
a sixteen month period, a biweekly aerial survey was flown along the 75km length of PBC from Boca
Raton inlet to Jupiter inlet with a high definition video camera and digital SLR camera mounted out of the
window of the plane to provide a continuous record of the area from the shore seaward to about 200m.
The light-colored, sandy seafloor and clear water characteristic of PBC facilitate visualization of the
sharks close to shore. The number of sharks was counted and used to generate a seasonal population
estimate but since the survey sampled only sharks close to shore at depths less than 5m, the total
population size is actually much greater. Shark abundance peaked in the winter (February) and declined
to nearly zero in the summer months and was inversely correlated with water temperature. The sharks
were not uniformly distributed along the coast, but appeared in loose clusters of up to thousands of
individuals. Although sharks could be found along the entire length of PBC, the stretch of coastline
between Boynton Inlet and Palm Beach Inlet consistently exhibited the greatest numbers of sharks.
There was no apparent correlation between shark abundance and proximity to inlets or reef structure. In
addition to sharks, seasonal abundance of other large marine vertebrates, including mantas and
manatees, was also quantified, although neither demonstrated the massive aggregations seen in the
sharks. These baseline abundance data can be used as a comparison for future studies to determine if
shark population size is changing and if sharks are restricting their southward migration as global water
temperatures increase. Future studies will employ electronic tagging of sharks to determine the extent of
their movements along the eastern seaboard.



Kakehashi, Ryosuke (Hiroshima university); Kurabayashi, Atsushi (Institute for Amphibian Biology,
Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University, Canada); Oumi, Shohei (Section of Agriculture and
Forest, Amami City Government, Amami, Kagoshima, Canada); Katsuren, Seiki (Okinawa Prefectural
Institute of Health and Environment, Canada); Hoso, Masaki (Netherlands Centre for Biodiversity
'Naturalis', Canada); Sumida, Masayuki (Institute for Amphibian Biology, Graduate School of Science,
Hiroshima University, Canada)

Complete mitochondrial sequences of three Japanese Babina (Ranidae, Anura) species and their
phylogenetic position in Ranidae

Genus Babina of family Ranidae initially consisted of two species (Thompson, 1912), but now includes 10
species (Frost, 2011). Three Babina species (Babina holsti, B. subaspera, and B. okinavana) are
distributed across the Ryukyu archipelago, Japan; the former two species and the latter species have
been listed as class B1 and B1+2 endangered species, respectively, in the IUCN Red List. At present, no
consensus on the phylogenetic position of genus Babina in family Ranidae has been reached. For




                                                                                                           355
example, Stuart (2008) suggested a close affinity between Babina and a ranid group consisting of
Glandirana, Hylarana, and Sanguirana, while Cai et al. (2007) indicated a clade consisting of Babina +
(Rana + Lithobates), and Kurabayashi et al. (2010) favored the monophyly of Babina and Odorrana.
Consequently, the sister taxon, or taxa, of genus Babina remains to be elucidated. To resolve this
phylogenetic problem, we sequenced the entire mitochondrial (mt) genome of three Japanese Babina
species and that of another ranid species (Lithobates catesbeianus). We then performed molecular
phylogenetic analyses with the largest molecular dataset (11,345 bp from 2 ribosomal RNA- and 13
protein-encoding genes) used to date in studies dealing with Babina phylogeny. It is well known that gene
rearrangements in the mt genomes of animals can provide usable phylogenetic information, and frequent
mt gene rearrangements have been observed in phylogenetically nested anurans (including Ranidae
members). Thus, we surveyed mt gene rearrangements in the Babina mt genome. Phylogenetic analyses
(maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference) revealed a monophyly of Babina and Odorrana. Of the
surveyed species, only L. catesbeianus manifested typical neobatrachian-type mt gene organization. In
the B. okinavana mt genome, an additional pseudogene of tRNA-His was observed in the D-loop
downstream region. Furthermore, in B. holsti and B. subaspera, the tRNA-His/ND5 gene block was
translocated from its typical position to the D-loop downstream region, and the translocated tRNA-His
gene became a pseudogene. The tRNA-His/ND5 translocation seems to be a synapomorphy of the two
Babina species (corresponding to the original Babina members). The position (D-loop downstream
region) of the tRNA-His pseudogene is consistent with the derived tRNA-His position reported from the
Odorrana mt genomes. Thus, the mt gene rearrangement observed here supports the monophyly of
Babina and Odorrana. Furthermore, the tandem duplication and random loss model, the traditional model
used for mt gene rearrangement, could be used to explain the mt gene rearrangements observed in
Babina and Odorrana.



Kam, Yeong Choy (Tunghai University); Cheng, Wei Chun (Tunghai University, Taichung, Taiwan);
Chen, Yi Huey (Chinese Culture University, Taipei, Taiwan); Yu, Hon Tsen (National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan); Roberts, Dale (University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia)

Sequential, polygynous double clutching does not produce more offspring in a tree frog with
paternal care

Sequential polygyny is a reproductive strategy that allows males to continue to mate and compensates for
the loss of future breeding opportunities incurred by egg attendance. Using the frog Kurixalus eiffengeri
we tested i) earlier predictions that attending males fathered two, overlapping clutches and ii) that double
clutching leads to improved offspring numbers. Using five microsatellite DNA markers, we genotyped 15
pairs of overlapping clutches which differed slightly in developmental stage. Parentage analyses showed
at least 12 of 15 pairs of overlapping egg clutches were sired by the attending male mated with different
females, providing the first genetic evidence to support an earlier prediction that attending males sired
both egg clutches. Field surveys found a low incidence of overlapping clutches (4.9 % of 263 egg-
occupied stumps), suggesting sequential polygyny is uncommon. Nests with multiple clutches contained
significantly more eggs than nests with single clutches but hatched similar number of tadpoles. Results
suggest that continuous calling that attracts females during egg attendance is a reproductive tactic that
maximizes mating opportunities. However, adoption of the sequential polygyny tactic may only result in
marginal fitness gains for males that are traded off against average higher egg mortality in larger egg
clutches.




                                                                                                        356
Kamei, Rachunliu (Systematics Lab, Department of Environmental Studies, University of Delhi); SD, Biju
(Systematics Lab, Department of Environmental Studies, University of Delhi, Canada)

Northeast India: an overlooked centre of caecilian diversity

Northeast India has traditionally been interpreted as a ‗gateway‘ between biodiversity hotspots rather than
having its own unique biota. Northeast India, a region that spreads across ca. 255,168 sq km , was
shown to contain only four extremely poorly known species of caecilians ever since the accidental
discovery of the first species more than a century ago in 1904. Caecilian-dedicated research in northeast
India was initiated in a backdrop of only 20 museum specimens collected from less than 10 localities. We
conducted soil-digging surveys during 2006–2011 comprising of over 2000 person-hours at more than
300 localities across northeast India and our studies have so far unearthed one new family of caecilians
(Chikilidae), one new genus (Chikila), and at least 20 new candidate species in two families –
Ichthyophiidae and Chikilidae. In addition to revealing hidden caecilian diversity, our morphological and
phylogenetic analyses have also shown that northeast India harbors an ancient lineage, 140 ± ca. 20
million years old, with its closest relatives in Africa. Our findings of chikilids‘ close phylogenetic and
morphological affinities to the African lineage (herpelids) reflects the importance of northeast India as an
important biogeographic unit in understanding vertebrate evolution and Gondwanan biogeography.
Further, the northeast Indian ichthyophiids hold the potential to improve our understanding of the
dispersal routes between the South and Southeast Asian caecilian fauna in this group, and hence that of
terrestrial dispersal in general, by virtue of their geographic location. Results and implications of our
preliminary investigations into the caecilian fauna of the currently poorly documented northeast India
underscores the importance of this region as a potential hotspot of caecilian diversity. However, further
explorations and conservation actions are urgent because the region‘s biodiversity is generally under high
threat from the burgeoning resident human population and rapid deforestation.



Kapfer, Joshua (University of Wisconsin-Whitewater);

The influence of habitat type and the presence of an invasive wetland plant (Phalaris arundinacea)
on capture rates of sympatric rare and common gartersnake species (Thamnophis butleri and T.
sirtalis).

Research that investigates the impact of invasive plants on reptiles, particularly snakes, is sparse.
Butler‘s Gartersnake ( Thamnophis butleri ) is a rare snake, endemic to the upper Midwestern United
States (USA).      Little research has focused on the habitat associations of this snake, which is often
sympatric with the Common Gartersnake ( T. sirtalis ).        The highly invasive wetland grass Phalaris
arundinacea (Reed Canary Grass) has become established or dominant throughout much of the
geographic distributions of these snakes. The impacts of this invasive grass on the habitat associations
of T. butleri and T. sirtalis have not previously been examined. During two years of drift fence surveys
at three survey sites and five habitats sampled in southeastern Wisconsin (USA), we captured 243 adult
T. butleri and 311 adult T. sirtalis. Thamnophis sirtalis was found more often in Reed Canary Grass than
T. butleri , which had more specific habitat preferences and most often occurred in upland habitats,
particularly grassland, rather than wetlands. These findings have important regulatory and conservation
implications for the globally rare T. butleri . For example, our data supports the importance of upland
habitat protection as part of conservation strategies for T. butleri . In addition, management of wetland
habitat for this species must consider the impact of RCG and direct habitat restoration strategies
accordingly.




                                                                                                        357
Karamiani, Rasoul (Razi university); Rastegar-Pouyani, Nasrullah (Razi University, KERMANSHAH,
Canada); Nilson, Göran (Göteborg, Sweden, Sweden, Sweden)

On the Status of Slender Racer Snake Platyceps najadum (Eichwald, 1831) (Reptilia: Colubridae)
in Iran

The genus Platyceps Blyth, 1860 distributed from southern parts of the Balkan Peninsula, Turkey, Syria
to Iran. Four species of this genus occur on the Iranian Plateau as follows: Platyceps karelini (BRANDT,
1838), Platyceps najadum (EICHWALD, 1831), Platyceps rhodorachis (JAN, 1865), and Platyceps
ventromaculatus (GRAY, 1834). Of the above-mentioned species, the Dahl‘s whip snake, Platyceps
najadum (Eichwald, 1831) is distributed from the Adria to the Kopet Dag, Turkmenistan, and extends at
least as far south as the lower Euphrates Valley and the Zagros range in Iran (Schätti et al., 2005) and
consists of six subspecies as follows: Platyceps n. najadum (Eichward, 1831), P. n. schmidtleri (Schätti
and McCarthy, 2001), P. n. atayevi (Tuniyev and Shammakov, 1993) P. n. albitemporalis (Darevsky &
Orlov, 1994), P. n. dahlii (Fitziger, 1826), and P. n. kalymnensis (Schneider, 1979).

 During field work on the herpetofuna of western and southwestern regions of the Iranian Plateau from
June 2008 to September 2010 we collected 50 specimens of Platyceps najadum and also examined the
specimens deposited in the RUZM (Razi University Zoology Museum), and examined based on metric,
meristic and pholidotic characters. The comparisons were indicative of the presence of differences in the
morphology and scaling between Iranian specimens with Turkish specimens that confirmed to separate
them in subspecific level.



Karin, Benjamin (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California); Stubbs, Alexander (Museum
of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California, Canada); Arifin, Umilaela; Iskandar, Djoko (Institut
Teknologi Bandung, Canada); McGuire, Jimmy (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California,
Canada)

Herpetofaunal Survey and Biogeography of Maluku Province, Indonesia

This talk focuses on a herpetofaunal survey undertaken as part of a 4-month field expedition to Indonesia.
Our sampling effort was focused on a series of remote islands in Maluku Province, eastern Indonesia. We
worked on four major island groups – Aru, Kei, Seram, and Banda – that are, nevertheless, rarely visited
by herpetologists, as well as on a series of smaller and very remote islands that form a chain between the
Kei Islands and Seram. These islands have rarely, if ever been visited by herpetologists previously and
were targeted in part because it was unclear a priori which major biogeographic provinces they belong to
(i.e., Maluku, Australo-Papua, or the Lesser Sundas). Our research team collected almost 1000
specimens from 10 islands representing at least 65 species, including at least 3 to 5 species that appear
to be undescribed. In addition to presenting our results on the herpetofaunal composition of these islands,
we present preliminary molecular phylogeographic data for a number of taxa, including Lamprolepis and
Cyrtodactylus, that places these insular populations in a larger biogeographical context. In Addition, we
compare a newly discovered population of Lophognathus found on remote Tam Island to the
phylogenetic findings of Melville et. al. (2010) on Australian and Indonesian populations of
Lophognathus. These findings will be presented in conjunction with a separate talk by Alexander Stubbs,
another member of the research expedition whose talk will focus on Carlia and Lygisauraus skinks.




                                                                                                       358
Karraker, Nancy E. (University of Rhode Island); Dudgeon, David (University of Hong Kong, Canada)

Importance of Amphibians to Streams in South China

Amphibians play important ecological roles and comprise a significant proportion of the community
biomass in some terrestrial and aquatic habitats. Declines in amphibian populations may impact
ecosystems where amphibians are key food web constituents. Our objectives were to delineate the
importance of larval and adult amphibians relative to other aquatic organisms in Hong Kong's streams.
We surveyed streams bi-monthly, quantifying density and biomass of larval amphibians (Paa exilispinosa,
Xenophrys brachykolos), fishes, crustaceans, and insect larvae and conducted monthly mark-recapture
surveys for all adult frogs for one year. Mean biomass of tadpoles was five times higher than decapoda
shrimps and crabs, the second and third most abundant taxa. Densities of tadpoles in pools ranged from
0 - 76 per sq m and averaged 17 per sq m during the study period. Three species of adult frogs were
recorded, ranging in densities from 0.40 – 0.85 frogs per sq m and averaging 0.50 per sq m. Despite
harboring the highest human densities in the world and associated pollution, hillslope streams in Hong
Kong are relatively well-protected and contain some of the highest reported densities of tadpoles and
adult frogs. Declines of streams amphibians in this region would result in the loss of the most important
herbivores and predators in these streams and possibly a significant source of prey for other stream-
dwelling animals.



Karst, Tanya (Victoria University of Wellington); Bell, Ben (Victoria University of Wellington, Canada)

Mitigation of mortality in a translocated rare New Zealand frog (Leiopelma pakeka)

The remaining natural population of the threatened New Zealand frog Leiopelma pakeka occurs in only
16 ha of regenerating forest on Maud Island in the Marlborough Sounds, New Zealand, where an
estimated 19,000-34,000 frogs occur. This population has been the source of a series of translocations,
and here we review the history and future prospects for the first NZ mainland translocation into the Karori
Sanctuary, Wellington, which has had mixed success. While transferred frogs survived well in mesh forest
enclosures, breeding over four successive seasons, those individuals released into the adjacent forest
failed to establish. To investigate this failure, we consider those factors most likely to contribute to such
apparent mortality. These include potential predators, such as the invasive house mouse, Mus musculus,
as well as birds that forage on the forest floor, including the little spotted kiwi, Apteryx owenii . We review
possible steps that might be taken to mitigate threats to the frog in Karori Sanctuary in the future, so that
a wild population might be established there. This would provide empirical evidence necessary to support
the proliferation and expansion of L. pakeka to other sites in New Zealand.



Kasperoviczus, Karina (University of São Paulo); Braz, Henrique B. (University of São Paulo, Canada);
Almeida-Santos, Selma (Butantan Institute, Canada)

Life-history variation in island populations of the Bothrops jararaca complex (Serpentes,
Viperidae)

Island species often show different life-history traits compared to their mainland relatives. Body size
variation is certainly one of the most commonly documented. In snakes, body size influences important
reproductive parameters as sexual maturity and fecundity. Hence, variation in body size also implies
variation in several aspects of life history. Here, we investigate body size variation and its influence on
sexual maturity and litter size in island populations of the Bothrops jararaca complex ( B. jararaca, B.



                                                                                                           359
alcatraz and B. insularis ). Data for adult body size, litter size and body size at maturity were obtained
from 321 preserved specimens from four island populations: B. jararaca from Búzios Island (BI) and
Ilhabela (II), B. alcatraz from Alcatrazes Island (AI) and B. insularis from Queimada Grande Island (QI)
and compared with a mainland population of their closest relative: B. jararaca from São Paulo city (SP).
Female body size differed among populations. B. jararaca females (SP, BI and II) did not differ in mean
body size, however they were larger than B. insularis (QI) and B. alcatraz (AI). Adult B. insularis were
larger than B. alcatraz. Litter size was influenced by maternal body size and differed among populations.
Litter size did not differ among SP, II and BI populations but it was higher than the island populations from
QI (mean = 7.9) and AI (mean = 2.7). Litter size in B. alcatraz was smaller than other populations. This
interpopulational variation in litter size is likely a result of the variation in the maternal body size. After
removing body size effects litter size did not vary among populations. Mean adult body also size
influenced body size at maturity. Minimum body size at maturity increases as mean adult body size
increases: mean adult body size explains 80% of the variation of body size at maturity. In general,
females attain sexual maturity with body size between 69% (II) and 95% (BI) of the mean adult body size.
Body size at sexual maturity varied among populations. B. jararaca females from SP and II and B.
insularis females (QI) attain sexual maturity with similar body sizes (relative to mean body sizes) (mean =
74%). B. alcatraz female mature at 81% of the mean body sizes and B. jararaca (Búzios) at 95%.
Thus, B. alcatraz and B. jararaca (BI) seem adopt the strategy of delaying maturity in relation to B.
insularis and B. jararaca from SP and II. Such late maturity provides attain relatively large body sizes at
maturity.



Kasperoviczus, Karina (University of São Paulo); Sueiro, Leticia; Santos, Juliana (University of São
Paulo, Canada); Almeida-Santos, Selma (Butantan Institute, Canada)

Ultrasonographic evaluation of the follicular dynamics in the golden lancehead, Bothrops
insularis, maintained in captivity

Information on squamates follicular dynamics is usually obtained from the dissection of several preserved
females. However, this approach may be difficult for those species poorly represented in museums,
especially threatened taxa. Ultrasonography is a non-invasive, secure and low-priced technique that may
be used alternatively to evaluate the functions of the reproductive tract. The golden lancehead Bothrops
insularis is an endemic snake from the Queimada Grande Island, Brazil. It is included in the red list of
IUCN as critically endangered. The Butantan Institute holds the project ‗Conservation of the golden
lancehead, Bothrops insularis ‘ (IBAMA: permit 25650-1) in which 40 adult individuals (20 males, 20
females) are kept in captivity since March 2010. Here, we used portable ultrasonography in combination
with abdominal palpation of follicles/eggs to assess the female reproductive status. Initially, we combined
both palpation and ultrasonagraphy. Palpation reliably revealed enlarged follicles but did not distinguish
between vitellogenesis and pregnancy. Therefore, we used frequent palpation throughout the year to
distinguish reproductive activity of any kind and periodic ultrasonography to verify palpation findings.
Ultrasonographic evaluations performed in September and October revealed in all females (n = 20) oval
structures, with low echogenicity measuring between 16 and 25 mm; characteristic of vitellogenic follicles.
Such structures were also observed in 11 females in December and in two females in February. However,
in one female additionally to the oval hypoechogenic oval structures, we also visualized oval
hyperechogenic and homogeneous structures, suggesting that such a structure rather than being
composed by liquid it is probably composed by connective/fibrous tissue or by fat. Later, this female
oviposited 13 atresic eggs in five different oviposition events. The follicles showed rigid consistency,
weighed from 0.53 to 2.40 g and measured from 6.52 to 26.28 mm in length. The data of follicular
dynamic presented confirms the reproductive cycle previously described for the species with



                                                                                                           360
vitellogenesis occurring between March and September. Moreover, these data suggest that even in
captivity and in the lack of contact with males, individual females did not lose the timing of reproductive
events. However, some individuals, for unknown causes, ovulate and oviposit atresic follicles, while
others seem to reabsorb the follicles and not ovulate.



Kathriner, Andrew (Villanova University);

New species of bent-toed gecko (Squamata: Gekkonidae: Cyrtodactylus) from East Timor

Recent investigations into the herpetofauna of East Timor have yielded several new species of bent-toed
geckos (Cyrtodactylus). Although known from elsewhere in the Lesser Sundas, members of this genus
were previously unknown from East Timor, which has long been herpetologically neglected. Collections
from 3 of the 13 administrative districts in the country yielded 27 Cyrtodactylus specimens representing
four putatively new species. In order to assess the phylogenetic position of these taxa and delimit species
boundaries we incorporated all samples into a larger molecular phylogeny of the genus, including
representatives of all major subclades. We applied maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and
Bayesian inference methods to analyze data from one mitochondrial DNA locus (ND2) and several
nuclear loci. All new taxa fall within a broader clade that also includes other Lesser Sunda species, as
well as the recently described C. kimberleyensis from Western Australia. They do not, however, form a
monophyletic group within this clade, suggesting more than one colonization of Timor. The colonization of
Australia from Timor is also supported by our data. All Timorese Cyrtodactylus, as well as most other
members of the larger clade to which they belong are characterized by small size (< 75 mm SVL) and
similar scalation and color pattern. Further investigation into the remaining unsurveyed districts of East
Timor may yield additional undescribed species of Cyrtodactylus . Until now the biodiversity of East
Timor has been under estimated, largely because of the nation‘s turbulent recent history.



Katzenberger, Marco (Estación Biológica de Doñana); Hammond, John (University of New Mexico,
Canada); Tejedo, Miguel (Estación Biológica de Doñana, Canada); Calabuig, Cecilia (Universidade
Federal de Rio Grande do Sul, Canada); Relyea, Rick (University of Pittsburgh, Canada)

Swimming your way through predators and pesticides: How the presence of a predator and a
pesticide affects the thermal physiology of an anuran

Most organims, in their natural environment, present a range of phenotypes which result from the
combination of both natural selection and environmental induction. Predation is a pervasive process in
nature that causes selection on, and induction of, prey phenotypes, such as altering morphology. The
presence of predatory stress induces considerable morphological changes in Grey Treefrog Hyla
versicolor tadpoles. Also, Relyea (2012) discovered that a pesticide (herbicide) was capable of inducing
changes in tadpole morphology in a direction and magnitude that appeared to mimic the adaptive
morphological changes induced by predators. To determine how this predator and herbicide-induced
plasticity affects the thermal physiology of the Grey Treefrog , we raised tadpoles in mesocosms, under
four different treatments (control, predator, pesticide, predator+pesticide), using dragonfly nymphs (Anax
sp.) as predators and Roundup Power Max as pesticide. For studying the thermal physiology, we
determined the upper critical thermal maximum (CTmax), using a slightly modified version of Hutchison‘s
dynamic method, and thermal performance curves (TPCs) based on locomotor performance (burst
swimming speed). Tadpoles in treatments which included the presence of predatory stress had
significantly higher CTmax. However, there was no visible effect of the pesticide on CTmax. Optimum



                                                                                                        361
temperature (Topt) appears to be very similar between treatments and tadpoles with only pesticide cues
show slightly lower Topt. Tadpoles in all induced treatments were always faster than in control, as
expected due to the morphological changes, indicating a vertical shift of the curves. Furthermore, the
increase in burst speed was higher around the optimum temperature, indicating a change in the shape of
the curve (specialist-generalist trade-off). This specialist-generalist change seems to be more evident in
the predator treatment. Although predator and pesticide cues have a similar effect on morphology, there
are considerable differences when it comes to thermal physiology. If the presence of this pesticide
significantly lowers Topt, there could be important ecological effects, especially considering the predicted
increase in environmental temperatures due to climate change.



Kawai, Ushio (Texas Tech University); Mori, Akira (Kyoto University, Canada); Horita, Juske (Texas
Tech University, Canada); Hori, Michio (Kyoto University, Canada); Perry, Gad (Texas Tech University,
Canada)

Analysis of diet and trophic position of lizards in a dry forest of northwestern Madagascar, using
stomach contents, feces, and stable isotopes

Madagascar is one of the hottest biodiversity hotspots and contains over 400 species of reptiles, and
many of them endemic. The Malagasy forest is rapidly disappearing because of clearing and other human
activities, making conservation of flora and fauna an international priority. Many studies of reptilian
taxonomy and biogeography have been conducted, but ecological studies are few. During the rainy
season (November to March) of 2009-2012, we conducted a dietary study of lizards living in a dry forest
of northwestern Madagascar. The study focused on four diurnal species ( Lygodactylus tolampyae,
Oplurus cuvieri , Phelsuma kochi, and Zonosaurus laticaudatus) and one nocturnal species (
Blaesodactylus ambonihazo) in disturbed and less disturbed habitat in Ankarafantsika National Park.
Diets were examined by stomach flushing and feces, and stable isotope ratio was analyzed to determine
their trophic positions. Stomach contents and feces analysis showed that the lizards mainly utilize
invertebrates, predominantly insects such as Hymenoptera and Coleoptera but also plant materials such
as fruits. The results of stable isotope analysis indicated that trophic dynamics of these lizard species
differed between habitats.



Keall, Susan (Victoria University of Wellington); Refsnider, Jeanine (Iowa State University, Canada);
Daugherty, Charles (Victoria University of Wellington, Canada); Godfrey, Stephanie (Murdoch University,
Canada); Moore, Jennifer (Michigan State University, Canada); Nelson, Nicola (Victoria University of
Wellington, Canada)

Female tuatara minimize effort/risk by migrating to the closest nesting rookery

Preservation of all necessary resources and habitat components is critical for the conservation of island
species that are unable to disperse. Migrations between residence and nesting habitat can exact high
costs on individual females, and may have population demographic consequences in cases where female
mortality during nesting migrations is high. Tuatara are the sole representatives of the reptilian order
Rhynchocephalia, and natural populations are restricted to 32 offshore islands in New Zealand; thus,
conservation of this unique species requires precise knowledge of habitat use and requirements on these
islands. We examined patterns in nesting migrations of the largest tuatara population, occurring on
Stephens Island, New Zealand, over five years. We found that only about 7% of female tuatara lived in
the rookery in which they nested, with most females instead migrating to a nesting rookery from their




                                                                                                        362
residential area. However, most females minimized the distance travelled on nesting migrations by
nesting in a rookery adjacent to their residential area. Females that travel further to nest likely incur
greater energetic costs. Moreover, because nesting habitat on Stephens Island is not limited but high-
quality home territories likely are, we hypothesize that female tuatara nest in the closest available nesting
habitat to minimize the likelihood of losing their territory to conspecifics while on nesting migrations.



Keehn, Jade (University of Nevada, Reno); Nieto, Nathan; Tracy, C Richard (University of Nevada,
Reno, Canada); Gienger, Chris (Austin Peay State University, Canada); Feldman, Chris (University of
Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV, United States)

Isolation at Work: Body Size Divergence between the Reptiles of Anaho Island and the mainland
of Pyramid Lake, Nevada

The "Island Rule" predicts that small animals that colonize islands will evolve larger body sizes, while the
reverse is expected to occur for large animals that colonize islands. However, the Island Rule is
controversial, with inconsistent and even contradictory trends reported for differing taxa, including reptiles.
We test the Island Rule in a reptile community isolated on a desert island-- Anaho Island in Pyramid Lake,
Nevada. Using live and museum specimens from Anaho Island and proximal mainland populations, we
examine whether size differences have accumulated in one snake and four lizards (Crotalus oreganus,
Callisaurus draconoides, Aspidoscelis tigris, Sceloporus occidentalis, Sceloporus uniformis ). In
addiction, we examine deviations in allometries and body scaring to make inferences about dietary shifts
and changes in predation pressure or competition between island and mainland populations, and whether
these mechanisms can explain the Island Rule in our system.



Keely, Claire (The University of Melbourne); Hale, Joshua (Museum Victoria, Canada); Parris, Kirsten;
Heard, Geoff (The University of Melbourne, Canada); Melville, Jane (Museum Victoria, Canada); Hamer,
Andrew (Australian Research Centre for Urban Ecology, Canada)

Conservation genetics of an endangered Australian frog in an urbanising landscape

Urbanisation is a leading cause of species extinctions worldwide and is considered a major threat to
global biodiversity. Recently proposed urban growth boundaries will increase the extent of Melbourne,
Australia by an additional 40,000 hectares. The endangered Growling Grass Frog ( Litoria raniformis )
will be directly impacted by Melbourne‘s urban expansion over the next few decades. Remnant
populations of this frog occur throughout the proposed urban growth areas, and the species is known to
be sensitive to habitat fragmentation caused by urbanisation. We assessed the genetic structure of
remnant populations of L. raniformis across Melbourne‘s urban fringe. Tissue samples were collected
from 270 individuals across the south-west, west and south-east regions of the city, and combined with a
further 179 samples obtained previously from northern Melbourne. Haplotype composition and diversity
were determined by sequencing a fragment of the mitochondrial gene, COI. In total, 24 distinct
haplotypes were represented. Shared haplotypes and low levels of diversity were observed between
populations distributed across Melbourne‘s north. In contrast, populations in the south-east were
composed largely of unique haplotypes and showed the greatest level of diversity.

Microsatellite-based analyses were used to examine population structure within northern Melbourne.
Structuring was high, suggesting restricted gene flow both between and within population clusters
(metapopulations). Gene flow in this system appears curtailed by strongly distance-limited dispersal and
by urban barriers.     Information acquired during this project will be integrated into models of



                                                                                                           363
metapopulation viability for L. raniformis around Melbourne, and used to inform decisions concerning
reserve design, translocations and re-introductions.



Keevil, Matthew G. (Laurentian University); Brooks, Ronald J. (University of Guelph, Canada); Litzgus,
Jacqueline D. (Laurentian University, Canada)

Investigating the trade-off between short-term reproductive effort and somatic growth in a
northern population of Snapping Turtles (Chelydra serpentina).

The morphology of turtles (i.e. the rigid shell) implies that individuals have an inherent body-size-
dependent constraint on their ability to increase annual reproductive output in response to periods of high
resource availability, especially when clutch frequency cannot be more than annual as a result of
seasonal limitations. Growth in body size in Snapping Turtles ( Chelydra serpentina ) at Algonquin Park,
Ontario, continues for several years after the first clutch is laid. This growth may result from annual
resource acquisition that exceeds the physical limit that can be invested in the current clutch given body
size constraints, or investment in growth (and future reproductive value) may be prioritized over
investment in the next clutch. We hypothesized that variation in annual resource acquisition and
assimilation due to environmental fluctuations will be partitioned into either variation in annual
reproductive investment or variation in somatic growth, with the more prioritised component displaying
less variation. If female Snapping Turtles prioritize investment in proximal reproductive effort over somatic
growth and future reproductive potential, then we predict that variance in clutch mass will not be higher
when growth rates are high, as during the years following the first reproductive event. However, if
individuals preferentially allocate resources towards maintaining somatic growth and future reproductive
potential, then we predict that clutch mass will show greater variation when growth rates are high. We
report preliminary results of an investigation into this relationship between variation in clutch mass and
somatic growth rate following maturity.



Keevil, Matthew G. (Laurentian University); Brooks, Ronald J. (University of Guelph, Canada); Litzgus,
Jacqueline D. (Laurentian University, Canada)

Twenty-two years later: A lack of density dependent compensation and no evidence for recovery
after a mortality event in an undisturbed population of Snapping Turtles (Chelydra serpentina).

Density dependent compensation includes a collection of mechanisms that permit population stability and
recovery from perturbations in population density. However, the importance of density dependence for
population regulation of long-lived organisms can be difficult to assess because demographic responses
operate over long temporal scales. Consequently, density dependent compensation in turtle populations
has been infrequently tested. We used data from a long-term mark-recapture and nest monitoring study
of Snapping Turtles ( Chelydra serpentina ) in Algonquin Provincial Park, Ontario, to assess population
recovery over two decades following a major natural mortality event that occurred between 1986 and
1989. We sought evidence for density dependent compensation by comparing survival, fecundity,
immigration, individual growth, and recruitment at initial and subsequent low density. If density affects
realized patch quality then we predicted that there would be a compensatory response in one or more of
these vital rates. Additionally, if dispersal in Snapping Turtles is mediated by resource competition, then
emigration will be negligible after a decrease in density and recruitment of dispersing individuals will
increase. Conversely, if inbreeding avoidance is the primary selective pressure causing dispersal then
both emigration and immigration are predicted to occur independently of changes in patch saturation. We



                                                                                                         364
found no evidence of density dependent compensation in any of the vital rates examined and no
indications of population recovery. The estimated population size of nesting females declined from 59
(95% CI = ± 9) the year before to 29 (95% CI = ± 9) the year after the mortality event. In 2010 the
population size was 23 (95% CI = ± 8) individuals. The estimated survivorship of nesting females in the
most supported Jolly-Seber model (0.95, 95% CI = ± 0.015) did not differ before and after the mortality
event. There was no positive change in relative clutch size or mass. Our observations also suggest a
continuing high rate of dispersal in our population and low recruitment from immigration. This lack of
density dependence and extremely slow or absent recovery has important consequences for
conservation and management. The insensitivity of dispersal to population density has additional
implications for populations in fragmented habitats where dispersal mortality is likely to be much higher.



Kelehear, Crystal (The University of Sydney); Brown, Gregory; Shine, Richard (The University of
Sydney, Camperdown, Australia)

Rapid evolution of parasite life history traits on an expanding range-edge

Ecologists and evolutionary biologists often make the simplifying assumption that the systems they study
are in spatial equilibrium, but this assumption is regularly violated in the natural world, as populations
often expand and contract in time and space. For instance, species invasions are generally coupled with
range expansions or contractions, which in turn, drive rapid evolutionary change. Cane toads (Rhinella
marina) are currently expanding their invasive Australian range with increasing rapidity – facilitated by
evolved increases in dispersal ability. Whilst there is growing evidence that range advance can induce
rapid evolutionary change in vertebrates, there is no evidence that similar changes are taking place in the
parasites of these expanding vertebrates, yet similar forces should be at work. We studied a parasitic
lung nematode native to South America that was introduced to Australia with the founder cane toads. We
collected parasites from across a gradient of cane toad invasion history from the range-edge to the
population core and exposed them to toads in a common garden to identify life‐history traits that facilitate
parasite range expansion. We conclude that range-edge parasites invest in few large offspring that are
better equipped to survive in an environment where host density is low, as is the case at an expanding
range edge.



Kenaley, Christopher (Harvard University);

A Device for Dampening Drag: A Novel Hypothesis for the Function of Enormous Fangs in Deep-
sea Fishes

Many deep-sea fishes possess spectacular morphologies that enable the capture of large prey in a
seascape devoid of biomass. Perhaps the most distinctive feeding morphologies of deep-sea teleosts are
enormous fangs set on extremely long jaws. Although the functional significance of these phenotypes has
long been assumed (e.g., caging or impaling devices), no single study has addressed what functional
advantages enormous fangs confer. In recent years, a handful of studies have employed theoretical
models to predict feeding performance and to describe the dynamic forces associated with jaw adduction
in deep-sea fishes. These studies have demonstrated that the most important force opposing jaw
adduction in long-jawed, deep-sea taxa, namely drag, differs substantially from that of shallow-water taxa,
namely inertia of the lower-jaw system. As a corollary, any prey item put in motion by the jaws of a deep-
sea predator might impose much greater negative forces associated with drag and that this might alter
adduction performance considerably. Based on these insights and a series of feeding simulations for



                                                                                                        365
several species of the dragonfish family Stomiidae, a new hypothesis is proposed for the function of
enormous fangs of deep-sea fishes. A theoretical model that accounts for mass and the hydrodynamic
properties of typical dragonfish prey items predicts that fangs function to optimally position prey in such a
manner that reduces negative forces acting on the lower jaw. These results demonstrate that without
optimal positioning by long teeth, the capacity of dragonfishes to consume large prey items is severely
diminished.



Kendall, Neala (University of Washington); Heino, Mikko (University of Bergen, Canada); Dieckmann, Ulf
(International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis, Canada); Punt, Andre; Quinn, Thomas (University of
Washington, Canada)

Plasticity and microevolution contribute to changes in age and size at maturation of Alaskan
sockeye salmon under size-selective harvest

Spatial and temporal variation in life history traits, including age and size at maturation, can be influenced
by natural environmental and anthropogenic processes, including size-selective exploitation. Such life
history trait changes can be mediated by phenotypic plasticity and genetic evolution. Wild population
complexes of sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) in Bristol Bay, Alaska have become smaller at a
given age over the last half-decade but their age composition has not changed. These fish have been
intensely harvested by a size-selective gillnet fishery since 1900 that has usually caught larger than
average fish, but selection has varied over time. Marked changes in both freshwater and ocean
conditions have occurred over this time period. We estimated probabilistic maturation reaction norms
(PMRNs) for males and females in nine discrete populations over 50 years to quantify differences in
maturation length thresholds and evaluate whether fishery selection contributed to microevolutionary
changes in maturation length. PMRNs decreased over time for six of nine spawning populations and
differed among spawning populations and between males and females. We conclude that environmental
changes in the ocean (decreased growth rates) have likely combined with adaptive microevolution
(decreased maturation length thresholds) to produce the observed length and age at maturation patterns.
PMRNs did not decrease in all populations perhaps because of variable size-selective fishing, less size-
selective exploitation, and lower rates of exploitation. Managers and scientists can incorporate
evolutionary considerations, track further changes in age and size at maturation, and consider the
important differences in key traits among locally adapted populations for continued sustainability.



Kendell, Kris (Alberta Conservation Association);

Northern Leopard Frog (Lithobates pipiens) Recovery Program in Alberta, Canada: Insights from
10 Years of Translocations

Alberta Conservation Association is a member of a provincial recovery team that is responsible for
facilitating, monitoring, and evaluating the conservation and recovery of the northern leopard frog (NLF)
(Lithobates pipiens) in Alberta. The team is guided by Alberta Fish and Wildlife and team members and
associated organizations are responsible for implementation of actions and strategies that are outlined in
the recovery plan to restore and maintain the species for future generations. A number of actions have
been designed to meet the objectives of the NLF recovery plan including: population and habitat
monitoring, reintroductions, habitat protection, and outreach initiatives. Several reintroductions have been
attempted in Alberta to re-establish the NLF in select areas. Between 1999 and 2010 we attempted two
approaches for reintroduction: head-starting and egg translocation. Reintroduction efforts using egg



                                                                                                          366
translocations have demonstrated some success. A self-sustaining NLF population has been achieved at
one site. In 2011, we observed introduced frogs from previous releases at four additional reintroduction
sites, including evidence of successful breeding. To help direct reintroductions, a genetic diversity and
structure study was undertaken to determine the genetic suitability of potential source populations. A
disease surveillance project was also undertaken to minimize disease transmission between amphibian
species during reintroductions and to determine the presence of amphibian disease, such as ―chytrid‖
fungus (Batrachochytrium dendobatidis), prior to reintroductions.



Kerr, Kaety (Hofstra University); Burke, Russell (Hofstra University, Hempstead, United States)

Lizards as hosts of Lyme-disease vectors in South Carolina

Host species composition and utilization by ticks may be important factors affecting the prevalence of
Lyme disease. In association with a larger NSF-funded study, the goal of our project was to measure host
species composition (particularly lizards) and their associated tick burdens. We examined the distribution
of larval and nymphal black-legged ticks ( Ixodes scapularis ) on hosts at the Savannah River Site (SRS)
in South Carolina from spring 2010 through spring 2012. We used a wide array of host capture methods,
replicated at three SRS sites. Methods included traditional methods such as Sherman traps, drift fences
with pitfall arrays, and cover boards, as well as burlap bands targeting arboreal lizards. All seven species
of lizards captured were parasitized by I. scapularis . Tick burden counts conducted in the field were
verified by holding animals in the lab. The techniques differed in their efficacy in catching tick hosts.
Methods most effective in capturing skinks ( Plestiodon ) were cover boards, pitfalls, hand captures, and
burlap bands, respectively. Burlap bands were highly effective for capturing arboreal species including
Anolis carolinensis and Sceloporus undulatus. Aspidoscelis sexlineata were only caught in pitfall traps.
Plestiodon fasciatus, P. laticeps, and P. inexpectatus had the highest tick burdens, and therefore were
the most important hosts. Ixodes nymph abundance peaked in April on Plestiodon with an average of
4.4 nymphs per skink and tapered off throughout the summer. Ixodes larvae were found on Plestiodon
from May to July with an average of 3.75 larvae per skink. Conversely, mice had much lower nymphal
and larval burdens throughout the summer. Between April and September when lizards are most active,
56% of Plestiodon captured were parasitized by juvenile ticks, whereas only 4% of mice were parasitized.
The difference in I. scapularis host utilization and the frequent occurrence of ticks on lizards suggests
possible differences in I. scapularis behavior in the southeast compared to the northern U.S. If juvenile
I.scapularis are questing for lizards in leaf litter and not on vegetation as in the north, human encounters
with ticks would be lowered.



Kessel, Steven (University of Windsor); Gruber, Samuel (Bimini Biological Field Station Foundation,
Miami, FL, United States); Franks, Bryan (Rollins College, Winter Park, FL, United States); Gedamke,
Todd (National Marine Fisheries Service, Miami, FL, United States); Chapman, Demian (Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, NY, United States)

"Acoustic fishing" - filling the gaps in acoustic coverage

Acoustic monitors have been used for many years to study various aspects marine organism life-history,
including residence, movement and migration.          Study species are issued with an acoustic transmitter
and an array of acoustic monitors is established in their suspected habitat/home-range.         The biggest
shortfall of this system is that data can only be collect when the study animals are within acoustic range of
a monitor. Without using additional techniques you cannot conclusively determine where they are the



                                                                                                         367
rest of the time.    In Jupiter, Florida, we have been using an array of Vemco VR2W monitors to track
lemon sharks ( Negaprion brevirostris ) since 2007.        Monitor placements were based either on diver
reports or best guesses of where the lemon sharks may spend their time. Other areas the animals use,
but not covered by reports or predictions, would not be revealed under the normal use of this technology.
To overcome this shortfall we employed a new technique labelled ‗acoustic fishing‘. Acoustic fishing is
the act of moving a monitor, or several monitors, through the marine environment to search for
acoustically tagged animals. The location of detections can later be extrapolated by matching the time
and date of the detection to the locations recorded by the associated GPS logger. We have employed
acoustic fishing in two different formats; 1) a monitor hung over the side of the vessel whist hook and line
fishing for lemon sharks. This not only has the potential to identify new areas of habitat use, but also
tells us if any (and which) previously acoustically tagged sharks were in the vicinity of our fishing efforts
but not captured. 2) We conducted focused acoustic fishing trips by drifting six monitors perpendicular
to shore, providing a more structured method for identifying new areas of use within the study region.
Acoustic fishing revealed up to 18 acoustically tagged sharks in the fishing area without a single re-
capture, indicating sharks may be avoiding the fishing gear after their initial capture event.      Focused
acoustic fishing trips supported theories of seasonal lemon shark presence in the region and also
provided additional data for other research projects using acoustic telemetry. Acoustic fishing is a cost
effect method for revealing new locations used by the study species and a good tool for identifying
potential new sites for fixed monitor deployments.



Khan, Zaheer (Department of Zoology, University of Karachi); Hussain, Babar (Canada)

Population status and distribution of reptiles in coastal areas of Karachi

Pakistan derives its marine resources from the Arabian Sea, which has a coastline of 1050 km and lying
in the Sindh and Balochistan provinces. Sindh and Balochistan coasts have different physical and climatic
characteristics. Karachi coast is an important area for reptiles. It has the marine, muddy, sandy and rocky
habitats having special significance in the distinct natural environment in the tropical region of southern
Pakistan. The reptiles of Pakistan are a blend of Palearctic, Indo-Malayan and Ethiopian forms, and have
179 species consisting of lizards, snakes, turtles, tortoises, crocodile and gavial. The important sites on
the Karachi coast for the reptiles are Manora, Sandspit, Hawkesbay and Cape Monze areas. The present
study was carried out between 2006-2011 covering four selected areas, total thirty reptilian species was
recorded including ten lizards species such as Tree Lizard (Calotes versicolor versicolor), Spotted Barn
Gecko (Hemidactylus brooki), Yellow Bellied Common House Gecko (Hemidactylus flaviviridis), Persian
House Gecko (Hemidactylus persicus), Blotched House Gecko(Hamidactylus triedrus), Mediterranean
House Gecko (Hamidactylus turcicus), Blue Tail Sand Lizard (Acanthodactylus cantoris), Spotted Lacerta
(Mesalina watsonana), and Bengal Monitor (Varanus bengalensis), Desert Monitor (Varanus griseus).
Seventeen snakes species viz. Beaked Sea Snake(Enhydrina schistosa), Blue Green Sea Snake
(Hydrophis caerulescens), Annulated Sea Snake (Hydrophis cyanocinctus), Persian Sea Snake
(Hydrophis lapemoides), Broad Band Sea Snake (Hydrophis mamillaris), Reef Sea Snake (Hydrophis
ornatus), Yellow Sea Snake (Hydrophis spiralis), Pygmy Sea Snake (Lapemis curtus), Spotted Small
Headed Sea Snake (Microcephalophis cantrois), Pelagic Sea Snake (Pelamis platurus), Spotted Viperine
Sea Snake (Praescutata viperina), Blotched Diadem Snake (Sphalerosophis diadema diadema), Cliff
Racer (Platyceps rhodorachis), Saw-scaled Viper (Echis carinatus) Black Cobra (Naja naja) Indian Sand
Boa (Eryx johnii johnii) and Glossy bellied Racer (Coluber Ventromaculatus), and three turtles species
Green Turtle (Chelonia mydas), Olive Ridley (Lepidochelys olivacea), and Hawksbill Turtle (Eretmochelys
imbricata). Along the Karachi Coast, a new Green Turtle nesting site was discovered near Mubarak
Village, an area of difficult access approximately 25 km from Hawkesbay. During 2010- 11, first time 3



                                                                                                         368
new species Desert Monitor, Indian Sand Boa and Glossy bellied Racer were recorded in the Manora,
Hawkesbay and Capemonze areas. Based on current data Green Turtles (Chelonia mydas) were the
most commonly reported species throughout our study period, while Olive Ridley (Lepidochelys olivacea)
has not been recorded since 2005. It has disappeared from the Karachi Coast most probably due to 2003
oil spill. During the surveyed we noted that habitat degradation a main threat at coastal areas of Karachi.



Kielgast, Jos (University of Copenhagen, Natural History Museum of Denmark); Francis Thomsen, Philip
(University of Copenhagen, Natural History Museum of Denmark, Centre for GeoGenetics, Copenhagen,
Denmark); Lønsmann Iversen, Lars (University of Copenhagen, Section for Freshwater biology, Hillerød,
Denmark); Willerslev, Eske (University of Copenhagen, Natural History Museum of Denmark, Centre for
GeoGenetics, Copenhagen, Denmark)

How to study your favourite organism in the field without the distress of finding it first?

Freshwater ecosystems are among the most endangered habitats on Earth, with thousands of animal
species known to be threatened or already extinct. Reliable monitoring of threatened organisms is crucial
for data-driven conservation actions but remains a challenge owing to nonstandardized methods that
depend on practical and taxonomic expertise, which is rapidly declining. Here, we show that a diversity of
rare and threatened freshwater animals—representing amphibians, fish, mammals, insects and
crustaceans—can be detected and quantified based on DNA obtained directly from small water samples
of lakes, ponds and streams. We successfully validate our findings in a controlled mesocosm experiment
and show that DNA becomes undetectable within 2 weeks after removal of animals, indicating that DNA
traces are near contemporary with presence of the species. We further demonstrate that entire faunas of
amphibians and fish can be detected by high-throughput sequencing of DNA extracted from pond water.
Our findings underpin the ubiquitous nature of DNA traces in the environment and establish
environmental DNA as a tool for monitoring rare and threatened species across a wide range of
taxonomic groups.



Kim, Jin Koo (Pukyong National University); Kwun, Hyuck Joon; Ji, Hwan Sung (Pukyong National
University, Canada)

Phylogeography of Mugil cephalus and Ammodytes personatus around the Korean peninsula:
evidence of a biogeographic barrier

Korea is bounded by water on the east (East Sea), west (Yellow Sea) and south (East China Sea), and
each of these seas are characterized by unique marine environments differing from each other. The
mean water depth varies from a maximum of 1,684 meters in the East Sea to only 44 meters in the
Yellow Sea. In the middle part of the East Sea, there is the stable polar front formed by the intersection
of the East Korean Warm Current (EKWC), which is higher in temperature and salinity, and the North
Korean Cold Current (NKCC). In the Yellow Sea, the Yellow Sea Bottom Cold Water (YSBCW) is
characterized by low temperature, low salinity and abundant suspended solids under the influence of
influx water from the Han River, Geum River, Youngsan River from Korea and Yangtze River from China.
Jeju Island and the southern part of Korea are directly affected by the high temperature and salinity of the
Tsushima Warm Current (TWC), a separated branch of the Kuroshio Warm Current (KWC). In particular,
Jeju Island is influenced by diverse water masses that include the Chinese Continental Coastal Water
(CCCW), YSBCW, Jeju Warm Current (JWC) and Korean Coastal Water. The diverse topography and
characteristics of these currents likely contribute to observed fish diversity as well as the biogeographic




                                                                                                        369
barrier in this region. There are four hypotheses regarding circulation patterns in the East China and
Yellow Seas suggested by Nitani (1972), Beardsley et al. (1985), Lie et al. (1998) and Lie and Cho
(2002). In order to clarify which hypothesis is closest to nature, we investigated molecular and
morphological differences among local populations of Mugil cephalus and Ammodytes personatus
around the Korean peninsula.



Kim, Sora (University of Wyoming); Casper, Dave (University of California, Santa Cruz, Canada);
Martínez del Rio, Carlos (University of Wyoming, Canada); Hoen, Danielle; Popp, Brian (University of
Hawaii, Canada); Koch, Paul (University of California, Santa Cruz, Canada)

Discrimination factors and incorporation rates for carbon and nitrogen isotopes from a long term
feeding study with sharks

Stable isotope analysis has provided insight to the dietary and habitat patterns of many birds, mammals,
and teleost fish. Crucial biological parameters to interpret field stable isotope data are discrimination
factors and tissue incorporation rates, which are not well studied in large vertebrate ectotherms. Sharks
have a unique physiology and a carnivorous diet, which likely affect their metabolic biochemistry and
these biological parameters. Because sharks have relatively slow metabolic rates and are difficult to
maintain in captivity, no long-term feeding study until isotopic steady state with a diet has been
conducted. Leopard sharks ( Triakis semifasciata ) were fed controlled diets for 3½ years in captivity. The
control group ate a constant diet of squid and the experimental group was switched to tilapia, an
isotopically distinct diet. Plasma, red blood cell, and muscle isotopic values were monitored throughout
the experiment to calculate discrimination factors and incorporation rates. Although discrimination factors
were similar to mammalian carnivores, tissue incorporation rates were an order of magnitude slower than
previously published studies. This discrepancy is likely due to the relatively slow metabolic rate of
ectotherms and large size of these leopard sharks in comparison to other feeding study subjects.
Furthermore, discrimination factors for liver, skin, and vertebrae were estimated for bulk tissue isotopic
compositions and for individual amino acids from white muscle tissue for individuals collected at the
experiment‘s termination. These results are the first robust discrimination factors and incorporation rates
for a suite of tissues from a long term controlled feeding study with sharks.



Kimble, Steven (Purdue University); Williams, Rod (Purdue University, West Lafayette, United States)

Rangewide population genetics of the eastern box turtle Terrapene carolina carolina

The eastern box turtle Terrapene c. carolina is experiencing steep census population declines across its
range in the eastern United States, likely due to a combination of habitat loss and fragmentation, road
mortality, disease, and collection. However, the genetic consequences of such declines vary
considerably, especially in long-lived taxa such as Testudines. For example, declines in census numbers
may reduce the genetic diversity available for a species to evolve responses to novel challenges such as
climate change or emerging diseases. Genetic considerations are also paramount in designing
conservation management practices such as head starting or transplantation. To address these gaps in
knowledge we collected samples from approximately 1550 individuals from the full range of the species
and genotyped them at six highly polymorphic microsatellite loci. Genetic diversity at these loci was high
(mean allelic richness = 41.6), and our data suggested the full range of the species was defined by only
three populations. Differentiation among these populations was low (mean Fst = 0.0278), and estimates
of effective population sizes were highly variable (699.9-7799.1). We sampled intensely (n≈00) in two



                                                                                                       370
contiguous state forests in Indiana and found that mean pairwise relatedness among individuals was very
low (r=0.002), suggesting high dispersal in this species and low chance of inbreeding depression. The low
level of population structure also suggests high gene flow, a surprising result in light of multiple studies
demonstrating low vagility among most adults. Despite anthropogenically-reduced connectivity of their
habitats and the prevalence of emerging infectious diseases, eastern box turtles still exhibit high genetic
diversity. This may provide sufficient flexibility for conservation and the species may maintain the ability to
evolve to meet new challenges in the long term. These conclusions should be interpreted cautiously,
however, as the genetic signatures observed are at the very least biased by sampling of more visible
adults, and may therefore represent a historical signal rather than contemporaneous genetic processes.



King, Jackie (Fisheries and Oceans Canada); McPhie, Romney (Fisheries and Oceans Canada,
Canada)

Age, growth and maturity estimates of spotted ratfish (Hydrolagus colliei) in British Columbia

The spotted ratfish (Hydrolagus colliei) is a deepwater chimaera ranging from southeast Alaska to Baja
California and is found at depths of up to 1,150 m. There is no commercial fishery for spotted ratfish in
British Columbia , but it is one of the dominant species routinely captured in groundfish bottom trawl
surveys. Despite being a large component of the ecosystem, few biological parameter estimates exist for
spotted ratfish due to a lack of suitable ageing structures to estimate age and growth. We sampled over
234 spotted ratfish captured in trawl surveys off the coast British Columbia ranging in size from 12 cm to
61.7 cm. The size at maturity estimates were larger for females (22.5 cm snout-vent length) than males
(17.5 cm). Both estimates are larger than those made for spotted ratfish off of California indicating
regional differences in life history traits for this species. We present preliminary results of age estimates
based on tritor counts on the vomerine plate. Based on these age estimates, we present growth curve
and age-at-maturity estimates for spotted ratfish. The vomerine plates are candidate ageing structures
for spotted ratfish, and warrant further investigation.



King, Richard (Northern Illinois University); Stanford, Kristin (Northern Illionois University and Ohio State
University F. T. Stone Laboratory, DeKalb, IL, United States); Reichard, Tim (Dr. Tim's Wildlife and
Exotics Care, LLC, Canada); Korfel, Lindsey; Flick, Lauren (Ohio State University F. T. Stone Laboratory,
Canada)

Pressure Sensitive Archival Tags: A Novel Method to Monitor Foraging Behavior in Semi-Aquatic
Snakes

To test whether pressure sensitive archival tags could be used to collect detailed information on the
foraging behavior of semi-aquatic snakes, we implanted Lotek tags programmed to record pressure every
2 min within the coelomic cavity of two adult female Lake Erie watersnakes ( Nerodia sipedon insularum ).
Snakes were also implanted with radio transmitters to facilitate recapture and tag recovery. These snakes
forage for bottom dwelling fish in the near shore waters of Lake Erie but spend non-foraging periods on
land. Thus, changes in pressure occur during transitions from non-foraging (terrestrial) to foraging
(aquatic) behavior. After several days of apparent inactivity, the two snakes exhibited 15 and 20 inferred
foraging bouts over a two week period during late-June and early-July. Inferred foraging bouts ranged
from 4 to 168 min with a median of 42 min. Intervals between inferred foraging bouts ranged from 60 to
1920 min (32 hr) with a median of 908 min (about 15 hr). Inferred foraging bouts accounted for 5.0% and
8.5% of the two snakes‘ time budgets. Individuals differed in the timing of inferred foraging bouts. One




                                                                                                           371
individual foraged predominately during daylight hours (18 of 20 foraging bouts) whereas the other was
equally likely to forage during daylight or at night (7 and 8 foraging bouts, respectively). Frequent
foraging, as inferred from pressure sensitive archival tags, is consistent with telemetry-based
observations of the two snakes included in our analysis as well as the feeding behavior of captive Lake
Erie watersnakes and patterns of prey recovery from free-ranging watersnakes. In contrast to other
methods, archival tags have the potential to provide far more detailed information on the timing, duration,
seasonality, and sex differences of foraging.



King, Richard (Northern Illinios University); Stanford, Kristin (Northern Illinios University, DeKalb, IL,
United States)

The roles of species biology, agency action, and public-private partnerships in Lake Erie
Watersnake recovery and de-listing

Restricted geographic distribution and declining population size led to listing of the Lake Erie watersnake,
Nerodia sipedon insularum , as threatened under the U.S. Endangered Species Act in fall 1999. The Lake
Erie watersnake recovery plan, approved in 2003, specified t hree criteria for delisting. The first,
Population Persistence , set overall and island-specific population size requirements for the U.S. islands.
The second, Habitat Protection and Management, set overall and island-specific habitat protection
requirements. The third, Reduction of Human-induced Mortality, sought to reduce intentional and
accidental human-induced mortality to the point where such mortality no longer represents a significant
threat. Recovery criteria were met through partnerships among state and federal agencies, universities,
non-governmental organizations, and citizen scientists and in fall 2011 the Lake Erie watersnake became
the     23rd species to be delisted due to recovery.         Timely listing, species biology (including high
reproductive potential and a shift in diet to an abundant new prey species), intensive population
monitoring, key land acquisitions, and active outreach efforts contributed to rapid recovery.          Post-
delisting monitoring will occur for a period of five years to ensure that the watersnake population remains
stable and that re-listing is not warranted.



King, Susan (Eastern Kentucky University); Richter, Stephen (Eastern Kentucky University, Richmond,
KY, United States)

Four-toed salamander (Hemidactylium scutatum) nest site characteristics in natural and
constructed wetlands

If constructed wetlands do not replicate the condition of natural wetlands, we could be losing critical
amphibian habitat. To study this, research needs to focus on species that have more restrictive habitat
requirements, like the four-toed salamander ( Hemidactylium scutatum ). In Daniel Boone National
Forest (DBNF) four-toed salamanders have been documented in constructed wetlands, but it is unclear if
constructed wetlands provide similar nesting characteristics provided by natural wetlands. The objective
of this research was to determine nest-site and wetland characteristics across constructed and natural
wetlands. In the spring of 2011, we searched the shoreline of six natural and six constructed wetlands in
DBNF and found 207 nests. At each nest we measured aspect, slope, pH, soil moisture, percent ground
cover, and distance to water. We also measured the canopy closure and amount of moss present at
each wetland. Four-toed salamanders nested in similar densities in natural and constructed wetlands.
Nest site characteristics were similar between wetland types, with the following exceptions: four-toed
salamanders nested more often in moss in natural wetlands (P < 0.001), the pH of the soil was lower at



                                                                                                        372
nests in natural wetlands (P = 0.02), and canopy closure was higher in natural wetlands (P = 0.03).
Factors important to the number of eggs per nest included wetland type, moisture, and female presence,
while the total number of eggs per wetland was explained by wetland type, area, and canopy closure.
Number of nests in a wetland was explained by wetland area. Results indicate the importance of
maintaining canopy closure, trees within the wetland, and downed woody debris to promote the growth of
large beds of moss. A second field season will focus on the factors influencing four-toed salamander
presence or absence in wetlands by comparing local and landscape characteristics of wetlands with and
without the species.



Kingsbury, Bruce (Indiana - Purdue University Fort Wayne); Frank, Michael (Indiana - Purdue University
Fort Wayne, Canada); Roe, John (University of North Carolina Pembroke, Canada)

Headstarting and Translocation as Repatriation Tools for Watersnakes

Habitat loss and fragmentation are factors leading to declines in many faunal populations. Restoring
habitats to support the rebound of local populations may help to remedy these declines, but in cases
where a species has been locally extirpated, natural recolonization is unlikely. Translocation has proven
to be a successful strategy for the repatriation of some extirpated wildlife, but its effectiveness for snakes
remains understudied. To explore the conservation value of such techniques, using telemetry we
compared the activities of Northern Watersnakes ( Nerodia sipedon ) that were resident at a site to
snakes translocated from nearby or that were headstarted in under various conditions in captivity.
Compared to residents, translocated snakes selected aquatic habitats with a more open canopy, moved
more extensively, and used areas outside of reserve boundaries more frequently. Yearling headstarts,
released the activity season after birth, showed restricted movements and used habitats in ways atypical
of residents. Translocated and resident snakes grew at similar rates, but yearling headstarts failed to
grow appreciably. Both experimental groups had low survivorship/site retention rates relative to
residents. Much of the mortality in headstarts occurred during the overwintering period, while mortality in
translocated snakes was limited to the active season. We also examined alternative approaches by
releasing headstarts that were raised for 1.5 years in captivity. These headstarts were raised largely
identically to the yearling headstarts, but for an additional year. They were then cooled for one month to
simulate an overwintering period, and divided into two groups to live for three months in either ―enriched‖
conditions, communally in an environment wherein they could bask and hunt more naturally, or
unenriched, wherein they remained in simple conditions as they had been raised previously. Both of
these older headstarted groups had similar growth rates to residents and were able to successfully
overwinter as well. Ultimately, survivorship was higher than, and thus at least as good as, residents
monitored over the same period. We conclude that headstarting can be successfully implemented in
terms of survival over one year post-release, and thus likely can be a useful tool for repopulation efforts of
imperiled species of Nerodia , including such species as the Copper-bellied Watersnake, N.
erythrogaster neglecta.



Kingsbury, Bruce (Indiana - Purdue University Fort Wayne); Woodley, Christopher; Deng, Yihao
(Indiana - Purdue University Fort Wayne, Canada)

Predicting Spring Emergence of the Eastern Box Turtle (Terrapene carolina)

Factors which stimulate Eastern Box Turtles ( Terrapene carolina ) and other reptiles to emerge from
over-wintering are poorly understood. This aspect of their biology is of general interest, but also has



                                                                                                          373
conservation value. We have found that turtles that have not emerged are less likely to be killed or injured
by prescribed fire. Resource managers could thus potentially minimize impacts of this and other
management tools if they could predict when turtles would be out. To find those environmental factors
linked to emergence, during the winters from 2006 to 2011 we monitored body (carapace) and soil
(surface, 15 and 30 cm) temperatures with iButton dataloggers, and also considered information from a
local weather station and derivatives of Julian date to examine circannual rhythms. Emergence times
varied by year and somewhat between individuals dispersed across the landscape within a given year,
thus emergence appears not to be principally driven by a circannual rhythm, but by local temperatures.
Later in winter body and soil temperatures were very stable and close to freezing. Early in March,
increased day length, rain, loss of snow cover and warmer air temperatures lead to higher and more
variable soil and body temperatures. Prior to emergence, body and all sub-surface soil temperatures
became quite similar, while surface temperatures continued to vary more widely. During this time, turtles
shifted body position to be closer to the soil surface. Cues most correlated with subsequent emergence
relate to shallow soil temperatures, and a robust predictive model can thus be derived from local soil
temperatures or even more generically using growing degree days. Implementation of such models to
help land managers time activities will thus help protect this declining species. The approach should also
have broader utility with respect to predicting emergence of other herpetofauna, and we will conclude our
presentation with an exploration of those potentials.



Kissel, Amanda (Simon Fraser University); Palen, Wendy (Simon Fraser University, Canada);
Govindarajulu, Purnima (Ministry of Environment, Canada); Bishop, Christine (Environment Canada,
Canada)

Evaluating conservation strategies for the Oregon spotted frog (Rana pretiosa) in British
Columbia, Canada

Strategies to stem or reverse declines in amphibian populations are often constrained by a lack of both
baseline population data and a clear understanding of the effectiveness of particular recovery methods.
This often results in management and conservation decisions based on expert advice and the
implementation of strategies modified from other recovery programs. The Oregon spotted frog ( Rana
pretiosa ) exemplifies this conservation dilemma, as it has been extirpated from 90% of its historic range,
and in Canada, is restricted to three remnant breeding populations. The Oregon spotted frog recovery
strategy in Canada includes a range of methods to augment extant populations, ranging from a ‗head-
start‘ program of early life stages, to captive breeding and re-introduction of older animals. However,
neither the biological or economic effectiveness of these various approaches has been evaluated. Here,
we used a series of field experiments, mark-recapture studies, and data from the published literature to
derive demographic life-history parameters for a stage-structured population matrix model to explore the
biological effectiveness of different management strategies.

We found strong support that later life stages (i.e. adult survival) have the largest effect on the
deterministic population growth rate. We also coupled these biological models with cost estimates in a
formal decision analysis to identify recovery strategies that both maximize the biological potential for
recovery while minimizing costs. For example, costs associated with the current ‗head-start‘ strategy are
on the order of $60,000 per year to produce 3000 juvenile frogs, whereas maintaining a full captive
breeding population requires an order of magnitude more funding. Our results suggest that this tradeoff is
maximized with a combination of low cost efforts such as translocating egg masses, and high cost captive
breeding and re-introduction of juvenile and adult frogs.




                                                                                                        374
In spite of these efforts, our estimates of the 20-year probability extinction for these populations remain
very high, suggesting that the recovery of this species may require more direct intervention than is
currently proposed.



Kissner, Jessica (Texas Tech University); Griffis-Kyle, Kerry (Texas Tech University, Canada)

Climatic Quandary: Amphibian Community Ecology during a Drought in the Southern High Plains

The Southern High Plains is characterized by its hot, dry climate, as well as its approximately 30,000
ephemeral playa wetlands. Anurans in this region are explosive breeders that depend on playa wetlands
for breeding habitat after rain events. As their complex life cycle suggests, they require suitable biotic and
abiotic conditions post-rainfall for successful breeding, egg survival, and tadpole development to ensure
population persistence. Amphibian ecology has received very little attention in Northeastern New Mexico.
Baseline data collection is necessary in this area to identify amphibian community composition, and key
habitat components impacting species presence, richness, and reproductive success. This region
experienced a drought in 2011, receiving less than half of its average annual precipitation. As such, we
were able to observe how amphibians use available habitat in the Southern High Plains in a drought year.
We sampled twenty-two playa wetlands using call, visual encounter, pipe, and funnel-trap surveys to
determine anuran species presence, richness, and reproduction. We recorded site-specific habitat
variables including rainfall amount, and playa water quality and area. We also measured landscape-level
factors such as road density, wetland density, and nearest wetland distance. Of the nine playa wetlands
inundated in 2011, we were able to detect anurans at five and evidence of reproduction at three wetlands.
Species richness ranged from 0 to 4 species per playa. Five anuran species were detected including the
spotted chorus frog (Pseudacris clarkii), a previously undocumented species in the state of New Mexico.
We observed wide fluctuations in pH (4.9 to 9.4) in wetlands used by anurans. With the threat of
impending climate change increasing the frequency of extreme events such as drought, it is crucial we
understand the impact this may have on community assemblages and associated available habitat.



Kissner, Jessica (Texas Tech University); Griffis-Kyle, Kerry (Texas Tech University, Canada)

Equipment Protection in Rural Rangelands of the Southern High Plains

Audio data-loggers are frequently used as a passive-means to record wildlife vocalizations in a variety of
taxa. Considerations regarding placement of this equipment is dependent not only on the biology of the
study species, but also on the environment in which they are used. For example, researchers typically
conceal equipment in an urban setting to prevent accidental or purposeful human destruction.
Additionally, it is important to consider using barriers for equipment placed in rural settings. When
conducting research in an area with large, terrestrial foragers such as cows, horses, and wild ungulates,
novel approaches are necessary to protecting this equipment and the data being collected. Furthermore,
when studying anurans in the southwest, precautions must be taken to further protect equipment from
lightening and submergence during monsoon rain events. We initiated a project on private rangeland in
the Southern High Plains in 2011 in which we established 10 unprotected data-loggers, attached with
screws 1 m above ground to wooden stakes driven 20 cm into the ground. Of the 10 data-loggers
deployed, seven were destroyed by ungulates, indicating a critical need to protect this equipment.
Following this, we conducted a field experiment to determine the degree of protection needed to guard
this equipment from damage. We established seven replicates with three treatments at each site: no
protection (control), box exclosure, and fenced exclosure. We also created false data-loggers using



                                                                                                          375
ammunition boxes with foam balls attached to the sides to simulate the microphones. In all conditions, we
attached the data-logger with fencing wire to the top of a t-post, approximately 1 meter from the ground.
For the box treatment, we made a rectangular mesh exclosure (48.3 cm x 27.9 cm x 12.7 cm) and placed
it over the data-logger. We created the fenced treatment by placing a triangular fence, constructed with
cattle panel and t-posts, around the data-logger. The three treatments were spaced approximately 2 m
apart and a trail camera was positioned with all three treatments within its field of view. We found that the
fence exclosure protected the data-loggers in all replicates while 43% in the box treatments and 100% in
the control treatments were destroyed.



Klaus, Samantha (Queen's University); Lougheed, Stephen (Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada)

Microclimatic predictors of call phenology for eastern Ontario anurans

Amphibians are considered indicators of ecosystem health because of their sensitivity to environmental
change due in part to their semi-permeable skin and aquatic developmental requirements. Mirroring many
other taxa, temperate frog species in recent years have increasingly initiated their breeding seasons
earlier, presumably in response to higher mean daily temperatures and the earlier onset of spring.
Conventional studies of climate change to date have used anecdotal records of environmental trends to
interpret phenological events. Despite the insight that this approach has provided, it is not ideal because
the data are often too broad-scale or piecemeal to allow detailed insights into factors that might affect
breeding behaviour. For example, many species of frogs occur in a variety of semi-aquatic ecosystems,
suggesting that different conspecific populations may be subject to different environmental influences.
Studying climatic variation at a local and regional scale simultaneously could help to attain greater
accuracy at predicting frog phenology and to understand which factors best predict the onset and peak of
breeding. Using seasonal remote survey stations, our research investigates how abiotic environmental
factors influence calling phenology in frogs using a four-year survey dataset of both microclimate and
male advertisement calls from wetland sites across eastern Ontario. Our study monitors when calling
occurs for nine species of frogs, the intensity of calling for each species, and the environmental conditions
daily for the entirety of their breeding seasons. We hope these long-term data will provide key insights
into the proximate factors that control initiation of breeding for eastern Ontario anurans, and enhance the
possibility for adaptive responses to changing temperature regimes. Our study also will allow us to better
predict responses to continued climate change.



Kleinteich, Thomas (Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel);

Made for digging - the functional significance of the caecilian skull

The fossorial lifestyle in caecilian amphibians (Lissamphibia: Gymnophiona) relates to various anatomical
specializations like limblessness and an elongated body shape. For digging, the skull of caecilians is
pushed into the soil; dorsoventral movements of the skull manipulate the substrate in front of the animal.
Several characteristics of the caecilian skull are generally considered as adaptations for fossoriality,
comprising the wedged shape, the fusion of bones, the coverage of the temporal region by dermal bones,
and the presence of widely overlapping sutures between bones. Here I will present a reviewing talk on the
recent progress in our understanding on how caecilian cranial morphology relates to digging
performance. Based on finite element modeling, we demonstrated that the presence or absence of
temporal fenestration in caecilian skulls surprisingly had no effect on the skull during digging. However,
the angle with that the skull is pushed into the substrate was found to be critical to minimize bending of



                                                                                                         376
the skull and to minimize stress. Further, finite element analysis suggests that the palate experiences the
highest stresses during digging and thus the palate is more likely to show adaptations for fossoriality than
the skull roof. The caecilian skull is kinetic, i.e. the squamosal plus the quadrate can be moved relative to
the parietal and the os basale. Cranial kinesis was shown to slightly decrease the stress on the tooth
bearing bones along the margin of the skull and to increase the stress on the palate. Further, cranial
kinesis results in a second joint for the jaw closing mechanism which was modeled to cause high effective
mechanical advantages for the jaw closing musculature and thus results in high bite forces. Interestingly,
species with temporal fenestration were found to have larger cross sectional areas in their set of jaw
levator muscles, suggesting that the absence, respectively presence, of temporal fenestration in
caecilians relates to biting performance, rather than digging.



Kleopfer, John (Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries);

Cooperative Management of an Endangered Urban Viper: The Story of the Canebrake Rattlesnake
(Crotalus horridus) Coastal Plain population in Virginia, USA

Kleopfer, John D. (JD), Alan H. Savitzky, Chris E. Petersen, Scott M. Goetz. Cooperative Management of
an Endangered Urban Viper: The Story of the Canebrake Rattlesnake ( Crotalus horridus ) Coastal Plain
population in Virginia, USA.

The Canebrake Rattlesnake ( Crotalus horridus ) Coastal Plain population is listed as State Endangered
in Virginia, USA. The Coastal Plain population of this species reaches the northern limit of its range in the
heavily urbanized region of southeastern Virginia known as Hampton Roads. Approximately 1.6 million
people live within 30 kilometers of all known populations. The primary causes of its decline have been
habitat loss and human persecution. With financial support from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service‘s State
Wildlife Grants program and the Department of the Navy‘s Natural Resources Program, the Virginia
Department of Game and Inland Fisheries began a partnership with the U.S. Navy and academic
biologists to investigate its ecology. The research site is located in Chesapeake, Virginia at the 1,214
hectare Naval Support Activity Norfolk, Northwest Annex (NSANW). To date, 50 individual rattlesnakes
have been radio-tracked and almost 15,000 observations have been recorded. Information on feeding,
reproduction, shedding, hibernation, predation and movement has been gathered. This research has led
to the acquisition of lands for conservation, including the 1,619 hectare Cavalier Wildlife Management
Area, which is adjacent to NSANW. The partnership has also resulted in the development of the 2011
Canebrake Rattlesnake Conservation Plan, which summarizes 17 years of research and provides
guidance for future research and conservation efforts. In 2011, the Canebrake Rattlesnake Conservation
Center was established at NSANW. This on-site facility allows researchers to perform surgeries for radio-
telemetry and to continue monitoring this population without removing snakes from the research site for
processing and transmitter implantation.



Klymus, Katy (University of Missouri); Humfeld, Sarah; Gerhardt, Carl (University of Missouri, Canada)

Behavioral and phylogenetic differentiation in the canyon treefrog, Hyla arenicolor

Understanding how species arise is a fundamental topic in biology and can be addressed by examining
the evolutionary forces that lead to speciation. One avenue is to examine the first step in the speciation
process: population differentiation. By looking at both phenotypic and genetic differences among




                                                                                                         377
populations we can hypothesize about the evolutionary forces that have led to observed phenotypic
differentiation.

In general, if trait and genetic divergence exhibit similar variability, neutral genetic drift may explain the
degree of differentiation. If, on the one hand, populations exhibit high trait variation relative to genetic
variation, we may invoke divergent selection acting on those traits. If populations have low phenotypic
variation but exhibit large genetic differences, then selection may be acting to conserve a particular trait
variant.

In this study we examined both genetic and behavioral differentiation within the canyon treefrog, Hyla
arenicolor . We were particularly interested in understanding if selection was acting to prevent
advertisement call divergence among genetically distinct lineages. Using genetic loci, we found evidence
for past hybridization and mtDNA introgression between two H. arenicolor populations and the sister
species, H. eximia. Advertisement call differences among H. arenicolor lineages were found to better
reflect the inferred nuclear phylogeny (both exon and AFLPs) rather than a phylogeny inferred from
mtDNA. These results suggest that lineages are not as divergent from on another as previously assumed
based on mtDNA data, and that drift rather than selection plays a more important role in call
differentiation within this system. We also describe biologically significant variation in the advertisement
calls throughout this specie‘s extensive range. Playback experiments suggest females can discriminate
against populations using specific call parameters, indicating a role for behavioral reproductive isolation.
Our results provide insight into the complex evolutionary history of this group, have implications for the
study of character evolution in this group, and emphasize the need for studies to expand sampling to
include closely rela



Knapp, Charles R. (John G. Shedd Aquarium); Hines, Kirsten (IUCN Iguana Specialist Group, Key
Biscayne, FL, United States); Zachariah, Trevor (University of Illinois, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Chicago Zoological and Aquatic Animal Residency Program, Urbana, United States); White, C. LeAnn
(5USGS National Wildlife Health Center, Madison, WI, United States); Iverson, John B. (Earlham College,
Richmond, United States); Buckner, Sandra D. (IUCN Iguana Specialist Group, Nassau, Bahamas);
Romero, L. Michael; Lattin, Christine R. (Tufts University, Medford, MA, United States)

Physiological Impacts of Tourism and Food Supplementation on Endangered Insular Iguanas

Physiological responses caused by wildlife-tourism interactions can be pronounced in free-ranging
species. Tourism companies in The Bahamas and Caribbean are increasingly marketing rock iguana
(genus Cyclura) feeding as part of their activity packages. This type of tourism is likely to continually
expand, and therefore the effects of these human-wildlife interactions should be monitored, understood,
and managed effectively. Using multiple populations of Bahamian rock iguanas (C. cychlura figginsi and
C. c. inornata), we investigated 28 sex-specific responses to both human-visitation pressure, and
associated food provisioning with a variety of semi-natural and unnatural food items. Our response
variables included body condition, physiological stress, and multiple hematological and biochemical
parameters. For both sexes, body condition and physiological stress (baseline corticosterone levels) did
not differ between visited and non-visited sites, suggesting that rock iguanas on islands visited by tourists
are not chronically stressed. However, for both sexes there were significantly elevated corticosterone
levels after 30 min of capture and restraint, indicating that these rock iguanas can physiologically respond
to stressful stimuli. We recorded hematological and biochemical differences between visited and non-
visited sites in response to being food provisioned. For both sexes, rock iguanas from visited sites had
higher packed cell volume, higher uric acid and lower potassium. In addition, females from visited sites
had higher glucose and iron. Males from visited sites, on the contrary, had higher calcium, cholesterol,



                                                                                                          378
cobalt, copper, and selenium, but lower molybdenum. We conclude that differences between visited and
non-visited sites are likely due to unnatural food items offered by tourists and the consequential changes
in how rock iguanas from visited sites forage. These effects may potentially have debilitating
consequences over time in these long-lived species, or under adverse environmental conditions.



Knapp, Nikolai (University of Wurzburg); Konopik, Oliver (University of Wurzburg, Wurzburg, Germany);
Bon, Wuu Yih; Grafe, Ulmar (Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Gadong, Malaysia)

Quantifying prey consumption by a tropical frog community: implications for ecosystem
consequences of amphibian declines

Knowledge about the ecosystem function of frogs is essential to assess consequences of global
amphibian decline on trophic interactions and ecosystem services. We estimated the daily amount of prey
(mostly arthropods) consumed by a tropical anuran community in a lowland mixed-dipterocarp rainforest
in Brunei Darussalam (Borneo). Values of consumed biomass per time were determined for numerous
prey organisms sorted to order level. Prey items included a wide range of arthropods, other frogs and
occasionally even snakes. To quantify prey consumption, abundance data on frogs was combined with
detailed information on each species‘ diet composition, obtained by stomach flushing and estimates of
daily nutrition requirements. In addition, prey uptake per day was estimated for certain frog and toad
species by following radio-tagged individuals and flushing stomachs before and after a 24 hour period of
foraging in their natural habitat. Feeding trials were used to correct for different digestion speeds of hard
and soft bodied prey items. Extrapolations of the impact of predation over 49,000 ha of rainforest (the
larger study area) were made by inferring a hypothetical stream network from a digital elevation model
with the assumption of a comparable frog community throughout the area. Our results provide a rough
estimate of total predation by a tropical anuran community and, thus, contribute to the understanding of
ecological functions of tropical anuran communities as an important group of insectivores in the rainforest
food web.



Knip, Danielle (The University of British Columbia); Heupel, Michelle (Australian Institute of Marine
Science, Townsville, Q, Australia); Simpfendorfer, Colin (James Cook University, Townsville, Q, Australia)

Evaluating marine protected areas for the conservation of tropical coastal sharks

Global declines in shark populations have created uncertainty in the future status of many species and
conservation efforts are urgently needed. Marine protected areas (MPAs) are used increasingly as
conservation tools around the world, but how they benefit mobile and wide ranging species like sharks
remains unclear. To evaluate the degree of protection MPAs may provide for sharks, we used an array of
acoustic receivers to examine the movements and spatial use of two tropical coastal species within two
MPAs in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park, Australia. Juvenile pigeye (Carcharhinus amboinensis) and
adult spottail (Carcharhinus sorrah) sharks were fitted with acoustic transmitters and monitored from 2009
to 2010. Both species displayed long-term use of MPAs, with some sharks detected for longer than 600
days. The mean percentage of time C. amboinensis and C. sorrah spent inside MPAs was 22% and 32%,
respectively. MPA use varied seasonally, with C. amboinensis spending a higher percentage of time
inside MPAs in summer (mean = 28%) and C. sorrah spending a higher percentage of time inside MPAs
in winter (mean = 40%). Although sharks used large areas inside MPAs, most tended to use only half of
the available protected space. In addition, all sharks made excursions from MPAs, but both species
exited and re-entered at consistent locations along the MPA boundaries. This research shows that MPAs



                                                                                                         379
have potential conservation benefits for shark populations by providing protection across different species
and life stages, and demonstrates how tracking studies can be used to help tailor MPA design to
maximize their effectiveness.



Knuckey, James (Moss Landing Marine Laboratories); Clerkin, Paul; Ebert, David (Moss Landing Marine
Laboratories, Canada)

Biodiversity and Conservation of Western Indian Ocean Chondrichthyans

The biodiversity of the Western Indian Ocean chondrichthyans is relatively unknown compared to other
better studied regions, such as the western North Pacific, North Atlantic , and Indo-Pacific regions. The
Western Indian Ocean has at least 279 species overall, with 152 shark species, 120 batoid species, and
8 chimaera species. This number comprises 23.3% of the approximately 1 ,200 valid species of
chondrichthyans. The sharks are more diverse than the batoids, but this is most likely due to more
attention having been paid to the sharks than the batoids in this region. The Carharhiniformes (82
species), Myliobatiformes (46 species), Squaliformes (36 species), and Rajiformes (29 species) are the
most dominant groups in terms of species-richness within this region.         The close proximity of the
Western Indian Ocean to the Indo-Pacific, which has been shown to be a center of origin for the marine
tropics, may explain the relatively high number of species. Most chondrichthyan species accounted for in
this study are coastal species, which may explain why some of the families have lower numbers than
reported in other regions, such as the Rajiformes; a species group known to generally occur in deeper
waters of the tropics. Islands and island chains show a high degree of endemism compared to the
continental shelf and upper slope habitats. The majority of species found in this region are listed as Data
Deficient (100 species), Near Threatened (54 species), or Vulnerable (51 species) on the IUCN Red List.
Enhanced identification of Western Indian Ocean chondrichthyans is crucial for developing improved
management and conservation policies for this group.



Kobayashi, Soh (Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry); Abe, Seiya (Central Research
Institute of Electric Power Industr, Abiko city, 20, Japan); Matsuki, Rikyu (Central Research Institute of
Electric Power Industry, Abiko city, 20, Japan)

Fine-scale case study of detecting genetic structure and gene flow restriction of Japanese brown
frog caused by recent urbanization.

To understand and evaluate connectivity between habitats is one of the most important issues in
landscape ecology. There were only few not so much case studies for amphibians which treat this issue
in fine scale of landscape, such as several square kilometers. For efficient evaluation of gene flow in fine
scale, landscape genetic approaches will be the most valid way. In the present study, we tested applied
techniques of landscape genetics to evaluate the genetic structure of Japanese brown frog (Rana
japonica) in the study sitefine scale area (approximately 3 x 3 kilometers) at Inba area, Chiba prefecture,
Japan. Japanese brown frog is one of the locally decreasing species, and suitable model animal for such
analyses because their breeding sites habitats in our study site wereare paddy fields which were divided
by hills (known as Satoyama landscape), and considered to form a meta-population. We used D-loop
region of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) regions as genetic markers for calculating Fst and FCT, both which
are indices ofas genetic distance among populations. Fst was compared with geological distances and
locations of breeding sites by using Barrier, and FCT was compared with locations of breeding sites by
SAMOVA to detect barriers of gene flow. In As the results of mtDNA analyses, three genetic groups and



                                                                                                        380
three barriers of gene flow was found. and Implication from past aerial photographs revealed that those
genetic structures mightwould be caused by urbanization in lastthis 50 years which implied from past
aerial photographs.



Koch, Andre (Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig); Arida, Evy (Museum Zoologicum
Bogoriense, Canada); Misof, Bernhard; Böhme, Wolfgang (Zoological Research Museum Alexander
Koenig, Canada)

Did Southeast Asian Water Monitor Lizards (Varanidae: Varanus salvator Complex) colonize
Sulawesi by crossing Wallace's Line?

Phylogeographic relationships between island populations of Southeast Asian water monitor lizards were
investigated testing biogeographic hypotheses about the origin of the endemic Sulawesi populations.
These giant lizards have excellent dispersal abilities and a wide distribution range, thus providing optimal
preconditions to serve as model organisms for studies of biogeographic scenarios and past migration
routes for the colonization of oceanic islands in the Wallacea region. We applied amplified fragment
length polymorphisms (AFLP) with six selective primer combinations which yielded a total of 726
polymorphic markers for 92 Varanus spp. individuals within a size range of 60–600 bases. Anonymous
AFLP markers were analysed using the Neighbour-joining algorithm and split networks. Sulawesi is
inhabited by two closely-related, albeit distinct evolutionary lineages of water monitors, with surrounding
off-shore islands harbouring further endemic populations. The majority of these off-shore islands support
populations which are closest related to populations of the respective opposite regions of Sulawesi.
However, despite their geographic proximity, the populations of the Flores Sea Islands, which may have
functioned as stepping stones to Sulawesi, do not present the sister clade to the populations of the
southwestern peninsula of Sulawesi. Instead, the Flores Sea Islands populations form a well-supported
clade which, depending on the out-group samples included in the analyses, represents the sister group to
the remaining Sulawesi region. Also, the phylogenetic position of the Banggai Island population east of
Central Sulawesi varies. In any case, it is genetically quite distinct from the Sulawesi populations.
Likewise, V. cumingi from the southern Philippines does not show a close relationship to the monitor
populations of northern Sulawesi. Colonization of Sulawesi by water monitors by island hopping via the
Philippines in the north or the Lesser Sunda Islands in the south, respectively, can be excluded. Likewise,
an invasion from the Moluccas via the Banggai-Sula Islands in the east seems unlikely. Rather, starting
from Sundaland we suggest a successful crossing of the Makassar Strait, better known as Wallace‘s
Line, which coincides with the biogeographic border of the Eurasian continental (Sunda) shelf.



Koch, Andre (Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig); Arida, Evy (Museum Zoologicum
Bogoriense, Canada)

Discovery and underestimated Diversity of the Amphibians and Reptiles of Sulawesi and its
offshore Islands, Indonesia

Compared with the herpetofauna of the three Greater Sunda (shelf) Islands of Borneo, Sumatra, and
Java, the diversity of amphibian and reptile genera on Sulawesi is impoverished. The oceanic character
of the herpetofauna is the result of the million-year-long geographic isolation of Sulawesi which is
separated from surrounding islands by deep ocean trenches. However, despite ambitious investigations
by several industrious scientists during the past two centuries, recent fieldwork on Sulawesi and its
smaller off-shore islands has revealed that the diversity of amphibians and reptiles has been largely



                                                                                                        381
underestimated. Since the last herpetological synopsis was published in 1996, 36 new amphibian and
reptile species plus five subspecies have been described or newly recorded for Sulawesi and its satellite
islands. Seven species were redescribed or revalidated, nine have been overlooked, and 12 species,
mainly snakes, were deleted from Sulawesi‘s species inventory because they had been erroneously
recorded from the island. In addition, more than 40 species, mainly skinks (family Scincidae), have been
identified as new to science and await formal description. This represents an increase by 35%! In total,
about 210+ different species of amphibians (ca. 50 spp.) and reptiles (ca. 160 spp.) are currently
recognized from the Sulawesi region. They belong to six amphibian families (Bufonidae,
Ceratobatrachidae, Microhylidae, Ranidae, Hylidae, and Rhacophoridae) and twenty reptile families
(Agamidae, Dibamidae, Gekkonidae, Scincidae, Varanidae, Acrochordidae, Boidae, Colubridae,
Cylindrophiidae, Elapidae, Homalopsidae, Pythonidae, Typhlopidae, Viperidae, Xenopeltidae, Emydidae,
Geoemydidae, Testudinidae, Trionychidae, and Crocodylidae). Almost 60% of which are endemics. The
degree of endemicity, however, probably represents a considerable underestimation due to lack of exact
distribution data for many species.



Köhler, Jörn (Hessisches Landesmuseum Darmstadt); Lemme, Inga (Technical University of
Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany); Erbacher, Martina (Hessisches Landesmuseum Darmstadt,
Darmstadt, Germany); Kaffenberger, Nathalie (Senckenberg Natural History Collections, Dresden,
Germany); Vences, Miguel (Technical University of Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany)

Molecules and morphology suggest cryptic species diversity and an overall complex taxonomy of
fish scale geckos, genus Geckolepis

The current classification of the Malagasy-Comoroan geckos of the genus Geckolepis recognizes three
valid species and is based on morphological differences only. Species allocation of individuals is difficult,
mainly due to the insufficiently known degree of variation and in many cases the partial loss of the
integument in preserved specimens. We here study Geckolepis specimens from almost its entire known
range and combine molecular and morphological data to estimate species richness in the genus, and to
assess the taxonomic validity of the morphological differences proposed. Analyses of mitochondrial (12S,
ND4) and nuclear (RAG1, CMOS) gene sequences support three major clades and the presence of
various divergent lineages within these clades, some occurring in sympatry. Among lineages, external
morphology seems to be comparatively conservative and differences are faint in many cases. For each
major lineage, we summarize the morphological characters being most diagnostic to distinguish it from
other lineages. The combined molecular and morphological data strongly indicate the presence of highly
divergent lineages qualifying for the status of Confirmed Candidate Species in five cases, two of which
are tentatively assigned to Geckolepis maculata and G. typica. In other lineages, differentiation is
shallower and these may either qualify for Unconfirmed Candidate Species or Deep Conspecific
Lineages. In conclusion, our analysis provides evidence for an underestimation of species richness in the
genus and a complex evolutionary history, not reflected by current Geckolepis systematics.



Kohlsdorf, Tiana (University of Sao Paulo);

Life in the underground:           morphological      and    physiological    adaptations     of   fossorial
gymnophthalmid lizards

The colonization of subterranean microhabitats during the evolution of a given clade likely involves living
in an environment that is completely different from the surface. These two microhabitats (surface and the



                                                                                                         382
subterranean) differ in several abiotic aspects, including thermal fluctuation during a daily cycle and the
ground resistance imposed to locomotion, which in the case of fossorial animals represents moving
surrounded by a compact medium. Given the divergence in the selective pressures associated to these
two environments, it is expected that fossorial lineages deriving from epigeal ancestors have evolved
several modifications that enhance their organismal performance in this very peculiar ecological setting.
The present talk will focus on the lizard family Gymnophthalmidae, using the clade as a biological model
for understanding how life under the surface affects morphology, physiology and performance. The theme
is explored using an integrative approach, in a phylogenetic framework. In the Gymnophthalmidae,
colonization of subterranean environments evolved twice independently, and evolutionary changes in
many traits can be identified in association with these two events. For example, evolution of head design
in the group seems mostly shaped by habitat usage (instead of diet), with very specific forms associated
to fossorial habits. Also, body elongation and limb reduction is observed in all fossorial gymnophthalmids,
although the patterns identified differ among the representatives of the two clades living under the
surface. These modifications in body shape have clear implications for locomotion (burrowing efficiency
and sprint speeds), and for thermal relationships, as the ratio [surface area/volume] is different between
lizard-like and snakelike morphologies. Body shape in Gymnophthalmidae has also evolved in strong
association with climatic parameters, as rainfall, temperature seasonality and aridity, which suggests that
the colonization of fossorial microhabitats may be favoured in arid environments with climatic peculiarities.



Koizumi, Yuki (Depertment of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University); Hikida, Tsutomu
(Depertment of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo, 32, Japan)

Molecular phylogeography of three species of the genus Scincella (Squamata: Scincidae) from the
East Asian Islands revealed by mitochondrial DNA

Three species of the genus Scincella are recognized from the East Asian Islands. Among them, S.
boettgeri and S. formosensis are endemic to the southern Ryukyus (Miyako and Yaeyama Island Groups)
and Taiwan, respectively. Another species, S. vandenburghi, had long been considered as a Tsushima
Island endemic species, but the previous morphological analysis showed that this species also occurs in
Korea as well. We surveyed the phylogenetic relationships among species and genetic variations within
each population using nucleotide sequences of mitochondrial DNA. The results indicated that monophyly
of the populations of Scincella in the East Asian Islands, S. boettgeri, S. formosensis and S.
vandenburghi, was strongly supported, and that a clade of these three species was a sister group of the
S. modesta from the continent. Among them, S. vandenburghi was the most basally diverged species,
distributed in Korea and Tsushima Island. Other two species was divided into the three major clades. The
first clade is widely distributed in the southern Ryukyus exclusive of Yonagunijima Island, and the second
clade is distributed in only Yonagunijima Island. Scincella boettgeri is comprised of these two clades. The
third clade consisted of samples from Taiwan. Each clade showed high levels of genetic divergence, but
relationships among these three were unresolved. We surmised that the two clades of S. boettgeri and a
clade of S. formosensis have had a long history and assumed that the segregation and vicariance of
Scincella in the southern Ryukyus and Taiwan had occurred in the Pliocene. The first clade from the
southern Ryukyus comprised three subclades, and the third clade , S. formosensis from Taiwan, was
divided into four subclades. Only two subgroups in the southern Ryukyus were distributed sympatrically in
two small islands. Considering the relatively high genetic differentiation among and low nucleotide
substitution within each subgroup, we assumed that the first clade and third clade diverged into some
subclades during Pliocene and extended their distributional range to the present islands or localities
during more recently. In contrast, S. vandenburghi exhibited almost no genetic variation throughout its
range. We observed some haplotypes, involving up to five substitutions, and no shared haplotypes were



                                                                                                         383
detected among these regions, Korea Peninsula, Cheju Island and Tsushima Island. The genetic
differentiation and nucleotide diversity was low compared to that in other two species, S. boettgeri and S.
formosensis. This finding suggested recent occurrences of strong bottlenecks and subsequent rapid
dispersals to Korea and Tsushima Island, probably around the last glacial period.



Kok, Philippe (Vrije Universiteit Brussel); MacCulloch, Ross (Royal Ontario Museum, Canada); Means,
Bruce (Coastal Plains Institute and Land Conservancy, Canada); Roelants, Kim; Van Bocxlaer, Ines;
Bossuyt, Franky (Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Canada)

Recent faunal arrivals on ancient table mountains

The Pantepui region of South America is characterized by table mountains (tepuis) made of Proterozoic
(> 1.5 billion years old) sandstone – the highest reaching nearly 3km elevation – that are isolated from
their surroundings by vertical cliffs up to 1000m high. Due to its ancient age and complex topography, this
region has been assumed to be an ideal nursery of speciation and a potential continental counterpart to
oceanic archipelagos. Although phylogenetic studies have indicated that some taxa endemic to the
Pantepui region as a whole originated in the Tertiary, the dynamics of biotic interchange between tepuis,
and especially between tepui tops, remains an evolutionary enigma. Using a comprehensive sampling of
five Pantepui amphibian genera ( Anomaloglossus , Oreophrynella , Pristimantis , Stefania , and
Tepuihyla ), and one reptile family (Gymnophthalmidae) we present molecular genetic evidence showing
that most of the amphibian and reptile taxa currently found on tepui summits - even on the highest and
most inaccessible ones - are young, mostly resulting from Pleistocene and Holocene dispersal. Our
results highlight that even small vertebrates, presumed to be relatively poor dispersers, are capable of
maintaining extended gene flow between anciently isolated table mountains, or between tepui tops and
uplands, keeping single-tepui endemism to a minimum. Our results additionally point out that several
Pantepui taxa are characterized by surprisingly high phenotypic differentiation between tepui tops
populations (or between tepui tops and uplands populations) in the absence of (or very low) genetic
divergence.



Kolbe, Jason (University of Rhode Island);

Adaptation and plasticity during Anolis lizard introductions

Invasive species often experience substantial shifts in climatic conditions during introduction from their
native to non-native ranges. Whether these shifts elicit a phenotypic response, and how adaptation and
phenotypic plasticity contribute to phenotypic change, are key issues for understanding biological
invasions and the interplay among evolutionary processes. I combine modeling, field data, and a
laboratory experiments to test for changing thermal tolerances during the introduction of two tropical lizard
species to Florida, Anolis cristatellus from Puerto Rico and Anolis sagrei from Cuba. Species
distribution models and bioclimatic data analyses showed lower minimum temperatures and more
seasonal and annual variation in temperature in Florida compared to both Puerto Rico and Cuba.
Laboratory acclimation experiments showed both species decrease their critical thermal minimum
temperature (CTMin) after being held at a low temperature. The introduced South Miami population of A.
cristatellus has diverged from its native-range source population by acquiring low-temperature
acclimation ability. By contrast, the introduced Key Biscayne population showed little change compared
to its source. Introduced populations of A. sagrei from Tampa and Miami both showed low-temperature
acclimation, but differences in CTMin persisted throughout the course of the experiment, suggesting



                                                                                                         384
possible adaptive divergence between these two introduced populations. Our climate analyses predicted
an adaptive response of thermal plasticity for introduced populations, which was observed in some but all
comparisons. The acquisition or divergence of thermal plasticity by introduced Anolis populations in
Florida may be advantageous for long-term persistence and expansion of their non-native ranges.



Kolmann, Matthew (Florida State University); Huber, Daniel (University of Tampa, Canada); Dean,
Mason (Max Planck Institute, Canada); Grubbs, Dean (Florida State University Coastal & Marine
Laboratory, Canada)

Feeding performance in a durophagous stingray

Durophagy is a feeding strategy which is typified by the majority of an organism‘s diet being comprised of
hard-shelled invertebrates. Implicit in this definition is not only the ingestion of hard-shelled prey but also
the mechanical dismantling of the prey carapace. The cownose ray, Rhinoptera bonasus, is a large
coastal pelagic stingray thought to specialize on bivalve prey. Investigation of feeding performance in
such an animal is particularly interesting in such that the ray‘s skeletal structure is oftentimes much more
compliant than the skeleton of its prey. Using traditional morphometric analysis of jaw adductor muscle
architecture coupled with physiological estimations of muscle forces we use a three-dimensional static
equilibrium model which calculates bite forces in cownose rays over their ontogeny. Additional
considerations of our model include the notion of asymmetrical biting and a jaw lever system shift which
maximizes mechanical advantage. Here we present the first biomechanical model for a myliobatiform
stingray using bite force as a performance metric. Preliminary data regarding bite force production in
Rhinoptera over their ontogeny show force production spanning from 17 N in neonate animals to over 200
N in mature adults. Concern regarding the effect of cownose ray predation on commercial bivalve
species is addressed with consideration to ecomorphology, specifically how high bite forces in
Rhinoptera translate to feeding success on commercial shellfish.



Komaki, Shohei (Institute for Amphibian Biology, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University);
Kurabayashi, Atsushi; Mafizul, Islam (Institute for Amphibian Biology, Graduate School of Science,
Hiroshima University, Higashihiroshima, 40, Japan); Tojo, Koji (Department of Biology, Faculty of
Science, Shinshu University, Matsumoto, 26, Japan); Sumida, Masayuki (Institute for Amphibian Biology,
Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University, Higashihiroshima, 40, Japan)

Distributional change and epidemic introgression in overlapping areas of Japanese pond frog
species over 30 years

Pelophylax nigromaculatus, P. porosus porosus, and P. p. brevipoda are three pond frog species
distributed in Japan. The distribution of each frog overlaps at two basins in central Japan (P.
nigromaculatus and P. p. porosus in the Matsumoto basin, and P. nigromaculatus and P. p. brevipoda in
the Ina basin), and hybrid descendants have been found in these areas. To clarify the distributional areas
and hybrid zones of the frogs, and to understand the mode of introgressive hybridization and its impact on
the frog populations, we conducted exhaustive sampling at each basin and performed allozyme and
mtDNA analyses with 233 individuals. In the Matsumoto basin, we analyzed 199 individuals (from 16
localities), and 44 P. nigromaculatus, 33 P. p. porosus, 8 possible F1 hybrids, and 34 hybrid descendants
between P. nigromaculatus and P. p. porosus were detected. Comparing the present distribution and that
of 30 years ago, it is revealed that the distribution of P. p. porosus has been narrowed and fragmented by
the invasion of P. nigromaculatus. Allozyme and mtDNA data of hybrid individuals strongly suggested
directional hybridization between female P. p. porosus and male P. nigromaculatus. Because



                                                                                                           385
reproductive efforts in females are usually much larger than those in males, when directional hybridization
occurs, mother species will suffer more damage than father species. Thus, the distributional change
would have been caused by the invasive directional hybridization by male P. nigromaculatus. In the Ina
basin, we analyzed 114 individuals (from 14 localities), and 45 P. nigromaculatus, 6 P. p. brevipoda, 1 F1
hybrid, and 61 hybrid descendants were detected. Pelophylax nigromaculatus was distributed over the
entire area of this basin and the distribution of P. p. brevipoda was limited to the northern part of the basin
sympatric to P. nigromaculatus. Comparing to the past report (30 years ago), distributional change of
these two frog species was not observed. However, our genetic analyses detected very few ―pure‖ P. p.
brevipoda individuals (n = 8) while we found 35 P. p. brevipoda–like individuals based on external
morphology. Given that these species have been co-occurred in this basin at least for 3 decades and
population size of P. p. brevipoda has been very small, ―pure‖ P. p. brevipoda individuals would have
been reduced by long-term accumulation of introgressed gene from P. nigromaculatus into P. p.
brevipoda populations. Consequently, this study shows that, in both Matsumoto and Ina basins, P.
porosus populations are commonly threatened by interspecific-hybridizations and subsequent gene
introgressions from P. nigromaculatus. Among the basins, however, introgressive hybridizations damaged
P. porosus populations in different ways.



Konopik, Oliver (University of Wuerzburg); Fayle, Tom (University of South Bohemia, Ceske Budejovice,
Czech Republic); Steffan-Dewenter, Ingolf (University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany); Grafe, Ulmar
(University Brunei Darussalam, Bandar Seri Begawan, Germany)

Impacts of logging on niche partitioning and food web structure of anuran ant-specialist
communities in lowland tropical rain forest in Borneo

As virtually all anurans are carnivorous, they are expected to play an important role as top-down
regulators of arthropods in places where they are diverse and abundant such as in Southeast Asian
rainforests. Arthropods and especially ants are well known to play key roles in tropical ecosystems, such
as pollination, seed dispersal and predation. Thus, abundant arthropod predators are likely to interact with
these ecosystem services.

Our study took place within the framework of the SAFE project (Stability of Altered Forest Ecosystems) in
Southeast Asia on the island of Borneo. We flushed stomachs of riparian anurans, which are the species-
richest amphibian communities on Borneo. We collected the samples at night in both secondary and
primary forests. In total we sampled more than 1000 individuals from 28 species. Prey items were
identified to order level with the exception of ants that were identified to genus and assigned to
morphospecies (or species where possible). From this dataset we were able to categorize the riparian
anuran species into ant-specialists, ant-avoiders and generalists. In addition, we collected ecological data
from the literature to assign the different ant taxa to certain ecological groups.

An unusually high number of over 226 ant morphospecies from 59 genera were found within the sampling
area. The number of ant species within a single stomach sample differed between frog species, but
generally ranged between 5 and 22. The composition of ant taxa eaten by the frogs together with their
ecological characteristics revealed a strong niche partitioning for the foraging habitat of the anuran
community: leaf litter, arboreal and generalist. We also identified differences in the food web structure
between secondary and primary forests that can be used to further clarify the shift in ecological
functioning in human modified forests.




                                                                                                           386
Konstantinidis, Peter (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Olsson, Lennart (Friedrich Schiller University
Jena, Jena, Germany); Hilton, Eric (Virginia Institute of Marine Science, Gloucester Point, VA, United
States)

Comparative ontogeny of the musculoskeletal systems of the head in non-teleostean
actinopterygians

The musculoskeletal system of the head and jaws of actinopterygian fishes has been the focus of many
studies due to their proposed key factor role for this group‘s evolutionary diversification. Most studies
however have either been concentrated on highly specialized teleostean groups or very broadly
comparative studies of distantly related taxa. To better understand the phylogenetic history of the
musculoskeletal system of the head and the jaw apparatus a more comprehensive and comparative study
of closely related taxa is needed. Therefore we have begun a comparative ontogenetic study of non-
teleostean actinopterygians. The juvenile and adult stages of these species are highly derived and their
aberrant states can easily be misinterpreted. In contrast, early in morphological development, highly
complex structures such as the head and the jaws are organized more simply and can homologous
structures can more easily be traced from their first appearance through to their terminal conditions. A
comparison of the early ontogeny of the musculoskeletal structures of the head across taxa will allow a
more detailed understanding and better resolution of the evolutionary processes leading to the
diversification of actinopterygian fishes. In this study we examined complete ontogenetic series of
Acipenser transmontanus, Polyodon spatula, Lepisosteus osseus, and Amia calva using whole mount
immunohistochemistry, 3D-reconstrcution of soft tissues, histology, and clearing and staining. The results
of this study will be discussed and used as the base of our ongoing study of morphological diversification
of the jaw apparatus within teleostean fishes.



Konstantinidis, Peter (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Dillman, Casey (Virginia Institute of Marine
Science, Gloucester Point, VA, United States); Metscher, Brian (University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria);
Olsson, Lennart (Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Jena, Germany); Hilton, Eric (Virginia Institute of
Marine Science, Gloucester Point, VA, United States)

Comparison of the jaw development between in the North American paddlefish, Polyodon
spathula, and the white sturgeon, Acipenser transmontanus

In this study, we compare the development of the jaws and associated musculature of the North
American paddlefish Polyodon spathula and the white sturgeon Acipenser transmontanus. Both taxa,
members of the order Acipenseriformes, have specialized feeding strategies: adult paddlefishes are filter
feeders with a large forward facing mouth, and adult white sturgeons are bottom feeders with a
subterminal, ventrally directed mouth. To identify the ontogenetic changes that result in these differences
in the adult condition for each species we used whole-mount antibody staining of the musculature,
histology, clearing and staining, microCT imaging of soft tissues, and 3D-reconstruction techniques. We
document that these differences in feeding style are strongly reflected in the morphology of the jaws and
the result of changes introduced in late stages of development. Paddlefishes have an elongated
palatoquadrate that is enclosed laterally by the large adductor mandibulae, while the palatoquadrate of
the white sturgeon is a stout cartilaginous block with a relatively small adductor mandibulae muscle,
connecting the palatoquadrate and Meckel‘s cartilage close to the jaw joint. Although the terminal
conditions are highly disparate between these two species, early ontogenetic stages of the two species
closely resemble each other. This leads to the hypothesis that developmental constraints in early
ontogeny are strongly linked to larval feeding behaviour.




                                                                                                        387
Korfel, Chelsea (The Ohio State University); Hetherington, Thomas (The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, United States)

Detecting a lower temperature threshold for amphibian survival in the context of an endemic
pathogen, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd): identifying an environmental refuge for high
Andean frogs

The amphibian chytrid, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), has contributed to the declines and
extirpations of anurans worldwide, and tadpoles are a likely reservoir for this enzootic disease. Here, we
have studied the prevalence of Bd in Gastrotheca pseustes tadpoles ranging from 2500-4200 masl in
Cajas National Park. While other studies have tested the high-temperature climactic threshold for Bd, our
work studies the lower critical limit for infection. Temperature decreased with increasing altitude at our
sites, and Bd prevalence also decreased with increasing altitude / decreasing temperature. The upper
limit of G. pseustes distribution corresponds to lab-tested temperatures near the critical minimum for Bd.
We also provide evidence that Bd-infection in tadpoles may result in poor body condition. These findings
suggest searching for rare species at the ecological edges of their distributions and that amphibian
conservation efforts should be conducted beyond the critical temperature limits of the fungal pathogen,
Bd.



Korfel, Chelsea (The Ohio State University); Hetherington, Thomas (The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, United States)

Seasonal And Habitat-associated Patterns Of Bd Infection In Green Frogs (Lithobates clamitans)
And Bullfrogs (L. catesbeianus) In Central Ohio

The amphibian chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), is widespread throughout central
Ohio. Green frogs (Lithobates clamitans) and bullfrogs (L. catesbeianus) are two generalist amphibian
species that are active from spring through autumn in Ohio and inhabit a broad range of aquatic habitats,
including streams, emergent wetlands, and vernal pools. We collected samples of these species from
March – November for two seasons (2010, 2011) and in different wetland habitats. Patterns of
occurrence of Bd were associated with both season and habitat, but these patterns of occurrence were
not correlated with infection intensity. On multiple occasions individuals were sampled in the same habitat
months apart, and data from these recaptured animals showed that frogs can lose, gain, and maintain low
intensity infections throughout the season of amphibian activity. Both asymptomatic bullfrogs and green
frogs were found with infection intensities above the reported critical threshold of 10,000 zoospore
equivalents; however, most infections were low intensity. We found that frogs displayed higher infection
rates but lower infection intensities in cooler conditions such as springtime or ravine streams compared to
warmer conditions such as summertime or emergent wetlands. These findings demonstrate that Bd can
persist in temperate environments experiencing temperatures well beyond the range of thermal tolerance
of Bd in laboratory experiments. Our findings also suggest that species such as green frogs and bullfrogs
can serve as reservoirs of Bd in temperate environments. Such information on the dynamics between
amphibian hosts and this fungal pathogen in a temperate environment contributes to a better
understanding of potential impacts of Bd on vulnerable amphibian species in temperate habitats
worldwide.




                                                                                                        388
Kotharambath, Ramachandran (University of Kerala); Wilkinson, Mark (The Natural History Museum,
London, London, United Kingdom); Oommen, Oommen V (University of Kerala, Trivandrum, India);
George, Sanil (Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Thiruvananthapuram, India); Nussbaum, Ronald
A (University of Michigan, Museum of Zoology and Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Ann
Arbor, United States); Gower, David (The Natural History Museum, London, London, United Kingdom)

Establishing the systematics of poorly known, elusive and ''lost'' caecilian species: the case of
Ichthyophis longicephalus Pillai 1986 (Amphibia: Gymnophiona: Ichthyophiidae) from the Western
Ghats of India.

The systematic foundation of most peninsular Indian caecilian species, both old and recent discoveries, is
generally weak. Species characterizations are mostly based only on type descriptions, using small
samples from point localities. The lack of follow-up systematic studies of described species coupled with
their generally cryptic habits has resulted in the poor understanding of the taxonomy, distribution,
population status and natural history of most peninsular Indian caecilians.

Ichthyophis longicephalus Pillai, 1986 is the least well-known striped Ichthyophis from the Western Ghats,
a 1600 km long mountain chain parallel to the western coast of India. This species has long been known
only from a poorly preserved holotype, collected from Silent Valley National Park in 1979, and a doubtful
referred specimen from c. 320 km south of the type locality. We conducted extensive fieldwork in 2009-
2010 aimed at ‗rediscovering‘ this species and stabilizing its systematics. The 2010 fieldwork was part of
the Amphibian Specialist Group of Conservation International‘s ''Search for the Lost Amphibians''
programme 2010. We conducted > 255 person hours of digging at 11 localities in forest and
anthropogenic habitats spread along approximately 250 km of the southern Western Ghats. We did not
find I. longicephalus in 47 hours of digging at its type locality, but we did find seven new specimens at two
new localities, 52 and 104 km north of the type locality. In addition, two overlooked specimens collected in
1990 from a third locality, 105 km north of the type locality, can also be identified as I. longicephalus.
Morphological comparison with types of Ichthyophis allows the new material to be referred to I.
longicephalus and for this species to now be better characterized. Mitochondrial DNA sequence data are
consistent with the interpretation that the new specimens represent a single species distinct from (and
most closely related to I. tricolor among) sampled congeners. The specimen previously referred to I.
longicephalus from c. 320 km south of the type locality is not I. longicephalus and likely represents an
undescribed species. The ‗rediscovery‘ of I. longicephalus, in disturbed habitats and new localities (some
of them protected), indicates that the species should be transferred from the Data Deficient category to
the Least Concern category of the IUCN Red List. The search for I. longicephlaus also generated new
knowledge on the distribution of other Western Ghats caecilians, including discovery of a hitherto
unknown indotyphlid species. Our study shows that new field surveys can contribute substantially to the
understanding of caecilians, especially generating the quality voucher specimens needed to underpin
understanding of diversity and distribution. India is fortunate in having native caecilians and caecilian
biologists, but more work needs to be done to make the most of this opportunity.



Kouba, Andrew (Memphis Zoo); Vance, Carrie; Willard, Scott (Mississippi State University, Mississippi
State, United States)

Emerging trends and challenges for in-vitro fertilization as a conservation tool for amphibian
captive assurance programs

For decades now developmental and evolutionary biologists have been using anurans as research
models due to the unique and rapid development of the tadpole life-stage. In order to collect gametes,



                                                                                                         389
eggs and sperm, for their studies and to insure that animals could continue to contribute multiple times to
subsequent experiments, a means had to be devised to induce spermiation and ovulation from live
animals. This research need ushered in the study of anuran hypothalamic hormones and pituitary
gonadotropins as well as the study of mammalian non-homologous hormone replacement therapy. Two
hormones that have been widely used for stimulating reproduction in amphibians include a synthetic
analog of luteinizing hormone releasing hormone (LHRH) and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG).
These two hormones efficacy for inducing spermiation or ovulation appear to be species-specific even
within similar taxonomic families. For example, LHRH is much more potent for stimulating spermiation in
Rana pipiens, whereas hCG is more potent for Rana sevosa. While there is a vast amount of literature on
the use of hormones to induce sperm collection and ovulation in a few laboratory model anuran species,
there has been limited application of these technologies to endangered species. In addition to challenges
associated with which hormone is most efficacious for obtaining gametes, collectively we know that the
following factors can impact the success of adapting these protocols to new species: 1) route of hormone
administration; 2) concentration of hormone; 3) timing of collections and synchronization; 4) how to collect
spermic urine or express eggs; and 5) frequency of hormone administration. In particular, studies
applying assisted reproduction technologies to urodeles and caecilians have been virtually ignored
placing these captive assurance colonies in greater threat of losing gene diversity over time than for
anurans. This symposium presentation will summarize what we know about the use of hormone therapy
for amphibian natural breeding and assisted reproduction, as well as emerging trends and challenges for
the future.



Kriger, Kerry (SAVE THE FROGS!);

SAVE THE FROGS! -- Promoting a Society That Respects and Appreciates Nature and Wildlife

Creating a frog-friendly human society is the single greatest action we can take to protect amphibians and
the habitats on which they depend. In May 2008 I founded SAVE THE FROGS! (www.savethefrogs.com),
America‘s first and only public charity dedicated to protecting amphibians. SAVE THE FROGS! works in
California, across the USA and worldwide to protect amphibian populations and to promote a society that
respects and appreciates nature and wildlife. Save The Frogs scientists have given over 200 public
presentations on amphibian conservation to schools, universities, government agencies, community
groups, businesses and nonprofits, to more than 10,000 attendees. We conceived and coordinate the
annual Save The Frogs Day, the world‘s largest day of amphibian education and conservation action.
Save The Frogs Day has been officially recognized by the Governors of Virginia and North Carolina, and
has been featured on CNN worldwide TV and the front page of Le Monde. Our supporters have held
Save The Frogs Day events in 29 countries. SAVE THE FROGS! has an ongoing campaign to get the
harmful pesticide Atrazine federally banned and out of production. On the 3rd Annual Save The Frogs
Day I led an anti-Atrazine rally at the steps of the US Environmental Protection Agency DC and a week
later gave a presentation on amphibian conservation to ten of the agency‘s pesticide scientists and
delivered over 10,000 petition signatures calling for an Atrazine ban. We have gotten two restaurants and
76 supermarkets to stop selling frog legs, and 12 schools to abandon frog dissections in exchange for
free Digital Frog 2.5 virtual dissection software. At my request, the City of Santa Cruz, California passed
legislation banning the importation, sale, release and possession of American Bullfrogs (Rana
catesbeiana), and we are calling on the state of California to do the same. In September 2011, we
launched SAVE THE FROGS! Ghana, the first international branch of SAVE THE FROGS!, and we are
now making plans for SAVE THE FROGS! Bangladesh, where we have active supporters at five
universities. The SAVE THE FROGS! website (www.savethefrogs.com) has over 250 pages of
information and has been accessed by over one million visitors. I encourage all scientists and graduate



                                                                                                        390
students to give public presentations or lead field excursions to show members of the public wild
amphibians in their natural habitats on future Save The Frogs Days; to contact their local media outlets to
offer interviews; and to impress upon their undergraduates the importance of nonprofit organizations as
an integral aspect of amphibian conservation efforts.



Krochmal, Aaron (Washington College);

Habitat Familiarity Drives Successful Terrestrial Navigation in Eastern Painted Turtles (Chrysemys
picta picta)

Aquatic turtles leave the water and traverse terrestrial habitats during oviposition or when seeking out
new aquatic habitats. Though overland movements are central to the biology of aquatic turtles, relatively
few studies have been devoted to nature, patterns and mechanisms of such movements, in part because
their fleeting nature makes them difficult to document. Using radiotelemetry, we investigated the terrestrial
movements of Eastern Painted turtles ( Chrysemys picta picta ) as they left an ephemeral water source
seeking new aquatic habitats. We monitored turtles at Chesapeake Farms (Kent Co, MD), a 3300-acre
wildlife management property where certain ponds are drained each summer as part of a waterfowl
management regime, enabling us to investigate how turtles naturally seek out new aquatic habitats. We
radiotagged 19 adult C. p.picta and monitored their movements from the time they left their home pond
until they reached a new, permanent water source. For comparison, we translocated 10 individual C. p.
picta from the Chester River Field Research Center (Queen Anne‘s Co, MD) to the same focal ponds at
Chesapeake Farms – a straight-line distance of 11.5 mi – and monitored them alongside resident turtles.
All resident turtles located a new, permanent water source within 24h of leaving their home pond.
Residents followed one of four specific, intricate routes to new water sources, and animals monitored for
two seasons (N=10) followed identical routes both years. All translocated turtles failed locate new aquatic
habitat in 480h, and instead, roamed the terrestrial habitat without direction. Even when portions of their
routes overlapped with those of resident animals, translocated animals failed to locate water, indicating
that they were unable to navigate novel habitats using sensory information alone. Relative to residents,
translocated individuals traveled greater distances at slower rates, changed direction more frequently,
and moved in irregular, non-linear patterns, failing to avoid navigation barriers. When taken together,
these results indicate that turtles seem to rely on habitat familiarity – as opposed to sensory information –
to direct successful overland movements, demonstrate the importance of habitat familiarity to directing
turtle movements overland, and call into question the suitability of translocation as a conservation method
for aquatic turtles.



Kroetz, Andrea (University of South Alabama, Dauphin Island Sea Lab); Drymon, J. Marcus (Center for
Ecosystem Based Fishery Management, Dauphin Island Sea Lab, Canada); Powers, Sean P. (University
of South Alabama, Dauphin Island Sea Lab, Canada)

Did the Closure of Katrina Cut Impact the Movements of a Coastal Shark?

Bonnetheads ( Sphyrna tiburo ) are highly mobile fish that occupy dynamic coastal environments.
Identifying the factors influencing the distribution of these fish is essential for understanding potential
impacts induced from anthropogenic alterations to coastal ecosystems. Dauphin Island is a barrier island
that was split into two halves in 2005 by Hurricane Katrina. This opening, known as Katrina Cut, allowed
for water flow between the Gulf of Mexico and Mississippi Sound and also served as a potential
passageway for mobile consumers to move freely between the two water bodies. Following the



                                                                                                         391
Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010, Katrina Cut was closed off by a solid rock wall in an attempt to
prevent oil from reaching the shoreline. Acoustic telemetry was used to asses if altering Dauphin Island‘s
natural coastline hindered ingress/egress of bonnetheads into Mississippi Sound. There were changes in
bonnethead movement from 2010-2011. Prior to the closure of Katrina Cut, bonnethead detections were
concentrated in a small area proximal to the cut during spring and summer of 2010. Following the closure
of Katrina Cut, telemetered sharks relocated to the west tip of Dauphin Island and Petit Bois Island, MS
during spring and summer 2011. A shift in preferred prey, habitat or abiotic parameters all present
possible explanations for the shift in distribution of this coastal shark. Regardless of the mechanism,
acoustic telemetry presents a means by which to identify a rapid shift in habitat use by a mobile consumer
in response to an anthropogenic alteration.



Kross, Chelsea (University of South Carolina Upstate); Gibbs, Elliott; Hayes, Adrian; Pilgrim, Melissa
(University of South Carolina Upstate, Canada)

The occurrence and calling phenologies of anurans in the Piedmont of South Carolina

Of the 6,260 described species of amphibians, 32.5% are listed as globally threatened by the World
Conservation Union. In response to global amphibian declines, the Declining Amphibian Task Force
developed the North American Amphibian Monitoring Program (NAAMP). The program uses breeding call
surveys to monitor anuran populations regionally. South Carolina joined NAAMP in 2008. As part of this
program, we conducted call surveys for 110 potential breeding sites distributed within 11 routes that span
10 Piedmont counties. Following standard NAAMP protocol for data collection, we completed 1, 257 call
surveys between 4/10/2008 and 6/23/2011. In this study, we used our call survey data to evaluate
species richness, anuran distributions, interspecific variation among anuran calling phenologies, and
relative abundance of detected anuran species. We recorded calling activity at each of the 110 potential
breeding sites and documented the occurrence of 16 anuran species in our region. The species we
documented were widespread, as we recorded 8 of our 16 species calling at over 40% of our sites. We
detected interspecific variation in calling phenologies. Species calling had clear times of peak calling
activity and we separated them into early-, mid-, and late-season breeding assemblages. Most species in
our region appear to have some established populations, as we determined that average calling
intensities for 15 of the 16 species were greater than one.       Using an ANOVA, we determined that
average calling intensities for our 8 most frequently recorded species differed significantly (F 7,989 =
50.5, p< 0.001). Tukey‘s HSD indicated that the eight average calling index scores separated into 5
groups. Overall, data we collected are contributing to a growing amount of information relevant to
monitoring the presence and persistence of anuran species.          Our hope is that through time such
information databases will allow researchers to develop conservation strategies that could slow
amphibian decline.



Kruger, Donnavan (North-West University); Weldon, Che; du Preez, Louis (North-West University,
Potchefstroom, South Africa)

Naming an umbrella: Morphology of the elygium

Tadpoles and adults of several frog species have a projection over the pupil of the eye that is believed to
be an adaptation to protect the eye from excessive light. In tadpoles this projection is a pigmented zone
originating from the dorsal margin of the iris and is called an elygium, whereas in the adult frog‘s eye the
projection is a fleshy dilation of the iris stroma, extending over the pupil and referred to as an



                                                                                                        392
umbraculum. However, these terms are commonly confused and used arbitrarily. This study aimed to
examine the ultrastructure of the eye in the Phofung River Frog (Amietia vertebralis) tadpoles using light
and transmission electron microscopy and to provide clear guidelines for the use of the terms elygium
and umbraculum. The elygium consists of an accumulation of chromatophores nested between the
stroma and corneal endothelium. A smaller ventral elygium is also present in this species and has the
same morphological arrangement as the dorsal elygium. The umbraculum is a homologous structure in
the eye of post-metamorphic A. vertebralis that starts to develop already in the tadpole and below the
overlaying elygium. The umbraculum is an extension of the iris stroma and analogous to the ventral
pupillary nodule, which is present in most frog species.



Kuhajda, Bernard (Tennessee Aquarium Conservation Institute); Piteo, Matthew; Fluker, Brook
(University of Alabama, Canada)

Evaluation of breeding site fidelity in the imperiled Trispot Darter, Etheostoma trisella

The Trispot Darter, Etheostoma trisella , is endemic to the Coosa River drainage of the Mobile Basin,
where it is extremely rare. Because E. trisella , as other members of the subgenus Ozarka , requires
highly specialized spawning habitat of spring seeps in ephemeral and headwater streams, it is
susceptible to habitat destruction and alteration. In October 2008, E. trisella was rediscovered in Little
Canoe Creek (Big Canoe Creek tributary) in St. Clair County, Alabama, after not being collected in the
state for 50 years, and multiple breeding sites have been discovered within the same creek system.
During the non-breeding season E. trisella resides in creeks and small rivers and must locate ephemeral
streams to spawn annually, therefore they may possess homing abilities to locate natal seep areas. To
test the possibility of homing ability or breeding site fidelity in E. trisella , microsatellite DNA data were
compared between four breeding sites within the Little Canoe Creek system from samples collected
during the 2011 breeding season. These included three ephemeral seep areas with only 200 to 800
meters separating the mouths of these tributaries and a fourth spawning area approximately 5.4
kilometers upstream. We evaluated genetic structure, migration, and homing tendencies. The four
breeding sites were not a homogenous group. Genetically based assignment tests showed that
individuals were more often assigned to their home site compared to other potential breeding sites, and
each breeding site contained a high percentage of non-migrants. Collectively, these results suggested the
possibility of breeding site fidelity for E. trisella . This information on the breeding behavior of E. trisella
is crucial for the conservation of this imperiled species, as individuals may prefer to return to their natal
site for spawning, as opposed to other potential breeding sites, and habitat destruction or alteration of
breeding sites could negatively impact reproductive success of E. trisella more than previously thought.



Kuhn, Arianna (Villanova University); Bauer, Aaron; Todd, Jackman (Villanova University, Biology
Department, Villanova, PA, United States)

Molecular phylogenetics of South African flat geckos (Gekkonidae: Afroedura) Loveridge, 1944
and the recognition of seven new species

The Family Gekkonidae comprises over 900 species in 54 genera and is nearly cosmopolitan in its
distribution. Among the areas of highest gekkonid diversity is the geologically complex and ecologically
diverse region of southern Africa. A number of gecko genera endemic to this region have been studied
phylogenetically, but one diverse genus of particular biogeographic interest for which no explicit
phylogenetic hypotheses have been published is Afroedura. The members of this genus are restricted in



                                                                                                            393
their distributions chiefly to rocky areas of South Africa but a limited number of species extend northwards
into Namibia, southern Angola, Zimbabwe, and southern Mozambique. The distribution of flat geckos,
however, is highly fragmented and most species are allopatric. We investigated phylogenetic
relationships for 14 of the 18 recognized species and subspecies of Afroedura, using nine molecular
markers, six of which have never been used in a comparative framework for squamates. Using Likelihood
and Bayesian analyses, a species tree was estimated that identified four distinct clades corresponding to
discrete biogeographic regions. Afroedura hawaquensis, the only representative taxon from the
southwestern Cape, is sister to all other Afroedura. Other groups include an Eastern Cape clade
comprising A. karroica, A. tembulica, and A. amatolica, and a tropical clade — A. bogerti, A. africana, A.
loveridgei, and A. transvaalica. Remaining species fell into an Eastern clade distributed chiefly in
Mpumalanga and Limpopo provinces of South Africa and in Swaziland. This final clade includes several
recognized species — A. langi, A. marleyi, A. major, and A. multiporis, but also seven new species, all
previously distinguished on morphological grounds but as yet undescribed. These new taxa highlight the
significance of the Eastern Escarpment and adjacent regions for Afroedura and provide further evidence
for discrete areas of endemism in this part of the subcontinent. Afroedura‘s area of greatest diversity
complements those of other rupicolous geckos in the genera Pachydactylus and Goggia, which show
their greatest richness in the southwestern Cape and in arid regions of the Northern Cape and Namibia.



Kühnel, Susanne (Friedrich Schiller University Jena); Beckmann, Felix (Helmholtz-Zentrum Gesthacht,
Canada); Kupfer, Alexander (University of Potsdam, Canada)

Genital morphology and the evolution of reproductive modes in caecilian amphibians

All caecilian amphibians practice internal fertilization via a unique copulatory organ: the everted male
cloaca. Since the caecilian cloaca is ontogenetically a part of the digestive system it is not a separate
structure exclusively dedicated for reproduction, like e.g. the squamate hemipenis.          Nevertheless
complex and diverse morphologies have evolved that include different patterns of longitudinal ridges,
tuberosities or crests, but also paired blind sacs. Previous morphological studies mostly concentrated on
the male cloaca. However, the true function of the intromittent organ during copulation, the presence of
corresponding female genital structures and general pattern and the evolution of characteristic species or
lineage-specific morphologies remain unclear. Here we present a comparative evolutionary study on
general and functional morphology aspects of the caecilian cloaca. Using specimens housed in natural
history museum collections we explore the cloacal anatomy of both sexes of several species representing
the major clades and reproductive modes by dissections and conventional histology combined with state
of art soft tissue SRµCT-scans. The results are interpreted within an evolutionary framework based on
most recent phylogenetic hypothesis, to check for gains and losses of specific genital morphologies. We
also test for sexual selection issues and if morphological patterns are linked to the highly variable
reproductive modes and levels of maternal care or other morphological aspects.

In summary the comparative investigation into the complex reproductive morphology of caecilians offers
great potential for the understanding of the evolution of vertebrate reproduction.




                                                                                                        394
Kuhnz, Linda (MBARI); Bizzarro, Joseph (University of Washington, Seattle, United States); David, Ebert
(Pacific Shark Research Center Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, Moss Landing, United States)

In-situ Observation of Deep-living Skates in the Eastern North Pacific

We report on in-situ observations of more than 500 deep-sea skates from between 600 and 3,322 m
among a variety of locations, including: the Pacific Northwest, northern California, the Monterey Canyon,
central California seamounts, southern California basins, and the Gulf of California. Physical information
(i.e., geographic location, depth, habitat associations), and biological data (i.e., species, sex, maturity,
behavior) were evaluated. Multiple skates of an unknown species were observed below 3,000 m and
represent some of the deepest visual observations of skates. Several additional unidentified species were
observed. This study also extends the maximum depth range of Amblyraja badia, Bathyraja abyssicola,
and B. spinosissima.



Kume, Gen (Nagasaki University); Furumitsu, Keisuke (Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, 3, Japan);
Yamaguchi, Atsuko (Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan)

Life history of fanray Platyrhina tangi in Ariake Bay, Japan

Growth, reproduction and feeding habits of fanray Platyrhina tangi were examined in Ariake Bay. Age
determination was conducted by vertebral centrum analysis using soft X-radiography. Annual band pair
deposition was determined by marginal increment and edge analyses. The von Bertalanffy growth model
best described the overall pattern of growth for both males and females (males L = 455.2, k = 0.56, t0 =
−1.09; females L = 555.8, k = 0.28, t0 = −1.77; L is the theoretical asymptotic total length in mm, k is the
growth rate coefficient and t0 is the theoretical time at zero length). The observed maximum ages were 5
years for males and 12 years for females.

Females reached sexual maturity at an older age and larger size than males [50% sexual maturity: male,
393 mm total length (TL) (2.1 years); female, 421 mm TL (2.9 years)]. The present data support a distinct
annual reproductive cycle for P. tangi. Parturition occurred from August to November followed
immediately by mating, ovulation and fertilization. Mature females become pregnant every year, and the
gestation period is almost 1 year. Fertilized uterine eggs without macroscopic embryonic development
were present throughout the annual reproductive cycle, indicating that the species utilizes embryonic
diapause as its reproductive strategy. Both reproductive tracts of females were functional, and fecundity
ranged from 1 to 12 with a mean of 6.0, increasing with TL.

Of 334 stomach specimens, 324 contained food and 10 (3.0%) were empty. Thirty-seven taxonomic
levels of prey were identified. The most common prey was shrimp, followed by fish and mysids. There
were no differences in the composition of the diet between sexes, but an ontogenetic dietary shift was
observed. Trophic level analysis revealed that trophic level increased with size; however, this species is
consistently a secondary consumer. Dental sexual dimorphism was also observed. Specifically, mature
males had much longer and sharper cusps than females and immature males. Since males and females
had similar diets, dental sexual dimorphism may be related to their reproductive behaviour.




                                                                                                        395
Kuo, Chi-Yun (University of Massachusetts Amherst); Irschick, Duncan (University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Amherst, MA, United States)

Lizard tail autotomy in a gradient of predation pressure: a field study of the common side-
blotched lizards Uta stansburiana

Antipredator traits often exhibit considerable variation among populations occupying different
geographical regions. As the level of antipredator responses should theoretically be fine-tuned to
predation pressure, antipredator traits presents an excellent model system to study the mechanisms that
drive phenotypic variation among populations. Autotomy is a striking example of a costly antipredator
strategy that exhibits extensive geographic variation. In this study, we explored the ecological mechanism
behind this variation by testing the hypothesis that the facility of autotomy varies among populations
under different predation intensities. Specifically, we tested whether the stimulus to induce autotomy will
be lower in individuals from high predation environments. To do so, we chose four Uta stansburiana
populations along a north-south transect (Arizona, Nevada, Oregon and Washington). We estimated
predation intensity using demographic data from the field and measured the threshold stimulus to induce
autotomy in each population. We then examined the relationship between the magnitude of predation
intensity and the threshold stimulus of autotomy among populations. A negative relationship will indicate
that the facility of autotomy responds to variation in predation intensity and therefore might be under
natural selection. On the contrary, a lack of variation in the threshold stimulus for autotomy suggests that
the facility of autotomy might not respond to predation and therefore might not evolve under different
predation regimes.



Kupfer, Alexander (University of Potsdam, Germany);

A brief review on recent discoveries in the golden age of caecilian biology

Traditionally the caecilian amphibians have been regarded the most poorly studied and least known major
group of vertebrates. About two thirds of caecilian species are categorized as ―Data Deficient‖ in recent
IUCN conservation assessments. However more recently we have seen major breakthroughs in
knowledge of caecilian biology, with remarkable discoveries including lunglessness, species biodiversity,
highly unusual reproductive modes, evolutionary relationships based on DNA sequences, functional
morphology and quantitative ecology. This talk will introduce into some of these major findings and how
they have been achieved but also tries to identify future research themes in the study of caecilian biology.



Kupfer, Alexander (University of Potsdam, Germany); Reinhard, Sandy (University of Jena, Germany,
Canada)

Life history evolution and sexual size dimorphism in newts and salamanders (Caudata:
Salamandridae): a comparative approach

Among amphibians the true salamanders and newts (Salamandridae) show an extraordinary diversity of
mating systems and reproductive strategies, i.e. favour aquatic or terrestrial reproduction, breed in lotic or
lentic waters, are either oviparous or viviparous and exhibit various interspecific trade-offs between
reproductive parameters. Sexual size dimorphism (SSD) indicates the difference in body size of mature
organisms, already described by Charles Darwin for salamanders. The presence of SSD often correlates
with a distinct adaptation to reproductive roles or ecology, whereas natural and sexual selection show
their effects. We have collected and reviewed current available data and analysed the evolution of life



                                                                                                          396
histories and SSD using a comparative phylogenic approach. Female biased SSD seem to prevail in
most aquatic breeders but male biased SSD has evolved at least in three clades both in lentic and lotic
habitats. Moreover a positive correlation between egg size and larval size, as well as between clutch size
and female body size supports a fecundity driven evolution of body size in lentic breeders.



Kurabayashi, Atsushi (Hiroshima University); Matsui, Masafumi (Graduate School of Human and
Environmental Studies, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 32, Japan); Belabut, Daicus; Hoi-Sen, Yong (Institute of
Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia); Ahmad,
Norhayati (Institute for Environment and Development (LESTARI), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,
Selangor, Malaysia); Sudin, Ahmad (Institute for Tropical Biology and Conservation, University Malaysia
Sabah, Sabah, Malaysia); Kuramoto, Mitsuru (Fukuoka University of Education, Munakata, 46, Japan);
Hamidy, Amir (Graduate School of Human and Environmental Studies, Kyoto, 32, Japan); Sumida,
Masayuki (Institute for Amphibian Biology, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University, Higashi-
hiroshima, 40, Japan)

From Antarctica or Asia? New colonization scenario for Australian-New Guinean narrow mouth
toads suggested from the findings on a mysterious genus Gastrophrynoides

Microhylidae is a geographically widespread family of anurans. Although several extensive molecular
analyses have attempted to elucidate their subfamilial relationships, and correlate these with Mesozoic
and Cenozoic continental drifts, consensus has not been reached. Further, generic level relationships
have not been well investigated in some microhylid subfamilies, and therefore subfamilial affiliations of
some genera are still unclear. To re-examine the subfamilial relationship of microhylids, to elucidate the
phylogenetic positions of two mysterious Asian genera, Gastrophrynoides and Phrynella, and to better
understand the trans-continental distributions of microhylid taxa, we performed molecular phylogenetic
and dating analyses using the largest molecular dataset (7164 nucleotide sites and ~ 52 microhylids)
applied to these taxa to date. We newly sequenced six nuclear genes and two mitochondrial (mt) genes
(approximately 8 kbp) from 22 microhylid frogs from eight subfamilies. The maximum likelihood and
Bayesian analyses resulted in the following phylogenetic information. (1) The recent view of the sister
relationship of Microhylidae and Afrobatrachia is disputable. (2) The subfamilial relationship of microhylids
suggested so far could be narrowed down to three alternatives. (3) Generic relationships of microhylines
were largely elucidated, excluding the positions of Chaperina, Micryletta, and Kaloula . (4) Although two
previous studies estimated different divergence ages for microhylid subfamilies, our estimated ages were
similar to the older one. Remarkably, our results clearly showed that one of two problematic Asian
genera, Phrynella , was nested in the clade of the Asian subfamily Microhylinae. By contrast,
Gastrophrynoides      occupied the most basal position of the Australian-New Guinean subfamily
Asterophryinae. The estimated divergence of            Gastrophrynoides from other asterophryine was
unexpectedly around 50 million years ago.         Although a colonization scenario via Antarctica to the
Australian-New Guinean landmass has been suggested for Asterophryinae, our finding suggested a novel
colonization route via Indo-Eurasia.




                                                                                                         397
Kurita, Kazuki (Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University); Hikida, Tsutomu
(Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan)

Island Colonization and Speciation of the Ryukyu Five-Lined Skink, Plestiodon marginatus, in the
Ryukyu Archipelago, Japan.

Oversea dispersal is one of the most important processes in the island colonization of many reptile taxa.
Here we obtained phylogeographic evidence for two cases of long oversea dispersals in Ryukyu five-lined
skink, Plestiodon marginatus. The Ryukyu Archipelago is located between Taiwan and the Japanese
main islands and divided into five island groups from south to north: the Yaeyama, Miyako, Okinawa,
Amami, and Tokara Groups. Three species of Plestiodon in East Asia have been recognized as a
monophyletic group: P. elegans from Taiwan and continental China, P. stimpsonii from the Yaeyama
Group, and P. marginatus from the Okinawa, Amami, and southern Tokara Groups. Previous studies
suggested that the populations from the islands of the northern Tokara Group resulted from the
colonization of P. marginatus by oversea dispersals. However, colonization routes, diversification periods,
and relationships among these populations have remained unclear. Phylogenetic analysis of the
populations of P. marginatus and its relatives based on a part of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene
showed that there were three distinct clades in the phylogeny. The first clade consisted of the populations
of P. m. oshimensis from the islands of the Amami Group (except for two southern islands) and the
southern Tokara Groups, and Suwanosejima Island in the northern Tokara Group. The second clade
included the populations from P. m. marginatus from the islands of the Okinawa Group, two southern
islands of the Amami Group, and Nakanoshima Island in the northern Tokara Group. The last clade
comprised P. elegans from Taiwan, P. stimpsonii from the Yaeyama Group, and the population from
Kuchinoshima Island in the northern Tokara Group. Thus, the populations from three islands in the
northern Tokara Group were derived from different sources. Furthermore, these populations diverged
during the Pleistocene after the island formations of the northern Tokara Group. In the Pleistocene, the
Kuroshio current entered the East China Sea between Taiwan and the Yaeyama Group, and flowed out
through the Tokara Group. This suggests that the ancestral populations from three islands of the northern
Tokara Group could have been carried by the Kuroshio current. The geographic distances between three
islands of the northern Tokara Group and the islands of the source populations are ca. 50 km
(Suwanosejima Island), ca. 400 km (Nakanoshima Island), and ca. 850 km (Kuchinsohima Island).



Kuriyama, Takeo (Toho University); Morimoto, Gen (Rikkyo University, Canada); Miyaji, Kazuyuki;
Sugimoto, Masazumi; Hasegawa, Masami (Toho University, Canada)

Pigment cells producing geographic anti-predator color variation of lizard, Plestiodon latiscutatus.

Body coloration of animals conveys visual signals both for the intraspecific and interspecific
communications. Coloration of prey animals suffers greater survival selection if it is for predator
avoidance than for intraspecific communication, such that survival functions of prey coloration have been
the subjects of many evolutionary biologists. However, few studies explicitly identified species that incur
selection pressures to enhance evolution of defensive coloration, primarily because it is often difficult to
detect specific prey–predator combinations with tight co-evolutionary relationships within complex web of
species. Furthermore, in order to have comprehensive understanding of proximate and ultimate
mechanisms of prey color evolution, we have to quantitatively evaluate how predators perceive and
recognize prey visual signals, have to know histological and physiological mechanisms of pigment cells
producing specific color pattern, and finally have to reconstruct history of evolutionary process.




                                                                                                        398
 Here we investigated evolution of defensive tail blue coloration of the insular lizard populations with a
hypothesis that tail coloration evolved to avoid specific predators with different color vision by integrating
predators‘ color vision, light reflectance of prey body, pigment cell mechanism producing various
coloration, and phylogeographical reconstruction of lizard-predator relationships. We selected the oceanic
island system of the Izu Islands and the adjacent Izu Peninsula as study sites, because proceeding
ecological studies already have revealed which types of predators are the major predators of the
respective island populations of the lizards, as lower insular biological diversity aided us to identify prey-
predator interactions much easier than continental situations.

 The lizard, Plestiodon latiscutatus, endemic to the Izu Islands and peninsula, showed marked
geographical color variation in terms of vividness of body stripe and blue tail, in which color pattern varied
coincidently with predator fauna (carnivore mammals, snakes and birds) of the islands. The lizards of
Peninsula type have vivid stripe and blue tail on the Izu peninsula and Oh-shima, where three types of
predators, carnivore mammals (Mustera itatsi), diurnal snakes (Elaphe quadrivirgata), the insectivorous
birds (Turdus celaenops) are living with the lizards. The lizards of the Kozu type have less vivid body
stripe and tail with brown at base, green at middle and blue at tip on the islands where the snakes are
major predator. Finally, the lizards of the Hachijyo-kojima type have obscured body stripe and mostly
brown colored tail with faint blue at the distal end of the tail.



Kwun, Hyuck Joon (Pukyong National University); Kim, Jin Koo (Pukyong National University, Canada)

Phylogenetic position of the genera Eulophias and Zoarchias (Perciformes: Zoarcoidei) using
mitochondrial and nuclear DNAs

Suborder Zoarcoidei comprises 9 families and 105 genera, their taxonomic position is not clear because
of no diagnostic characters. Among them, the genera Eulophias Smith, 1902 and Zoarchias Jordan
and Snyder, 1902 are representative problematic groups. According to morphological and osteological
studies (Makushok, 1958, 1961), Eulophias belongs to the family Stichaeidae, but Zoarchias belongs to
the family Zoarcidae based on their caudal skeleton. Subsequently, Zoarchias moved to the family
Stichaeidae based on dorsal and anal fins structure, i.e., dorsal fin with many spines and many soft rays,
and anal fin with one spine and many soft rays. On the other hand, the family Zoarcidae members almost
have soft rays only in dorsal and anal fins (Anderson, 1994). Also, Zoarchias members are similar to the
family Stichaeidae than to the family Zoarcidae in having gill membranes free to isthmus and 2-3 epurals
(Anderson, 1994). Notwithstanding, these two genera still have taxonomic problems up to date (Nakabo,
2002; Mecklenburg and Sheiko, 2004). Therefore, in order to clarify taxonomic position of the two genera
( Eulophias and Zoarchias ) we analyzed mitochondrial and nuclear DNAs of two species, and also
compared with those of 23 species as outgroup.



Kyosoung, KOO (Jeju National University);

The effects of salty environment on the development of tadpoles of Japanese tree frog, Hyla
japonica

The study investigated the effects on the development of Japanese tree frog, Hyla japonica, by salty
environmental conditions such as the breeding site containing seawater by sea waves and wind. During
the reproduction season (early May to late July), the field survey was conducted in Geomun-do, the island
in Korea. Based on the survey, the Japanese tree frogs that are bigger than the frogs in other places and



                                                                                                          399
the tadpoles of the frogs inhabit in the abnormal water condition containing seawater were found. We
presumed that the salty circumstance brings both of positive and negative influences to the frogs. Two
kinds of breeding sites confirmed the habitation of the frogs and tadpoles were selected to determine the
effects of salty environment: (1) the water near shore including seawater; (2) fresh water in inside of the
island. The tadpoles in salty and fresh water have monitored in the discovered places of them. In the
laboratory, the containers with three conditions were arranged, and the tadpoles from salty and fresh
water were housed in each conditions; salty water, fresh water, aged tap water. During this study, the
time to the metamorphosis and the morphological changes of the tadpoles were estimated recorded.



LaBrecque, John (San Francisco State University); Clark, Brian (San Francisco State University, San
Francisco, United States)

Who's Your Daddy?: Multiple Paternity is a derived reproductive strategy and a synapomorphy for
the Embiotocidae (surfperches)

The Spotfin Surfperch Hyperprosopon anale and the shiner surfperch Cymatogaster aggregata,
(Embiotocidae), are viviparous fishes that exhibit a unique reproductive strategy. Unlike most fishes
Embiotocids give birth to a relatively few number live offspring; a costly parental investment. Therefore,
having multiple paternity would be an important tactic for maximizing fitness and genetic diversity. Two of
13 Embiotocid genera have been shown to use multiple paternity as a reproductive strategy. In order to
infer whether multiple paternity is a general strategy of all Embiotocid surfperches, it is crucial to examine
members of the basal group, which consists of the genera Amphistichus and Hyperprosopon (subfamily
Amphistinae). Of these, Hyperprosopon anale, the spotfin surfperch is the most ancestral taxon. We
found that Hyperprosopon exhibit multiple paternity with a varying number of sires per brood. In addition,
we compared aspects of this strategy including number of sires and offspring per brood in a northern
population of Cymatogaster with data from a previous study of a southern population.



LaDuc, Travis (The University of Texas at Austin); Christiansen, James (The University of Texas at
Austin, Canada)

Should I stay or should I go? Temporal persistence and activity of Kinosternon flavescens (Yellow
Mud Turtle) in permanent tanks in the Chihuahuan Desert

Even slight differences in the timing and amount of rainfall can have tremendous effects on desert-
adapted turtle species. Since 2006, we have studied a population of Kinosternon        flavescens (Yellow
Mud Turtle) across a 31 square km section of a private ranch in the Chihuahuan Desert (Jeff Davis Co.,
TX) using mark-recapture techniques as well as radio telemetry. We focused our efforts on four perennial
windmill-fed cattle tanks, trapping tanks 4-6 times between May and October, and marking over 300
turtles to date. Sex ratios were female-biased; male turtles grow faster and larger than female turtles.
Turtles do not overwinter in the tanks, instead returning to the water in May and June, and remaining
inthe tank as late as September. Variation and/or delays in summer rains have the potential of shifting
reproduction and movements of turtles at tanks separated by as little as 7 km. At the largest tank, less
than 10% of the turtles were captured for five consecutive seasons. The presence and temporal
persistence of turtles in the tanks during a given active season varied greatly, with some turtles captured
only once during a season but others captured multiple times. This presence and persistence in captures
varied between the sexes as well as between populations at different tanks with the correlations between
these captures and precipitation patterns to be discussed. Recruitment, based on the presence of second



                                                                                                          400
calendar year or younger turtles, was highly variable as well, again differing between tanks and years.
Radio telemetry revealed additional information about the timing of movements in adults, particularly
those movements to and from the water during the active season.



Lahti, Megan (Arizona Western College); Brodie, Jr., Edmund (Utah State University, Canada)

Morphological Variation of Dwarfed Populations of Short-horned Lizards and Great Plains Toads
in the San Luis Valley, Colorado

Morphological measurements are reported for dwarfed populations of short-horned lizards and Great
Plains toads inhabiting an isolated valley in south-central Colorado (the Valley). Since the initial reporting
in 1968, no studies have investigated the extent or degree of body size reduction in these presumably
isolated populations. Using both museum and live specimens, 16 morphological features of adult toads
(n = 92 museum, 139 live) and 27 morphological features of adult lizards (n = 103 museum, 73 live) were
measured. Females and males of both species were significantly smaller than their non-valley
counterparts (p &lt; 0.05); Valley toads were 34% smaller than non-Valley populations while Valley
lizards are 30% smaller. Valley populations of both species are disproportionately dwarfed compared to
populations adjacent to the Valley including significantly smaller head lengths in lizards (p = 0.0004) and
significantly smaller head widths, parotoid lengths, and head lengths in toads (p &lt; 0.09). A MANCOVA
indicates that there is a both a locality and sex effect on the morphologies of both species (p &lt; 0.001)
and a sex*locality interaction for toads (p =0.04).        The morphological uniqueness among dwarfed
populations of lizards and toads provides insight into the effects of their presumed isolation within the
Valley, such as implications towards potential variation in their life/natural- histories and genetic diversity.



Lamarre, Philippe (University of Montreal); Angers, Bernard (University of Montreal, Canada); Réale,
Denis; Milot, Emmanuel (UQAM, Canada)

Men, snakes and islands; impact of fragmented landscapes on the genetic organization of two
colubrid species.

The Montreal metropolitan community includes numerous islands located at the confluence of the Saint-
Lawrence and Ottawa Rivers. In such a fragmented landscape, dispersal of animals is limited by the
distance between islands. Similarly, populations within the strongly urbanised Montreal Island are
separated by increasing stretches of poor or inhospitable habitats, affecting both dispersal and population
size. This study seeks to assess the effects of these factors by comparing the organization of genetic
diversity, using microsatellite markers, of two highly distinct snake species. The common garter snake ( T.
sirtalis ) has a high dispersal ability and should thus be less influenced by insularity. Consequently, global
diversity between islands and continent is expected to be similar and differentiation among insular
populations low. On the other hand, Dekay‘s brown snake ( S. dekayi ) is specialized in open and recently
disrupted habitats and its population size should then be less impacted by human perturbations. As a
result, differentiation between populations in disturbed and undisturbed areas is expected to be similar,
whereas the opposite should be observable in T. sirtalis . This study is designed to provide a
comprehensive picture of the impacts of human activities on both dispersal and population size in snakes.




                                                                                                            401
Lambert, Max (Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies);

Microhabitat use by turtles in a highly modified waterway: will removing introduced red-eared
sliders alter basking behavior of threated western pond turtles?

Western pond turtles ( Emys=Actinemys marmorata ) are California‘s only native aquatic turtle species.
Western pond turtles are declining throughout their range but maintain dense and seemingly healthy
populations in developed habitat. Red-eared sliders ( Trachemys scripta elegans ) have been distributed
throughout the world due to the pet trade and are considered the most widely introduced reptile in the
world. Although sliders are viewed as a problem species there has been little documentation of their
effect on native turtle populations. We measured both varying (e.g., visibility and human disturbance) and
also non-varying (e.g., slope and substrate) characteristics of 24 basking sites in a highly modified
northern California waterway. From 2009-2010 we surveyed each species‘ presence at all sites. We
found that a higher frequency of human disturbance, shallower slopes, deeper water adjacent to the
basking site, and a steel mesh substrate were all associated with higher relative abundance of the
introduced sliders. This study indicates that the two species are using habitat differently in this highly
modified waterway but cannot distinguish between competitive exclusion and species-specific habitat
preference as the cause of these differences. In the summer of 2011 we removed most of the red-eared
sliders from the waterway and are now assessing if pond turtles alter basking behavior in response to the
slider removal. By treating slider removal as a large-scale experimental treatment, we hope to determine
the response of pond turtles in the next few years.



Lana, Fernanda (Federal Rural University of Pernambuco); Hazin, Fábio; Oliveira, Paulo; Rego, Mariana;
Roque, Pollyana (Federal Rural University of Pernambuco, Canada)

Reproductive Biology, Relative Abundance and Distribution of Silky Shark, Carcharhinus
falciformis (Muller & Henle, 1939), in the Southwestern and Equatorial Atlantic Ocean

The present work aimed at studying the ecology of the silky shark, Carcharhinus falciformis , including
aspects of its reproduction, relative abundance, distribution, habitat use and migration in the Equatorial
Atlantic Ocean. From November 1992 to December 2011, 153 specimens were examined, 72 males and
81 females, resulting in a sex ratio close to 1:1 (0.89:1.00). All specimens were caught by commercial
tuna longline boats, in the area located between the latitudes of the 008°N to 053°S and longitudes 008°E
to 048°W. The results suggest a size at first maturity for females around 205- 210 cm and for males
between 180- 205 cm TL. Females were found in 5 maturational stages: juvenile (n = 29/ 35.8% from 74 -
204 cm, TL), maturing (n = 10 / 12.3%, from 215 - 295 cm TL), pre- ovulatory (n = 14 / 17.3%, 177 - 280
cm TL), pregnant (n = 24 / 29.6%, 203 - 270 cm TL) and resting (n = 4 / 4.9%, from 223 - 285 cm TL).
Males were classified into 4 stages: juvenile (n = 38/ 52.8% from 81 - 220 cm TL and clasper length - CL
&lt;12 cm), maturing (n = 16/ 22.2%, from 166 - 208 TL cm, 9.5 - 24.5 cm CL;), adult (n = 17/ 23.6%, from
141 - 272 cm TL, CL&gt; 24.5 cm) and neonate (n = 1/ 1.4%, 82 cm TL, CL 4 cm). The ovarian fecundity
ranged from 2 to 60 follicles and uterine fecundity from 7 to 25 embryos. The distribution and relative
abundance were analyzed based on catch and effort data from 16.016 sets made by Brazilian tuna
longliners, from 2004 to 2011. The area with the highest concentration was located between latitudes
005ºN and 020ºS and between longitudes 020ºE and 040ºW. The proportion of silky sharks in relation to
the total catch in numbers and catches of sharks in general, equal to 0.2% and 6.4%, respectively, were
very low, showing the character of their incidental catches. The habitat preferences and their distribution
in depth, temperature ranges and vertical movement, were analyzed using PSAT tags (Pop-up Satellite
Archival Tag) in the vicinity of Archipelago of Saint Peter and Saint Paul – ASPSP. Two males of silky




                                                                                                       402
sharks of 130 cm and 100 cm TL each were tagged with PSAT programmed to remain in the animal for
73 days collecting data. The preferred temperature range displayed by the species was between 27 - 28°
C with a preferred depth between 1 - 10m, showing a markedly shallow distribution for the species. The
animals also exhibited a marked superficial behavior during the day and a little deeper at night.



Landler, Lukas (Virginia Tech / University of Vienna); Gollmann, Günter (University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria)

Magnetic orientation of the Common Toad: establishing an arena approach for adult anurans

Background

Magnetic orientation is a taxonomically widespread phenomenon in the animal kingdom, but has been
little studied in anuran amphibians. We collected Common Toads ( Bufo bufo ) during their migration
towards their spawning pond and tested them shortly after displacement for possible magnetic orientation
in arena experiments. Animals were tested in two different set-ups, in the geomagnetic field and in a
reversed magnetic field. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study testing orientation of adult
anurans with a controlled magnetic field of a known strength and alignment.

Results

After displacement, toads oriented themselves unimodally under the geomagnetic field, following their
former migration direction (d-axis). When the magnetic field was reversed, the distribution of bearings
changed from a unimodal to a bimodal pattern, but still along the d-axis. The clustering of bearings was
only significant after the toads reached the outer circle, 60.5 cm from their starting point. At a virtual inner
circle (diameter 39 cm) and at the start of the experiment, orientation of toads did not show any significant
pattern.

Conclusions

The experimental set-up used in our study is suitable to test orientation behaviour of the Common Toad.
We speculate that toads had not enough time to relocate their position on an internal map. Hence, they
followed their former migration direction. Bimodality in orientation when exposed to the reversed magnetic
field could be the result of a cue conflict, between magnetic and possibly celestial cues. For maintaining
their migration direction toads use, at least partly, the geomagnetic field as a reference system.



Lang, Jeffrey (Gharial Conservation Alliance);

Gharial Ecology on the Chambal River, North India

Following a die-off (&gt;100 animals) of Gavialis gangeticus in winter 2007-08, ecological and behavioral
studies were initiated on the resident breeding population in the lower Chambal River, near the Yamuna
confluence. Over 4 yrs, individual gharial (11f:9m; 2-3.5m totl) have been tracked via radio telemetry at
daily/weekly intervals, and the distribution and abundance of gharials of all size/age classes have been
monitored weekly/monthly. Local observers, traveling by motorbike/on foot, have documented the
seasonal movements and behavioral ecology, particularly during breeding, of free-living adults and
subadults in an open, dynamic river system subject to monsoonal flooding and periodic drought.
Individual gharial exhibited well-defined, predictable residency patterns that varied seasonally. Most



                                                                                                            403
frequented 5-15km of river length, inhabiting an upstream segment in low water/dry season, and a
downstream area during the monsoon. Some made exceptional, long-distance seasonal movements (80-
140km+), moving downstream with high water, and returning upstream 3-6 months later. To date, the
resident population under study appears to be healthy, and the size/age distribution of animals indicate
annual breeding and hatchling recruitment.      Behavioral interactions of adults and young have been
observed and photographed during hatching, immediately post-hatching, and throughout the first year for
young. Male and female gharial guard and defend incubating eggs and newly hatched young from
predators. Close associations of yearlings with each other (at 9 months of age) and with attending adults
suggest that parental care continues through the first year of life. In gharial, biparental care, and in
particular paternal defense of young, may be the usual condition for this unique crocodilian lineage.
These studies are directly relevant to management /conservation strategies, and also of interest in
understanding the ecology and evolution of parental care in crocodilians.



Langhammer, Penny (Arizona State University); Burrowes, Patricia (University of Puerto Rico, San
Juan, PR, United States); Bryant, Anna (Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United States); Lips, Karen
(University of Maryland, College Park, MD, United States); Collins, James (Arizona State University,
Tempe, AZ, United States)

Chytridiomycosis in a direct-developing frog: ontogenetic variation in susceptibility, pathogen
transmission, and population-level impacts of the amphibian chytrid fungus in Eleutherodactylus
coqui

The Caribbean is a hotspot of amphibian decline, with nearly 75% of species threatened with extinction.
Three species of direct-developing frogs went extinct on Puerto Rico in recent decades, and the pathogen
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), which causes chytridiomycosis, is a suspected cause. Long-term
field data indicate that extant species are also declining, including Eleutherodactylus coqui. In theory,
extinction from infectious disease can occur if disease-induced mortality is significant and pathogen
transmission is maintained despite low host densities. In Central America direct-developing species are
among those that survive epidemic waves of chytridiomycosis. Their persistence may be related to a
lower dependency on water bodies, resulting in reduced pathogen growth and transmission. We studied
the ontogenetic susceptibility of the direct-developing Eleutherodactylus coqui to Bd. We also estimated
the rate of Bd transmission to test if direct (animal-to-animal) and indirect (environment-to-animal)
transmission occurs in a terrestrial species. We exposed adult and juvenile (6-21 weeks in age) E. coqui
frogs to Bd under identical conditions, and monitored morbidity, mortality, and recovery over 11 weeks.
Juvenile frogs exposed to Bd had lower survival than control froglets or adults, while most adults were
able to clear infection rapidly. Through a series of experiments, we discovered that the rate of Bd
transmission is low, but indirect transmission does occur: frogs can become infected by using a habitat
previously inhabited by an infected frog. Juvenile coqui frogs have higher Bd infection prevalence and
intensity than adults, and our work has shown that they are more susceptible to mortality from disease.
This ontogenetic difference in susceptibility has important implications for frog populations in the
Caribbean: endemic Bd can lead to reduced recruitment by reducing survival of juveniles, even if adults
are relatively resistant or tolerant. We will use the data on transmission and susceptibility to develop and
analyze a stage-structured disease model to explore the population-level outcomes of chytridiomycosis
on direct-developing frogs.




                                                                                                        404
Langhorne, Cecilia (Mississippi State University); Calatayud, Natalie; Rowlison, Tricia (Mississippi State
University, Mississippi State, United States); Kouba, Andrew (Memphis Zoo, Memphis, TN, United
States); Vance, Carrie; Willard, Scott (Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, United States)

Short-term cold storage and cryopreservation of boreal toad (Bufo boreas boreas) sperm

Natural breeding can be difficult to initiate in captive populations of threatened amphibians, such as the
southern Rocky Mountain boreal toad (Bufo boreas boreas), and exogenous hormone protocols have
been established to bypass unknown environmental cues and stimulate gamete release and breeding.
However, asynchronous sperm-egg release is still a problem and can reduce fertilisation potential. Thus,
alternative means for storing sperm short-term (2-5 days) or in long-term genetic resource banks for in-
vitro fertilisation would improve the number of tadpoles that could be produced and released into the wild.
The objectives of this study were to: 1) explore the potential for short-term storage of spermic urine at
4˚C, and 2) develop an optimal long-term storage solution by establishing a successful cryopreservation
protocol for boreal toad sperm. Preliminary studies in this species identified the hormone human chorionic
gonadotrophin (hCG), at a dose of 10 IU/g, as effective in promoting spermiation, with peak sperm
concentration between 3 and 7 hours post-hormone administration (PA). Spermic urine samples were
collected at 2, 3, 5, 7, 9, 12 and 24 hours PA and the following sperm parameters were measured:
percent motility, percent forward motility and quality of forward movement. Samples with sperm motility
greater than 67% were selected and stored at 4˚C for up to 14 days and motility parameters measured
daily. Mean percent motility decreased by 13% over the first 24 hours, 40% by day 7, and by day 14 had
reduced to 11%, while forward progression was maintained up to an average of 8 days. We are currently
testing the toxicity of a number of penetrating cryoprotective agents by incubating with spermic urine at
4˚C for 1, 5, 10 and 20 minutes and analysing subsequent motility parameters. In addition, we hope to
report on optimisation of cooling and thawing rates to ascertain the most effective conditions for sperm
freezing and recovery. Protocol efficacies will be assessed by evaluating membrane integrity and post-
thaw analysis of sperm motility parameters. The ability to maintain viable sperm in cold storage not only
provides a means of sperm transportation between captive assurance colonies but also allows for the
preservation of genetic material and storage of unique genes for the long term conservation of the boreal
toad.



Langkilde, Tracy (Penn State University);

Invasive species management viewed through an evolutionary lens: lessons from Fire Ants

Billions of dollars are spent each year on the management of invasive species in the United States alone.
Mitigation is typically based on effects of invaders on native species, usually soon after introduction.
Efforts to protect native taxa from ―unnecessary‖ perturbations are though to increase their ability to
survive future impacts. Long-term effects of invaders are poorly known, but likely to be critical when
prioritizing management strategies. Red imported Fire Ants (Solenopsis invicta) act simultaneously as
predators and venomous prey upon native species, including the Eastern Fence Lizard (Sceloporus
undulatus). Adult lizards from fire ant invaded sites are faced with strong within-lifetime selection for anti-
predator behavior and have evolved longer legs, which allow them to avoid encounters and escape fire
ant attack. Juvenile lizards are most vulnerable to fire ants as toxic prey, because they are stung inside
the mouth as they eat these invasive ants. Juveniles have evolved to avoid eating fire ants, but acquire a
―taste‖ for fire ants as adults. Newly invaded lizard populations are therefore likely to be strongly
impacted by fire ants, but quickly adapt to survive this threat. This research reveals that evolutionary and
lifetime exposure to threats posed by global change can interact in complex ways to shape adaptive




                                                                                                           405
responses. Ensuring native species have the capacity to evolutionarily respond to threats can be
important for facilitating their survival of future perturbations.



Lannoo, Michael (Indiana University School of Medicine);

Ethics and values in amphibian conservation in the United States

Across most of the United States, amphibians have not shown they carry the economic or emotional clout
to save amphibians. Therefore amphibian conservation biologists should consider increasing efforts to
join forces with other groups holding shared interests. Many candidate cooperative groups are oriented
around game and fish, which are commercially important and have been able to weather the policies of
both sides in the current malevolent bipolar political climate in this country. Such groups would offer hope
for amphibians in all areas of the country, and in all political climates, not just those favoring
environmental interests. However, game and fish policies favoring amphibians have not generally been
formalized; such practices currently depend on the interests, values, and ethics of individual land
managers. In lieu of yet more legislation, establishing a new ethic that recognizes amphibians as critical
components of most American ecosystems would go far towards conserving amphibians. Here I use an
example from our recent work on Crawfish Frogs ( Lithobates areolatus ) to show how engaging land
managers can promote amphibian conservation outside of formal institutional policies and practices in a
region of the country not known for its progressive politics.



Lardner, Bjorn (Colorado State University); Savidge, Julie (Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO,
United States); Reed, Robert; Rodda, Gordon (U.S. Geological Survey, Fort Collins, CO, United States)

A telemetry-based method for measuring animal activity

Radio transmitters for animal telemetry can be built to incorporate a mercury switch that causes the signal
to change from a fast pulse rate to a slow pulse rate depending on how the transmitter is oriented. But the
lack of signal change is not evidence that the animal did not move, because not all movements cause the
switch to tip. We tried to increase the reliability of information on activity in juvenile Brown Treesnakes
(Boiga irregularis) by analyzing, with the sound analysis program Avisoft SAS Lab Pro, not just pulse rate
but also the signal amplitude received and recorded (with a <$100 digital recorder) at a fixed station. We
exploited the fact that the transmitter‘s antenna orientation relative to the receiving antenna affects the
strength of the signal received. Also the structure and density of vegetation between the transmittered
animal and the receiver will cause variation in received signal amplitude when an animal travels through a
heterogeneous habitat. There are commercially available data loggers that automate collection of this
type of data, but they can be quite expensive – especially if more than one logger is required (as when
multiple animals located far from each other are simultaneously tracked). Our solution is comparably
cheap, but more labor intensive. However, we believe our method can extract more data, or data of better
quality, than can commercial logging stations, because we have the ability to tailor the signal detection
settings afterwards. Doing so, we can optimize the delicate tradeoff between failing to detect transmitter
signals (signal discrimination threshold set too high) versus registering excessive background radio
frequency noise (threshold set too low). We describe field recording obstacles that we experienced;
provide pros and cons of different software analysis workflows; show how pulse rate data compare to
amplitude data; and visualize how weather station data can be aligned with activity diagrams. We note
that those who work on very small animals, requiring the most lightweight possible transmitters (e.g. 0.35




                                                                                                        406
g), might be able to use amplitude data alone to avoid the additional weight (0.4 – 0.5 g) inflicted by
inclusion of a position-sensitive switch with the transmitter.



Lardner, Bjorn (Colorado State University); Rodda, Gordon; Yackel Adams, Amy (U.S. Geological
Survey, Fort Collins, CO, United States); Savidge, Julie (Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO,
United States); Reed, Robert (U.S. Geological Survey, Fort Collins, CO, United States)

Detection rates of geckos in visual encounter surveys: Turning confounding variables into useful
knowledge

Visual encounter surveys without capture-mark-recapture are prone to generate population size indices
suffering from an unknown bias because survey conditions differ in time and space. Knowledge of
variables that cause such variation, and the size of their effects, can be used to guide the collection of
relevant survey covariates, correct survey data, or anticipate situations where bias might be unacceptably
large. Adjusting for these ‗nuisance‘ variables can simultaneously help shed light on the ecology of the
target species. We used negative binomial regression to evaluate confounding variables for a data set
where 220-meter long transects were surveyed at night, on 9,475 occasions, for invasive Brown
Treesnakes (Boiga irregularis) and – as a by-product – their gecko prey (primarily Hemidactylus frenatus
and Lepidodactylus lugubris). Searchers differed substantially in gecko detection rates with the most
extreme pairwise comparisons differing by a factor of six. Detection rates with the worst and the best
headlamp differed by a factor of at least two. More geckos were seen during wet weather conditions, but
the effect size was small. Strong winds had a negative effect on sightings, and the wind effect is
potentially as large as those of searchers or headlamps. The moon phase caused 14% more gecko
sightings when contrasting a detection-rate peak (waning and new moon) to a detection-rate dip (a few
nights prior to full moon). The latter result was obtained when simultaneously adjusting for whether or not
the moon was above the horizon at the time of the focal transect survey, which had an additive effect
corresponding to 11%. Fitting a sine function to data suggested that the gecko population size was 24%
higher at the end of the wet season than at the end of the dry season. There was also strong support for
more long-term population fluctuations. The various factors influencing gecko counts are likely to play a
role in nocturnal surveys of many cryptic species. While some factors can be addressed well with
measured covariates, others will be difficult to eliminate as a significant source of error in long-term
monitoring programs.



Larson, Derek (University of Toronto); Evans, David (Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, ON, Canada)

Tooth variation in Varanus komodoensis

Establishing the range of intraspecific variation of taxonomically informative characters is essential when
recognizing species based on morphological characters. In fossil datasets, this information is often
lacking due to restricted sample sizes of individuals of a known species, with many fossil vertebrates
known only from a single individual. Varanus komodoensis , as the largest extant lizard and the largest
living animal with xiphodont (latterally compressed, serrated) teeth, has often been used in
palaeobiological studies as a model for theropod dinosaurs in terms of feeding behaviour and tooth and
jaw biomechanics. Here we use V. komodoensis to illustrate the range in variation in the teeth of an
extant xiphodont faunivore. Fifteen skulls of reproductively adult Varanus komodoensis were measured
to evaluate the degree of morphological variation present in the species. Nineteen linear skull
measurements were taken, and three gross tooth measurements as well as mesial and distal tooth



                                                                                                       407
denticle size were measured for each of ten teeth across the tooth rows. Tooth counts vary little among
specimens, the smallest specimens having one fewer dentary tooth positions than the largest skulls, but
maxillary and premaxillary tooth counts remaining identical. Denticle size and tooth width in regionally
equivalent teeth also remain essentially constant across the size ranges even though tooth length and
height increase approximately proportionally to skull size. These findings suggest that some aspects of
tooth morphology are remarkably consistent between individuals and robust to differences in body size.
Comparison of multiple individuals indicates the potential of diagnostic characters in teeth. The presence
of consistent measurements at the same tooth position in individuals differing in size also suggests the
possibility of identifying tooth position consistently based on tooth morphology. These results have
implications for the study of theropod dinosaurs, as most of our knowledge of the abundance and
diversity of these animals comes from the description of isolated teeth. These results are important for
understanding the role this variation plays in the functional morphology.



Larson, Shawn (Seattle Aquarium); Griffing, Denise; Hollander, Joel; Christiansen, Jeff (Seattle
Aquarium, Canada)

Summary of sixgill shark tagging and abundance estimates from 2003-2009 in the urban inland
waters of Elliott Bay, Seattle

Anecdotal reports of diver-shark encounters in the Pacific Northwest stimulated interest in the normally
deep-dwelling, poorly studied bluntnose sixgill shark (Hexanchus griseus) and the reason for its
presence in the shallow waters of the Salish Sea. Capture/Mark/ Recapture techniques were used to
identify individual sharks for population structure and movement pattern analysis. Temporal changes in
relative abundance in Puget Sound are reported from a controlled study site (2003-2005) at the Seattle
Aquarium and citizen sighting/encounter reports (2000-2009). At the Seattle Aquarium study site on Elliott
Bay, Seattle, 45 sixgills were tagged with modified Floy visual marker tags, along with an estimated 116
additional untagged sixgills observed via video camera.          The majority of sixgills observed were
adolescents, and they were found to be significantly more abundant in the summer months. Observations
of sixgills peaked in 2003-2005 and declined to very few observations from 2006-2009. While
conservation measures have been enacted in Washington and British Columbia waters, additional
measures may be necessary as large, long-lived sharks like sixgills are thought to be unable to sustain
exploitation.



Lattanzio, Matthew (Ohio University); Miles, Donald (Ohio University, Athens, OH, United States)

Functional consequences of disturbance for tree lizards: Integrating isotopic evidence from
multiple trophic levels

Changes in resource diversity and number, mediated by trophic interactions, ultimately shape species
responses to disturbance. At the heart of the species response to these changes is the individual stress
response to the disturbance itself: to disperse, adapt, or go extinct. For many individuals, the most viable
option is to adapt, which usually requires some level of plasticity in trophic (functional) relationships. In
arid grassland habitats of the southwestern US, prescribed fire is a common practice intended to mimic
historical episodes of wildfire and maintain ecosystem structure and function. However, the changes to
the environment incurred by this disturbance mimic those predicted by recent models of climate change:
an increase and spread of grass cover and non-native grass species. The functional consequences of
this structural reorganization of dominant vegetation types remain unknown. Here we model changes in



                                                                                                         408
habitat and trophic linkages during a three-year period in southeastern Arizona. We monitor three study
sites: an unburned control, and two treatment sites varying in burn frequency. As predicted, these sites
differ significantly in resource distributions, with grass cover positively associated with burn frequency
(Analysis of Similarities, Global R=0.45, P<0.05). We focus on ornate tree lizards (Urosaurus ornatus), a
meso-predator, and model trophic linkages at each site using stable isotope analysis. Our analyses
involve mixing models of carbon and nitrogen isotopes based on tissues from multiple trophic levels (i.e.,
primary producers, arthropod consumers, and lizards). We provide a synergistic model of the functional
consequences of disturbance for lizard species that can inform future studies and conservation efforts
alike.



Lattanzio, Matthew (Ohio University); Miles, Donald (Ohio University, Canada)

Habitat use, phenotypic variation, and grazing: The responses of tree lizard populations to altered
landscapes

A major question in ecology is how the stress-responses of organisms to habitat disturbance affect
population dynamics. Because disturbance alters the distribution of resources (e.g., structural and
dietary), organisms that use those resources likely have to adjust their habitat preferences in disturbed
regions to satisfy energetic and social (e.g., territorial) demands. Moreover, offspring reared in disturbed
environments may differ in a variety of phenotypic traits, including morphology and performance
capabilities, from those in undisturbed environments.         Ranchland grazing is a common land
management practice in the arid southwestern US, yet its acute and chronic effects on wildlife remain
largely unknown. The mosaic of disturbed and unaltered patches created by grazing thus provides an
opportunity to link the stress response of reptiles with population persistence in a fragmented landscape.
Here we expand on a project begun during 2009 evaluating the phenotypic responses of tree lizard (
Urosaurus ornatus ) populations to land management practices in Arizona by presenting data from grazed
and unaltered sites in the Malpai borderlands area of Cochise County, Arizona. Results from six sites will
be presented: four grazed and two unaltered sites. Preliminary analyses highlight strong structural
variation among grazed and unaltered sites (ANOSIM, Global R = 0.276, P&lt;0.001), which is expected
to translate into variation in habitat use by tree lizards. We will analyze lizard habitat use with spatially-
explicit models to account for variation in the available environmental matrix at each site. Because these
lizards are polymorphic (associated with primary throat coloration), we will compare intra-specific
dynamics in habitat use as well. We will frame our habitat use results in the context of disturbance but
also with reference to morphological (in both size and color expression) and performance (endurance)
variation across sites. In this manner, we will be able to delineate how changes in the landscape as a
result of disturbance influence phenotypic integration by small-bodied ectotherms.



Laumann, Katie May (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Dillman, Casey; Hilton, Eric (Virginia Institute
of Marine Science, Gloucester Point, VA, United States)

Phylogenetic systematics of sturgeons (Acipenseridae) based on mitochondrial DNA data

The systematics of sturgeons (Acipenseridae) have been studied through morphological and molecular
methods, although a well-resolved, broadly accepted phylogeny remains elusive. The 25 extant species
in the family are classified in four genera:            Acipenser, Huso, Scaphirhynchus,        and
Pseudoscaphirhynchus . The two species of the genus Huso have been considered to be the sister-
group to all other sturgeon species based on morphological data; the remaining species form the



                                                                                                          409
subfamily Acipenserinae, which contains the genus               Acipenser    (17 species) and the tribe
Scaphirhynchini (including 3 species of the genus Scaphirhynchus and the 3 species in genus
Pseudoscaphirhynchus ).        Recent studies using both morphological and molecular data have
reconsidered this hypothesis, although the details of relationships vary from study to study. For example,
the position of Huso varies drastically as do the details of the break-up of tribe Scaphirhynchini (e.g.,
Scaphirhynchus has been found to be either the sister-group of all other sturgeons or sister to multiple
groupings of other sturgeon species, only some of which include                    Pseudoscaphirhynchus.
Pseuoscaphirhynchus has been found to be most closely related to A. stellatus .) Recent molecular-
based phylogenetic hypotheses have utilized relatively short segments of different loci, which may
contribute to the lack of agreement among these studies. Adding uncertainty to the reliability of some of
these studies is the use of molecular data from unvouchered specimens. In this presentation, we will offer
a new phylogenetic hypothesis for the family Acipenseridae based on more complete sequences of three
mitochondrial loci (cytochrome b , 16S, and 12S), a partial sequence for cytochrome oxidase I , and
development of additional phylogenetically informative loci. Preliminary pairwise distance analyses of loci
from full mitochondrial sequences (available for H. huso, S. albus, and six species of Acipenser ) have
shown significant variation in NADH-1 and NADH-6, indicating that these loci may be phylogenetically
informative. For this reason, these loci will be included in our analyses. The primary focus of this study is
to clarify the placement of Huso relative to species within Acipenser . Additionally, we will more
thoroughly investigate relationships among Acipenser, Scaphirhynchus, and Pseudoscaphirhynchus.



Lavin, Brian (Sonoma State University); Feldman, Chris (University of Nevada, Reno, Canada); Wogan,
Guinevere; McGuire, Jimmy (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California, Berkeley, Canada)

Biogeography in a wide-ranging forest lizard: Elgaria coerulea

Elgaria coerulea is a lizard that lives in cool moist forests and ranges around the Great Central Valley of
California into the Pacific Northwest as far north as British Columbia and into the interior mesic forests of
Idaho and Montana. The species is divided up into four subspecies, E. c. coerulea that lives in the coast
range in the vicinity of San Francisco Bay, E. c. palmeri that lives in the Sierra Nevada Mountain Range,
E. c. shastensis that lives in Northern California, and E. c. princeps that lives in the Pacific Northwest.
Previous morphometric analysis found evidence for a coastal and interior pattern class.

We examined mtDNA (ND2 and ND4) in E. coerulea throughout it's range in order to determine
biogeographical patterns. While low support was found for the relationships between most of the deeper
genetic breaks, within major lineages small scale phylogeographical patterns were present and
supported. Major lineages as well as sublineages were confined to geographical areas some of which are
major biogeographical breaks found in other species. Based on the mtDNA the biogeographical patterns
may not be supported with the current taxonomy although lineages were found that resemble E. c.
princeps and E. c. coerulea. They were also related to E. c. shastensis in the Interior Coast Range
while major lineages of E. c. shastenis and E c. palmeri were grouped together with very low support.




                                                                                                         410
Lawing, A. Michelle (Indiana University); Flecks, Morris; Ahmadzadeh, Faraham; Dambach, Johannes
(Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Canada); Engler, Jan O. (Zoologisches
Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig and Trier University, Canada); Habel, Jan-Christian; Hartmann,
Timo (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Canada); Hörnes, David (AG Zoologischer
Garten Köln, Canada); Ihlow, Flora; Schidelko, Kathrin; Stiels, Darius (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum
Alexander Koenig, Canada); Polly, P. David (Indiana University, Canada); Rödder, Dennis (Zoologisches
Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Canada)

Extinct during the past, yet still alive? Evaluating the impact of glacial cycles on species richness,
distribution, and phylogeographic patterns in Nearctic Chelonians

Global climate is changing and species must respond by tracking suitable habitat, adapting to the
changing conditions, or becoming extinct. To understand how species will respond to future climate
change, we have investigated their historic patterns of response to fluctuating climates. Glacial climate
cycles over the last two million years have repeatedly restructured the environment and changed
availability of suitable habitat. We used species distribution modelling to assess the temporal niche
dynamics in Nearctic Chelonians (n=59 of 61 species) over the last 320 ky. We choose these turtles and
tortoises because their current distributions are well documented, they have a good fossil record, they
have well resolved phylogenetic relationships, and many of their phylogeographies are modelled with
molecular data. We combine these independent lines of evidence to test two hypotheses: (1) Species
currently occupying only small ranges are more likely to be found in non-analogous climates when their
current realized niches are projected onto past climates than species occupying large ranges. (2) Our
palaeophylogeographic modelling of historical range changes are consistent with the chelonian fossil
record and molecular phylogeographic hypotheses. (1) We found that species currently occupying small
ranges are frequently forced into non-analogous climates when their potential distributions are projected
onto past climates. Comparisons of the most similar available climates with those currently occupied offer
new insights in the species‘ niche dynamics beyond their currently realized niches. However, some
species with small ranges that occur in highly stable climates (e.g., Kinosternon durangoense) are
predicted to have had minimal range expansions or contractions and were not forced into non-analogous
climates by the palaeophylogeographic models. (2) We found that our palaeophylogeographic modelling
of ranges through the past 320 ky are largely consistent with the fossil record and that our models are in
concordance with published molecular phylogeographic studies. Specifically, we are able to show that
strong bottleneck effects are evident in those species with the most extensive range contractions. In
addition, several species‘ ranges dwindle to nothing in our models during glacial maxima, highlighting
species specific niche dynamics or scale effects not covered by our framework. These issues are
discussed and compared in detail with available genetic studies.



Leache, Adam (University of Washington);

Biogeography of African Agama lizards

African lizards in the genus Agama are a diverse and widespread component of squamate diversity in
Africa. Their extensive distribution across Africa makes them an ideal group for investigating continent-
wide biogeography. Agama lizards are also exceptionally diverse morphologically and behaviorally and
have evolved a variety of social structures, habitat preferences, body sizes, and sexual dimorphic
colorations. In collaboration with 15 researchers from across Europe, Africa, and the United States, I
present a comprehensive phylogeny for African Agama lizards that captures nearly all species diversity
and paves the way for new insights into continent-wide analyses of diversification and biogeography.
Estimating phylogenetic relationships using a combination of two mitochondrial genes and four nuclear



                                                                                                      411
genes provides strong support for unique evolutionary radiations within each region of Africa. The
phylogeny also supports the parallel evolution of body sizes, habitat preferences, and social structures,
and transitions in this suite of characters are correlated. The weak support for critical nodes at the base of
the phylogeny result in estimates of the historical connections between areas and ancestral character
states with wide confidence intervals. Reducing this error by estimating a phylogeny with increased
support is being accomplished with new DNA sequence capture techniques that target 500 homologous
nuclear loci simultaneously.



Leal, Manuel (Duke University); Leal, Manuel (Duke University, Durham, NC, United States)

Behavioral flexibility and problem-solving in lizards

The role of behavioralflexibility in responding to new or changing environmental challenges is a central
theme in cognitive ecology. Studies of behavioral flexibility have focused mostly on mammals and birds
because theory predicts that behavioral flexibility is favored in species or clades that exploit a diversity of
habitats or food sources and/or have complex social structure, attributes not associated with ectothermic
vertebrates. Here, we present the results of a series of experiments designed to test cognitive abilities
across multiple cognitive modules in three species of Anolis lizards. Anoles exhibited behavioral flexibility
across multiple cognitive tasks, including solving a novel motor task using multiple strategies and reversal
learning, as well as rapid associative learning. However, the species differ in the degree of behavioral
flexibility. The observed levels of flexibility were unexpected because lizards are commonly believed to
have limited cognitive abilities and highly stereotyped behavior. Also, interspecific differences in flexibility
might be related to differences in the ecology of each species, although it is also possible that other
factors such as differences in species "personality" can contribute to our results. More generally, our
findings strongly suggest a re-thinking of our understanding of the cognitive abilities of lizards and of the
factors favoring the evolution of behavioral flexibility.



Leary, Arianne (University of North Florida Biology Department);

Evaluating the effects of the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill on coastal and pelagic species in the
Gulf of Mexico via polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon metabolite detection in bile with fixed
wavelength fluorescence

The Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill (DHOS) released large quantities of petroleum into the Gulf of Mexico. It
is vital to determine the effects on the Gulf wildlife from the oil-related pollutants, particularly the polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which are the most toxic components of oil. The goal of this study is to
evaluate the effects of the oil spill on pelagic and coastal species in the Gulf of Mexico. This study
examined PAH-metabolites, fluorescent aromatic compounds (FACs), in fish bile by means of fixed
wavelength fluorescence. Fluorescent values were measured for naphthalene, pyrene and
benzo(a)pyrene; concentrations were also determined for each FAC with biliary protein concentrations
used       to normalize.     Additionally, the ratio between petrogenic (naphthalene) and pyrogenic
(benzo(a)pyrene) FACs was assessed to analyze source of PAHs. The results show evidence for
naphthalene-, pyrene- and benzo(a)pyrene- like metabolites present in bile for all locations, suggesting
animals are accumulating PAHs and metabolizing them into FACs. The results also indicate differences
between species suggesting that species may metabolize the PAHs in different manners. Teleost showed
higher concentrations for naphthalene-like metabolites than elasmobranchs suggesting that teleost
accumulate more PAHs than elasmobranchs. Sites impacted by oil show higher naphthalene values than



                                                                                                               412
references sites, indicating the animals in these sites are accumulating PAHs that are likely due to a
petrogenic source, such as oil from the DHOS. In particular, sandbars sharks showed higher values for
naphthalene-like metabolites at oil impacted sites compared to the reference sites, but not for
benzo(a)pyrene.



Leavitt, Daniel (Texas A&M University); Fitzgerald, Lee (Texas A&M University, Canada)

Should we make generalizations about specialists? Disassembly of a lizard community in a
fragmented sand dune ecosystem

Fragmentation disrupts the structure of populations, communities, and species‘ distributions. We will
discuss a comparative field-based study examining consequences of fragmentation on lizard community
structure in a sand-dune landscape in southeastern New Mexico. We evaluated patterns of community
structure using data from nearly 12,000 captures of 8 species of lizards over a 3-year period to analyze
patterns of relative abundance, species occurrence, and idealized models of community organization.
We ask if specialists are more susceptible to fragmentation effects than generalists. Non-fragmented
sites were more diverse than fragmented sites (Hurlbert‘s ∆1: 0.40 ± 0.09; 0.22 ± 0.05; respectively, W =
8, p < 0.001). Two of the eight species present, Holbrookia maculata and Sceloporus arenicolus, were
significantly less abundant in fragmented sites than in non-fragmented sites (W = 33, p= 0.01; W = 7, p <
0.001, respectively). Structure of non-fragmented communities was suggestive of the ―nested subsets‖
model but the fragmented communities did not demonstrate any clear pattern of structure. Not all species
responded equally to fragmentation. Both H. maculata and S. arenicolus, demonstrate narrow habitat
preferences and were also the most affected by fragmentation. Holbrookia maculata select for flat,
western facing habitat with shinnery oak cover. Sceloporus arenicolus select for steep slopes in blowout
habitats. Phrynosoma cornutum is a dietary specialist but did not demonstrate a distinct response to
fragmentation though they were in higher numbers in the fragmented sites. Regardless if a species is a
specialist or generalist, the specific mechanisms responsible for reduced species abundance or presence
should be evaluated on a species-to-species basis.



Leavitt, Daniel (Texas A&M University); Fitzgerald, Lee (Texas A&M University, Canada)

Singing in the rain?: an evaluation of the endemic ecological specialist, Sceloporus arenicolus as
an umbrella species for biodiversity conservation.

The umbrella species approach to biodiversity conservation suggests that protected status for one
species will benefit other co-occurring species. In December 2010, the dunes sagebrush lizard (
Sceloporus arenicolus ) was proposed for listing as Endangered by the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service. Protection for this species was predicted to result in ―umbrella‖ protection for many other
endemic or priority species found within the Mescalero-Monahans Shinnery Sands ecosystem. At least 15
species of beetles, cockroaches, and crickets along with S. arenicolus are endemic to this ecosystem.
Some of these species are psammophilic, and use shinnery oak dunes, which is required habitat for S.
arenicolus . However, not all the endemics are dependent on shinnery oak dunes. We evaluated
endemicity and species richness patterns for ants, beetles, lizards, and small mammals at 27 locations
where dunes sagebrush lizards are present and not present. Analysis of patterns in species richness in
this ecosystem indicate that multiple habitats in addition to the habitat for S. arenicolus would be
required to prevent localized species loss and community disassembly.      We also used null models to




                                                                                                      413
compare patterns of species co-occurrence and were able to identify the scale at which presence of S.
arenicolus corresponds with high endemicity and richness.



Leeb, Christoph (University of Vienna Department of Evolutionary Biology); Ringler, Max; Ringler, Eva;
Gollmann, Günter (University of Vienna Department of Evolutionary Biology, Canada)

A camera trap study of mass-hibernation in Salamandra salamandra in the Vienna Woods, Austria

Although the fire salamander Salamandra salamandra is a character species of the Vienna Woods in
Austria, studies on the population ecology of this primarily nocturnal species are lacking for this region so
far. We investigated a population of S. salamandra in the Maurerwald, a managed forest at the city
boundary of Vienna, where S. salamandra uses small ponds and puddles as breeding sites, thereby
contrasting the common stream-breeding habits of fire salamanders. Population size was estimated via a
capture-mark-recapture study from 2010-2011. A total of 1460 capture events, representing 935 different
individuals, indicate a population size between 1900 and 2600 individuals at a density of at least 38/ha.
Location data of recaptured individuals, obtained by GPS, allowed us to identify a 0,5ha trench-system in
a rich structured part of the forest as the main winter-hibernation site. Field observations and the analysis
of movement patters suggested a prominent role of one single burrow in this trench system as a retreat
site. This was confirmed by a self-constructed light-barrier camera which we placed at the entrance of the
burrow. Off more than 25.000 photos that were taken during five month since mid-October 2011, over
5.000 showed fire salamanders, representing a total of over 160 different individuals. This indicates a
mass-hibernation of at least 6% of the estimated population size inside this single burrow, a phenomenon
which has been anecdotally mentioned in the literature, but was not investigated in detail so far. The
pictures also show that at least four out of six other amphibian species that occur in this region hibernate
in this burrow syntopically ( Ichthyosaura alpestris, Bombina variegata, Bufo bufo, Rana dalmatina ).
Furthermore Natrix natrix , a potential predator of S. salamandra , and Apodemus sylvaticus (Wood
mouse) were captured on the pictures. Our study points out the importance of rich structured habitats for
amphibians and demonstrates the significance of detailed knowledge on specific characteristics of certain
populations for effective conservation management. On the other hand our study shows the possibilities
of camera traps for individual-based studies in herpetology, a method that is underrepresented compared
to similar studies on other vertebrates.



Lee-Yaw, Julie (University of British Columbia); Jacobs, Chris (Leiden University, Canada); Irwin, Darren
(University of British Columbia, Canada)

Evidence for reduced feeding performance in a contact zone between long-toed salamander
subspecies

Studying the outcome of secondary contact between lineages that were separated in distinct Pleistocene
refugia provides insight into the fate of biological diversity in northern areas. In cases where reproductive
isolation between lineages is weak, secondary contact may result in extensive hybridization and the
eventual collapse of genetic differences between lineages. In contrast, lineages that evolved substantial
ecological or genetic differences in isolation may maintain their distinctiveness if individuals do not
recognize members of the other lineage as mates or if hybridization leads to the production of offspring
that are less fit than non-hybrid offspring. The post-glacial range of the long-toed salamander (
Ambystoma macrodactulyum ) is comprised of three distinct lineages or subspecies. Here we present
genetic evidence to support hybridization between two of these lineages where they come into secondary



                                                                                                         414
contact. To better understand the fate of these lineages, we explore the fitness of hybrid and non-hybrid
adult individuals. Specifically, we test feeding performance and subsequent mass acquisition during the
summer feeding period, a critical time for individuals to gain sufficient resources for winter hibernation and
gamete production. Results from our common garden experiment point to both reduced feeding
performance and mass acquisition in hybrid individuals. The potential implications of these results for
both the maintenance of genetic differentiation across the range of the long-toed salamander and the
taxonomic status of subspecies will be discussed.



Lefebvre, Jose (Acadia University); Mockford, Steve (Acadia University, Canada)

Male effective population and level of multiple paternity in Blanding's turtles (Emidoidea
blandingii) in Nova Scotia

Freshwater turtle mating systems have several interesting components including multiple paternity within
a clutch of eggs, and the ability of females to store sperm. Studies of turtle mating systems have focused
on the role of these female characteristics in establishing and maintaining genetic diversity within a
species, and the effect that variations in these traits have on the maintenance of viable populations.
Previous research, done at Acadia University, suggests that characteristics of male mating dynamics may
also have significant impacts on population viability. Work done on the Nova Scotia population of
Blanding's turtle ( Emydoidea blandingi) suggests that male mating success may be much lower than
previously thought, and that the effective number of breeding males may be as low as 5% of the male
census population. If true, the genetically effective size of the population (N e ) may be much lower than
the census size of the population; this would influence assessments of the species risk of extinction, and
management plans to mitigate those risks. This involved collecting genetic samples from clutches of
hatchling turtles, from the known mothers of these clutches, and from as many males as possible. These
samples were genotyped at 10-11 microsatellite loci to establish individual DNA profiles. A model will be
developed based on the rejection algorithm of Ramakrishnan et al . (2004) to estimate male mating
success based on the relationship between maternal and offspring genotypes. Two data sets exist from
other populations (Osentoski, 2001; Refsnyder, 2009) to which this model could be applied which would
provide some measure of whether the Nebm/N m ratio varies within the species.



LeGros, David (Laurentian University); Steinberg, Brad (Algonquin Provincial Park, Canada);
Lesbarrères, David (Laurentian University, Canada)

Forest roads and mitigation techniques for salamanders in Algonquin Provincial Park.

Habitat fragmentation is a serious threat to wildlife in many regions. In some regions of Canada, there are
extensive networks of roads that can fragment habitat, even in remote areas. For salamanders, which
have specific environmental requirements, roads can prevent migrations and dispersal as they represent
a physical barrier due to elevated temperatures, reduced humidity and lack of suitable hiding places. To
help mitigate the negative impacts of roads in Algonquin Provincial Park, Canada, we tested several
types of woody debris (wood chips, conifer boughs and timbers) applied to the surface of un-used forestry
roads. We hypothesize that these treatments will encourage amphibians to cross roads in specific places
by creating refuges. We used pitfall traps and to test the effectiveness of treatments. The addition of
woody debris did not show clear benefits for salamanders when sampled with pitfall traps. However,
additional analysis of the timber treatment provided insight into refuge selection by salamanders.
Salamanders chose timbers that were significantly larger than average pieces, most likely because these



                                                                                                          415
large timbers retain higher humidity and cooler temperature than small timbers. Aggregations of
salamanders also occurred under timbers, demonstrating the benefit of suitable cover when crossing
roads. Overall, our study demonstrates that applying large woody debris can create suitable short term
habitat for salamanders on an un-used logging road.



Lehr, Edgar (Illinois Wesleyan Univerity); Moravec, Jiri (National Museum, Department of Zoology, Praha
1, Czech Republic); Cusi Martinez, Juan Carlos (Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Lima,
PERU, Canada)

Herpetofaunal Inventory of the Yanachaga-Chemillén National Park in Peru

Established in 1986 the Yanachaga-Chemillén National Park (YCNP in the following) covers 1220 km²
between 460 and 3643 m elevation and is located at 10º33"37' – 17'37"S and 75º30'21" – 20'39"W in
eastern central Peru. Environmental gradients within the YCNP span the ecoregions of puna (3000 –
3643 m), montane forests (600 – 3000 m), often separated by Inter Andean valleys, and humid tropical
forests (below 600 m). Exploration of the herpetofauna has mostly been neglected. The Instituto Nacional
de Recursos Naturales reported 16 species of reptiles and 2 species of frogs from the YCNP in 1995, but
did not list these species. The few herpetological surveys that were conducted inside the YCNP in the
1980s by Hedges, early 1990s by Icochea, in 2008 by Chaparro and by Boano and colleagues, and in
2010 by Venegas and colleagues had a focus on amphibians, were short and lasted between a few days
to a few weeks. In summary, 12 new species of amphibians and one species of lizard from the YCNP
have been described since 1990.         Excursions to the YCNP will be conducted in the rainy season
between January and March 2012. The objectives are to record amphibian and reptile species along
altitudinal gradients in different ecoregions and habitats through transects and quadrat plots, to collect
data about ecology and behavior of species such as habitat preference, reproductive mode or acoustic
communication, and to describe species new to science including unknown amphibian larvae. This
presentation is aimed to summarize all available and new herpetofaunal data obtained in the YCNP.



Leite, Cleo (UNIFESP); Taylor, Edwin (University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom); Wang,
Tobias (Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark); Abe, Augusto; Denis, Andrade (UNESP, Rio Claro, São
Paulo, Brazil)

Cardiac shunts and physiological function: new experimental models x same old question

Along the last decades several evidences contribute to the assumption that the magnitude and/or the
direction of the reptile cardiac shunt, L-R shunt (systemic bypass) or R-L shunt (lung bypass) is
influenced by the physiological state of the animal and also that it is regulated. The cardiac shunt is
hypothesized to be of adaptive significance in a number of ecological and physiological situations.
Despite that, direct experimental confirmation of any fitness improvement is nonexistent until today. A
recent study on rattlesnakes, C. durissus , reported bilateral differentiation on the cardiovascular role of L
and R vagus branches. C. durissus has bilateral vagal innervation of the heart, while the resistance of
the pulmonary artery to its single lung is controlled solely by the L vagus. So the left unilateral vagotomy
(LUV) is an efficient method to prevent the cardiac shunt control in C. durissus . Recent results
evidenced that LUV was validated for long-term experiments since the absence of blood flow control
remains over time and the unilateral vagotomy by itself did not cause any harm effect. The LUV leads to
an immediate and permanent increasing in the Qpul and it has been suggested that it could change the
overall dynamic of oxygen usage due the alteration on the systemic PO 2 and O 2 cascade and so the




                                                                                                          416
RMR in different temperatures and hence, if persistent, could chronically affect some measurable
physiological parameters such as min and max VO 2 in different temperatures, long run appetite and
growth rate. Despite the hemodynamic alterations were corroborated by our experiments the supposed
consequences of it were not present. The cardiac shunt did not provide any fundamental advantage, or
play any important role: (1) for the maintenance of RMR in 15, 20 and 30C; (2) for the energy mobilization
during spontaneous or impelled activity in 20 and 30C; (3) In any factor that contributes for the energy
mobilized during digestion; (4) In any important factor for the mass conversion and growth; (5) for the
energy usage during long term food deprivation; (6) for the energetic mobilization during spontaneous or
forced activity. Until recently, the current hypotheses on the adaptive function of the cardiac shunt were
mostly deduced based on correlations between the net cardiac shunt and the physiological state of the
reptiles. Such hypotheses were not confirmed here. An alternative explanation is that the cardiac shunt
could have adaptive significance during the embryonic stage and due the low metabolic requests of the
reptile species and could simply persist in adult stages because they have not been selected against.
Such alternative explanation changes the adaptive concept for this character, which has been driving
both the experimental design for functional studies, and the view of the obtained results.



Lemckert, Francis (Niche Environment and Heritage);

Strong Breeding Site Fidelity in male Perons Tree Frog (Litoria peronii)

Perons Tree Frog is a wide ranging hylid breeding in ponds, pools and streams found in various habitats
located throughout southeastern Australia. Two old ponds and four newly constructed ponds were
searched for frogs regularly between 2004 and 2010, with individuals being collected and marked with
PIT tags to determine when and where frogs appeared. I marked 198 males at the two old ponds, which
are separated by less than 10m, but none of the 52 recaptured males (recaptured 1-9 times) were
recorded swapping ponds. The four new ponds were constructed in 2000 and are separated by distances
of less than 300m. They were colonised by adult perons tree frogs as soon as they filled and I marked
280 male frogs at the ponds with 62 being recaptured 1-3. Two frogs have been recorded using a second
pond. It appears that male frogs retain very strong fidelity to a selected breeding site. However, given that
adult frogs selected the new ponds, it is not based on returning to the natal site. This may be a case of
strong fidelity to the first chosen breeding site, with frogs opportunistically selecting an available site that
they essentially remain faithful to for the rest of their lives.



Lenders, Rob (Radboud University Nijmegen); Janssen, Ingo (RAVON & UvA/IBED, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands)

The grass snake and the basilisk, from pre-Christian protective house god to the Antichrist

The grass snake and the basilisk, from pre-Christian protective house god to the Antichrist H.J.R.
Lenders, Radboud University Nijmegen, Institute for Water and Wetland Research, Department of
Environmental Science, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.    I.A.W.     Janssen,    RAVON       foundation,
Nijmegen/Amsterdam, The Netherlands &amp; University of Amsterdam, Institute for Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Dynamics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The grass snake, Natrix natrix , is the only oviparous reptile species able of maintaining sustainable
populations in the far north of Europe (up to 67° north latitude). The species owes its far northern
distribution to agriculture, or, to be more specific, to stock breeding which resulted in the production and



                                                                                                            417
potting up of dung. Dung heaps appear to be perfect breeding sites for grass snakes and even surpass
‗natural‘ reproduction sites in quality: forcing manure is an energy source for grass snake egg
development that exceeds the capacity of more natural sources such as rotting wood. We examined
whether there are also historical indications for the importance of dung and dung heaps as crucial
elements in the grass snake‘s life cycle throughout Europe. Moreover, we raised the question whether
this hypothesized dependence of the grass snake on human culture, may have had a reciprocal effect. In
other words: did the apparent bond of grass snakes to agriculture also have a cultural effect? For this, we
conducted an historical research making use of historical sources covering a wide variety of disciplinary
fields such as natural history, archaeology, and the history of folklore, alchemy and religion. From these
sources it became apparent that agriculture has had a clearly positive influence on grass snakes since
the Neolithic. This positive influence of humans on the species did not only result from physical
opportunities offered by humans in the form of dung heaps that were beneficial for reproduction and
hibernation, but also from the fact that grass snakes were considered to be chtonic deities that were not
to be harmed. The conversion of Europe to Christianity, however, marked the turning of the cultural tide
for the species. From being a god originally, the grass snake turned into the number one symbol of the
Anti-Christ: the basilisk. Pre-Christian as well as Christian superstition regarding grass snakes survived
well into the 20 th century and is possibly still present in some remote parts of Europe. However, with the
increasing loss of influence of the Christian believe and superstition in large parts of Europe also the
witch hunt for the grass snake has largely come to an end by now. Measures in the form of creating
artificial reproduction opportunities by means of compost and manure heaps rehabilitate the grass snake
and reinstate this species‘ place in our natural and cultural environment.



Lennon, Corissa (Eastern Illinois University); Mullin, Stephen (Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, IL,
United States)

Trophic niche breadth in a widely-foraging snake (Colubridae: <i>Coluber</i>)

The trophic niche width of a species varies depending on the foraging strategy employed by the
individuals within a population. Among reptiles, the niche breadth of many species of snakes is relatively
understudied.      Within this clade, the genus Coluber includes wide-ranging, actively foraging snakes
that have been historically labeled as dietary generalists. We report on the diet composition of Coluber
constrictor foxii , the Blue Racer.       The dietary information available for this subspecies is mostly
anecdotal and little is known about ontogenetic or gender differences in the prey species consumed. In
addition to obtaining gut contents by palpation, we employed stable isotope analyses using δ 13 C and δ
15 N to quantitatively describe the dietary preferences of C. constrictor foxii . We collected blood and
tissue samples of C. constrictor foxii , along with whole specimens representing a range of potential prey
taxa.     We freeze-dried all samples, homogenized them using an amalgamator, and analyzed the
samples using mass spectroscopy. We compared the isotope signatures of potential prey taxa to those
from C. constrictor foxii tissues to determine the prey items that the snakes are including in their diet.
We used a Bayesian mixing model to determine the source of δ 13 C and δ 15 N in the snake tissues,
and assessed differences in diet between individuals representing different genders and ontogenetic
stages. At the population level, C. constrictor foxii appears to support the pattern typical of a dietary
generalist; differences exist, however, when comparing prey taxa consumed by different life-history
stages and sexes.




                                                                                                         418
Lesbarreres, David (Laurentian University); Pauli, Bruce (Environment Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada)

Conclusions & Perspectives on the Threats to Canadian Herpetofauna

While some hot spots are of particular concern, Canadian herpetofauna is as much at risk. In total, 20
amphibians and 37 reptiles are listed by the Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada
(COSEWIC), from Special Concern (26%) to Threatened (28%) and Endangered (46%). With more than
6000 km from East to West and more than 40º latitude from North to South, Canada presents a diversity
of threats on its species at least equal to any other country. As this Symposium ends, scientists from all
over Canada will be developing new research collaborations and identifying strategies aimed at reducing
or preventing the loss of amphibian and reptile biodiversity. At a time when multidisciplinary approaches
are encouraged by both governmental and funding agencies, this symposium presents a unique
opportunity to bring together researchers with different research scope in order to improve our
understanding of the amphibian and reptile population declines in Canada.



Levasseur, Kathryn (University of South Carolina); Tilley, Dominic (Jumby Bay Hawksbill Project,
Canada)

Examining long-term trends in hawksbill turtle reproduction on Long Island, Antigua, West Indies

Although numerous marine turtle studies have compared the reproductive output of neophytes (first-time
nesters) and remigrants in nesting assemblages, few have accumulated enough long-term data to
examine reproductive longevity in individual turtles. With over two decades of comprehensive nesting
data for nearly 400 individuals, the Jumby Bay Hawksbill Project (JBHP) can begin to address questions
of long-term reproductive output. The JBHP has monitored Long Island, Antigua‘s nesting hawksbill
population with saturation tagging protocols (identifying nearly 100% of individuals) for 25 years. Many
remigrants have been documented nesting for over 15 years. Our objective with this investigation is to
evaluate within- and among-season changes in fecundity as hawksbills senesce. With data collected by
the JBHP, we use a subset of 46 individuals with six or more documented nesting seasons spanning 12
to 25 years. We examine several features of individual reproductive output, including remigration
intervals, number of clutches per season, inter-nesting intervals and clutch size. We evaluate these
reproductive parameters in two ways: with respect to individual age and nesting experience. Preliminary
results suggest that remigration intervals, inter-nesting intervals and clutch size remain constant over
time, and the number of clutches per season appears to decrease after remaining constant for many
nesting seasons. We also discuss the ecological and management implications of our findings and make
recommendations for future analyses to better understand the relationship between hawksbill senescence
and fecundity.



Levine, Brenna (University of Arkansas); Smith, Charles F (Wofford College, Canada); Douglas, Marlis R
(University of Arkansas, Canada); Davis, Mark A (University of Illinois, Canada); Beaupre, Steven J;
Douglas, Michael E (University of Arkansas, Canada)

Genetic Structure of the Copperhead (Viperidae: Agkistrodon contortrix) at its Most Northern
Distribution

Molecular tools have been used to survey dispersal, migration, inbreeding, effective population size,
reproductive success, and genetic diversity across a broad range of biodiversity, Their focus in North
American pit vipers has been on species that warrant conservation concern, or those with a broad



                                                                                                      419
literature base, such as Timber( Crotalus horridus ) and Massasauga rattlesnakes (Sistrurus catenatus).
Scant effort has been directed towards the molecular ecology of the Copperhead (Agkistrodon contortrix),
other than to evaluate male reproduction and phylogenetic history. Thus, employing DNA-based
molecular techniques to study the natural history of A. contortrix will broaden our knowledge of
molecular ecology in North American pit vipers, and particularly in a non-threatened species that can
serve as a surrogate for threatened and endangered (T&amp;E) taxa. In this study, we employed 23
polymorphic tetra-nucleotide microsatellite loci to explore population parameters in A contortrix mokasen
at its most northern distribution. All loci were polymorphic, averaging 6.7 ( + 0.524) alleles per locus (253
individuals). Average relatedness was -0.004 ( + 0.045) and the average coefficient of inbreeding was
0.023 ( + 0.161). No significant differences were found in average relatedness between (and among)
males compared to females. Multiple paternity exists in this population in that several clutches with known
mothers were assigned to more than one male.            We also present estimates of relative reproductive
success, effective population size, dispersal, natal philopatry and fidelity to hibernacula.



Lewandowski, Justin (University of South Carolina); Allen, Dennis (University of South Carolina,
Canada); Greig, Thomas (NOAA/NOS/NCCOS, Canada); Quattro, Joseph (University of South Carolina,
Canada)

Genetic Stock Identification and Migration in Black Sea Bass (Centropristis striata) Along the
Western Atlantic Coast

The resilience of any managed species to exploitation is dependent upon management strategies that
incorporate crucial information suchas the reproductive capacity within (self-recruitment) and among
(migration,larval dispersal) distinct population segments (DPS). Population structure and demographics of
managed species need to be adequately understood to assess and refine current management plans.
The black sea bass ( Centropristis striata ) is a demersal fish (family Serranidae) found throughout the
western Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico. It is known that two subspecies exist: C. striata striata in the
Atlantic, and C. striata melana in the Gulf. However, morphological and behavioral evidence has
suggested that two distinct populations exist in the Atlantic, north and south of Cape Hatteras. This has
been called the two-stock hypothesis. Whether or not there exists two stocks has important management
implications. If there are indeed two distinct stocks that are being managed as one single entity,
estimates of population size and, by extension, stock health, will be exaggerated. In addition, fishing
pressure based on these incorrect population estimates of a single larger population will have an
increased negative effect on both populations, and recruitment of new individuals from the alternate stock
for replenishment is limited or non-existent. To test the two-stock hypothesis, DNA samples have been
collected from throughout species‘ range from the late 1990s (year 1) and over a decade later (year 2); a
portion of the mitochondrial DNA control region as well as three nuclear loci were screened and the
genetic data analyzed. The results indicate that C. striata in the Atlantic are a largely (though relatively
recently) isolated, two-stock scenario with some very limited mixing between the two populations. This
crucial information on C. striata genetic stock structure will allow for the development of more informed
management strategies.




                                                                                                         420
Lewis, Brett (University of Kent); Wright, Amy (Lloyd Bore Landscape and Ecology Ltd, Canada)

Colonisation patterns of newly created ponds by great crested newts

Dispersal and colonisation is a fundamental property of amphibian population dynamics. However, the
mechanisms underlying these processes remain poorly understood. We examined the colonisation
patterns of four ponds by newts following their creation in 1998. Ten years later, we monitored the
responses of the newly established newt population to the creation of four further ponds immediately
adjacent to the existing ponds. Newts were first observed in the four original ponds in 1999 and numbers
stabilised at less than 20 individuals over the next few years. In 2006 the ponds were drained, relined and
refilled, removing all potential predators. Two years after the management the ponds underwent an
upsurge in recruitment to the population with adult numbers more than doubling. Following construction of
four new ponds in 2009 the population underwent a further increase of 25%. Not all individual newts
returned to breed in the ponds every year, but several newts that first colonised the ponds in 1999 are still
alive in 2012 and are therefore at least 13 years old. Newts were found to use both the old and newly
constructed ponds and showed no preference for either. Indeed, newts appeared to move freely between
both old and new ponds with only 27% of newts showing any sign of pond fidelity. Equally, newly created
ponds were colonised by a mix of established adults and new recruits. Invertebrate surveys revealed that
newly created ponds had fewer predators and prey than old ponds. Newts therefore face a trade-off in
terms of laying eggs in established ponds with more food but more predators, or new ponds with the
opposite. However, there were no significant differences between the numbers of larvae found in the old
or new ponds.

Newly created ponds are colonised rapidly if they are sited within existing amphibian habitats, and
pioneering colonisers are not confined to dispersing first-time breeders. Managing the old ponds and
doubling the aquatic habitat resulted in tripling of the population size within a few years. The present
study confirms the importance of wetland creation as breeding sites for amphibians and invertebrates.



Li, Chenhong (College of Charleston); Naylor, Gavin (College of Charleston, MUSC, Charleston, United
States); Hofreiter, Michi (York University, York, United Kingdom)

Leveraging NextGen sequencing for Systematics

Next generation sequences affords opportunities to collect DNA sequence data on a genomic scale.
However, the overhead associated with assembling and annotating genomes for downstream analyses
is time consuming and currently represents a significant bottleneck to comparative genomics.
Phylogenetic biologists are generally less interested in complete genomes than they are in obtaining
multiple nuclear orthologous markers across a set of taxa of interest. To date, no procedures have been
developed to facilitate the efficient collection of such data. We present a method that uses targeted
gene capture in conjunction with next generation sequencing techniques to obtain sequence data from
hundreds of orthologous protein coding sequences across multiple species in a single sequencing run.
We demonstrate the efficacy of the approach with chondrichthyan fishes.




                                                                                                         421
Liang, Shih-hsiung (National Kaohsiung Normal University); Li, Kuan-chung (National Kaohsiung
Normal University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan); Shieh, Bao-Sen (KAOHSIUNG MEDICAL UNIVERSITY,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan)

Reproductive cycle and food composition of an invasive predacious fish, snakehead Channa
striata, in southern Taiwan

The objectives of this study are to investigate the reproductive cycle and food composition of an invasive
predacious fish, snakehead Channa striate, in southern         Taiwan .      The impact of this species on
endemic aquatic organisms was also evaluated.           From September 2008 to December 2010, 294
individuals were collected, included 164 females, 108 males, and 22 undetermined, from reservoirs,
streams, and wetlands in southern Taiwan . Females‘ mean              body depth, belly width and body
weight     were significantly greater than those of males. The food composition of C . striata included
fish, amphibians, reptilian, gastropods, crabs and aquatic insects.      According to the Gonadosomatic
Index value, the female C . striata is sexually mature at a minimum standard length of 23.5 cm , and
has a reproductive season lasted from July to September, but may possibly extend to all year round.
According to its reproductive cycle and feeding habit, C . striata have adapted the aquatic environments
in Taiwan , and its predacious impact would severely threat the endemic aquatic organisms within the
island. Suggestions to properly control and eliminate C . striata population in the field of Taiwan are
recommended.



Liedtke, Hans Christoph (Univeristy of Basel); Müller, Hendrik (Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Jena,
Germany); Menegon, Michele (Museo Tridentino di Scienze Naturali, Trento, Italy., Trento, Italy); Beck,
Jan; Ballesteros, Liliana; Nagel, Peter; Loader, Simon (University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland)

Do mountains promote terrestrialization of life history strategies in African amphibians?

Many amphibian lineages show a terrestrialization of their reproductive breeding strategy, though it is
unclear what causal factors are linked to this. Predation and habitat have been proposed as factors
driving the evolution of terrestrialized breeding strategies. The influence of habitat on the evolution of
terrestrialized breeding strategies has never been tested using appropriate data or methods. We test
whether species occurring across different habitats show different patterns of terrestrialization in their
breeding strategy. Based on species distribution data, we assembled a dataset comprising 180
amphibian species and coded life history modes for East African species. We tested whether montane
forest amphibian species have significantly different breeding strategies compared to lowland forest and
non-forest, and montane grassland communities. We show significant association between terrestrialized
breeding and montane forest assemblages. This result is robust to likely biases in the data. We also
accounted for phylogenetic non-independence in tests of correlations between habitat and breeding
strategies. Terrestrial oviposition is strongly correlated with montane forest habitat, but terrestrial
development is not. Various hypotheses have tried to explain the high frequency of terrestrial breeding
strategies in amphibian communities, and our analysis points to montane forest habitats being an
important factor in terrestrialization.




                                                                                                       422
Lind, Amy (USDA Forest Service); Kupferberg, S.J. (University of California, Berkeley, Canada); Yarnell,
S.M. (University of California, Canada); Palen, W.J. (Simon Frasier University, Canada)

Effects of altered stream flow regimes on California amphibians: Lessons from experiments and
population and habitat modeling for Rana boylii

Rivers are among the most impaired ecosystems in the world and many species of amphibians and fish
that depend on riverine environments are at risk. In western North America, California waterways embody
the full range of river management. Some have been transformed into cement-lined canals and many are
impounded by dams, with flows diverted or otherwise altered; only a few remain unimpaired. When
hydropower dams are relicensed, there are unique opportunities to improve flow regimes and habitats for
native species, such as the foothill yellow-legged frog ( Rana boylii ). Decline of this species has been
attributed to the flow regulation and habitat fragmentation associated with water storage and hydropower
dams. R. boylii is adapted to the wet winters and dry summers of California‘s Mediterranean climate;
breeding during the relatively predictable springtime transition from high to low flows. In a series of
studies, we have combined field and laboratory experiments with population and habitat models for R.
boylii to describe key flow-related habitat attributes and assess the implications of altered flow regimes
on the long-term viability of this species. Population metrics of this frog may strongly represent the
condition of both aquatic and riparian environments because this species depends on instream
environments for reproduction and recruitment, as well as streamside habitats post-metamorphosis. We
found that adults are selective about breeding sites and egg masses and tadpoles occupy a narrow range
of water depths, velocities, and temperatures in both regulated and unimpaired rivers. When alteration of
natural flow regimes shifts conditions outside this narrow range, mortality of early life stages ensues.
Population projection models illustrate how these effects translate to the population level resulting in
multi-fold increases in extinction risk. Hydrodynamic models of physical conditions, which use R. boylii -
specific habitat suitability criteria, provide a tool for assessing how different flow regimes may affect
aquatic lifestages. Coupling these tools with knowledge of natural flow regimes, in particular the
springtime snow-melt recession in mountainous regions of California, we have developed new water
management approaches for regulated rivers in hydropower relicensing procedures. These semi-natural
flow regimes may significantly improve conditions for this native frog and potentially for other similarly
adapted aquatic species.



Lingnau, Rodrigo (Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná); Ahmann, Francielle S.; Evseev, Ivan
G.; Bortolini, Joseane (Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná, Canada); Ievsieieva, Ievgeniia;
Assis, Joaquim T. (Instituto Politécnico - UERJ, Canada); Alves, Haimon D. L. (COPPE - UFRJ, Canada)

Comparison of skulls of the Proceratophrys bigibbosa species group (Anura: Cycloramphidae)
from south Brazil through x-ray computed microtomography

The Proceratophrys bigibbosa species group is characterized by the presence of postocular swellings
and absence of hornlike palpebral appendages. In south Brazil there are three species in this group:
Proceratophrys avelinoi , P. brauni and P. bigibbosa . The main difference is on body size of the three
species, beside some differences on advertisement calls, development of postocular swellings and
distribution of tubercles over the dorsum. The body size varies from the smaller P. avelinoi to the larger
P. bigibbosa , and P. brauni with an intermediate body size. As the external appearance of these three
members of the group is very similar to each other, it is interesting to have a better osteological
characterization of skulls of these species, until now based mostly on external appearance. Herein we
report on the results of a comparative skull morphological characterization of three species of the
Proceratophrys bigibbosa species group from south Brazil using the X-ray computed Microtomography



                                                                                                      423
technique through Skyscan 1174 system. Five samples of each three species, i.e. fifteen samples in total,
were scanned. The data obtained were reconstructed and analyzed using Skyscan software. The
reconstructed images were used to create a 3D head model and measure the craniums proportions. The
main result is that it is already possible to detect differences in skulls through a qualitative analysis of
visual images of the three species. From a frontal view, there are differences in the projection of the
tubercles above the ocular cavity between P. brauni and P. bigibbosa , being more developed in P.
brauni than in P. bigibbosa . From a dorsal view, it is possible to see that the surface of the
frontoparietals, including their ridges side in P. avelinoi is much smoother than for the other two species,
and in P. bigibbosa there is a greater projection of the ridge of the frontoparietal, reaching squamosal.
The computed tomography can be used for osteological characterization without destroying the samples;
it can also be useful in distinguishing specimens of collections where there is doubt about their
identification due to similar external morphology. Bearing in mind the advantage of the method, an
osteological characterization without destroying the sample, we can preview that computed
microtomography is highly promising for analysis of various species of amphibians and other taxa in
general, particularly in countries with a high biodiversity, like Brazil.



Lingnau, Rodrigo (Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná); Savegnago, Leoberto; Toniazzo,
Fernando (Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná, Canada)

Diversity and conservation of amphibians in areas under intense agricultural pressure in
southwestern Paraná, southern Brazil

The southwestern region of Parana state, in south Brazil, is characterized by an economy based on
agriculture, with extense areas with plantations of soybean, corn, wheat, beside beef and dairy cattle. The
region belongs to the Atlantic Forest biome, originally covered completely by a mixture of the so called
Araucaria Forest and a seasonal semideciduous forest. Human activities in this region caused a
enormous environmental degradation, and now the coverage of the Atlantic forest in southwestern
Paraná is estimated at only around 8%, composed mainly of little and isolated remnants. To contribute to
the knowledge and conservation of frogs in this region, from November 2010 to February 2012 we carried
out expeditions to four municipalities in southwestern Paraná (Palmas, Francisco Beltrão, Dois Vizinhos
and Coronel Domingos Soares). At Palmas was sampled an area of a conservation unit, where there are
grasslands, wet grasslands and extensive riparian forests of different streams. Francisco Beltrão and Dois
Vizinhos are two cities with large areas focused on agriculture, and surveys were made in small
remnants, and near water bodies in rural areas. In the city of Coronel Domingos Soares, who is one of
the cities with the highest percentage of remaining forest in southwestern Paraná, we sampled water
bodies as swamps, lakes and streams along 9km of the access road to the city. Potential threats to the
conservation of amphibian species were recorded for the areas and their surroundings. So far 23 species
were recorded in all four areas. The family Hylidae was the most representative, with 13 species, followed
by Leptodactylidae (3), and Cycloramphidae Leiuperidae (2), Bufonidae, Microhylidae and Ranidae (1),
the latter represented by the exotic bullfrog Lithobates catesbeianus . Most species (96%, n = 22) used
permanent or temporary ponds in open areas. A single species, Hypsiboas curupi , was found restricted
to a small remnant riparian vegetation in the city of Dois Vizinhos, and also at a riparian forest in Palmas.
We could observe that the majority of the amphibian fauna in this area is composed by habitat
generalists, and species with broad geographic distribution. We also observed that the greatest impacts
to the conservation of frogs in the region are the supplementation of natural habitats by extensive areas
of agriculture, without respecting the laws for maintenance of riparian vegetation along rivers and
streams, and the presence of exotic species.




                                                                                                         424
Lingnau, Rodrigo (Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná); Bastiani, Veluma I. M.; Lucas, Elaine
M. (Unochapecó, Canada)

Frogs from remnants of the Atlantic Forest hotspot in south Brazil

In southern Brazil, state of Santa Catarina, there is great anuran richness, still growing every year, with
descriptions of new species and increases on geographic distribution of some species within the state.
This situation hinders decision-making on the conservation of this taxonomic group and their associated
environments. Although the lack of basic information about the fauna, the state of Santa Catarina is
located entirely within the Atlantic Forest biome, considered the fifth among the 34 global hotspots of
biodiversity. To contribute for the knowledge and conservation of frogs in the Atlantic Forest, from
October 2010 until October 2011 three expeditions of ten consecutive days were done in three areas in
the highlands of Santa Catarina. The sampled areas were located in the municipalities of Vargem Bonita
(1,400 hectares), Concórdia (741 hectares) and Palma Sola (1.863 hectares). Anurans were surveyed by
active search of potential reproductive sites, such as ponds, permanent and temporary pools, ponds and
streams. Potential threats to the conservation of amphibian species were recorded for the areas and their
surroundings. Thirty species were recorded in the three areas, 14 in Vargem Bonita, 19 in Concórdia and
24 in Palma Sola. The family Hylidae was the most representative, with 14 species, followed by
Leptodactylidae (4) Cycloramphidae (3), Bufonidae and Leiuperidae (2), Brachycephalidae,
Centrolenidae, Hylodidae, Microhylidae and Ranidae (1), the latter represented by the exotic Lithobates
catesbeianus. Most species (80%, n = 24) used permanent and / or temporary ponds in open areas,
however, some habitat specialist such as Crossodactylus schmidti, Hypsiboas curupi, Limnomedusa
macroglossa, Proceratophrys bigibbosa and Vitreorana uranoscopa used mainly streams inside the
forest, and Ischnocnema henselii was found on leaf litter inside the forest. Among these habitat
specialists, C. schmidti and P. bigibbosa are considered as ―near threatened‖ at IUCN. The other habitat
specialists, although not included in any category at IUCN, could be regionally endangered due to various
local threats like as: strong presence of exotic species of fauna and flora; presence of pets; likely use of
pesticides in crops of the surrounding areas and selective removal of native vegetation of economic
interest. These threats are common throughout the plateau region of Santa Catarina, and may not affect
only amphibians, but several other groups of the biota.



Lips, Karen (University of Maryland); Caruso, Nick (University of Maryland, College Park, MD, United
States); Grant, Evan (USGS Patuxent, Canada); Muletz, Carly (University of Maryland, Canada);
Fleischer, Rob (Smithsonian Institution, Canada); McDiarmid, Roy (USGS/Smithsonina Institution,
Canada)

Spatial, temporal and taxonomic variation in patterns of population decline in Appalachian
Plethodontid salamanders

Highton (2005) documented widespread population declines in 28 species of Plethodon in the eastern
US by the 1980‘s, a pattern typical of infectious disease or climate change. Between June–October 2011,
we resurveyed 67 of Highton‘s sites, including 192 populations of 14 species of Plethodon over an area
of 767 km. Our goal was to compare current species presence and abundance to historic surveys, and to
determine whether Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ( Bd ) was present. At each site we sampled 3, 50 x
3m plots and captured all salamanders found under cover objects. We identified each capture to species,
sex, and age class; swabbed each animal for Bd ; and measured snout-to-vent length (SVL), mass and
body temperature. We captured a total of 1,870 salamanders (μ= 8.6/site; range = 0–75) of 14 species,
swabbed 1,400 animals at 62 sites, and analyzed 612 swabs. To determine whether Bd was present
historically, we swabbed museum specimens collected at 5 sites. Using results from contemporary field



                                                                                                        425
surveys and historic data collected from those same sites between 1957–96, we compared patterns of
occupancy among decades using multi-season dynamic occupancy models that account for incomplete
detection. We did not find one or more species at 71% (44/62) of sites and on average we found 1.02
species missing per site (range = 0–3). Species groups varied in the amount of population loss:
glutinosus were absent at 51% (31/63) of historic sites, welleri from 50% (3/6), cinereus from 24%
(14/59), and jordani from 6% (2/35).           We found a significant decrease in occupancy for the genus
across all sites (goodness-of-fit test; z = -3.552; p = 0.0004), with significantly greater decreases at higher
elevations and lower latitudes (z = -6.03; p &lt; 0.0001). Occupancy was initially 95% in 1950–1970,
dropped to 84% in 1980 and declined to 74% since 1990.             We detected low levels of infection (2–20
ZSE; μ = 7.25) by Bd in 4 individuals (0.7% prevalence) from Catoctin N.P., MD.                  qPCR of 258
museum specimens of cinereus and glutinosus species groups from Pisgah N.F. (1970-87) were
negative, as were 184 from Shenandoah N.P. (1957-65). Analyses of museum specimens continue, to
determine whether Bd was more prevalent historically. Our results support predictions of species loss
from higher elevations in the southern Appalachians as explained by projected changes in regional
climate (Milanovich et al. 2009). Future studies need to evaluate mechanisms of climate change on
populations.



Litzgus, Jacqueline (Laurentian University); Seburn, David (Seburn Ecological Services, Ottawa, ON,
Canada)

Implementing recovery actions for freshwater turtles in Canada

Decreases in biodiversity and increases in human threats to the natural world have prompted government
agencies to create legislation to protect species at risk of extinction and their habitats. In Canada, at the
federal level there is the Species at Risk Act (SARA) which protects residence for threatened,
endangered, and extirpated species on federal lands. The federal government will also identify critical
habitat (habitat needed for survival) for threatened and endangered species. To date, critical habitat has
only been identified for one freshwater turtle, the Nova Scotia population of the Blanding‘s Turtle
(Emydoidea blandingii). At the provincial level in Ontario, there is the Endangered Species Act (ESA).
Species that may be at risk are reviewed by a team of experts (by COSEWIC at the federal level and by
COSSARO at the provincial level). If upon completion of review a species is listed as at risk, the
government is required to outline steps that will be taken towards species recovery in a Recovery
Strategy for endangered and threatened species, and in a Management Plan for species of special
concern. In Ontario, the government must respond to the Strategy or Plan within 9 months via a
Government Response Statement which summarizes their intended actions and priorities for species
recovery. The Canadian government created various funding programs to support stewardship activities
for species at risk, including the Habitat Stewardship Program, the Interdepartmental Recovery Fund, and
the Aboriginal Fund for Species at Risk. In 2007 the Ontario government created the Species at Risk
Stewardship Fund which provides funding on a competitive basis to individuals and organizations for
stewardship activities that support implementation of the ESA. Of the 8 species of turtles in Ontario, 7 of
which are considered to be at risk, to date only the Wood Turtle (endangered) has an approved provincial
Recovery Strategy and Government Response Statement, under which the species‘ habitat is regulated.
Case studies describing recovery actions for Canadian turtles will be discussed.




                                                                                                           426
Lloyd, Rhiannon (University of Portsmouth);

Amphibian cryobanking and associated advanced reproductive techniques

Biobanking (or cryobanking) is recognised as an essential and integral part of the IUCN Amphibian
Conservation Action Plan. Approximately one-third of the 6,260 amphibian species assessed to date are
described as critically endangered, endangered or vulnerable. Biobanks, containing e.g. germplasm
(sperm and eggs), embryos, somatic cells, and tissue, are a second line of defence against species
extinction. Biobanks have huge potential to serve as a resource for conservation research (e.g. samples
can be used to assess the current genetic diversity of a population) and, in association with assisted
reproduction techniques, breeding (e.g. sperm can be used to reintroduce genes periodically to maintain
the genetic diversity of a population). However, obtaining offspring using a combination of biobanked
samples (e.g. sperm cells) and simple assisted reproduction techniques (e.g. in vitro fertilisation) is often
limited due to the damage caused to the samples during the freezing and thawing, i.e. sub-optimal
cryoprotocols. The aim of this talk is two-fold. First, to provide a brief summary of the information gathered
during the 2010 Amphibian Ark Advisory Committee (ABAC) Workshop: Towards and Biobanking
Strategy for Amphibian Conservation (co-hosted by the Zoological Society of London and European
Xenopus Resource Centre (Portsmouth), UK) and the 2011 ABAC Survey: Global Biobanking Activities.
Second, to review a number of advanced reproductive techniques (e.g. intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection,
nuclear transfer and primordial germ cell transfer), which have arisen from the study of laboratory
amphibians and other taxa, that could be used in combination with biobanked samples, even if they have
been cryopreserved sub-optimally. Such advanced reproductive techniques are likely to be key to
biobanks fulfilling their potential as amphibian conservation breeding tool.



Lock, Brad (Zoo Atlanta);

An in situs Conservation Program for Guatemala's Endangered Herpetofauna

Only 150-200 Guatemalan Beaded Lizards, Heloderma horridum charlesbogerti, remain in the wild. This
species is listed as vulnerable by the IUCN was elevated to CITES I status in 2009. The spiny-tailed
iguana, Ctenoasura palearis, is listed by the IUCN as critically endangered. Severe pressures including
habitat loss and degradation, illegal collection, food consumption and, until recently indiscriminate killing
by locals due to negative myths about the Beaded Lizard threaten these species with imminent extinction.
With no reports of live individuals, the Guatemalan Beaded Lizard was thought to be extinct in the mid-
1990s. Zootropic began a long term, integrated conservation program in 2001. This program incorporates
field research, public education, local community capacity building and habitat protection.

In the nine plus years that Zootropic‘s program has been active the Beaded Lizard has become a flagship
species for the MotaguaValley and the impetus for the government of Guatemala to undertake initiatives
to conserve its dry forest habitat. With DWCF support in 2007, 200, 2009 and 2011 we were able to
expand the educational program to encompass the entire school age population of the villages
surrounding the Motagua valley and to date have presented this conservation awareness message to
over 45,000 children. Before this program beaded lizards were killed on site and now we have villagers
working with the program to preserve these species and their habitat. In 2007 the best remaining large
tract of land was purchased and a research facility was constructed in 2010. This facility has begun to
generate revenue through the hosting of conservation workshops, university classes and visiting
scientists. This has led to direct financial benefit for the local villagers who have participated in the
construction of the facility as well as through the provision of services to the facility. As a direct result of
Project Heloderma, over 3,500 hectares of habitat (both governmental and private) have been registered



                                                                                                            427
as official protected areas. The partners in Project Heloderma are now expanding this model to another
critically endangered group of lizards in Project Abronia.



Lomas, Emily (Thompson Rivers University); Larsen, Karl (Thompson Rivers University, Canada);
Bishop, Christine A. (Environment Canada, Canada)

Effects of Habitat Development and Human Disturbance on the Northern Pacific Rattlesnake in
Osoyoos, British Columbia

The South Okanagan region of British Columbia, Canada, is undergoing drastic landscape changes to
meet the needs of expanding tourism and agriculture industries. The Northern Pacific Rattlesnake
(Crotalus oreganus oreganus) is one of many local endangered species. Altered land-use and increased
human activity has the potential to negatively affect snake behaviour, body characteristics, and spatial
ecology, yet little work has been done in the region to evaluate the response of snakes to such
disturbances. Using a 10 year mark-recapture data set (2002-2011) and multi-year radio-telemetry study,
we investigated disturbance effects on rattlesnake size, body condition, behaviour, and movement
patterns in a 470 ha region of Osoyoos, British Columbia. Snakes were classified along a gradient of
increasing disturbance, based on the intensity and proximity of human-use in the area in which they were
found. As the intensity of disturbance increased, snakes showed significantly lower body condition
(represented by the residuals from the log-log linear regression of mass on length). Additionally, males
and non-gravid females found in sites exempt from human presence were heavier and longer than
snakes in all other areas. Mean visibility (exposure from cover objects) of adult males in 2010 and 2011
varied significantly with substrate temperature, but did not differ between disturbed and undisturbed sites.
Although at this time we cannot identify the specific factors affecting snakes in this region (e.g. potential
low quality and quantity of prey), snakes in human-disturbed landscapes clearly appear susceptible to
negative effects from land development. Body condition and growth rate changes may affect over-winter
mortality rates and selection, resulting in changes in population demographics over time. Any or all of
these factors may destabilize these vulnerable snake populations.



Longo, Ana V (Cornell University); Lips, Karen R. (University of Maryland, Canada); Zamudio, Kelly R.
(Cornell University, Canada)

Identifying targets of the amphibian-killing fungus: Insights from a devastated Neotropical
amphibian community

During the well-documented outbreak of the amphibian-killing fungus ( Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis,
Bd ) at El Copé, Panamá, this emergent pathogen caused major biodiversity losses at the taxonomic,
lineage and phylogenetic levels. We investigated the initial species response after the arrival of Bd by
focusing on two host defense strategies: resistance and tolerance. Resistance involves hosts limiting
pathogen load and thus inducing a cost to Bd , while tolerance controls disease damage at the expense
of the host. Evidence from single-host populations indicates that host density alone determines disease
outcome, with high densities causing extirpation and low densities allowing persistence. We hypothesize
that, in addition to density, heterogeneity in host defenses may be an important mechanism for disease
transmission in diverse amphibian communities. Here, we demonstrate how a naïve Neotropical
amphibian community composed of dozens of species with high transmission heterogeneity showed
similar responses to the invasion by Bd . We show that host-specific ecology, evolutionary history and
density predicted infection intensity and species survival, and that the presence of highly infectious



                                                                                                         428
species dictated community response during the epizootic. The persistence of resistant species six years
post-decline significantly decreased infection risk in the community. These findings have important
implications for the coevolution of antagonistic interactions between amphibians and Bd . Using long-
term data from field studies allows us to position amphibian taxa on the Bd resistance-susceptibility
continuum, predict new epidemics, and improve the design of mitigation strategies enhancing tolerance
levels.



Longrich, Nicholas (Yale University); Bullar, Bhart-Anjan (Harvard University, Canada); Gauthier,
Jacques (Yale University, Canada)

Coniophis precedens: a transitional snake from the Late Cretaceous of North America

Snakes are the most diverse group of living reptiles, but their origins and early evolution remain poorly
understood due to a lack of transitional forms. Several major questions remain outstanding: did snakes
originate in a marine or terrestrial environment, and how did their unique feeding mechanism evolve? The
late Cretaceous Coniophis precedens was among the first Mesozoic snakes discovered, but until now
only an isolated vertebra has been described, and so it has been overlooked in discussions of snake
evolution. Here, we report previously undescribed material from this 65 million year old snake, including
the maxilla, dentary, and additional vertebrae. We show that Coniophis is a stem snake, not an anilioid
as previously thought. Accordingly, its morphology and ecology are critical to understanding snake
evolution. Coniophis exhibits fossorial adaptations and occurs in a continental floodplain environment,
consistent with a terrestrial rather than a marine origin of snakes. The skull is intermediate between that
of lizards and snakes. Hooked teeth and an intramandibular joint indicate that Coniophis fed on relatively
large, soft--‐bodied prey. However, the maxilla is firmly united with the premaxilla, palate, jugal, and
nasals, indicating an akinetic rostrum. Coniophis therefore represents a transitional snake, combining a
snake-‐like body and a lizard--like head. Subsequent to the evolution of a serpentine body and
macrocarnivory, snakes evolved a highly specialized, kinetic skull, which was followed by a major
adaptive radiation in the Early Cretaceous.



Losos, Jonathan (Harvard University);

Natural History of the Little-Known Horned Anole of Ecuador, Anolis proboscis, and its equally
little-known relative, Phenacosaurus orcesii

The natural history of South American anoles is generally little known, and nowhere is this more true than
that of the horned anole of Ecuador. Until recently known only from six male specimens, and not seen for
40 years, the biology of this species--and the use of its horn--is virtually unexplored. Here, we report
observations on the habitat use, behavior, and morphology of this species. In addition to discovering
tantalizing details about the horn, we also test the hypothesis that this species is similar to twig anoles of
the Caribbean. We also examine the natural history of the Ecuadorian species Anolis (Phenacosaurus)
orcesi, the natural history of which was previously unknown and which also is similar in appearance to a
twig anole.




                                                                                                          429
Lötters, Stefan (Trier University);

An incomplete explanation of the evolution of Amazonian Atelopus

Harlequin toads, genus Atelopus, are a diverse group of New World amphibians. Ongoing research
suggests that their diversity in the Amazon basin and its vicinities is difficult to interpret when it comes to
the question what is a species. One reason is that data remain sparse when attempting to view
populations in an integrative taxonomic approach. Another is the occurrence of 'extremes'. On the one
hand, there are early Neogene lineages which, by morphology, are hard to distinguish from others but
appear as potential cryptic species in molecular phylogenies. On the other hand, differences in body plan
(e.g. presence vs. absence of stapes) and coloration a priori suggest other populations to represent
distinct species, which show rather limited molecular divergence and are apparently the result of very
recent (Pleistocene) splits. The Disturbance Vicariance hypothesis may help explaining diversity in
younger lineages, especially for populations associated with higher elevations. It fails, however, to explain
populations - both of early Neogene and Pleistocene origin - which are pure lowland dwellers. Especially
older lineages can be found today in areas where it is unlikely that they had occurred during Pliocene and
Pleistocene. Does long-distance 'river rafting' play a role?



Lotti, Matthew (University of Rhode Island); Wetherbee, Bradley (University of Rhode Island, Kingston,
RI, United States); Grace, Mark; Driggers, William (NOAA/NMFS/SEFSC, Pascagoula, Pascagoula, MS,
United States)

At-vessel mortality and related factors among three carcharhinid sharks caught by fisheries-
independent bottom longline surveys in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico and the Northwest Atlantic Ocean

Mortality rates among commercially-caught elasmobranchs in the US must be carefully monitored to
ensure stock sizes are not declining past renewable levels. Catch limits restrict fishermen from excess
shark retention, but if discarded individuals suffer high levels of at-vessel mortality, less protection is
offered by such management. The U.S. commercial bottom longline fishery utilizes gear soak times in
excess of 9 hours and this soak period that has been shown to correlate to at-vessel mortality for many
shark species, especially among those that use obligate ram ventilation. The NOAA/NMFS/Southeast
Fisheries Science Center, Mississippi Laboratories bottom longline survey utilizes only 1 hour soak times
per set. However, even with a reduced soak time, at-vessel mortality still occurs. The purpose of this
research was twofold: 1.To determine mortality rates for three shark species commonly-caught by
commercial bottom longline fisheries in the Gulf of Mexico and western North Atlantic: scalloped
hammerhead Sphyrna lewini , blacktip Carcharhinus limbatus , and Atlantic sharpnose Rhizoprionodon
terraenovae; 2. Investigate specific biological, technical, and environmental factors correlated to at-vessel
mortality in light of a controlled soak-time. At-vessel mortality after 1 hr was found to be &gt;11% for S.
lewini, C. limbatus, and R. terraenovae . The probability of at-vessel mortality was found to decrease for
each species as length and bottom DO content increased. For S. lewini , males were found to have a
higher probability of at-vessel mortality than females. Among C. limbatus, sharks caught on J hooks
were found to have greater probability of at-vessel mortality than those caught on circle hooks. For R.
terraenovae, the probability of at-vessel mortality was found to increase with bottom water temperature.
Restricting the commercial bottom longline shark fishery from areas of low DO may decrease rates of
shark at-vessel mortality, and with it, potential discard mortality. Use of circle hooks over J hooks is
recommended to reduce at-vessel mortality among C. limbatus . Additionally, fishing in lower
temperature areas may serve to reduce at-vessel mortality among R. terraenovae . These results may
facilitate the creation of more species-specific management for elasmobranchs.




                                                                                                           430
Lotzkat, Sebastian (Senckenberg Forschungsinstitut und Naturmuseum);

Reptile diversity and distribution in the highlands of western Panama


The Cordillera Central of western Panama constitutes the eastern half of the Lower Central American, or
Talamancan, highlands, which separate the perhumid Caribbean from the seasonally subhumid Pacific
lowlands throughout most of Costa Rica and western Panama. Especially in the latter country,
herpetological surveys of these mountains have long been of punctual nature, leaving large stretches
unexplored and many issues regarding taxonomy and biogeography unsolved. Over the past decade,
more and more localities within this rugged mountain chain have been visited by herpetologists. Between
2008 and 2010, I have spent 12 months in the Comarca Ngöbe-Buglé as well as the provinces of Bocas
del Toro, Chiriquí, and Veraguas of western Panama, visited more than 35 generalized localities, and
together with accompanying students collected over 850 well-documented squamate specimens currently
understood to represent 112 species. Among these and other vouchers, I gathered and compared
morphological as well as 16S and COI mtDNA data to assess intraspecific variation and species
boundaries. For a comprehensive biogeographical picture, I have collected several thousands of locality
records from literature and collection databases.

The collection of new material along with the application of integrative taxonomy considerably
complement our knowledge of reptilian diversity in western Panama. Distributional range extensions for
known species, discoveries of secretive organisms formerly unknown to science, and the identification of
cryptic lineages within species complexes have noticably lengthened the respective species lists. Against
this background, the multitude of newly generated distributional records now allows to approximate the
actual geographic distribution of several taxa for the first time. This applies to recently described
endemics of high or intermediate elevations as well as to common lowland species. Reptile species
occurring in Panama‘s Cordillera Central typically exhibit one of the following four distributional patterns:
(1) More or less widespread lowland species like Basiliscus basiliscus and Spilotes pullatus reach up to
premontane or montane elevations along the Caribbean and/or Pacific versant; (2) ―Golfo Dulce
endemics‖ like Potamites apodemus and Lachesis melanocephala are restricted to the Pacific lowlands
and adjacent premontane elevations of eastern Costa Rica and western Panama; (3) ―Talamancan
highland endemics‖ like Anolis salvini and Rhadinaea calligaster occur over large parts of the Lower
Central American highlands, i.e., along well more than one hundred kilometers of premontane and/or
montane elevations in both Panama and Costa Rica; (4) Small-scale highland endemics like Anolis
benedikti and Geophis talamancae are known only from a few rather contiguous localities and appear to
be restricted to usually well less than one hundred kilometers at premontane and/or montane elevations.
In the latter context, special emphasis must be placed on the blatantly underexplored Serranía de
Tabasará comprising the eastern continuous part of the Cordillera Central, between the Fortuna
depression and Santa Fé. This range of difficult access harbors a set of small-scale highland endemics of
its own, whereas its natural habitats find themselves seriously threatened with destruction owing to a
desastrous socioeconomic setting. Most of this mountain chain falls within the indigenous autonomy
territory Comarca Ngöbe-Buglé, where extreme poverty drives the growing population to increasingly
exploit the natural resources while legendary metal deposits attract foreign mining interests. Since the
greatest part of the Serranía de Tabasará is completely devoid of protected areas, its proper endemics
are facing an uncertain future.




                                                                                                         431
Loudon, Fiona (University of Western Sydney); Strassmeyer, Alana; Harland, Karen (University of
Western Sydney, Canada); Spencer, Ricky-John (Univeristy of Western Sydney, Canada)

Circadian Rhythms of Heart Rates in Amniotic Eggs

Oviparous species such as turtles are ideal for investigating endogenous physiological circadian rhythms
during embryogenesis with minimal influence of maternal biorhythms and the advantage of being able to
manipulate the external environment after oviposition occurs. As ectothermic animals, many physiological
processes in turtles are closely related to environmental temperature. Turtle embryos were thought to be
thermally passive however they can control, to an extent, their metabolic rates when stimulated by more
developed clutchmates, and through movement within the egg when exposed to heat gradients. This
study was designed to monitor embryonic heart rates in an ectothermic oviparous species, the short
necked Murray River turtle, Emydura macquarii, to determine if heart rates were constant during
development in the absence of external cues. Eggs were incubated at constant temperature (26oC and
30oC) and only exposed to light during transfer from the incubator to the digital egg monitoring system.
Heart rates were recorded at six hour intervals over 24 hours every seven days throughout development.
Circadian rhythms were detected in week four of incubation and continued until hatching. Heart rates
were not related to the time of day and varied by up to 20% throughout the 24 hour period. This study
found that endogenous circadian rhythms of heart rate are established early during embryogenesis. The
results also suggest external environmental cues are needed to establish developmental rates and
coordinate hatching and emergence from the nest. Initial investigations into individual heart rates and
heart rate synchronisation within a clutch will also be discussed.



Lougheed, Stephen (Queen's University);

Phylogeographic perspectives on conservation of Canadian herpetofauna. Past insights and
future research.

Over the last 2 decades, the phylogeographic literature has burgeoned to include over 20,000 articles.
These papers collectively have helped us to understand the effects of Pleistocene-induced range
fragmentation and postglacial population dynamics on genealogical relationships within species. They
also have provided insights into the impacts of orogenesis, riverine barriers, changing sea levels and
historical vegetation shifts on rates and patterns of diversification, and have revealed cryptic species (by
no means is this an exhaustive list). Importantly, some phylogeographic research has provided key inputs
into conservation strategies for species listed as vulnerable or endangered, primarily in the domain of
prioritization of focal populations. However, in my view there remain some key deficits in our knowledge
particularly in the application of phylogeographic data to conservation and management of species at risk.
Relevant questions include: 1. Do diagnosed lineages in any way reflect adaptive diversity or potential? 2.
Are well-supported lineages identified in phylogeographic studies incipient species? 3. What are the
consequences of secondary contact and are these crucibles of new species origins? In this talk, I will use
published studies and data from my own laboratory to explore these issues with a focus on Canadian
herpetofauna.




                                                                                                        432
Lovich, Jeff (U.S. Geological Survey); Agha, Mickey; Liszewski, Meaghan (U.S. Geological Survey,
Flagstaff, AZ, United States)

Climatic variation predictably affects clutch phenology in Agassiz's Desert Tortoise (Gopherus
agassizii)

Phenology is the study of the timing and environmental causes both biotic and abiotic of biological events
and life cycles. We studied clutch phenology of an Agassiz‘s Desert Tortoise (Gopherus agassizii)
population at a wind energy generation facility near Palm Springs, California for seven field seasons from
1997-2011, and at Joshua Tree National Park in 1998. Using radiotelemetry and X-radiography we
quantified variation in the following phenophases based on the number of calendar days since 1 January:
appearance and disappearance of first and second clutches, and interclutch intervals between first and
second clutches. Third clutches were only observed in five of seven years, produced by seven different
females, none of which produced more than one triple clutch during the entire period of study, so they
were not included in some statistical analyses. During the course of the study, shelled eggs were visible
from as early as 11 April to as late as 28 July, and the total length of time that eggs were visible differed
statistically among years. Appearance of first clutches in cool years was later than in warm years. After
controlling for maternal effects, we observed statistically significant interannual variation in all
phenophases except for interclutch intervals. Based on known and inferred oviposition dates in 2011,
females dropped their eggs 1-12 days (x = 6.4) after they were last visible in X-radiographs. Using degree
day methodology we calculated heat unit accumulation (HUA) during the post-hibernation and nesting
season for each year. After setting our biofix to the approximate date of emergence from hibernation
(March 1) at a minimum threshold temperature of 17.8o C we calculated HUA to various clutch
phenological events. We then used minimum HUA during two time periods to predict the mean date of
first clutch appearance in subsequent years, with 1-6 day accuracy. We also tested the broader
application of HUA against reproduction data collected at Joshua Tree National Park, and predicted first
clutch appearance within one day. HUA, as it relates to clutch phenology, has important management and
climate modeling implications for predicting phenophases in the reproductive cycle of the federally
threatened Desert Tortoise.



Lovich, Robert (U.S. Navy);

Herpetological Success Stories, and updates from the United States Department of Defense

The United States Department of Defense (DoD) properties contain the highest density of endangered
species and habitats of any federal landowner in the United States. Likewise, herpetofaunal diversity and
abundance on DoD lands is considerable. With 29 million acres of habitats within the United States, DoD
has a wealth of herpetological success stories. Herein I will highlight some of the many examples of DoD
and the respective military services contributions to the conservation, management, and research on
herpetofauna through time, including the recent formation of DoD PARC and its accomplishments. The
DoD maintains a unique role of stewarding some of the finest natural resources in the United States,
while prioritizing national defense mission requirements.




                                                                                                         433
Lowe, Christopher (California State University Long Beach); Alexander, Xydes; Forney, Christina; Manii,
Esfandiar; Moline, Mark; Clark, Christopher (California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo,
San Luis Obispo, CA, United States)

The future of elasmobranch behavior research: The development and utility of smart shark
tracking robots

The evolution of acoustic telemetry tracking technology has significantly advanced our knowledge and
understanding of elasmobranch behavior. Yet despite these advancements there are still logistical and
economic limitations to characterizing behavior of shark and rays in the wild. To reduce some of these
constraints we have developed an automated acoustic telemetry tracking system for characterizing the
diel fine-scale movement patterns and habitat use of highly mobile coastal elasmobranchs. This system
utilizes a team of customized Iver2 Ocean Server autonomous underwater vehicles (AUV) equipped with
paired hydrophones and receivers. AUVs are able to track a tagged shark and determine its position
using particle filter estimation, while simultaneously characterizing the seafloor and water column
surrounding the shark. Experiments demonstrate that localization of stationary and mobile transmitters in
coastal environments and autonomous tracking of tagged leopard sharks using AUVs have position
estimation errors better than those obtained via manned active tracking. Specialized AUV controller
programming is designed to reduce behavioral interference, while identifying and characterizing changing
patterns of movement.



Lowe, Katrin (Griffith University); Hero, Jean-Marc (Griffith University, Southport, Australia)

Acid frogs can stand the heat: morphological and ecological responses to fire.

Natural disturbance events such as fire can have varying effects on species ecology and morphology.
Knowledge of amphibian responses to fire is limited, with species and population responses varying
among studies. Such variation is attributed to differences in fire regimes; sampling methodologies;
historical exposure to fire, and the natural history of species and populations. Even less is known about
morphological responses of amphibians post-fire. Acid frogs occupy a discrete ecological niche being
restricted to fire-adapted acidic coastal wallum wetlands of eastern Australia. Visual encounter surveys
were conducted monthly over two years at sites spanning the latitudinal range of Litoria olongburensis, to
examine short and long-term responses of three threatened acid frog species (L. olongburensis, L.
freycineti, and Crinia tinnula) to fire. Fires altered the thermal properties of habitats by increasing
substrate temperatures and widening daily temperature ranges. Acid frog populations did not suffer
adversely from at least moderate intensity fires, as suitable refuges were available, including standing
water. All species were present shortly after fire and successful reproduction of all species occurred once
wetlands were sufficiently inundated to sustain tadpoles until metamorphosis. These observations
suggest that these frogs are highly adaptable and able to breed in radically fire-altered environments.
Spatial variation in relative abundance of the three species responded differently to long-term fire history,
highlighting the importance of assessing community-wide responses to fire. Furthermore, L.
olongburensis displayed colour morph variation across their range over different spatial and temporal
scales. Spatial variation in overall colour morph frequencies was strongly correlated with time-since-fire
and vegetation colour. Gradual temporal changes in morph frequencies were evident across seasons,
with more abrupt frequency changes following a fire. Hence, colour morph variation might be explained by
individual colour change in response to abrupt changes in vegetation colour due to fire. This study
demonstrates the dynamic responses of acid frogs to fire, and the adaptability and resilience of these
frogs in fire-prone landscapes.




                                                                                                         434
Luer, Carl (Mote Marine Laboratory); Walsh, Cathy; Ritchie, Kim; Yordy, Jennifer; Miedema, Jodi (Mote
Marine Laboratory, Canada); Bodine, A.B. (Clemson University, Canada); Cannons, Andrew; Luna, Vicki
(USF Center for Biological Defense, Canada)

Antimicrobial Properties of Epidermal Mucus from Two Species of Ray (Cownose Ray, Rhinoptera
bonasus, and Atlantic Stingray, Dasyatis sabina)

The protective secretion produced by epidermal mucus cells in stingrays is being investigated to identify
mucus-associated antimicrobial compounds with the potential for development into novel therapeutics to
treat wound infection pathogens. Freshly obtained epidermal mucus from cownose rays ( Rhinoptera
bonasus ), and Atlantic stingrays ( Dasyatis sabina ) can be separated by gentle centrifugation into an
aqueous supernatant and a viscous pellet. The aqueous supernatant contains at least 20 proteins/protein
subunits based on SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Chemical extraction of fresh mucus with 1)
Tris-EDTA, 2) acetic acid and solid phase extraction, and 3) selected surfactants (Triton X-100, Tween
80, and N-octylglucoside) results in partial purification of mucus compounds. Fresh mucus also contains
bacterial symbionts that are not seawater contaminants. Forty-six of 384 bacterial isolates cultured from
R. bonasus and 49 of 227 isolates from D. sabina epidermal mucus demonstrated antibiotic activity
against at least one human pathogenic tester strain in primary screens performed at Mote Marine
Laboratory. Of the 46 R. bonasus isolates, 13 demonstrated antimicrobial activity against a different
panel of pathogenic bacterial tester strains when screened at University of South Florida Center for
Biological Defense. Using the GenBank database, BLAST searches performed on 16S rDNA sequence
data identified six different genera among 22 of the 49 D. sabina -derived bacterial isolates that produced
antibacterial compounds against various tester strains. Some of the active isolates not genetically
confirmed with the database could be undescribed organisms. Culturable libraries of all isolates have
been cryopreserved.



Luhring, Thomas (University of Missouri); Holdo, Ricardo (University of Missouri, Canada)

Body Size as an Adaptation for Drought Survival in Stochastic Aquatic Environments: An Age-
Structured Approach

In the Southeastern United States, two families of ―giant salamanders‖ have evolved to live in a variety of
aquatic habitats. Amphiumidae and Sirenidae each contain species that diverged in body size and are
capable of surviving periodic droughts by aestivating in wetland sediments. Although both families have
followed different evolutionary histories, each has diversified into a few species that differ primarily in size.
Using sirenids as a case study, we constructed demographic models to investigate the effects of
environmental stochasticity (in the form ofdrought regimes) on persistence of species with contrasting life
history strategies. The two species we model differ in their time to maturation, which determines the
intrinsic rate of population growth as well as maximum size, which in turn determines survival under
drought conditions. We used an age-structured approach, with density-dependent fecundity and size-
dependent mortality data derived from published sources for the two species. Simulations (with identical
environmental parameters for both species) consisted of 5000-year runs in a simulated wetland subjected
to stochastic drought events varying in mean duration. In models without competition, persistence
decreased sigmoidally with drought duration.        Increase in body size caused an upward shift in the
threshold drought severity needed to precipitate extinction. We conducted a global sensitivity analysis for
each species model to determine what demographic parameters had the greatest influence on model
behavior. Maximum mass attained was the most important variable driving extinction events.                   For
models with competition, variation in competition strength from heterospecifics changed model output



                                                                                                             435
only when mean drought severity was low enough to permit the smaller species to persist. Results
fromthis model indicate that regional drought maintains divergent life-history strategies in sirenids as a
temporally selective agent on body size.



Luhring, Thomas (University of Missouri); Earl, Julia; Semlitsch, Raymond (University of Missouri,
Canada)

Island in the Sun; Nutrient Cycling in isolated systems is mediated by canopy cover, predation
and the complex life-histories of their transient tenants

Limitation of nutrients in ecosystems has wide-reaching effects on community composition and system
functions. Although we are beginning to understand the impacts of the movement of nutrients between
donor and recipient systems, the majority of these studies focus on trophic effects of nutrient import from
a large diffuse area into a relatively smaller and finite recipient system. In this study, we investigate the
effects of nutrient dynamics on a finite donor system (isolated wetlands) that exports nutrients (in the form
of amphibian metamorphs) into a large and diffuse recipient system (terrestrial uplands). We used
outdoor mesocosms (n=72) to simulate aquatic systems varying in canopy cover (high or low) and
community composition (four single species treatments, two multispecies community treatments, and a no
amphibian control) to test for effects of life-history differences, community effects, and predation on
nutrient cycling within aquatic systems. In addition to influencing local nutrient cycling, metamorphosed
amphibian juveniles represent a nutrient loss from the aquatic (donor) system to the terrestrial system
(recipient) that is proportional to their biomass export. Depletion of Nitrogen and Phosphorus levels in
amphibian mesocosms (compared to background rates in control tanks) were generally strongest and
related to the timing of metamorphosis of anurans. Community tanks with predators (adult newts) had
reduced anuran survivorship and higher total phosphorus and total nitrogen than community tanks without
predators. Although we tested the effects of community composition on biomass and nutrient export, bi-
phasic amphibians transport nutrients from terrestrial to aquatic (i.e., egg masses) and aquatic to
terrestrial systems (i.e., emigration of metamorphosed juveniles). The temporal separation and net
movement of these subsidies warrants future research into their ecological significance. These results not
only reinforce the role of amphibians as key players in nutrient cycling, but provide further empirical data
for investigating the effects of spatial subsidies on both recipient and donor systems.



Luken, Alissa N. (California State University, Northridge); Espinoza, Robert E. (California State
University, Northridge, Northridge, CA, United States)

Temperature-Dependent Sprint Performance of Nocturnal and Diurnal Geckos: Does Dollo's Law
Apply to Physiological Traits?

One of the most intriguing and rare phenomena in evolutionary biology is the occurrence of evolutionary
reversals because of the presumed difficulty of re-evolving ―lost‖ traits (Dollo‘s law). Previous tests of
Dollo‘s law have focused on morphologicaltraits, perhaps because physiology is considered more
evolutionarily labile. Most of the world‘s 1200+ gecko species are nocturnal and active at body
temperatures that are suboptimal for performance. Yet, geckos descended from diurnal lizards, which are
generally active near their thermal optimum. Several gecko lineages have independently reversed to
diurnality. We tested whether reversals to diurnality in geckos are associated with a return to performance
levels of diurnal lizards or whether their long history of nocturnality has compromised gecko performance.
We hypothesized that diurnality in geckos would be associated with faster sprints at warmer temperatures



                                                                                                         436
(as for typical diurnal lizards) and slower sprints at lower temperatures compared to closely related
nocturnal geckos. Following Dollo‘s law, we predicted that the maximum performance of diurnal geckos
would not approach values of typical diurnal lizards. We used a comprehensive phylogeny of geckos to
identify the nocturnal sister taxa of secondarily diurnal geckos. A total of 28 gecko species was sprinted at
five ecologically relevant temperatures and maximum sprint performance was determined for each
temperature. While most (71%) of the species in our study had typical performance curves (i.e., slowest
sprints tended to occur at the lowest body temperature and declined again at the highest body
temperature), two species had performance curves that continued to increase with temperature, two
species had curves that increased initially and then reached a plateau, and four species had curves that
fit a third-order polynomial function. Sprints of species pairs analyzed to date (three nocturnal:diurnal
pairs), show no difference in temperature-dependent sprint performance between the nocturnal and
diurnal species. This may indicate that thermal physiology is evolutionarily conserved in geckos; however,
data from additional species are needed to determine whether this pattern is widespread.



Lukey, Natasha (University of Waterloo); Cunnington, David (Environment Canada- Canadian Wildlife
Service, Canada); Ashpole, Sara; Murphy, Stephen (University of Waterloo, Canada); Govindarajulu,
Purnima (British Columbia Ministry of Enviroment, Canada)

Where do we go from here? Long-term, Adaptive Management of Invasive American Bullfrogs
(Lithobates catesbeiana) in the South Okanagan Valley, British Columbia

American Bullfrogs, Lithobates catesbeiana, significantly and negatively impact ecosystems. Alien
bullfrogs out-compete, predate upon, and transmit diseases to native amphibians. Since their introduction
in the 1950's, bullfrogs have been detected in 5 wetlands in the South Okanagan region of British
Columbia, Canada. We developed a three-tiered, adaptive management system in response to the
bullfrog threat. The first management tier is physical removal of, and active monitoring for, bullfrogs of all
stages. Removal has resulted in significant reduction in bullfrog detections from a high of 73 adults and/or
juveniles in 2005, to 4 adults and/or juveniles in 2010. Following the low number of detections in 2010, we
installed automated recording devices at 2 of the 5 infected water bodies in 2011. Continued visual and
in-person auditory detection efforts, combined with the audio recordings, yielded 0 bullfrog detections in
2011. The second management tier assesses risk levels for future colonization or recolonization post-
removal. Maximum entropy habitat suitability modeling in conjunction with effort analysis will determine
the proportion of wetlands vulnerable to recolonization post-removal, and help predict human and
financial resources required for continued population suppression. Habitat suitability modeling has shown
permanent, stagnant wetlands surrounded by agriculture to be at highest risk for bullfrog invasion. The
third management tier incorporates stakeholder awareness and education to facilitate monitoring of
bullfrog populations. We distributed surveys to stakeholder groups (school teachers, neighboring
landowners, vector businesses, and the general public), to measure each group's level of knowledge of
bullfrog presence, identification, and reporting. Fifty percent or more of all target groups were not
confident with identifying and/or reporting bullfrogs. To achieve long-term suppression and potential
eradication, we recommend continued stakeholder education to improve bullfrog identification and
reporting, reduced but continuing in-person detection effort, expanded monitoring using automated
recording devices, and continued habitat suitability model and effort analysis. This three tiered
management system provides a strong example of a successful invasive species risk assessment and
management approach to vertebrate invasions outside the Okanagan Valley, Canada.




                                                                                                          437
Lumbantobing, Daniel (The George Washington University);

Osteology of the Gill Arches of the Subfamily Danioninae (Teleostei; Cyprinidae)

 Danioninae, with approximately 320 species in 51 genera, is one of the most species-rich teleost
subfamilies. Despite such diversity, let alone the growing interest in the biology of some of its species,
little is known about danionine morphology and its utility in the systematics of the group. The osteological
aspects of the gill arches in 32 species of the subfamily Danioninae, representing 21 valid genera, have
been comparatively studied. Serving as outgroup taxa, five species of four non-danionine subfamilies
were also examined. The danionine gill arches is shown to constitute a remarkably high structural
diversity, as demonstrated by 16 variable characters, eleven of which are described herein for the first
time. Based on outgroup comparison, Danioninae is uniquely diagnosed by the presence of a
cartilaginous fifth epibranchial with a ventral tip articulating only with the posteroventral edge of the fourth
epibranchial. In contrast, the cartilaginous fifth epibranchial in all the outgroup taxa is ventrally associated
not only with the fourth epibranchial, but also with the cartilaginous dorsal tip of the fourth ceratobranchial.
Given the presence of such a danionine epibranchial articulation in Sundadanio , this enigmatic-yet-
problematic genus is here classified in Danioninae, regardless of the conflicting and poorly-resolved
topologies of the molecular trees of previous studies. The rasborin process sensu Liao et al. (2010) is
confirmed as a synapomorphy that supports the monophyly of the tribe Rasborini. In addition,
incorporation of the genera Amblypharyngodon and Pectenocypris within Rasborini according to
previous molecular studies is corroborated by the presence of the rasborin process in both taxa, which is
reported herein for the first time. Several novel osteological structures in the gill arches unique to other
danionine taxa were also discovered, particularly in the genera that exhibit highly-evolved modifications of
feeding behavior, such as Amblypharyngodon , Esomus , Pectenocypris , and Raiamas .



Lyons, Kady (California State University Long Beach); Carlisle, Aaron (Hopkins Marine Station, Pacific
Grove, CA, United States); Blasius, Mary (California State University Long Beach, Long Beach, CA,
United States); Mull, Christopher (Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada); Winkler, Chuck
(Southern California Marine Institute, Terminal Island, CA, United States); O'Sullivan, John (Monterey Bay
Aquarium, Monterey, CA, United States); Lowe, Christopher (California State University Long Beach,
Long Beach, CA, United States)

Levels of Organic Contaminants and Mercury in Four Species of YOY Lamnid Sharks

During reproduction, females have the ability to transfer accumulated contaminants to offspring by a
process called maternal offloading. Since organic contaminants are biomagnified through the food web, a
mother‘s the trophic level should highly influence the magnitude and composition of contaminants passed
to developing young. Liver contaminant concentrations were measured in four species of young of the
year (YOY) lamnid sharks caught in southern and central California to compare the degree of maternal
contaminant transfer from females with varying diets. YOY white sharks (n=19) had the highest levels of
organochlorine contaminants among all four groups (∑PCBs 14 ± 10 µg/g ww [wet weight], ∑DDTs 75 ±
87 µg/g ww), followed by mako sharks (n=4; ∑PCBs 7 ± 7 µg/g ww, ∑DDTs 13 ± 75 µg/g ww), thresher
(n=1; ∑PCBs 2.8 µg/g ww, ∑DDTs 5.7 µg/g ww) and salmon sharks (n=17; ∑PCBs 0.6 ± 0.5 µg/g ww,
∑DDTs 0.7 ± 0.6 µg/g ww). YOY white sharks also had the highest level of total mercury in their muscle
(∑Hg 1.4 ± 1.1 µg/g ww) compared to salmon sharks (∑Hg 0.3 ± 0.1 µg/g ww). YOY white sharks were
also the only species to show contaminant signatures (high DDT:PCB ratio) indicative of foraging from the
Palos Verdes Superfund site. While diet and foraging location of YOY sharks may play a role, the amount
of contaminants accumulated by these young sharks is probably highly influenced by their mothers.
Therefore, adult lamnids such as white and mako sharks that feed on highly contaminated marine



                                                                                                            438
mammals are more likely to pass higher loads of contaminants to their offspring.    The elevated
contaminant levels of these young animals are of concern since the physiological effects of these
contaminants on health and reproduction are unknown.



Lyra, Mariana (UNESP); Haddad, Célio (UNESP, Canada)

Using DNA Barcodes to estimate species richness in Neotropical amphibians

Amphibians are currently facing serious population declines and/or extinctions worldwide. At the same
time, several new species are continuously being described, suggesting that our knowledge of amphibian
species diversity is far from complete and underscoring the need for an acceleration in taxonomic
research. In this context the use of molecular tools, such as DNA Barcoding, can contribute as
alternative measure to the rapid and easy assessment of species richness in this hyperdiverse group.
Controversially, there are only a few studies using DNA barcode in amphibians and virtually no large-
scale contributions to the South American amphibian fauna. The greatest diversity of amphibians on the
planet is found in Brazil, a continental scale country comprising several biomes. Information on genetic
diversity of Brazilian amphibians, as in other groups, is still poorly known. The aims of our work are to
DNA Barcode amphibians from Brazil and make a preliminary estimate of genetic diversity in this group.
So far we have analyzed COI sequences from 220 species of amphibians (~ 1000 sequences), including
samples of all families of frogs and toads currently recognized in Brazil, six species of caecilians, and one
species of salamander. Intraspecific diversity was high among analyzed species (mean=3,8%; range 0 –
18.7%). In 39 of 220 cases, well-supported, distinct intraspecific lineages were identified which may
suggest the presence of cryptic species. Although in all cases, intraspecific lineages require additional
investigation using complementary molecular techniques and additional characters such as morphology
and acoustic data, it is clear that amphibian species richness is underestimated in Brazil. Results suggest
that diversity may be 20% greater than currently known. Moreover, the results indicate that the
incorporation of genetic data in collections is strategic and fundamental for the recognition of lineages,
and thus accelerate the characterization and quantification of the diversity of Neotropical amphibians.
DNA Barcode data can contribute effectively for          conservation and       management        of Brazilian
species.



Lyson, Tyler (Yale University); Scheyer, Torsten (University of Zurich, Canada); Bever, Gaberiel (New
York College of Osteopathic Medicine, Canada); Hsiang, Allison; Gauthier, Jacques (Yale University,
Canada)

Evolutionary developmental model for the origin and early evolution of the turtle shell: integration
of developmental data with the fossil record

The evolutionary steps that resulted in the unique, shelled body plan of turtles and the phylogenetic
position of turtles within Reptilia are interdependent problems that have fascinated and confounded
comparative biologists since the 19th century. While boney ―shells‖ have evolved numerous times during
amniote evolution (e.g., placodonts, armadillos, ankylosaurs), in all cases except turtles these structures
are clearly composites of dermal osteoderms. In turtles, however, the underlying structure of the
carapace is a unique outgrowth of intramembranous bone derived from the periosteum of the developing
ribs and thoracolumbar vertebrae. The recent discovery of the late Triassic Odontochelys semitestacea,
the oldest unequivocal stem turtle with distinctively broadened ribs and lack of osteoderms, helps break
up the historic morphological gap between early turtles and other reptiles. For example, several



                                                                                                          439
postcranial characters revealed by O. semitestacea are also present in the late Permian Eunotosaurus
africanus– whose general similarity with turtles (e.g., broadened ribs) has long been recognized but
generally assumed (but never tested) to reflect convergence rather than homology. New E. africanus
fossils reveal several unambiguous synapomorphies uniting E.africanus with turtles: number of dorsal
ribs and vertebrae reduced to nine, T-shaped ribs in cross section, elongate dorsal vertebrae, and loss of
ventral ribs and sternum. Furthermore, histological data of the broadened E. africanus ribs show dermal
bone growth from the perichondral collar of the developing rib, a mode of development unique to turtles.
These data indicate E. africanus is the earliest and basal-most turtle. The ontogenetic appearance of
turtle shell characters matches the morphologic transitions found between E. africanus                  O.
semitestacea, and more crownward stem turtles. Here we integrate developmental data with the new
fossil and histological data, and analyze the ―key‖ morphological transitions within a broader phylogenetic
framework to ultimately propose an evolutionary developmental (evo-devo) model for the origin of the
turtle shell. The model hypothesizes when specific developmental and morphological transformations
arose within the lineage leading up to extant turtles.



Mabee, Paula (University of South Dakota);

Synthesis of evolutionary and developmental data for fishes using new informatics tools

The diversity of phenotypes that evolved in fishes and other vertebrates result from evolutionary changes
in regulation of genes that drive development. Although relatively little is known about the genes that
underlie the skeletal variation among fish species, substantial data from genetics and development are
available for zebrafish, a widely studied model organism. Because developmental processes are highly
conserved, this knowledge can be leveraged for understanding the evolution of skeletal diversity.The
Phenoscape Knowledgebase (http://kb.phenoscape.org) integrates similarly structured phenotypic data
from extinct and extant vertebrates (currently teleost fishes) and model organisms (currently zebrafish).
Using ontology-based reasoning the Knowledgebase provides (1) testable hypotheses of candidate
genes involved in the evolution of phenotypes that vary across taxa and (2) the capacity to browse, sort,
integrate, and aggregate morphological data in unparalleled ways, including across different biological
levels (cell, tissue, organ, system) and according to similarity of different types. Examples these features
will be provided using the skeleton of the hyoid arch and gill arches of fishes.



Machado, Taís (Instituto Butantan); Silva, Vinícius Xavier (UNIFAL - Universidade Federal de Alfenas,
Canada); Silva, Maria José de Jesus (Instituto Butantan, Canada)

Cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 divergences among closely related species of the Bothrops
neuwiedi group (Serpentes, Squamata)

Overlapping of morphological features of species has been a problem for the taxonomy of Bothrops
neuwiedi group. Such group currently comprises eight species widespread in open areas of South
America. A previous study based on mitochondrial DNA (cytb and ND4) revealed lack of correspondence
between molecular phylogeny and the current taxonomy which could be explained by different
methodologies applied to analyze different datasets. Alternatively, we could also hypothesize that
introgression events and/or phenotypic plasticity and/or convergent morphological evolution could be
occurring and interfering in the correct identification of specimens. DNA barcoding theoretically could
provide rapid and accurate species identification, using a small standardized segment of the genome,
usually the cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (cox1), a mitochondrial gene. Successful barcode



                                                                                                        440
identification depends upon genetic diversity, which is markedly lower within than between species. This
study aims to investigate the applicability of the 680 bp sequence of cox1 as a molecular marker for
species identification in B. neuwiedi group and for reconstructing phylogenetic relationships. Sequences
from representatives of all the species of Bothrops neuwiedi group were obtained, edited/aligned with
CodonCode Aligner, and the analyses were performed using Mega 5, TNT 1.1., PhyML 3.0 and Mr.
Bayes 3.1.2. Preliminary results evinced Bothrops erythromelas, B. lutzi, B. marmoratus, B. neuwiedi and
B. pauloensis with high intraspecific divergences, which could indicate the occurrence of cryptic species,
although introgression would also be a probable phenomenon in some of these taxa. Low level of
interspecific divergence between B. diporus and B. pubescens was observed - hypothetically due to
recent evolutionary radiation. Two major geographic highly structured lineages were recovered:, one
distributed along the Brazilian coast from north to southeast and another one in the countryside from
central-west to south region. Cox1 shows less informative sites than cytb and ND4, although the analysis
of the three genes combined has been shown less polytomies of the main lineages than previously
observed.

Grants: FAPESP, CAPES



Mackessy, Stephen (University of Northern Colorado);

Biology and Venom Biochemistry of the Desert Massasauga (Sistrurus catenatus edwardsii) in
Colorado

The Massasauga (Sistrurus catenatus) is a small rattlesnake which occurs in grasslands of North
America, from northern Mexico to southeastern Canada. Although threatened in many parts of its range,
the diminutive Desert Massasauga (S. c. edwardsii) remains abundant at several locations in more mesic
regions of the shortgrass steppe of southeastern Colorado. Our numerous studies of the ecology/natural
history and venom biochemistry/genomics make Desert Massasaugas one of the better-characterized
species of rattlesnakes, and this summary will examine the interplay of animal biology and venom
biochemistry. Snakes (750) were collected on a private ranch in southeastern Colorado and were
processed in the lab (morphometrics, venom extraction and PIT-tagging; 12 snakes were also implanted
with radios for telemetry studies). Massasaugas were radiotracked for two years during the active season
to determine spatial ecology and habitat use. Venoms were subjected to a variety of biochemical and
proteomic analyses, and two snakes were sacrificed for transcriptomics studies. Massasaugas make
strongly directional migratory movements which are resource-driven. Abundant prey (lizards, centipedes,
rodents) and favorable thermoregulatory sites occur in the summer habitat, while stable hibernacula exist
in the shortgrass habitat. Long-term mark/recapture studies indicate that Desert Massasaugas are
abundant but short-lived, with average adult survivorship of <4 years. Desert Massasauga venom is quite
potent toward both lizards and rodents, and it is much more toxic to a common rodent prey species
(Perognathus) than toward rodent species not utilized (Peromyscus). Proteomic and genomic analyses
indicate that a crotoxin homolog, characteristic of other type II rattlesnake venoms, is not expressed in
this species, but genes for 5 isoforms of three-finger toxins (3FTXs) are present. Unlike most viper
venoms, only one dominant isoform of an acidic PLA2 is present in venom of S. c. edwardsii. The Desert
Massasauga is one of only a few species of viperids demonstrated to possess genes for 3FTXs, a protein
family which includes the potent α-neurotoxins of elapids and several taxon-specific neurotoxins of some
rear-fanged snakes. However, 3FTxs do not appear to be expressed in the venom. Based on 2D SDS-
PAGE, over 100 proteins comprise this venom, and serine proteinases (thrombin-like, kallikrein-like) are
abundant components which may contribute to high venom lethality in mice and lizards. The Desert
Massasauga in Colorado is an excellent model species for evaluating influences of numerous ecological



                                                                                                       441
factors on venom evolution, and continuing studies are investigating population levels of venom and
genetic variation.



Mackessy, Stephen (University of Northern Colorado); Saviola, Anthony (University of Northern
Colorado, Canada); Chiszar, David (University of Colorado Boulder, Canada)

Ontogenetic Shift in Response To Prey-Derived Chemical Cues in Prairie Rattlesnakes (Crotalus
viridis viridis)

Snakes often have specialized diets that undergo a shift from one prey type to another depending on the
life stage of the snake. Crotalus viridis viridis (prairie rattlesnake) takes different prey at different life
stages, and neonates typically prey on ectotherms, while adults feed almost entirely on small
endotherms. We hypothesized that elevated rates of tongue flicking to chemical stimuli should correlate
with particular prey consumed, and that this response shifts from one prey type to another as individuals
age. To examine if an ontogenetic shift in response to chemical cues occurred, we recorded the rate of
tongue flicking for 25 neonate, 20 subadult, and 20 adult (average SVL = 280.9, 552, 789.5 mm,
respectively) wild-caught C. v. viridis to chemical stimuli presented on a cotton-tipped applicator; water-
soluble cues from two ectotherms, (prairie lizard,           Sceloporus undulatus , and house gecko,
Hemidactylus frenatus ), two endotherms, (deer mouse, Peromyscus maniculatus and lab mouse, Mus
musculus ), and water controls were used. Neonates tongue flicked significantly more to chemical cues of
their common prey, S. undulatus, than to all other chemical cues; however, the response to this lizard‘s
chemical cues decreased in adult rattlesnakes. Subadults tongue flicked with a higher rate of tongue
flicking to both S. undulatus and P. maniculatus than to all other treatments, and adults tongue flicked
significantly more to P. maniculatus than to all other chemical cues. In addition, all three subclasses
demonstrated a greater response for natural prey chemical cues over chemical stimuli of prey not
encountered in the wild ( M. musculus and H. frenatus ). This shift in chemosensory response
correlatedwith the previously described ontogenetic shifts in C. v. viridis diet. Because many vipers show
a similar ontogenetic shift in diet and venom composition, we suggest that this shift in prey cue
discrimination is likely a general phenomenon among viperid snakes.



Mackessy, Stephen (University of Northern Colorado); Saviola, Anthony (University of Northern
Colorado, Canada); Chiszar, David; Busch, Chardell (University of Colorado Boulder, Canada)

Relocator Proteins: Identification of the Chemical Component of Venoms Allowing Prey Recovery
During Strike-induced Chemosensory Searching

Vertebrate predators utilize a broad arsenal of behaviors and weaponry for overcoming fractious and
potentially dangerous prey. In response, defenses may evolve among prey that decrease predatory
success, leading to an evolutionary arms race whose dynamics change over time. This reciprocating
compensatory response has been invoked to explain aposematic color patterns among toxic prey and
their snake predators, and a similar Red Queen effect may help explain the seemingly unnecessary
complexity of snake venoms. Among the advanced snakes, a chemical mode of dispatching prey, venom,
is commonly utilized to obtain prey rapidly and with minimal contact. Snake venoms contain a variety of
protein, peptide and small organic compounds, and a persistent issue in the study of venom evolution has
been to explain the compositional complexity of venoms. Lethal toxicity toward particular prey has
demonstrated the adaptive significance of several taxon-specific venom components, but for most venom
proteins, particularly the many low toxicity, non-enzymatic fractions, a well-defined role in envenomation



                                                                                                          442
and predation has not been established. One of these protein families, the disintegrins, are common,
well-characterized components of viperid venoms, and a major activity is to disrupt cell-cell and cell-
matrix interactions mediated by cell surfaceintegrins. Here we show that disintegrins, in addition to these
demonstrated pharmacological roles, are used by rattlesnakes to tag prey chemically, allowing for
relocation after envenomation. Enzymatic and other major protein components of size exclusion-
fractionated Crotalus atrox (Western Diamondback) venom had no effect on discrimination of
envenomated vs. non-envenomated prey by snakes, but a peak containing only the monomeric
disintegrins crotatroxins 1 and 2 elicited a statistically significant response to treated prey. The identity of
these small proteins was confirmed by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry and N-terminal sequencing. We
suggest that a major biological role of venom disintegrins for rattlesnakes is to allow these strike-and-
release predators to relocate envenomated prey effectively. In the field, this chemical tag on prey will help
minimize foraging time and greatly expedite discrimination of a trail left by envenomated prey from the
many trails of non-envenomated conspecifics. Our results demonstrate unequivocally that venom
components can have important biological roles which extend beyond those that are apparent from their
biochemically functional roles.



Mackey, Mark (University of Missouri); Semlitsch, Raymond (University of Missouri, Columbia, MO,
United States)

Using headwater streams and salamanders to test hypotheses of golf course impacts

With more than 18,000 golf courses in the U.S. encompassing over 2.7 million acres, golf has become a
significant land use. The purpose of this study was to examine the impacts of golf course management
on stream habitat and water quality and to specifically examine the influence of golf management on
stream salamander communities. We tested the following hypotheses about the effects of golf course
management on streams: golf courses 1) produce chemical runoff which affects stream salamander
communities directly downstream of courses, 2) cause direct habitat alteration which affects stream
salamander communities on golf courses, 3) cause indirect habitat alteration which affects stream
salamanders directly downstream of golf courses. We measured relative abundance and diversity of
larval and adult stream salamanders in 60 stream reaches located upstream, on, and downstream of 10
golf courses in western North Carolina. We also measured 13 biologically relevant riparian and in-stream
habitat characteristics to better understand the impacts of management on habitat quality. We made
predictions about direct (on course) and indirect (downstream) effects for each habitat variable. We also
measured nitrate and pesticide levels upstream and downstream of courses to test the chemical runoff
hypothesis. Salamander abundance and diversity did not differ in streams located upstream and
downstream of golf courses. Stream reaches on managed portions of golf courses on average contained
lower salamander abundances and diversity for adults and larvae, though only larval diversity was
significant. Nitrate was not detected at any of the stream reaches and only two of the 16 pesticide
chemicals screened for were detected in negligible proportions. On average none of the 13 habitat
variables measured differed in upstream and downstream reaches. Six of these variables were
significantly altered in the on-course streams. Overall our chemical, salamander, and habitat results did
not support the chemical runoff hypothesis or the indirect habitat alteration hypothesis. Our findings of
altered habitat characteristics and lowered larval salamander diversity in on-course streams provide
support for the direct habitat influence hypothesis. This study provides a useful starting point for
understanding the current impacts of golf course management on stream habitat and water quality, and
provides a directed transition into the next step of experimental habitat manipulation for stream
biodiversity enhancement.




                                                                                                            443
Maddin, Hillary (Harvard University); Russell, Anthony; Anderson, Jason (University of Calgary, Canada)

Morphological evolution and phylogeny of caecilian amphibians (Gymnophiona)

Caecilian amphibians remain the least well understood of the three lissamphibian orders, in terms of
many fundamental aspects of their biology and evolution. Currently, phylogenetic analyses of characters
drawn from the morphology of caecilians lack resolution, as well as complementarity with the results of
phylogenetic analyses that employ molecular data. A hypothesis of phylogeny that incorporates
morphological data permits the identification synapomorphies and provides a context for exploring
evolutionary transitions within a group. Stemming from the hypothesis that the braincase has the potential
to yield phylogenetic information, the braincases and intimately associated stapedes of twenty-seven
species (twenty-three genera) of extant caecilians were examined using images assembled via micro-
computed tomography. Thirty-four new morphological characters pertaining to the braincase and stapes
were identified and tested for congruence with previously recognized morphological characters. The
results reveal that characters of the braincase and stapes resolve generic-level relationships in a way that
is largely congruent with the results of molecular analyses. The results of a combined analysis of
molecular and morphological data provide a framework for conducting ancestral character state
reconstructions and permit the generation of a hypothesis relating to the plesiomorphic condition of the
caecilian braincase, which bears relevance to ongoing discussions about lissamphibian phylogeny. The
current analyses resulted in the identification of 70 new synapomorphies for various clades of taxa, 24 of
which appear to be unique for the taxa that possess them. Together these data demonstrate the utility of
the application of characters of the braincase and stapes for resolving phylogenetic relationships in this
group. The results are discussed as they pertain to caecilian systematics and morphological evolution.



Madelaire, Carla (USP - Universidade de São Paulo); Gomes, Fernando (USP - Universidade de São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil)

Relationship between androgens, reproductive physiology, immunocompetence, and parasitism
in anurans of Brazilian semi-arid, Caatinga.

Most of the anurans are seasonal breeders, with males presenting a circulating androgen peak during the
breeding season. Although the maintenance of high androgen levels is necessary during the breeding
season to express morphological and behavioral secondary sexual characters, they may show
immunosuppressive effects. In this way, during the breeding season, there may be an important tradeoff
between reproductive effort and resistance to parasite infection. Environments marked by drastic
seasonal energy and water availability are particularly challenging for the organisms, since energy
restriction has been shown to accentuate the tradeoffs in experimental studies on different vertebrates.
An example of this kind of environment is the Brazilian Caatinga, a large semi-arid region characterized
by high temperatures and seasonal, limited and somewhat unpredictable rainfall. In Angicos, a locality
within the Caatinga biome contaning some permanent water bodies, different species of anurans deal
with the dry season in different ways. While Pleurodema diplolister aestivate borrowed, Rhinella
granulosa and R. jimi remain in foraging activity around permanent lakes. In this way, anurans from this
locality present a very interesting model for comparative studies of the seasonal variation in the
relationship between androgens, reproductive physiology, and parasitism. We are analyzing testosterone
plasma levels, leukocyte counting and profile, intensity of endoparasites, testicular morphology, fat
reserves, organ masses, and stomach contents of males from these three species collected during three
periods: (1) dry season, (2) during the rainfall, when males are calling, and (3) in the interval between




                                                                                                        444
rainfalls, when males are foraging within the reproductive season. The implications of our findings will be
discussed.



Maerz, John (University of Georgia);

A Salamander Perspective on Earthworm Invasions of North Temperate Forest Ecosystems

Nonnative species invasions are a major component of global change.            In the eastern deciduous of
forests of North America, nonnative earthworm invasions have been transforming the structure and
function of forest floor environments and having complex effects on the plants and animals that depend
on those environments. I summarize what is known about the earthworm impacts on forest ecosystems
including effects on terrestrial salamander diet, abundance, and role in ecosystem function. In short,
earthworms are an important prey to many predators including herpetofauna.            Earthworm invasions
drive most of the spatial and temporal variation in energy intake for red-backed salamanders ( Plethodon
cinereus ), which is associated with altered salamander fecundity, social behavior and morphology.
However, the major impact of earthworm invasions is the rapid loss of leaf litter from the forest floor,
which leads to more rapid soil drying and reduced arthropod abundances.            As a result, salamander
abundance has declined exponentially among forest sites where earthworm invasions have reduced
forest litter cover.     Work using double-labeled leaf litter applied to forest plots with and without
earthworms demonstrated that earthworm invasions altered the rates and total amounts of energy and
nutrients that move from leaf litter to salamander populations. The total amount of C and N that moved
into salamander populations over four years was significantly lower on earthworm-invaded plots
compared to worm free plots, resulting in less C and N retention by salamander populations following
earthworm invasion. Collectively our research shows that despite being a potentially abundant food
source, earthworms reduce the net amount of energy and nutrients that flow from forest leaf litter to
support salamander populations and nearly eliminate the contribution of salamanders to nutrient retention
in forest ecosystems.       There is likely little that can be done to eliminate earthworms from invaded
forests, but actions to reduce the introduction of earthworms to new areas through the movement of bait
and soils could protect remaining non-invaded forests.



Maglia, Anne (US National Science Foundation);

NSF Collections Programs: Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections (ADBC) and
Collections in Support of Biological Research (CSBR)

I will discuss two collections-relevant funding opportunities in the US National Science Foundation‘s
Division of Biological Sciences---Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections (ADBC) and Collections
in Support of Biological Research (CSBR).       I will provide historical perspectives on the programs and
updates on recent changes to the solicitations. Additional information may be found at:
http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=503559 (ADBC) and
http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=503651 (CSBR).




                                                                                                        445
Mahler, D. Luke (University of California, Davis); Castañeda, María del Rosario (Museum of Comparative
Zoology, Cambridge, MA, United States)

A new organization dedicated to the conservation of Anolis lizards: The Anoline Lizard Specialist
Group (IUCN SSC)

We present a new IUCN SSC specialist group dedicated to the conservation of anoles: the Anoline Lizard
Specialist Group (ALSG). For years, the study of Anolis lizards has thrived on many fronts of research,
from genomics to ecology to macroevolution. Despite this, there have been very few coordinated efforts
to conserve anoles during this time, and the conservation status of the world‘s nearly 400 species of
anoles is largely unknown. What is known, however, is that many species of anoles are threatened by a
variety of factors, including habitat destruction, climate change, commercial trade, and threats from
invasive species. Despite this, almost none are afforded international protection. In a recent conservation
assessment project that included 54 randomly sampled anole species, 43% were found to be threatened
according to IUCN Red List criteria, suggesting that many anole species and populations are declining
(Bohm et al., in review, Biological Conservation). The ALSG aims to engage the vibrant community of
anole biologists in applied conservation activities. Our first task as a specialist group will be to assess
the conservation status of all species of anoles that have not previously been assessed. Building on this
knowledge, the ALSG will seek to identify specific threats to Anolis lizards, and will develop, through
international collaboration, plans to conserve those species that are most severely threatened.



Mahler, D. Luke (University of California, Davis); Lambert, Shea M. (Stony Brook University, Stony
Brook, NY, United States); Geneva, Anthony J. (University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, United States);
Hedges, S. Blair (Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, United States); Losos, Jonathan B.
(Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States); Glor, Richard E. (University of Rochester,
Rochester, NY, United States)

Discovery of a short-limbed giant Anolis from Hispaniola supports a deterministic model of island
evolution and community assembly

We report the discovery of a species of giant anole from Hispaniola that provides new evidence for
determinism in the evolution and assembly of Caribbean island Anolis faunas. The new species is most
closely related to Hispaniolan ―crown-giant‖ ecomorph anoles ( Anolis ricordii clade). However, it is
ecomorphologically most similar to Cuban ―giant twig‖ anoles of the Chamaeleolis clade: both are very
large anoles with short limbs and a short tail that tend to utilize relatively narrow perches in cluttered
habitats this discovery adds a new dimension to the phenomenon of among-island ecomorph matching
that characterizes Greater Antillean anole faunas. In addition, phylogenetic comparative analyses suggest
that key aspects of the similarity of Hispaniolan and Cuban ―giant twig‖ anoles may be the product of
evolutionary convergence. Being restricted to a narrow band of threatened mid-elevation forest near the
border of the Dominican Republic and Haiti, this new species should be considered critically endangered.



Mahony, Michael (The University of Newcastle);

Evidence of extensive reticulate evolution between diploid and tetreploid lineages in the
Australian Desert Burrowing Frogs of the genus Neobatrachus

Four of the nine species of the Australian desert burrowing frog of the genus Neobatrachus are bisexual
tetraploids (4n=48) the remainder are bisexual diploids (2n=24). Apart from differences in chromosome



                                                                                                       446
number four of the diploid and two of the tetraploid species have very similar but not identical karyotypes
based on chromosome morphology, nucleolar organizer region (NOR) location and C-banding. One
diploid and two tetraploid species have distinctive and unique NOR locations. The tetraploids are
distributed in the central desert regions of Australia while the diploids occur peripherally in semi-arid and
Mediterranean climate zones to the west, southwest and southeast of Australia. Extensive geographic
overlap of ranges between several of the diploid and one tetraploid occur in the southwest but in other
regions the distributions are broadly allopatric with zones of parapatry. At parapatric zones hybridization
occurs between diploid and tetraploid specie, and in most cases the resultant triploid (3n) hybrids grow to
maturity with secondary sexual features but show high levels of infertility resulting from imbalances at first
meiosis. Evidence of partial fertility comes from the detection of backcross pentaploid (5n) and hexaploid
(6n) individuals. One zone of tetraploid x tetraploid hybridization was also detected, and hybrids were
chromosomally balanced (4n) but showed a range of developmental/somatic abnormalities, with evidence
of F2 or backcrossing between hybrids and the parental species based on the number of distinctive NOR
markers. Genetic studies (allozymes and mtDNA sequencing) provide evidence that extensive reticulate
evolution occurs between the diploid and polyploid species with genes occurring often well removed from
zones of parapatry within this complex.



Makhubo, Buyisile (University of Stellenbosch); Tolley, Krystal (South Afircan National Biodiversity
Institute, Cape Town, South Africa); Bates, Michael (National Museum, Bloemfontein, South Africa)

Phylogenetic relationships among members of the Afroedura nivaria species complex in South
Africa

The Afroedura nivaria complex is one of six recognized species complexes within the southern African
endemic gecko genus, Afroedura. The A. nivaria complex is a morphologically conservative group of
medium-sized geckos endemic to South Africa. They are unevenly distributed in the Eastern Cape, Free
State and KwaZulu-Natal provinces. The complex currently comprises five described species. These
nocturnal and rupicolous geckos shelter in narrow rock crevices on outcrops. The status of these species
has not yet been confirmed using molecular methods and it is unknown whether or not additional lineages
are present on isolated outcrops. We investigated the hypothesis that endemics with a narrow distribution
(i.e., A. amatolica and A. tembulica) are single valid species, but that isolated populations in the
widespread species (A. nivaria, A. karroica and A. halli) demonstrate genetic variation at the species
level. To investigate the evolutionary relationships among these taxa, fragments of two mitochondrial
genes (16S and ND4) and one nuclear marker (KIAA) were sequenced and analysed using Bayesian
inference, maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood. All analyses strongly supported the genetic
distinctiveness of known species. However, the A. nivaria complex is not monophyletic, with some
lineages clustering within the other species complexes. The phylogeny also shows some structuring at
the species level within the three widespread species, suggesting the presence of cryptic species. In
addition, one narrow endemic (A. amatolica) also showed two distinct lineages. These findings suggest
the existence of five (up to seven) additional cryptic lineages.




                                                                                                          447
Mali, Ivana (Texas State University); Schwinning, Susan; Forstner, Michael (Texas State University,
Canada)

Toward Sustainable Worldwide Utilization of Chelonians

The commercial harvest of long-lived species with slow intrinsic population growth rates from the wild
almost always leads to overexploitation and the eventual loss of an industry unless strong and biologically
effective regulation is put in place. Due to recent and historical overexploitation without regard for
sustainability, many living chelonians of the world are now in perilous decline. The most striking recent
examples come from Asia, where increasing demand for turtles in food markets has led to the collapse of
a continental turtle fauna. Despite the collapse of the wild turtle stocks across Asia, the demand for turtles
in Asian turtle markets has remained strong. This is not an Asian continental issue, however, as the
consequences of the trade have a planetary scope. For example, the U.S. and the state of Texas, in
particular, had become a leading turtle exporter to supply the demands no longer served by native
species in Asia. Recent studies show that declines in turtle abundances in Texas are likely due to
overexploitation. As a response, current commercial harvest regulations of turtles in Texas allow the
harvest of three freshwater turtle species to occur only on privately owned land or water. Based on simple
matrix population model of red-eared sliders (Trachemys scripta elegans), we show the level of
vulnerability of turtles to additive mortality. We also provide further suggestions of how sustainability of
this unique evolutionary group can be achieved by comparing it with very successful strategies that have
been used in delisting and even achieving sustainable harvest of American alligator (Alligator
mississippiensis). We compare the cases of the American alligator and the red-eared slider to examine
the circumstances under which farming has provided a sustainable alternative to harvest from the wild.
We used matrix models of turtle and alligator growth in the wild and in captivity to estimate population
growth rates and the potential for financial gains from selling animals. By linking life histories,
farming/ranching, and economic aspect of such in these two taxa, we discuss future guidelines to be
followed in order to successfully utilize turtles as game animals worldwide.



Mandelman, John (New England Aquarium); Cicia, Angela; Coutre, Karson (University of New England,
Canada); Driggers, William; Ingram, Walter (NOAA (National Marine Fisheries Service), Canada);
Sulikowski, James (University of New England, Canada)

The survival of rajids discarded in western Northwest Atlantic commercial otter-trawling
operations

Due primarily to regulatory factors, skates from the family Rajidae are routinely discarded as bycatch
during otter-trawl commercial operations in the Northwest Atlantic Ocean, the gear type responsible for
the highest annual capture and discard biomass of skates in this region. Thus, post-release survival has a
profound impact on the overall fishing mortality, stock status and management of this group. However,
despite a presumed species-specific range in tolerance to the rigors of trawl capture and handling and
mounting management and conservation concern, few studies have investigated the post-trawl capture
viability/condition or short-term (delayed) mortality among skates indigenous to the Northwest Atlantic,
and never under true commercial conditions in the Gulf of Maine. We investigated the viability/condition
and short-term (72 hour) delayed survival of a mix of prohibited ( Amblyraja radiata ; Malacoraja Senta )
and target ( Leucoraja ocellata ; Leucoraja erinacea ) skate species subsequent to capture by otter-trawl
across a variety of capture conditions. Of the 1,288 skates evaluated, negligible immediate mortality was
observed in any species following capture, even in relation to the most heavily packed and/or prolonged
trawls. Aside from M. Senta (41%), delayed survival rates by species were high overall (82-92%), with
L. ocellata (92%) the most resilient species. Although factors varied by species, logistic regression



                                                                                                          448
modeling revealed trawl duration as the most universal predictor of survival. The overt viability/condition
of skates at the time of capture was also a strong predictor of delayed survival. Although in general
Northwest Atlantic skates appear more resilient to trawl capture and handling than previously estimated,
species differences must be accounted for when managing this group.



Mandrak, Nick (Fisheries and Oceans Canada);

Updating the Freshwater Fishes of Canada

The Freshwater Fishes of Canada by Scott and Crossman is considered to be the definitive book on
the Canadian freshwater fish fauna. The composition and distribution of the fish fauna has changed
considerably since the publication of Freshwater Fishes of Canada in 1973. There are 26 species, not
included in the 1973 book, now established in Canada as a result of new introductions, changing
taxonomy, and additional field surveys. The additional field surveys and more recently published regional
books have improved our knowledge of the distributions of all freshwater fishes in Canada. Revising the
Freshwater Fishes of Canada in its entirety is a daunting task. Rather than revise it in a single volume, a
supplement, Freshwater Fishes of Canada New to the Fauna Since 1973 , will include full species
accounts in the same format as the original book for the 26 species established since 1973. A second
supplement, An Atlas of the Freshwater Fishes of Canada Annotated with an Identification Key , will
include update distribution maps and an illustrated identification key for all freshwater fishes in Canada.
There are insufficient data to produce dot distributions maps; therefore, shaded distribution maps based
on tertiary watersheds (n=966) will be compiled based on known records and the expert opinion of
regional experts. It is expected that the two volumes will be published in 2013.



Manenti, Raoul (Università degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Biologia); Pennati, Roberta
(Dipartimento di Biologia, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy); Santo, Nadia (Centro
Interdipartimentale di Microscopia Avanzata - Cima, Milano, Italy); Ficetola, Gentile Francesco
(Dipartimento di Scienze dell¿Ambiente e del Territorio, Milano, Italy)

Environmental vs social: which processes affect spatial segregation in cave salamanders:? An
analysis with Hydromantes strinatii

The identification of processes determining the distribution of organisms is a major challenge of spatial
ecology. Two types of processes have been proposed to explain patterns of spatial segregation, at the
intraspecific level: the social and the habitat segregation hypotheses. European cave salamanders
(genus Hydromantes) are ideal organisms for the study of spatial segregation. Cave salamanders are not
obligate cave-dwellers but during warm seasons they retreat to underground environments where they
find a more suitable microclimate. Previous studies observed spatial segregation between age classes of
cave salamanders, with juveniles living more close to the cave entrance, but the processes determining
segregation have not been assessed. We tested the causes of distinct distribution patterns in H. strinatii.
In 11 natural caves we recorded the location and age class of all salamanders observed. Each cave was
subdivided in 3-m longitudinal sectors; in each sector we measured the major determinants of
salamander distribution in underground environments (temperature, humidity, illuminance and spider
abundance). We used generalized mixed models to assess spatial segregation between salamander age
classes, and to test if segregation was explained by social processes (e.g., competition, cannibalism) or
by differences in habitat selection. We found significant segregation between age classes, juveniles being
associated to the more external sectors. Multiple environmental features varied along caves. Juveniles



                                                                                                        449
were associated to sectors with high spider abundance, while adults were associated with scarce
invertebrates and lower temperature. When the effect of environmental features was taken into account,
the relationship between juveniles and adults was not negative. This suggests that segregation was
mostly determined by different habitat preferences between age classes. Juveniles require more food
than adults, and probably select external sectors because of the higher prey availability. However,
external sectors also have more predators and instable microclimate. Age classes probably have different
risk-taking strategies between age classes. For juveniles, accessing to abundant food is necessary for
growth and development, therefore they choose superficial sectors, even if this may be risky. Conversely,
after attaining sexual maturity, adults may trade off food availability in favour of safe areas with stable
micro-climate.



Mao, Jean-Jay (Dept. of Forestry & Natural Resources, National Ilan University, Taiwan); Huang, Ming-
Huei (Dept. of Forestry & Natural Resources, National Ilan University, Taiwan, Canada)

A study on evaporative water loss of semi-aquatic snakes in Taiwan

This study was based on the assumption that semi-aquatic snakes, live in habitats with sufficient water,
so their water-loss prevention mechanism will be lower than that of terrestrial snakes under the same
temperature and moisture control conditions. It was also hypothesized that the different microhabitat
conditions (e.g. water depth) utilized by each semi-aquatic snake species, may also indicate their water
requirement and aquatic habitat adaptation tendencies, which will be exhibited by a low to high water
evaporative loss gradient.         Six semi-aquatic snakes (Amphiesma stolatum, Enhydris chinensis,
Enhydris plumbea, Sinonatrix annularis, Sinonatrix percarinata, and Xenochrophis piscator ), two
terrestrial snakes ( Dinodon rufozonatum rufoznatum, and Pseudoxenodon stejnegeri stejnegeri ) of
Taiwan, and two exotic aquatic snakes (Acrochordus javanicus, and Erpeton tentaculatum), were utilized
as test subjects in this study to determine whether ecotype, microhabitats utilization, body size, or
phylogeny were the major factors that affected the water evaporative ratio. All study snakes were placed
into a controlled environment with humidity of 50% and temperature of 25℃, and their body masses were
recorded as it changed every hour to examine the water evaporative loss ratio. The study revealed that
the evaporative water loss of E. chinensis, S. annularis , S. percarinata were higher than that of other
experimental snakes, and showed a correlation between the aquatic tendency and microhabitat
distribution gradient of water depth. The gradients of evaporative water-loss ratio from the higher group
(deep water depth habitat species) to the lowers (the ecotone from water to land habitat) were E.
chinensis, S. annularis, S. percarinata, E. plumbea, X. piscator, and A. stolatum in that order . The
evaporative water-loss of the aquatic snake, A. javanicus , was noticeably higher than that of the other
semi-aquatic snakes, but the ratio of E. tentaculatum was located at intermediately between X. piscator
and A. stolatum . The evaporative water-loss ratios were negatively correlated to body mass in the ten
study snakes, which means the heavier individuals experienced lower water loss rates. The body surface
area showed a negative correlation to the water-loss ratio of E. chinensis , E. plumbea , E.
tentaculatum, S. annularis , and X. piscator , but not for that of S. percarinata .




                                                                                                       450
Mao, Jean-Jay (Dept. of Forestry & Natural Resources, National Ilan University, Taiwan); Fang, Suei-
Cyuan (Dept. of Forestry & Natural Resources, National Ilan University, Taiwan, Canada)

The influence of water level fluctuations on the Sinonatrix percarinata population in Song-Lo
Lake, Taiwan

This study mainly utilized a mark-recaptures method and focused on the population ecology of Sinonatrix
percarinata in Song-Lo Lake, northeastern Taiwan. The lake is isolate, with an intermittent watershed.
Because the floor of the lake is pervious, and rainfall is the only source of incoming water, the water level
of the lake is highly dynamic. Sinonatrix percarinata is a semi-aquatic snake, and its population depends
on the water sources changes, so the population in this locality was expected to face severe fluctuating
environments (water area about 0.5 to 4.2 ha.) in the lake region. Therefore, the study focused on the
microhabitat utilization, prey resources, and predation stress of S. percarinata at different water levels.
The hypotheses that the lower water level would increase intraspecies competition, predation risk, and
reduce the prey resources, and may be evident in S. percarinata population conditions were also tested.


The study results showed that S. percarinata selected different microhabitats within water level
fluctuations. Significant positive correlations between the water level, the depth at which the snakes are
encountered, and grass cover ratio were noted, and negative correlations with the distance to the
shoreline, and the stone and mud cover ratios were also found. In this study S. percarinata primarily
preyed on frogs ( Babina adenopleura ; 65%; n=26) and tadpoles (18%; n=26). Among months, there was
a negative correlation between the body conditions of the snakes and the relative abundance of S.
percarinata and B. percarinata respectively, and there was a positive correlation with the injury ratio of
S. percarinata . In addition, the rainfall pattern affected anuran abundance and reduced the prey
abundance, and the weather conditions thus affected snakes that were in poor body conditions, and/or
were reproducing, and the injury ratio increased during in dryer periods.

This study also found that the leech ( Hirudo nipponia ) parasitize S. percarinata , and can cause
mortality. To examine the effects of H. nipponia on S. percarinata , the leeches were sampled, as part
of a brief study, with Ortmann's funnel traps. The study found that H. nipponia are attracted by S.
percarinata , and that the numbers of H. nipponia were positively correlated with the water temperature,
and negatively correlated with the water level. Therefore, based on the results of this study, it is believed
that H. nipponia is probably an important biotic factor that influences S. percarinata populations in
constant lower water level conditions.



Marcangeli, April (Towson University); Gasparich, Gail (Towson University, Towson, MD, United States);
Snodgrass, Joel (Towson University, Towson, United States)

The Impacts of Urbanization and Spatial Scale on Genetic Diversity of Blacknose Dace
(Rhinichthys atratulus) Populations

Contemporary processes and environmental variation can be dominant forces that act on genetic
variation of fishes in freshwater stream systems. The interaction among movement of individuals, spatial
connectivity, and unidirectional flow of water in dendritic streams can determine the amount of gene flow
along and among catchments and influence population persistence. In urbanized catchments, increased
amounts of impervious surface cover surrounding urban streams results in hydrological changes that
ultimately influence connectivity, movement, and effective population sizes. However, information is
scarce regarding the effects of hydrological changes in urban streams on genetic diversity of freshwater



                                                                                                         451
fishes. We utilized microsatellites to compare genetic population structure of a headwater species,
Rhinichthys atratulus, between two urban and two rural stream systems with similar dendritic structure to
assess the effects of urbanization. Additionally, we addressed the matter of spatial connectivity within
stream networks by examining the amount of differentiation and structuring in populations separated by
different spatial scales nested within each watershed. Preliminary findings indicate higher levels of
pairwise fixation indices between two populations in different watersheds (Fst = 0.120) than two
populations in the same watershed that are separated by less than seven kilometers (Fst = 0.057).
Analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA) revealed that 31% of the molecular variance was explained by
among-population variation from populations in different watersheds, while 14% of the molecular variance
was explained by among-population variation from populations in the same watershed. Utilizing multiple
spatial scales can improve our understanding of how urbanization may be impacting genetic diversity of
fishes and can provide valuable insight into the evolutionary potential of populations in urban areas.



Marchand, Rheana (Erell Institute/Salish Kootenai College);

Microhabitat analysis of Chondrodactylus turneri

I characterized the habitat use and activity patterns of adult male, adult female, and juvenile
Chondrodactylus turneri , a common nocturnal gecko endemic to southern Africa, during December-
January 2011-2012 in the Namib-Naukluft National Park, Namibia.          I assessed their activity periods
relative to time of night and the lunar cycle, measured characteristics of habitable rocks, determined
microhabitat use by adult and juvenile geckos, and examined measurement data for size differences
among males, females, and juveniles. Of the 120 lizards that were captured and measured, 40 were
adults (snout-to-vent length (SVL) = 78.8 ± 0.6 mm) and 80 were juveniles (SVL = 41.9 ± 0.6 mm).
There was no sexual dimorphism in body length (SVL) between adult males and females, but adults did
differ in body proportions. Head width, but not head length, was significantly associated with snout-vent
length in adult males. The opposite trend occurred among adult females: head length, but not head width
was significantly correlated with snout-vent length. Rocks were considered habitable if they were at least
0.5 m wide and 0.5 m long and had at least 1 crevice that was 15 X 5 cm. Lizards were captured by hand
on habitable rocks significantly more often than on uninhabitable rocks. Juveniles were captured in the
open 84% of the time, but adults were captured equally often in the open and in crevices. Adult males
and adult females did not differ in their capture locations.      Higher rocks with more crevices were
preferred by geckoes; together, rock height and number of crevices accounted for 31.8% of the variation
in gecko captures.      Proximity to other rocks did not explain any of the variation in lizards occupying
rocks.     More detailed observations on lizard movement patterns and the characteristics of lizards co-
occurring will be provided.



Maritz, Bryan (University of the Witwatersrand); Alexander, Graham (University of the Wiwtaersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa)

Striking it rich: why ambush predators eat large meals?

Snakes that ambush prey are known to consume relatively enormous meals. While the costs associated
with consuming large meals have been investigated, few studies have attempted to quantify the relative
advantages of consuming very large meals, primarily because the frequency with which such prey items
are encountered by wild snakes remains unknown. We quantified prey availability and feeding
preferences for the African viperid Bitis schneideri in order to understand the advantages of consuming



                                                                                                      452
very large meals. We used captures from 4185 pitfall trap-nights to quantify the prey community available
to ambushing snakes. Additionally, we used observations of feeding by wild snakes, and examined the
stomach contents of road-killed snakes to quantify the relative abundance of prey types in the diet of B.
schneideri . Finally we used an individual-based modeling approach to estimate the relative energetic
advantages of the capacity to consume very large meals (largest 5% of prey items in the prey
community). We found that the prey community at my study site was dominated by lizards, particularly
Meroles knoxii , and that community structure did not vary significantly between seasons. Moreover we
found a strong, positive correlation between the relative abundance of prey types in my traps, and in the
diet of B. schneideri , suggesting that they are generalist feeders that consume prey types proportionally
to the rate at which those prey types are encountered. We found that the distribution of availability of
prey, and thus energy, was right-skewed, and that very large meals were encountered infrequently by
ambushing snakes. However, my modeling suggests that even when snakes only very rarely encountered
large meals, the ability to consume those meals increased energy intake by 1.3 times. We propose that
this represents a strong selective force, especially given the strong relationship between energy intake
and reproductive output in snakes.



Markle, Tricia (University of Minnesota); Kozak, Kenneth (University of Minnesota, Canada)

Thermal acclimation, range size variation, and the fate of thermal specialists under climate
change: a test case in plethodontid salamanders

Thermal acclimation (rapid physiological adjustment in a variable environment) may enable a species to
occupy a broader range of thermal conditions, and is predicted to be an important factor influencing
species‘ distributions. Following predictions of the climate variability hypothesis, it is anticipated that
species with greater latitudinal extents should exhibit greater thermal acclimation of metabolism than
species with restricted geographic ranges. We tested for a relationship between latitudinal extent and
acclimation ability by comparing the basal metabolic rates (BMR) of 20 salamander species acclimated to
three different temperatures (6.5°C, 14.5°C, and 22.5°C). For each acclimation temperature, BMR was
measured at three experimental temperatures (5°C, 15°C, and 25°C). Our results suggest that species
with broad vs. narrow latitudinal ranges do not have significantly different acclimation capacities.
However, some narrow-ranging montane species exhibit a significant reduction in BMR following
exposure to the highest acclimation temperature. While negative compensation of BMR in response to
high temperature has traditionally been viewed as an adaptation to survive through short-term suboptimal
conditions, recent work suggests that such a response may also be a sign of physiological stress
(metabolic depression). If so, such species may be at increased risk of population decline and local
extinction in the face of rapid climate warming.



Marques, Ricardo (Centro de Ecologia e Conservação Animal ¿ ECOA, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Católica do Salvador); Santos Tinôco, Moacir; Colombini Browne-Ribeiro, Henrique (Centro
de Ecologia e Conservação Animal ¿ ECOA, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Católica do
Salvador, Salvador, Brazil)

Colonizing recent lands: Snakes distribution at the Restinga on the north coast of Bahia, Brazil

The Restinga ecosystem consists of coastal sand dunes habitats within the Atlantic rainforest biome,
originated from the Quaternary period through marine transgressions and regressions, depositing
different sand layers on the continental newly formed terraces. This edaphic difference resulted in




                                                                                                       453
different types of vegetation colonization, providing four different habitat types: Beach vegetation
(herbaceous vegetation and many coconut trees), Humid zone (flooded land with herbaceous vegetation),
Shrub vegetation (numerous bushes separated by sandy soil) and Restinga dry forest (arboreal
vegetation not dense).This heterogeneity provides several niches for reptiles, which are well-adapted to
low water availability. Despites the aforementioned issues, Restinga‘s herpetofauna is described owning
low endemism and knowing this, we ask: Where do these species come from? From the main biome or
others surrounding formations? The aim of this study was to discuss the different snakes‘ species
assemblages found in the northern coast of Bahia‘s Restinga ecosystem and their probable origins. The
study was conducted on eight sites along 220 km northern coast of Bahia, within Restinga habitats and
followingthe permit SISBIO Nº 23355-1 - 04/2013. Surveys were conducted from June/2010 to
August/2011 every two months. Visual encounter survey and incidental encounter were used as sample
techniques. Each site was surveyed for one day during two hours by two surveyors, totalizing 1.024 h of
sample effort. Along 16 months, 75 snakes were recorded in 17 species. Among these species, 41% of
them are found on Atlantic rainforest, Cerrado and Caatinga biome. Other species as Micrurus ibiboboca
is found on Caatinga and Atlantic rainforest biome. Cerrado and Caatinga owns records of Liophis
almadensis, Helicops leopardinus, Philodryas nattereri and Micrurus lemniscatus, while Eunectes
murinus, Philodryas patagoniensis and Bothrops leucurus are recorded to Cerrado biome and forested
environments within Atlantic rainforest. Species as Bothropoides jararaca apparently is better distributed
in Atlantic rainforest biome, despites only one record to Bahian Cerrado while Pseustes sulphureus
occurs in Atlantic rainforest and Amazonian biome, evidencing forested environments preference. These
results show that Restinga‘s colonization may have occurred after sea regression by these species from
three different surrounding biomes, this could also justify its low species endemism.



Márquez, Roberto (Universidad de Los Andes); Arenas, Lina María (Universidad de Los Andes, Bogotá,
Columbia); Escovar, Tatiana (Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Columbia); Amézquita, Adolfo
(Universidad de Los Andes, Bogotá, Columbia)

Two means to an end? Evolution of the aposematic syndrome in poison-dart frogs of the genus
Phyllobates

Aposematic animals reduce predation risk by training predators to associate conspicuous, usually colour,
signals with unpalatability or toxicity. Aposematism usually involves a whole evolutionary syndrome of
phenotypically correlated traits, allegedly body size and aerobic capacity. Such correlations have been
often estimated across species and genera, at a deep phylogenetic level. To better understand the very
origin of such correlations we (1) built a phylogenetic hypothesis based on more than 2000 bp from both
nuclear and mitochondrial markers and (2) reconstructed the evolutionary changes in coloration, toxicity
and body size in a relatively small clade, the hypertoxic frogs in the genus Phyllobates. W e found strong
evidence for parallel evolution of conspicuous yellow coloration and large body size, but not in
hypertoxicity. The molecular and coloration data also suggest hybridization between two species. The
putative hybrids are, however, not intermediate in toxicity. We discuss the relative role of hybridization, as
well as directional and disruptive selection in promoting phenotypic covariation in this group.




                                                                                                          454
Marquez-Farias, J Fernando (Facultad de Ciencias del Mar. Universidad Autonoma de Sinaloa.
Mexico); Smith, Wade (Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA., Canada); Rodríguez López, Jorge
E; Lara-Mendoza, Raul E. (Facultad de Ciencias del Mar. Universidad Autónoma de Sinaloa. Mexico,
Canada)

Growth and migration of Scalloped Hammerhead Shark Sphyrna lewini from the Nursery in the
Southern Gulf of California, México

In the absence of parental care, some species shark used shallow areas for the birth of their offspring. In
these areas, the newborn will find food and protection against predation. The cohort of sharks that born in
a given season does not migrate from the breeding area until they achieve a certain size. However, prior
to migration, the cohort of newborns must survive to birth and stay alive in the nursery area. We
investigated the hammerhead sharks in the coastal zone of southern Sinaloa monitoring the artisanal
shark fishery. Based on observations of the umbilical wound condition was possible to determine the
state of development which was encoded in open (0= neonate) and closed (1= juvenile). Using a binary
logistic regression, we determined the proportion of neonates (y) that survive to birth as function of length
(x). The value of L50% of the logistic function represents when half the cohort survived the birth event
given the healed wounds. We note that sharks are born around 43 cm TL in late May and reach L50% =
53 cm TL in few weeks. The growth of juveniles continues until February of the following year. At 83 cm
TL, half the cohort born in the season has migrated from the nursery area. We discuss the sources of
natural mortality for age-0 and the implications of directed fishing in nursery grounds.



Marshall, Jonathon (Weber State UNiversity);

Perspectives on speciation research and the importance of communicating our results with a
wider audience

Speciation can be driven by a diverse array of evolutionary processes and mechanisms. These
processes, responsible for the separation of independent evolutionary lineages, can be complex and are
usually not mutually exclusive in any biological system. The multifaceted nature of speciation research
makes it difficult to understand for the non-scientist. However, with the ever-increasing attack on
evolution from religiously and politically motivated detractors makes an understanding of the speciation
process vital for its public defense. Here, I suggest several ways we as scientists might better accomplish
this task.



Marshall, Jonathon (Weber State UNiversity); Sites, Jack (Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, United
States); Ramírez-Bautista, Aurelio (Universidad Autónoma de Estado de Hidalgo, Pachuca, Mexico);
Sinervo, Barry; Bastiaans, Elizabeth (University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, United States);
Schwabb, Tyson (Weber State University, Ogden, UT, United States)

The fog of species boundaries in the Sceloporus grammicus lizard species complex of México.

Much research has been done with aim of identifying species boundaries in the Sceloporus grammicus
species complex. This has not been an easy task. Over the last 40 years morphological and ecological
data have been compared, allozymes and karyotypes scored, restriction fragment length digests
analyzed, and geographical pattern assessed and still no overwhelming consensus on clear species
boundaries has emerged. This integrative approach to species delimitation has generated important
insights into hybrid zone dynamics, chromosome evolution, relative merit and applicability of various



                                                                                                         455
species delimitation methods, and speciation in this species complex but in the end only a nebulous
picture of boundaries has resulted. To date, our best estimate at species boundaries finds four
hypothesized evolutionary lineage clusters. These clusters segregate out into groups of individual or
combined chromosome races. In this study, we add DNA sequence and environmental data to our
assessment of species boundaries. Four hundred and twenty-five individual tail samples were collected
from 85 localities across central México. The fast evolving mtDNA gene CytB was sequenced for all 429
individuals. The slower evolving 12S mtDNA gene and the nuclear gene MYH2 were then sequenced for
a subset of these individuals and locality data used to test ecological exchangeability using ecological
niche models. Analysis of DNA and ecological data to some extent supports previous delimitation but
also underscores the challenges of identifying distinct boundaries between recently evolved lineages.



Marsigliano, Kyra (University of South Carolina); Roberts, Mark (University of South Carolina, Canada);
Lampkin, John; Muhling, Barbara (NOAA/NMFS/SEFSC Miami, Canada); Ingram, Walter
(NOAA/NMFS/SEFSC Pascagoula, Canada); Quattro, Joseph (University of South Carolina, Canada)

Building A DNA Barcoding Database for Atlantic Billfishes

Effective management of the world‘s important fisheries hinges on having appropriate data about the
structure and status of individual stocks.     Stocks of Atlantic billfish, a collective term applied to two
families of large, highly migratory, predaceous fish with a large, sword-like upper rostrum, are negatively
impacted by recreational and commercial fisheries. In an effort to manage these species, larval density
is oftentimes used as a proxy for reproductive output, and therefore larval counts and geographical
locations are used in the formulation of comprehensive management strategies.           Unfortunately, visual
identification of larval billfish, frequently 2-6 mm in length, is often impractical and imprecise.
Employment of a genetic barcode – a means for identifying larval individuals to species based on short
DNA sequences – could circumvent this issue.         We have developed a genetic barcode for billfishes
based on sequences of the mitochondrial ATCD locus.         This locus has been useful for identification of
larval tunas and, in our experience, provides more accurate species identification among closely related
taxa. The         ATCD locus was amplified with universal primer sets, sequences aligned, and
unambiguously changing DNA differences between taxa identified using the computer program CAOS.
Individual unknown larval samples were compared to reference sequences from adult specimens
collected in cooperation with NOAA and NMFS and reliably assigned to species. We discuss the results
of these comparisons and the potential for visual misidentification of certain species pairs.



Martin, Jennifer (Virginia Institute of Marine Science);

Comparative ontogeny of the ink related structures in the families Radiicephalidae and
Lophotidae (Acanthomorpha, Lampridiformes)

The inkfishes, a monophyletic group containing two families, the monotypic Radiicephalidae and
Lophotidae, consisting of two genera ( Lophotus , Eumecichthys ), are rare, meso/bathypelagic fishes
distributed in all oceans except polar seas. One synapomorphy of the group is the presence of an ink
gland, which is analogous to the cephalopod ink sac. This unpaired, tubular organ overlies the hindgut
and discharges a dark, ink-like fluid into the cloaca, presumably as a fright-response. This structure is
unique to these three genera as no comparable structure exists among teleost fishes. However, beyond
the gross anatomical level, little is known regarding ink gland structure and development due to the rarity
and subsequent misidentification of these fishes, particularly during the early-life history stages.



                                                                                                         456
Undoubtedly present and functional in adults, examination of early-life stage specimens reveals the early
appearance of the ink gland in larval      Radiicephalus (18mm SL),         Lophotus    (23mm SL) and
Eumecichthys (32mm SL). New observations on the ontogeny and anatomy of this unique structure will
be compared across genera and phylogenetic implications will be discussed.



Martins, Marcio (Instituto de Biociencias, Universidade de Sao Paulo); Moraes, Renato (Instituto de
Biociencias, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Canada); Sawaya, Ricardo (Universidade Federal de Sao
Paulo, Canada); Marques, Otavio (Instituto Butantan, Canada)

Altitudinal variation in diet and morphology of Bothrops jararaca populations (Serpentes,
Viperidae) in southeastern Brazil

Widely distributed snakes are exposed to different environmental conditions throughout their ranges, what
can affect local prey availability. Thus, these species may present geographic variation in the types
and/or sizes of prey consumed, and perhaps differences in morphological characters associated to
feeding. We explore these questions using Bothrops jararaca populations from coastal and adjacent
mid-elevation sites ( 450-950 m asl) in southeastern Brazil. Bothrops jararaca is a diet generalist that
shows ontogenetic change in prey types and sizes: juveniles eat mostly frogs and lizards (relatively small
prey), whereas adults eat mainly small mammals (relatively large prey). For this study, we obtained 330
individual prey from over 900 museum specimens collected in the State of São Paulo. We considered
juveniles those individuals with SVL smaller than that of the smallest mature individual. Juveniles from
coastal sites consumed endothermic prey in significantly lower frequency than juveniles from mid-
elevation sites. This variation may reflect the fact that frogs are available throughout the year at the coast
whereas they show a marked seasonal variation in availability at mid-elevation sites. Adults from mid-
elevation and coastal sites did not differ in the frequency of different prey types in the diet. However,
snakes from mid-elevation sites consumed relatively larger prey and showed relatively larger heads and
larger and stouter bodies than those from the coast. These morphological differences may reflect
differences in the size of prey consumed, that would result from different prey availability (in size and
types) at distinct altitudes. Suggestively, among lanceheads of the genus Bothrops , species which feed
more frequently on large endothermic prey tend to have larger headand to be larger and stouter. Our
results indicate that even within a relatively small spatial scale, variation in prey availability mediated by
climatic conditions could be responsible for interpopulational variation in snake diet and morphology.



Martins, Marcio (Instituto de Biociencias, Universidade de Sao Paulo); Gaiarsa, Marilia; Alencar, Laura
(Instituto de Biociencias, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Canada)

Interannual stability in the abundance of stream frogs in the Atlantic Forest of Brazil

Three species of stream frogs, Hylodes asper , H. phyllodes , and Cycloramphus boraceiensis , are
sympatric and usually syntopic in the Atlantic Forest of southeastern Brazil (0-800 m asl). Population
declines and/or local extinctions of these species occurred at two montane sites, although there are no
additional records of decline. Characterizing temporal variation in these species is crucial for detecting
variations caused by diseases or other human-induced factors. Here we describe temporal variation in
the abundance of these three species in four streams (hereafter S1-S4) distributed along 5 km of the
coast of São Paulo State, southeastern Brazil. From January 2007 to December 2010 we monthly
sampled one trasect (100-120 m long) in each stream. We searched for frogs while walking slowly
upstream, during daytime and at night. Both active and inactive frogs were recorded. We compared



                                                                                                          457
encounter rates (frogs/100 m) among years with one way ANOVA and seasons (dry/wet) with a Student's
t-test. We gathered 5665 observations of individuals of the three species studied: 2513 of C.
boraceiensis , 2096 of H. asper , and 1056 of H.phyllodes . Hylodes phyllodes occurred in all four
streams, whereas H. asper and C. boraceiensis occurred only in S1, S2, and S4. The average
encounter rate of H. asper was 14.1±5.9 frogs/100 m (9.8-19.1 frogs/100 m), of H. phyllodes 5.2±2.3
frogs/100 m (2.2-10.5 frogs/100 m), and of C. boraceiensis 14.5±4.4 frogs/100 m (6.1-24.3 frogs/100
m). Monthly encounter rates (streams combined and streams not used excluded) were not significantly
different among years in any of the species studied. Encounter rates were significantly higher in the wet
season (October to March) than in the dry season (April to September) for H. asper and C. boraceiensis
, whereas in H. phyllodes there was no difference between seasons. Most of the seasonal variation
found for H. asper and C. boraceiensis may reflect the higher juvenile recruitment in the wet season in
both species. Although we found strong evidence that the populations studied are infected by Bd (five
dying animals with Bd infection symptoms in four years), our results indicate that these populations are
stable. Occasional observations of these same populations in 2001 (S1 only) and 2006 (all four streams),
indicate that they were similarly abundant by then; thus, these populations may have been stable
throughout the 2000s.



Mason, Robert (Oregon State University);

Chemical ecology of Gartersnakes: Pheromone receptors to behavior

We study the evolution of chemical communication systems in snakes by examining both the diversity of
chemical signals and the underlying physiological mechanisms mediating their production, expression,
and reception. Reproduction in snakes is dependent on the production and perception of sex
pheromones. Pheromones are thought to be potent reproductive isolating mechanisms.

One of the few vertebrate pheromones isolated, characterized, and synthesized is the sex pheromone of
the Red-sided Garter Snake, Thamnophis sirtalis parietalis . When males encounter a female expressing
the pheromone, they exhibit stereotyped courtship behaviors including chin-rubbing and rapid tongue-
flicks. We now know that with a single tongue-flick, a male garter snake can determine not only whether
another snake is a member of its own species, but also if it is a male or female, a female from the male‘s
own den versus another den, a large female versus a small female (larger females produce more young),
and whether a female is likely to reproduce this year or store his sperm for a following year. Our work
on the garter snakes has examined ultimatelevel questions such as male body size and mating success,
size-assortative mating, mating plugs, female mimicry, antipredator tactics, thermoregulatory behavior,
migratory behavior and others. We are currently investigating the phenomenon of multiple mating,
paternity analyses, and sperm competition in this species.

At the proximate level, we know that the pheromone, a nonpolar, hydrophobic blend of 13 long-chain (C
29 –C 37 ) saturated and monounsaturated methyl ketones, is insoluble in aqueous solutions. This
pheromone is detected by the vomeronasal organ (VNO), which is specialized for the reception of
nonvolatile chemical cues. Male garter snakes deprived of a functional vomeronasal (VN) system are
unable to detect or respond appropriately to pheromones. But the mechanism by which the hydrophobic
pheromone gains access to the aqueous environment of the VNO remained unknown. Results to date
indicate that the Harderian glands‘ (HG) secretions, which duct exclusively into the VNO in snakes,
contain pheromone-binding proteins. For over 300 years, the function of the cephalic HG of vertebrates
has been the subject of speculation. Our studies in garter snakes demonstrate that the HG serves as a
mediator in providing access for the female sex pheromone to the VNO of male gartersnakes.



                                                                                                      458
Matamoros, Wilfredo (Museum of Natural Science, Louisiana State University); McMahan, Caleb;
Chakrabarty, Prosanta (Louisiana State University / Museum of Natural Science, Baton Rouge, LA,
United States)

Biogeographic patterns of Central American freshwater fishes: an analysis of more than 500
species from the entire region and adjacent areas

A large portion of the Central American fish fauna (particularly in the north) has been poorly studied for
their biogeographic patterns including in the recognition of major areas of endemicity. Even areas that
have been studied recently for these patterns, including nuclear (Matamoros et al. 2011) and southern
Central America (Smith and Bermingham 2005), would benefit from a more complete analysis of the
entire region and adjacent areas. In order to better understand the biogeographic relationships of
obligate freshwater fishes from Central America we analyzed distributional data from 98 river drainages
(included the Atrato and Magdalena Rivers from Colombia and the Usumacinta-Grijalva River from
Mexico). The analyses included 508 freshwater fish species including members of Cichlidae, Poecillidae,
Characidae, Heptapteridaand others. Areas of endemism were determined by using multivariate analyses
and parsimony analyses of endemicity. The historical biogeography of these freshwater clades was
investigated using Brooks parsimony (BPA) and newly produced phylogenies of Poeciliidae and
Cichlidae. We recover 14 major areas of endemicity in Central America and there is a clear differentiation
among Pacific and Atlantic slope drainages throughout the region. Endemism is generally low throughout
Central America, with the lowest values in Nuclear Central America and the highest endemism is
recovered in the Tuyra River in the south and the Usumacinta River in the north. The results of the BPA
suggest that the historical biogeography of Central America is complex and is a result of both vicariance
and dispersal.



Mathew, Mercy (Walter sisulu university);

Reproductive Toxicity of        endosulfan-an      organochlorine     pesticide-on    male    toads   (Bufo
melanostictus Schneider)

Increased use of agrochemicals considered to be             one of the most important anthropogenic activity
responsible for the decline of nontarget fauna like amphibians. Persistence of organochlorine pesticides
may pose great risk to the reproductive health of organisms.The aim of this study is to evaluate the
effects of sublethal concentrations of endosulfan on the testes histoarchitecture and Gonadosomatic
index of Bufo melanostictus Schneider. Adults were exposed to two sublethal doses (0.24ppm and
0.48ppm )of endosulfan for a period of 30 days .A control group without exposure to endosulfan was
also maintained. .Up to ten days , testes of those exposed to 0.24ppm showed more or less normal
structure where as changes were very evident in the testes of those exposed to 0.48ppm from the 5th day
onwards. But after ten days of exposure, pronounced changes were observed in all the treatments.
Degenerative changes in the seminiferous epithelium, histological changes in reproductive organs,
testicular atrophy, tubule shrinking, necrosis of spermatogenetic cells,clumbing of chromatin material etc
were noticed followed by a reduction in the gonado somatic index.Significant reduction has been noticed
in the different stages in seminiferous tubule and this could affect the reproduction of male toads
negatively. The structure of the testes of pesticide exposed bufo was completely disorganised and also
an inbalance in the proliferative activity exhibited, further confirmed the lethality of pesticides on Bufo .




                                                                                                         459
Matich, Philip (Florida International University); Heithaus, Michael (Florida International University, North
Miami, FL, United States)

Resource pulses drive seasonal variability in bull shark trophic ecology

Estuaries are characterized by considerable variation in both abiotic and biotic conditions across multiple
spatial and temporal scales. This variation can lead to spatial and termporal variation in food web
dynamics. Within the Florida Coastal Everglades, much of the estuarine habitat is oligotrophic, and prey
resources for upper trophic level predators are generally scarce. Thus, resource pulses that enter the
ecotone region of the estuary during the dry season when marsh species migrate to channels, could be
important in the diets of estuarine predators.       We used stable isotope analysis of an estuarine top
predator, juvenile bull sharks, to elucidate variation in trophic interactions in space and time and with
changes in shark size.      Carbon isotopic values of bull sharks in the Shark River Estuary suggest that
they take advantage of the freshwater resource pulse during the dry season.          However, data suggest
that all sharks do not rely on this pulse of food, which may be attributed to physical tolerances, trade-offs,
prey preference, foraging experience, and/or individual specialization.       Our study shows the potential
importance of large, highly mobile predators, like bull sharks, in linking freshwater and estuarine food
webs, and the complexity of Everglades‘ trophic dynamics. Further research investigating the timing of
these resource pulses and quantifying the biomass that enters channels during the dry season may
provide insight into how the physical changes caused by proposed restoration efforts may lead to
important biological changes.



Mattox, George (Universidade de São Paulo - Brazil); Britz, Ralf (Natural History Museum, London,
London, United Kingdom); Toledo-Piza, Mônica (Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil)

Osteology of Priocharax Weitzman & Vari (Teleostei: Characiformes: Characidae): developmental
truncation in a miniature Amazonian fish

Priocharax       is a genus of Neotropical characiforms comprising two miniatures that are among the
smallest species of the order. Priocharax ariel was described from the Upper Rio Negro in Venezuela
and was subsequently recorded from other localities along the Rio Negro in Brazil, and P. pygmaeus is
only known from its type locality in the Upper Rio Amazonas. In the original description, Priocharax was
hypothesized, although tentatively, to be closely related to species of the characid subfamily Characinae,
and a subsequent phylogenetic analysis of this subfamily resulted in a basal position of Priocharax as
the sister-group to the remaining 11 genera of the Characinae. In a more recent phylogenetic study of the
Characinae, this subfamily was found to be non-monophyletic and divided into two not closely related
clades: a more restricted Characinae and Heterocharacinae. Priocharax was recovered as a member of
the latter subfamily. However, the profound modifications in the skeleton of Priocharax prevented a better
evaluation of its relationships to the rest of the Heterocharacinae, and therefore a more detailed
anatomical study was initiated to address this question. The osteological study of Priocharax revealed
that 17 bones are absent and 12 other skeletal structures are simplified when compared to related
characids. Comparison of the skeleton of adult Priocharax with early developmental stages of other
characids revealed that most of the absences and simplifications of Priocharax can be interpreted as
developmental truncations, i.e. terminal deletions. The most striking developmental truncations were
found in the pectoral fin, in which the whole endoskeleton remains cartilaginous and only posttemporal,
supracleithrum, cleithrum and a single postcleithrum are present. Other interesting truncations are in the
ethmoid region of the skull, in the infraorbital series and in the Weberian apparatus, where the claustrum
is absent. Our study also revealed some sexual dimorphisms in Priocharax , especially in the pelvic
girdle (e.g., presence of bony hooks on pelvic fin of males, contralateral pelvic bones of males articulated



                                                                                                          460
with each other and anterior elongation of the pelvic bone in males). These new data will be now included
in a phylogenetic reanalysis of the Heterocharacinae.



Mattox, George (Universidade de São Paulo - Brazil); Britz, Ralf (Natural History Museum, London,
London, United Kingdom); Toledo-Piza, Mônica (Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil)

Skeletal development of Salminus brasiliensis (Teleostei: Characiformes Characidae) with a
sequence of ossification for the species

Ontogenetic data for Neotropical fishes are still scarce despite their vast diversity and information on their
skeletal development is even lacking entirely. Among the Ostariophysi, skeletal development has been
studied in selected representatives of the Gonorhynchiformes, Cypriniformes and African Siluriformes,
leaving the diversity of Neotropical Characiformes, Siluriformes and Gymnotiformes still unexplored.
Starting to fill this gap, we studied the development of the entire skeleton of a putatively basal characid,
Salminus brasiliensis , to provide a sequence of ossification for a representative of the Characiformes that
can be used in further comparative investigations. Our study was based on 86 specimens (3.2-22.4mm
NL/SL) covering approximately 30 days post hatching and including ossification data for 150 bones.
Specimens were cleared and stained and presence of a bone was scored whenever a mineralized
structure was detected. First ossifications start at 5.0mm (cleithrum and UP4 and CB5 tooth plates).
Ossification continues with the remaining tooth bearing bones (premaxilla and dentary at 5.4mm, maxilla
at 6.4mm), opercle (5.4mm) and branchiostegal rays (6.4mm). The first bone to ossify in the
neurocranium is the parasphenoid (7.4mm) followed by the basioccipital around the notochord (8.0mm),
exoccipital (9.4mm), frontal and lateral ethmoid (12.0mm). The hyopalatine arch begins ossification with
quadrate (8.0mm) and hyomandibular (8.5mm). Branchial arches commence their ossification with CBs
(CB1 at 8.3mm), followed by EBs (11.2mm) and PBs (12.0mm). The infraorbital series is the last complex
to ossify starting with the antorbital (16.8mm). The first ossifications of the axial skeleton are vertebral
centra (9.9mm) followed by neural arches (11.1mm), hemal arches (12.0mm), ribs and hemal spines
(12.7mm). Weberian apparatus starts with vertebral centra (9.9mm), neural arches (11.1mm),
intercalarium and scaphium (12.4mm). Fin rays form first in the caudal fin, followed by dorsal and anal
fins (9.9 and 10.4 mm, respectively), pelvic fin (15.7 mm) and the pectoral fin (16.8 mm). The
endoskeletal fin supports begin to ossify with the proximal radials of the anal and dorsal fins (12.7 and
12.9mm, respectively), pelvic bone (17.2mm), coracoid and scapula (18.4mm). A diagram of the complete
sequence of ossification is provided. Significance of this kind of information is briefly exemplified with the
case of the miniaturized characiform Priocharax .



Maxfield, Jessica (San Francisco State University); Van Tassell, James (American Museum of Natural
History, Canada); St. Mary, Colette (University of Florida, Canada); Joyeux, Jean-Christophe
(Universidad Federal do Espirito Santo, Canada); Crow, Karen (San Francisco State University, Canada)

Extreme gender flexibility: Using a phylogenetic framework to infer the evolution of variation in
sex allocation, phylogeography, and speciation in a genus of bidirectional sex changing fishes
(Lythrypnus, Gobiidae)

The genus Lythrypnus is a group of marine gobies that exhibit extreme gender flexibility as bidirectional
sex changers. The genus consists of 20 described species and several undescribed species that are
distributed in the Americas. Five species have been characterized with respect to sex allocation and
gonad morphology. The hormonal, morphological, and behavioral aspects of sex change have been



                                                                                                          461
studied extensively for one species, L. dalli . These data, however, have not been interpreted in an
evolutionary context because a phylogenetic hypothesis has not previously been proposed for the genus
Lythrypnus . We propose the first phylogenetic hypothesis for the genus based on molecular data from
three mitochondrial genes ( 12s, ND2 , and cytb ), a nuclear gene Rag 1 and nuclear intron S7 . We
also include four previously undescribed Lythrypnus species. Our results support the monophyly of the
genus with L. heterochroma , an Atlantic species, as the basal taxon. After the divergence of L.
heterochroma , there are two main clades, one comprised of species distributed in the Atlantic, the other
comprised of species distributed in the Pacific. These data indicate an Atlantic origin for the genus,
followed by divergence after the closure of the Isthmus of Panama. Our data also support the monophyly
of three previously described species complexes, the L. rhyzophora complex and L. dalli complex in
the Pacific, and the L. mowbrayi complex in the Atlantic. The Brazilian taxa, including three previously
undescribed species, are not monophyletic and occur in two distinct Atlantic clades. We mapped patterns
of sex allocation within this genus onto the fully resolved and supported topology, and found that sexual
plasticity and gender flexibility is likely a synapomorphy for the genus. Overall our results create a well-
supported framework to understand the phylogeography of the genus, and to interpret the evolution of
sex allocation in Lythrypnus gobies.



Mayer, Michael (Trier University, Biogeography Department); Schulte, Lisa M. (Trier University,
Biogeography Department, Trier, Germany); Schulte, Rainer (INIBICO, Tarapoto, Peru); Lötters, Stefan
(Trier University, Biogeography Department, Trier, Germany)

Do frogs respond to modified calls of congenerics? Field experiments on Mullerian mimic poison
frogs from Peru

We studied acoustic communication in two Peruvian poison frogs, Ranitomeya variabilis and R. imitator,
which are Mullerian mimics. In both species males make strong use of their advertisement calls to
communicate with conspecifics. This explains why vocalizations in these species are structurally different.
The goal of our study was to understand: What is in a call of R. variabilis that R. imitator does not
respond. We conducted phonotaxis experiments with loudspeakers in the natural habitat with (i) original
R. imitator calls for reference, (ii) R. imitator calls at different frequencies, and (iii) four modified calls,
artificially produced and intermediated between the two species. Experiments were videotaped and
response intensity was measured (N = 30), with help a defined grid over which frogs approached the
sound source: number of jumps, jump angles, time and straightness of paths in terms of spatial and
temporal patterns. Results suggest that frequency is more important than pulse rate. Of the modified
calls, R. imitator interacted best with its own call when played with in note frequency or interval as in R.
variabilis . It showed limited response to R. variabilis calls when modified with R. imitator attributes.



Mazerolle, Marc (Université du Québec en Abitibi-Témiscamingue); Perez, Amélie; Brisson, Jacques
(Université de Montréal, Montréal, PQ, Canada)

Impact of the exotic common reed (Phragmites australis) on larval development of the wood frog
(Lithobates sylvaticus)

In the context of declining amphibian populations, the introduction of alien species has been the subject
of numerous studies but few were dedicated to exotic plants. We hypothesized that the establishment
ofthe exotic common reed ( Phragmites australis ) would lengthen larval anuran development and
decrease the survival rate by modifying habitat structure, changing water characteristics, and decreasing



                                                                                                            462
food availability. We tested these hypotheses by studying the larval development of the wood frog (
Lithobates sylvaticus ) during a experiment in field enclosures. Within each enclosure, we created
habitats with three different reed densities (none, medium, and high). Tadpoles were placed in the
enclosures and were followed for six weeks up to metamorphosis during which we monitored water
quality and phytoplankton composition. At the end of the experiment, survival, developmental stage and
morphological traits were determined. We found no impact of reed density on most abiotic factors such as
temperature, pH, or total phenolic concentration, but water depth tended to be lowest at high reed
densities. Tadpole survival rate, weight, and morphological measurements did not vary across
treatments. However, tadpole development was delayed for nearly two Gosner stages at the highest reed
density (i.e., 104 shoots m -2 ) compared to the control. Phytoplankto abundance varied with reed
density, but the patterns varied across groups. Our results suggest that common reed affects amphibian
species with rapid development such as wood frogs. Though larval survival rates were similar across
treatments, slower development under high reed densities implies a longer exposure to the risk of the
pond drying out.



Mazerolle, Marc (Université du Québec en Abitibi-Témiscamingue);

Road impacts on amphibians and reptiles: paving the way for future research

With the increase of the human population and expansion of road networks, many efforts have been
devoted to investigating the effect of roads on amphibians and reptiles in different areas of the globe.
Habitat loss and individual mortality on the road from collisions with vehicles are direct results of road
establishment. However, road effects can extend to adjacent populations and manifest themselves
through occurrence and abundance patterns or genetic structure. Behavior and movement patterns can
also be disrupted by road structures and vehicular traffic, but other impacts are more insidious. For
instance, road runoff modifies water chemistry and can decrease larval development or survival. Salt and
other deicing agents are of particular concern in Canada, as these substances are spread on roads in
very large quantities. Forestry and mining activities in northern Canada are increasing due to demand for
natural resources and are generating large road networks. However, their effects are largely
undocumented. Despite the wealth of observational studies on the effects of roads on amphibians and
reptiles worldwide, manipulative experiments remain scarce. For instance, studies could be bonified by
using controlled impact (BACI) designs (before and after road construction) to distinguish the effects of
habitat loss from the effects of traffic intensity, and quantify these effects across time. Another research
need involves the estimation of vital rates for individuals in populations adjacent to roads differing in traffic
intensity.



McCallister, Michael (University of North Florida); DiGirolamo, Tony (Florida Fish and Wildlife
Commission, Canada); Gelsleichter, Jim (University of North Florida, Canada)

Understanding the effect of prey abundance on habitat selection for the Atlantic sharpnose shark
(Rhizoprionodon terraenovae) in a northeast Florida estuary

Sharks are considered top predators in many marine ecosystems, and can play an important role in
structuring those communities. As a result, it is important to understand the factors that influence the
abundance and distribution of sharks.      One hypothesis is that the abundance and distribution of
predators is driven by the abundance of potential prey resources. The goal of this study was to examine
the influence of prey abundance on habitat selection for Atlantic sharpnose sharks in a northeast Florida



                                                                                                             463
estuary.     Atlantic sharpnose sharks were caught in Cumberland Sound from 2009 – 2011 and catch
rates were compared between open sound habitat and protected creek habitat.           Stomach contents of
sharks caught in 2010 –2011 were analyzed to determine the preferred prey items of Atlantic sharpnose
sharks. The abundance of potential prey items in sound and creek habitats was determined from finfish
abundance data obtained from the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservsation Commission. Catch rates of
Atlantic sharpnose sharks in open sound and creek habitat were compared with the abundances of their
preferred prey items found in those habitats.      Understanding patterns of habitat use and foraging
behavior can provide insight on how predators select habitat, and the importance of those habitats. This
is particularly important as management efforts continue to focus on identifying essential fish habitats.



Mccardle, Logan (Southeastern Louisiana University); Fontenot, Cliff (Southeastern Louisiana
University, Canada)

Patterns of Road Mortality in Snakes along the Manchac Land Bridge in Southeast Louisiana

Roads represent significant sources of mortality for snakes in many regions. Snakes are a useful group to
assess magnitude of road mortality because they are important trophic components and are useful
indicators of trophic dynamics within an ecosytem. Snakes often occupy niches in the middle of the food
web and are controls for prey species as well an energy source for their predators. In addition, snakes
possess life history traits that may make them more vulnerable to road mortality than other fauna, and are
in decline in many areas. As part of a long-term herpetofauna monitoring study we quantified road
mortality in 13 snake species on a road that transects the wetland between Lakes Pontchartrain and
Maurepaus in Southeast Louisiana. We describe inter- and intraspecific patterns, as well as temporal
patterns, to identify species and demographic groups (sexes, and age reproductive classes) within
species that are most susceptible to road mortality. This information may be useful in future planning,
construction, and mitigation of roads through snake habitat.



McCoy, Earl (University of South Florida); Osman, Nick (University of South fForida, Tampa, FL, United
States); Hauch, Brad (University of South Florida, Tampa.Florida, United States); Mushinsky, Henry
(University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States)

Successful Translocation of the Threatened Florida Sand Skink

The Florida Sand Skink (FSS), Plestiodon reynoldsi , is a threatened fossorial lizard found only on the
central ridges of Florida.  The habitat of the FSS has been so severely reduced by development that
conservation strategies beyond land acquisition and management have become necessary.             In 2007,
more than 500 individuals were collected from a single population at a location slated for development,
individually marked, and moved to a nearby site with no existing FSS, but with apparently suitable habitat.
Three hundred of the Individuals were released into 15 20-m 2 enclosures, representing 5 habitat
treatment types. Survival and reproduction were monitored for three subsequent years.               Across
treatments, recapture rate was 37%. Survival for the first two years was estimated to be about 70%. A
decline in survival occurred in the third year, likely reflecting aging of the population.       Minimum
recruitment was 15 individuals in 2008, 17 in 2009, and 35 in 2010.             Continued monitoring to
accommodate one full generation, 4+ years, is in progress.




                                                                                                       464
McCracken, Shawn (Texas State University); Forstner, Michael (Texas State University, Canada)

Living on the edge: Oil road effects on the occupancy and abundance of anurans inhabiting an
upper canopy tank bromeliad (Aechmea zebrina) in lowland rainforest of the Yasuni Biosphere
Reserve, Amazonian Ecuador

Forest canopies are among the most species-rich terrestrial habitats on earth and one of the remaining
unexplored biotic frontiers. Tank bromeliads provide microhabitat for a high diversity of fauna and flora in
tropical forest canopies and are considered a keystone resource. A number of amphibians inhabit these
phytotelmata, yet their ecological role and status in forest canopies remains mostly unknown. For this
study, anurans were collected from an upper canopy tank bromeliad ( Aechmea zebrina ) in trees at ~20-
45 m (x̅ = 33 m) above the forest floor. Bromeliads were sampled from trees located along ~30 km trails in
undisturbed primary rainforest and the south-central portion of the Maxus oil road within the Yasuni
Biosphere Reserve of Amazonian Ecuador. The Maxus road where bromeliads were sampled has
experienced relatively little deforestation aside from infrastructure development for petroleum extraction
operations (i.e. roads, pipelines, processing facilities and related disturbances) as compared to the
northern roadway that is experiencing extensive colonization and associated deforestation. Ninety-eight
individuals from 10 species were collected from 180 bromeliads in 32 trees. Generalized Linear Mixed
Models were used to assess the effects of disturbance and a suite of ecological factors on the occupancy
and abundance of anurans collected. Analyses were conducted using the full species dataset and
reduced species sets based on a priori knowledge about their use of canopy microhabitats. Full dataset
analysis revealed bromeliads in undisturbed forest had a significantly greater occupancy and abundance
of anurans than those along the Maxus road, while recorded ecological factors had no relationship.

Reduced species set analyses demonstrated that anuran occupancy was highest in undisturbed forest;
abundance showed mixed significance results although it was also greatest in undisturbed forest, and
again the recorded ecological factors had no relationship. This study is the first to investigate upper
canopy anurans utilizing tank bromeliad microhabitat and reveals that even the minimal footprint of
petroleum extraction operations, primarily roads, in rainforest environments can have significant impacts
on a unique anuran community. Based on these results, it is recommended that future petroleum
development treat rainforest habitat as an offshore system where roads are not used and current access
roads be protected from colonization and further deforestation.



McCutcheon, Sara (Florida Atlantic University); Kajiura, Stephen (Florida Atlantic University, Canada)

Lanthanide metals as potential shark deterrents

Sharks comprise a large portion of unwanted bycatch in longline fisheries worldwide and various
technologies and modifications to fishing protocols have been proposed to reduce elasmobranch bycatch.
Since bycatch species are often trophically similar to target species, technologies need to be developed
to specifically reduce elasmobranch bycatch without impacting the catch of target species. Lanthanide
metals have been proposed as an elasmobranch-specific repellent. When submerged in a polar solution,
such as water, lanthanide metals undergo a hydrolytic reaction and release electrons, which produces a
charge distribution in the water. The charge produced by the metals likely exceeds anything that sharks
naturally encounter in the wild and will presumably overwhelm their electrosensory system. We evaluated
the efficacy of lanthanide metals as potential shark deterrents. Specifically, we quantified the electrical
charge produced by six lanthanide metals in seawater, compared their dissolution rates, and performed a
behavioral assay to determine effectiveness against two shark species. We found that there was no
difference in the voltage produced by the six tested metals in ambient seawater. The charge distribution



                                                                                                         465
decayed as a power function with distance from the metal sample. From the function for voltage decay
with distance we derived the function for the voltage gradient (ie. electric field). Based upon the median
sensitivity reported for six elasmobranch species, we calculated that sharks should detect a sample of
neodymium at a minimal distance of 65-85 cm. The dissolution rate for the lanthanides varied from -1.6
to -0.2 g/h. As the metals dissolved the voltage remained constant presumably due to more extensive
pitting which increased 3D surface area despite a decrease in mass. In a behavioral assay, neodymium
was ineffective at repelling bonnethead sharks (Sphyrna tiburo) tested individually and in groups, and
lemon sharks (Negaprion brevirostris) in groups. Therefore, due to high cost, fast dissolution rates, and
lack of deterrent effects, lanthanide metals are not recommended for use in mitigating shark bycatch.



McElroy, Eric (College of Charleston); Bergmann, Philip (Clark University, Worcester, United States)

The impact of tail loss on locomotor performance

The effect of tail autotomy on locomotor performance has been studied in a number of lizard species,
from arboreal geckos to generalized terrestrial lizards. These studies show that tail autotomy can have
a positive, a negative, or no effect on locomotor performance with a variety of mechanisms proposed to
explain these findings.     This study examines the effect of experimentally-induced tail autotomy in two
arboreal lizard species ( Takydromus sexlineatus and Anolis carolinensis ) and two terrestrial lizard
species ( Aspidoscelis sonorae and Holbrookia maculata ). This sample represents a broad range of
tail sizes; Takydromus has an exceptionally long and heavy tail, Holbrookia has a short and light tail,
and Anolis and Aspidoscelis have intermediate tails. Based on these morphological differences, we
expected loss of the tail would have the greatest effect on performance in Takydromus and the least
effect in Holbrookia . We quantified the effect of autotomy on maximum running speed and acceleration
capacity in all four species as they ran down a flat racetrack. We also ran the two arboreal species on
30 and 70 degree inclines to examine how autotomy affects climbing speed and acceleration. Finally, we
examined how several possible kinematic predictors of performance changed following autotomy.            On
the flat, running speed and acceleration were generally unaffected following tail autotomy, even though
some species exhibited marked alterations in kinematics following autotomy. It seems that the size of
the tail has very little impact on how autotomy affects running performance on flat substrates; which
agrees with the mixed results of several previous studies.         On the vertical, autotomy significantly
reduced both running speed and acceleration with several kinematic variables changing to produce this
effect. Thus, it appears that arboreal species generally rely on the tail as a functional appendage. In
addition, this result suggests that autotomy may have different effects on performance depending on the
focal species‘ habitat use and the type of performance studied (climbing vs. running vs. jumping, etc.).



McFarlane, Gordon A. (Fisheries and Oceans Canada); Cisneros, Andres (UBC, Canada); King,
Jacquelynne (Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Canada); Sumaila, Rashid (UBC, Canada)

Economic Impacts of Shark Conservation in British Columbia

Although data-deficiency often hinders formal assessments, it is widely recognized that shark species
around the world have historically been overfished. In British Columbia, three shark species have been
listed under the Species at Risk Act (SARA) as Endangered or Special Concern. Currently these listings
have not required bycatch mitigation in fisheries which encounter these shark species. It is recognized
that conservation measures in the form of fishery restrictions will have economic costs from the
adaptation of an industry to new restrictions. In the case of fisheries these costs follow from limitations on



                                                                                                          466
catch (targeted or incidental) leading to reductions in fishing effort, which can result in lowered catch and
profits. We examine the potential economic costs of mandated bycatch reduction, with a conceptual case
study. We chose two model species: bluntnose sixgill shark (Hexanchus griseus) which is the most
common SARA-listed bycatch species in the British Columbia groundfish fishery; and Pacific halibut
(Hippoglossus stenolepis) which is the most economically important groundfish fishery in British
Columbia. We ask the overarching question: ―Undercurrent fishing conditions, what effect might sixgill
shark bycatch limitations have on the BC halibut fishery?‖



McGlashan, Jessica (University of Western Sydney); Old, Julie; Spencer, Ricky-John (University of
Western Sydney, Canada)

Embryonic communication in the nest: metabolic responses of reptilian embryos to
developmental rates of siblings

Incubation temperature is a major environmental factor that affects developmental rates and defines
many phenotypes and fitness characteristics of reptilian embryos. In turtles, eggs are deposited in several
layers within the nest and thermal gradients create independent developmental conditions for each egg.
Despite differences in developmental rate, several studies have revealed unexpected synchronicity in
hatching, but the mechanisms through which synchrony is achieved may differ between species. We
determined whether embryos hatch prematurely or developmentally compensate in response to more
advanced embryos in a clutch by assessing the proximate mechanisms of synchronous hatching in an
Australian freshwater turtle ( Emydura macquarii ). Developmental asynchrony was established within a
clutch of turtle eggs and both respiration and heart rates were measured throughout incubation in
constant and fluctuating temperatures. Turtles hatched at similar developmental stages in all incubation
treatments, with less-developed embryos in experimental groups responding to the presence of more
developed eggs in a clutch by increasing both respiration and heart rates. Early hatching did not reduce
neuromuscular ability at hatching. These results support developmental adjustment mechanisms of the
‗catch-up hypothesis‘ for synchronous hatching in E. macquarii and implies some level of embryo–embryo
communication. The group environment of a nest facilitates the development of communication
mechanisms between embryos and the evolution of environmentally cued hatching.



McGuire, Jimmy (University of California at Berkeley);

Sulawesi biogeography and Wallacean flying lizards revisited: An analysis based on multispecies
coalescent phylogenetics, molecular phylogeography, and spatially-informed genetic clustering
analyses of 50 SNPs

The island of Sulawesi, Indonesia has received substantial attention from biogeographers on account if its
close proximity to Wallace‘s Line, its long period of isolation from any other major land area, its
consequent high degree of endemism, and its complex tectonic history that may have driven substantial
in situ diversification. Outstanding questions regarding Sulawesi biogeography include the primary
mechanism by which it has acquired its biota (i.e., via vicariance, by direct dispersal across land-bridges,
or by overwater dispersal), the temporal window during which major features of the biota arrived on the
island, the number of areas of endemism on the island, and the role that tectonic accretion of several
paleo-islands into the large composite island that exists today may have played in Sulawesi species
diversification. During the past few decades, molecular phylogeographic studies have been undertaken
for a diversity of Sulawesi taxa, but often with sparse geographic coverage and typically with



                                                                                                         467
mitochondrial data alone. Here we present data for the Draco lineatus Group of flying lizards, a
monophyletic assemblage that is endemic to Sulawesi and its satellite islands, as well as the adjacent
islands of southern Maluku Province. I will first present a 9-locus multispecies coalescent phylogenetic
analysis for the entire 45-species Draco assemblage in an effort to establish the timing of major
speciation events within the Draco lineatus Group. I follow this with a densely sampled standard
phylogeographic treatment of the D. lineatus group based on three mitochondrial genes and three nuclear
genes for 525 D. lineatus group samples. Finally, I present spatially-informed genetic cluster analyses of
a 50 SNP dataset obtained for 370 D. lineatus group samples, with the goal of testing whether the
multitude of within-species genetic clusters identified in the phylogeographic data set, which is largely
driven by mitochondrial divergences, in fact appear to reflect reproductively isolated cryptic lineages.
Results of these analyses are interpreted in light of the outstanding questions related to Sulawesi
biogeography outlined above.



McKelvy, Alexander (CUNY Graduate Center and CUNY College of Staten Island); Burbrink, Frank
(CUNY Graduate Center and CUNY College of Staten Island, Canada)

Phylogeography of Lampropeltis calligaster

Enumerating biodiversity across the planet is an importantgoal for evolutionary biologists and
conservationists. Cryptic diversity clearly makes this goaldifficult, even in countries with a long history of
taxonomic exploration. In addition, improperly quantifying diversitywithin groups hampers the ability to
understand processes responsible fordiversification within said group. Here we provide an example of
large vertebrate predator that likely represents more than one species. A wide ranging but poorly known
snake, the Prairie Kingsnake ( Lampropeltis calligaster ) found from Southern Florida to Virginia and
Texas north to Illinois, currently is recognized as a single species composed of three subspecies. We
sampled this species liberally throughout its known range and examined phylogeographic structure and
population demographic history using multi-locus data in a Bayesian coalescent framework. We show
deep phylogeographic structure in this taxon likely associated with the Mississippi River, suggesting that
L. calligaster is composed of more than one species. This is one of the last wide-ranging members of
the genus Lampropeltis to be studied at the phylogeographic level which upon correcting taxonomy here
will aid downstream processes used to study evolution and diversification in this genus.



McKenzie, Valerie (University of Colorado);

Landscape-scale dynamics of amphibian disease across human-altered ecosystems

The role of infectious disease and parasites in the ongoing decline of modern amphibians is emerging as
a complex interaction between host animals, pathogens, and a changing environment. Anthropogenic
landscape alterations produce changes in the environment that may either increase or decrease the
transmission of parasites and pathogens. This will depend on the life history of the parasite and the host,
as well as the type of disturbance. I will contrast bodies of work that address how land use changes
influence disease transmission in amphibian hosts, one in tropical amphibian communities, and one in a
temperate region of the United States. In Costa Rica, I examined parasites communities of three species
of amphibians (Lithobates vaillanti, Eleutherodactylus fitzingeri, and Smilisca puma) from sites in either
undisturbed rainforest or areas that had been clear-cut for cattle pasture. Land-use type contributed to
significant differences in parasite community composition for the more aquatic hosts species and less so
for the terrestrial host species. Land-use type was related to environmental characteristics such as the



                                                                                                          468
presence or absence of specific amphibian predators, water quality differences, and degree of excess
nutrient input, all of which influence the abundance of certain parasites. In Colorado, USA, I examined the
decline of native leopard frogs (Lithobates pipiens) and how it relates to land use shifts from agriculture to
urbanization in conjunction with an invasive species, American bullfrogs (Lithobates catebeiana), and the
emerging chytrid fungal pathogen, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd). In this ongoing work, we
conducted systematic resurveys of historical leopard frog sites and discovered that native leopard frog
declines in Colorado are significant and that they are regionally specific, with the most severe declines in
the northern Front Range region. Leopard frogs appear to be negatively affected in urbanized habitats,
particularly where invasive bullfrogs are present. While Bd was not significantly associated with present
day high plains populations of leopard frogs, it is widely thought to have been associated with past
declines of leopard frogs at higher elevations. These two studies underscore how infectious disease
responses to land-use change can be a complex process that is mediated by associated changes in the
biotic communities, including parasite intermediate hosts and reservoir hosts.



McLister, James (Indiana University South Bend);

Searching behaviour by male Bird-Voiced Treefrogs (Hyla avivoca): responses to females,
conspecific males, and heterospecific males

Chorusing Bird-Voiced Treefrogs (Hyla avivoca) exhibit less perch site fidelity and wander more
compared to related species. Field observations found frequent aggressive interactions among
conspecific males, aggressive interactions between male H. avivoca and male H. chrysoscelis, and
amplexus to be initiated by males leaping onto the backs of receptive females from a distance. These
observations suggest that male H. avivoca, unlike related species, actively seek out rivals and mates
within a larger territory. To test this hypothesis, individual frogs (male and female H. avivoca and H.
chrysoscelis) were placed inside clear containers 1.5 m from where a male H. avivoca was calling. Male
H. avivoca approached the frog in the container 71% of the time (n=31 trials), but did not apporach the
container if it was empty (n=5). When subjected to a similar experiment, male H. chrysoscelis showed no
response (n=20). Choice trials were done comparing the preference of H. avivoca for females,
conspecific males, or heterospecific (i.e., H. chrysoscelis) males. Male H. avivoca tended to approach
other males rather than females (31 vs 20 trials; P=0.12) and tended to approach male H. chrysoscelis
rather than conspecifics (28 vs 16; P=0.07). When the choice was between a container with a frog and
an empty container, the empty container was never chosen (10 vs 0; p<0.01). Male H. avivoca visually
seek out and confront other frogs when they are calling and this marks an evolutionary divergence in
male behavior between H. avivoca and related species.



McMahan, Caleb (LSU Museum of Natural Science); Matamoros, Wilfredo (LSU Musuem of Natural
Science, Canada); Chakrabarty, Prosanta (LSU Museum of Natural Science, Canada)

Phylogeography of the Black-belt Cichlid, Paraneetroplus maculicauda (Teleostei: Cichlidae)

The black-belt cichlid, Paraneetroplus maculicauda , is found in Caribbean slope rivers of Middle
America from Belize to the Río Chagres in Panama. This deep-bodied cichlid is typically found in
lowland stretches of rivers, as well as lagoons and back-water areas. Given its apparent tolerance to
brackish water conditions, it has been speculated that the relatively large distribution of this species could
be due to dispersal along the coast. The purpose of this study is to investigate the occurrence of
phylogeographic structure within the range of this wide-spread species using multiple mitochondrial and



                                                                                                          469
nuclear markers. These data indicate some phylogenetic structuring within this species based on the
separation of major drainages and geological regions within Middle America. Notably this species
provides a phylogenetic pattern that can aid our understanding of major geological events/regions
including the Motagua Fault, Chortis Block, and the formation of the Costa Rican/Panamanian Arc.
Information on the geologic history of Middle America, as well as major river dynamics, will be used to
better understand the evolutionary history of this species.



McMahon, Taegan (University of South Florida); Brown, Jenise; Halstead, Neal; Sears, Brittany;
Venesky, Matthew; Rohr, Jason (University of South Florida, Canada)

Direct evidence of acquired resistance to Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in Osteopilus
septentrionalis (Cuban treefrogs)

Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ( Bd ) parasitizes amphibians and has been implicated in the decline or
extinction of hundreds of amphibian species. Despite extensive research on this host-parasite system,
little is known about host immune defenses against Bd . We investigated whether Osteopilus
septentrionalis (Cuban treefrogs) could acquire resistance to Bd after zero to three episodes of Bd
exposure (11d exposure; 3x10 6 zoospores/exposure) followed by heat-induced clearance of infection
(11d at 32 °C). After each exposure and clearance period, we determined the prevalence and intensity of
Bd infection via skin swabs and quantitative PCR and evaluated tolerance to infection by examining the
relationship between Bd load and frog survival and weight. At the conclusion of the experiment, we will
investigate several aspects of immunity against Bd . We found no evidence that multiple infections
affected tolerance of Bd (i.e., mortality or growth) but Bd abundance significantly decreased with
increasing number of exposures (p = 0.01). These findings are direct evidence that O. septentrionalis
can develop resistance to Bd . The capability of frogs to acquire resistance could alter transmission and
persistence of Bd .



McNeil, Jeffie (Mersey Tobeatic Research Institute); Herman, Tom (Acadia University, Canada); Frech,
Troy (Mersey Tobeatic Research Institute, Canada); Mockford, Steve (Acadia University, Canada)

Nesting resources in space and time: a tale of fidelity and uncertainty in Blanding's turtles

Blanding‘s turtles ( Emydoidea blandingii ) occur in three small populations in Nova Scotia, which are
each separated by less than 25km. Despite their relatively close proximity, these populations have
previously been shown to be genetically and morphologically distinct, and their habitat characteristics
differ considerably. In this project we examine nesting movements, timing, site fidelity and clutch sizes
among two of the populations, KP and ML, over a 10 year period (2001-2011). We explore the influences
of differences in nesting site size, substrate, stability, and spatial distribution on turtle movements and
fidelity in the two populations. The KP population occurs inside a national park and has had an annual
volunteer-based nest protection program since the 1992. The ML population occurs in a working
landscape and has had a similar nest protection program since 2000, which has been facilitated by more
frequent radio tracking and identification of individual turtles than the KP population. Females from the
ML population lay smaller clutches than those from KP and the annual onset of nesting tends to occur a
few days earlier in the season. In both populations, nests can occur inland or on lakeshores. KP females
display strong fidelity to their general nesting area and no females have been recorded moving between
inland and lakeshore nesting sites. In contrast, many ML females show less fidelity to the general nesting
area and often make considerable movements between nesting attempts. Movements between inland



                                                                                                       470
and lakeshore nest sites are frequently recorded at ML. This variability in behaviour may be in response
to more variable water levels and less available suitable substrate at ML. The striking differences among
the populations in Nova Scotia underscore the need for site-specific management of this species and the
movements documented at ML illustrate the importance of protecting the overall area rather focusing on
individual nest sites.



McPherson, Diana (FIN Photography); Blaiyok, Kautchang (N/A, Koror, Republic of Palau); Masse,
Bruce (ENV-ES Enviornmental Stewadrship Group, Los Alamos, NM, United States); Helfman, Gene
(univ of georgia, Lopez Island, WA, United States)

Large jacks attack and kill Blacktip Reef Sharks

Adult sharks have few natural enemies aside from other sharks. Documented attacks by bony fishes are
exceedingly rare. We report several instances of highly aggressive, fatal, non-consumptive attacks on
Blacktip Reef Sharks (Carcharhinus melanopterus) by Giant Trevally (Caranx ignobilis). Our direct
observations and informant‘s reports suggest that large Giant Trevally and other carangids pursue and
ram sharks at several Indo-Pacific locales. Carangids head-butt sharks behind the gills and above the
pectoral fins, causing blood to stream from the gill region. Attacks continue until a shark is immobilized,
despite obvious injury to the head of the trevally. An attacking carangid continually outmaneuvers its
victim, restricts its escape efforts, and thwarts apparent attempts by other sharks to defend an individual
under attack. Post-mortem examination of sharks indicates damage to several internal organs. These
attacks differ from oft-reported incidents of mobbing. We seek information on similar interactions to
determine if this turning of the tables is a common phenomenon.



McPhie, Romney (Department of Fisheries and Oceans); King, Jacquelynne (Department of Fisheries
and Oceans, Canada)

Diel vertical migration of bluntnose sixgill sharks (Hexanchus griseus) in the Strait of Georgia,
British Columbia

Previous observations on the diel activity patterns of bluntnose sixgill sharks ( Hexanchus griseus ) were
most consistent with the hypothesis that foraging activity is responsible for their diel patterns of vertical
movement. However, ecosystems vary with respect to physical processes (e.g. mixing, stratification and
the depth of thermocline) as well as food web dynamics (e.g. prey abundance and availability).           We
used temporal depth and temperature data collected from pop-up satellite tags to test the foraging activity
hypothesis for sixgills residing in the Strait of Georgia . Alternate hypotheses that might explain diel
vertical migration patterns include the avoidance of predators and/or competitors, or thermoregulation.
Our results extend the spatial scale of observations made in the nearby ecosystem, Puget Sound .



McVeigh, Doreen (Hood College);

Genetic Analysis of Populations of the Cownose Ray, Rhinoptera bonasus, in the Chesapeake Bay
and Gulf of Mexico.

Cownose rays, Rhinoptera bonasus , are elasmobranchs found in the Western Atlantic from Brazil to
Massachusetts. In the spring and early summer, large schools of rays migrate into the Chesapeake Bay




                                                                                                         471
to forage. The rays also utilize the Chesapeake Bay as a nursery for young-of-the-year pups and a
breeding ground. During the summer, cownose rays migrate throughout the polyhaline portion of the Bay,
but it is not currently known if these subgroups of animals are genetically isolated. In this study, we
analyzed DNA sequence variation from portions of two variable mitochondrial genes, cytochrome b and
cytochrome c oxidase I, in samples collected from two sites in the Chesapeake Bay (St. George Island,
MD and Reedville, VA) and from Tampa Bay, FL. Preliminary results indicate that there is a statistically
significant difference in the distribution (p &lt; 0.05) of haplotypes between the two Chesapeake Bay
populations as well as a difference between Chesapeake and Tampa Bay populations. Florida and
Reedville share a haplotype that is present in substantial frequencies (34% and 23%, respectively); this
haplotype is absent from the St. George Island population. These results suggest that the two
Chesapeake locations attract different southern source populations each summer.



Means, Ryan (Coastal Plains Institute); Means, Rebecca (Coastal Plains Institute, Canada); Miller,
Debra; Gray, Matthew (University of Tennessee, Canada); Johnson, Steve (University of Florida,
Canada); Means, Bruce (Coastal Plains Institute, Canada); Brenes, Roberto (University of Tennessee,
Canada)

A conservation strategy for the imperiled striped newt (Notophthalmus perstriatus) in the
Apalachicola National Forest, Florida

The striped newt (Notophthalmus perstriatus) has a small global distribution restricted to north Florida and
south Georgia, and is a candidate for federal listing as threatened. Evidence suggests that there are two
distinct genetic groups, herein referred to as "western" and "eastern." The largest stronghold for the
western group is within the Apalachicola National Forest (ANF) of Florida, where there are 19 historically
known breeding ponds scattered throughout its native longleaf pine habitat. The entire species is
declining, but the western group's decline is more severe. No adult western newts have been observed in
the ANF since 2007 and no larvae since 1999. Currently there is only one reliable breeding pond left in
Georgia. Cause for decline is unknown, but we believe that some combination of 12-year drought, habitat
alteration, and possibly disease are to blame. We are conducting a 5-year study funded by the USFS to
investigate the cause of decline and repatriate the western striped newt back into its ANF stronghold.
Here, we report Years 1-2 of our study and discuss the remaining three. Years 1-2 were spent intensively
sampling the ANF for vestigial western striped newts. As anticipated, no western striped newts were
observed. This provided further evidence to proceed with repatriation. Also in Year 1, we began
establishment of a western group assurance colony, in collaboration with the Memphis Zoo, using an F1
generation of 21 larvae collected from the last reliable breeding pond. This colony will be the source for
repatriations later in this study. Currently we are challenge testing eastern striped newts for susceptibility
to ranavirus and surveillance testing the study area for the presence of ranavirus as precaution prior to
repatriation. Synthetic liners will be installed in Year 2 underneath the centers of the four recipient
wetlands prior to repatriations to ensure wetlands don't go dry during larval development. Liners are
expected to act as confining layers that capture rainwater in otherwise porous, drought-stricken soils.
Larval repatriation will take place in Years 3 and 4. Repatriation success will be measured utilizing
encircling drift fences, individual marking, and dipnet sampling through Year 5. This is the first repatriation
attempt for the imperiled striped newt, and to our knowledge, the first salamander repatriation to employ
pond liners in natural wetlands to enhance habitat and increase repatriation success.




                                                                                                           472
Mebert, Konrad (Freelance);

Ecological aspects on position and width of hybrid zones between Nerodia sipedon and N.
fasciata in the Carolinas

Nerodia     fasciata and N. sipedon segregate ecologically and form hybrid zones along ecotones of
water current (related to topography), salinity, and temperature in North Carolina, USA.     For example,
at the Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge, p ure N. fasciata genotypes could not be found at
salinities &gt; 0.5 ppt, whereas N. sipedon with low genetic fasciata influence (10%) were usually
collected at salinities &gt; 1.0 ppt and other N. sipedon with less fasciata influence were collected at
salinities &gt; 4.0 ppt. Farther north the hybrid zone coincides with an isotherm of annual average
temperature between 15 to 15.5 o C that parallels an east-west line approximately 10-20 km south of the
border with Virginia . N. fasciata occupies the range of increased temperatures south of the isotherm.
To the west in central North Carolina, the hybrid zone follows the Fall Line (Zone) which represents the
topographic transition between the hilly Piedmont and the flat Coastal Plain. The range of N. sipedon
west of this contact zone is associated with increased amounts of lotic water systems, whereas N.
fasciata occupies only lentic habitats below the Fall Zone, corroborating similar observations in the
southern and the Mississippi River Valley contact zones. Correspondingly, N. sipedon also expands
deeper into the coastal and alluvial plains along larger rivers. Variation in the width of these ecotones
relates to the variable width of hybrid zones, a pattern that corresponds to the geographic-selection
model.



Mebert, Konrad (Freelance);

Hybridization between the water snakes Nerodia sipedon and N. fasciata in the Carolinas: a
genetic approach

Nuclear markers generated by AFLP (Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism) method were used to
study the hybrid zone between the waters snakes Nerodia sipedon and N. fasciata in the Carolinas,
USA. The genetic characters were nearly fixed in corresponding species and so served as diagnostic
markers. They revealed extensive introgression between the two species not recognizable with
morphological characters (see poster). Lower than expected frequencies under Hardy-Weinberg
Equilibrium of both, genetic sipedon markers and specimens with a high interspecific heterozygosity,
infers selection against N. sipedon and hybrids with an increased genetic mixture (hybridization),
respectively. This is consistent with a pronounced genetic and morphological dominance of N. fasciata
characters in the hybrid zone. The genetic data support the species status of the two taxa as
independent entities under either, the Phylogenetic Species Concept due to the diagnostic genetic
markers, and the Evolutionary Species Concept due to the heterozygote deficiency of hybrids. The
suggested phylogenetic position of both species is consistent with other genetic, morphological, fossil,
and ecological data from earlier studies. The combined data suggest that the hybrid zone probably is a
constant in their evolutionary history and based on fossil records is at least 4-5 million years old. The
location of the various subsections of the hybrid zone correlates with environmental aspects and implies a
geographic-gradient model.




                                                                                                       473
Mebert, Konrad (Freelance);

Morphological differences between the water snakes Nerodia sipedon and N.                    fasciata in the
Carolinas: a look at their contact zone

A few traditionally applied characters of color pattern that putatively distinguish between the two water
snakes Nerodia sipedon and N. fasciata were compared with an additional set of morphological
characters to evaluate interspecific differences and to study their applicability to describe the hybrid zone
in the Carolinas, USA. Many of the morphological characters exhibited significant interspecific
differences, but only the number of dorsally complete crossbands yielded diagnostic quality. Higher
values in several scalation characters are found in N. sipedon compared to N. fasciata , in females
compared to males in both species, as well as in northerly populations within each species. Respective
characters include postocular scales, ventral scales, and dorsal scale rows (or farther posterior positions
of scale row reductions). N. sipedon has larger cephalic proportions, whereas N. fasciata evolved
larger eyes and an edgier head (canthus rostralis). Character variation in color pattern is large, but N.
fasciata tends more to rectangular ventral markings, a pronounced postocular stripe, and melanism than
N. sipedon , thus corroborating earlier studies. Possible relationship of morphological species differences
with environmental factors will be briefly discussed. Discriminant function analyses of morphological
characters were successful in separating both taxa with little overlap between them. Canonical scores
show the intermediacy for many specimens from the contact zone, but are unsuitable to describe the
degree of hybridization for individual specimens. Although a genetic analysis by AFLP (see oral
presentation) revealed that all intermediately patterned specimens were of mixed interspecific origin, the
often used morphological characters are not suitable to reveal the scope of interspecific introgression, as
most specimens from the contact zone classified as pure species exhibited actually a mixed genotype.



Medina, Cintia (CONICET-CENPAT); Luciano, Avila (CONICET-CENPAT, Canada); Sites, Jack W
(Brigham Young University, Canada); Morando, Mariana (CONICET-CENPAT, Puerto Madryn, Argentina)

Molecular phylogeny of the kriegi complex (Iguania: Liolaemini)

The widely-distributed lizard genus Liolaemus has the largest number of species in southern South
America (~ 235), Within Liolaemus two major groups of species are recognized: Liolaemus and
Eulaemus , and within Liolaemus sensu stricto , one of the several recognized clades is the L.
elongatus-kriegi complex.        . The kriegi-complex can be defined on the basis of several diagnostic
morphological characters, including large and stout bodies, and many             shared features of color and
scalation. All are saxicolous and viviparous, and prefer damp environments in basaltic habitats.
Latitudinally, the complex extends from 37±S, near ―El Planchón‖, the type locality of L. buergeri (VII
administrative region, Chile), to the southern distributional limit at the northern edge of Chubut province at
42±S. Originally, the kriegi complex included three described species based on morphological
characters, L. buergeri , L. kriegi y L. ceii , but more recent molecular (mitochondrial) studies revealed
four candidate species in this complex (Morando et al., 2003). In this study we test the hypotheses of
Morando et al. (2003) with an expanded molecular data set that includes six nuclear and two
mitochondrial gene regions (5,202 bp), based on a total of 30 lizards from all the type localities and
covering to total geographic distribution of the group. We present a comprehensive assessment of the
diversification history of the kriegi-complex in Patagonia Argentina, as inferred from relationships
recovered from concatenated sequences using MP, ML, and BI methods. We also reconstructed a
species tree incorporating the multispecies coalescent approach as implemented in BEAST, and we
estimated divergence times between the main clades of the kriegi complex. The recovered phylogenetic




                                                                                                          474
hypotheses were highly concordant across all methods, except for one taxon for which evidence suggest
a hybrid origin. We discuss the taxonomic and biogeographic implications of these results.



Medina, Maria Fernanda (The University of Texas at El Paso); Greenbaum, Eli (The University of Texas
at El Paso, El Paso, TX, United States); Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University, Radnor Township CDP, PA,
United States); Branch, William R. (Bayworld Herpetology, Humewood, South Africa)

Systematics of African Skinks in the Panaspis wahlbergi Complex

Snake-eyed skinks are relatively small lizards of the genus Panaspis/Afroablepharus that are mostly
endemic to the savannah areas of Sub-Saharan Africa. During an expedition in January 2010, specimens
of this genus were collected from a moss forest in Katanga Province, Democratic Republic of the Congo
(DRC). Three species, listed by de Witte (1953) and Broadley and Cotterill (2004), are known to reside in
the Katanga province: P. seydeli, P. smithii and P. wahlbergi. Only the latter species has a congruent
morphology with the newly collected specimens. To test our hypothesis of conspecificity between P.
wahlbergi (described from Natal, South Africa) and the newly collected Katanga specimens, we used
PCR to amplify the mitochondrial genes 16S and cyt b (550 bp and 614 bp respectively) and the nuclear
gene PDC (422 bp). We aligned these data for analyses with maximum likelihood (RAxML program)
optimality criteria. We reconciled the molecular and morphological datasets gathered from the newly
collected species with previously published literature. Based on the relatively long branch lengths of
lineages in our well-supported phylogeny, P. wahlbergi is a complex of at least five cryptic species.



Meiri, Shai (Tel Aviv University);

GARD ¿ mapping the global distribution of reptiles

We are mapping the distribution of all the world‘s reptile species in order to identify patterns and drivers of
richness, endemism, congruence with other taxa, and threat, and to model distribution under climate
change. We use published range maps and distribution records, museum data and expert opinion to
create species range maps. These data will allow global reptile distribution to be known for the first time.
So far we have mapped the distribution of ~4500 species of lizards, 2000 species of snakes and all non-
squamate species. Using these data we aim to identify correlates of species richness (historical correlates
/ environmental correlates): Can we predict distribution from diversification - historical components rather
than current-day climate? We will identify different types of hotspots e.g., for rarity, richness and
endemism, and examine the cross taxon congruence - both between reptiles and other taxa and within
reptiles: squamates and non-squamates, lizard and snakes, different saurian and ophidian families;
fossorial taxa etc. Adding phylogenetic information enables us to identify geographic centres of
diversifications and estimate both phylogenetic diversity and times of diversification and test whether they
are congruent in space, in time and across lineages. We use the distribution data to map traits (e.g., body
size, activity times, life history, body temperatures etc.) – and decipher how they evolve in relation to
climate. Results are analysed in a phylogenetic context to determine what aspect evolutionary history has
on the current distribution of reptiles. While increasing aridity and temperatures globally may cause wide-
ranging extinction of temperate biota, these very processes can be predicted to benefit reptiles that are
usually thought to be highly thermophilic and aridity-resistant. This, however, may not be the case, as
recent data and models suggest wide-spread population declines and extinctions. We will model reptile
distribution with current climate change projections to identify possible benefactors on the one hand and




                                                                                                           475
species that are likely to be facing greater risks of extinction on the other. The data will be further used to
advance towards the IUCN‘s global reptile assessment.



Melo, Marcelo (Universidade Federal de São Paulo);

Sex with lights on or off? The secrets for the diversification of the deep-sea swallowers
(Acanthomorphata: Chiasmodontidae)

The Processes of deep-sea fish diversification are poorly understood because the barriers are not very
clear anymore, vast areas of the oceans remain poorly sampled, and several groups still need taxonomy
and phylogeny revisions. The chiasmodontids, however, serve as good models for biogeography because
the taxonomy is fairly well solved, there are little gaps in known species distribution, the family is
monophyletic, and there is a phylogenetic hypothesis available for species interrelationships.
Chiasmodontidae is a family of exclusively deep-sea fishes, which includes four genera: two
mesopelagic, Chiasmodon Johnson (seven species) and Pseudoscopelus Lütken (17 species); and
two bathypelagic Dysalotus Mac Gilchrist (two species) and Kali Lloyd (seven species). Kali and
Dysalotus are widely distributed in all oceans and occur sympatrically; although some species usually
occurs in higher latitudes than others. Chiasmodon and Pseudoscopelus , however, have a high level of
endemism. Overlaying the cladograma on the distribution maps, it becomes evident that the actual
species range was caused by vicariant events: closely related species have disjunctive distributions with
little or no range overlapping, while members of distant-related clades can be found sympatrically.
Consistent patterns among different species of Pseudoscopelus and Chiasmodon indicate that the
mechanisms of isolation were similar and include plate tectonics, marine currents, temperature variation
and zones of oxygen depletion. Intrinsic biological characteristics also have a hole in the process: half of
family diversity is composed of species of Pseudoscopelus . Compared to the other chiasmodontid
genera, the species of Pseudoscopelus have a novel structure: photophore – absent in only two
species. The photophores are arranged in species-specific patterns on head and body, with tenuous
variation among the closely related species, but more significant variation among the distant related
species. The photophores of deep-sea organism are extremely important for the colonization of that
twilight zone: in most cases they serve as a mechanism of counter illumination for camouflage or
individual species recognition, but in other fish families can also form structures such as lanterns and
baits for predation.



Melo, Marcelo (Universidade Federal de São Paulo); Spitz, Jérôme (Université de La Rochelle, Canada);
Klepadlo, Cynthia (University of California, San Diego, Canada)

The deep-sea fish Chiasmodontidae (Acanthomorphata): a family in a taxonomic turmoil

The family Chiasmodontidae is composed of four genera and 33 valid species: Chiasmodon Johnson
(seven valid species), Dysalotus Mac Gilchrist (two valid species); Pseudoscopelus Lütken (17 valid
species); and Kali Lloyd (seven valid species). Chronologically, the taxonomic history of the
chiasmodontids can be divided into four distinct periods: the first, from the description of the type species,
Chiasmodon niger Johnson 1864, to 1892, with four nominal species described (two valid, one species
inquirenda); the second, from the beginning of the twentieth century to the mid-1930‘s, with 17 nominal
species described (13 valid); the third from 1965 to 1975, with four nominal species described (three
valid); and the fourth from 2005 to the present, with 19 species described (14 valid). Genus-level
taxonomic revisions were undertaken in the third period. In the fourth period, after neglect of more than



                                                                                                           476
30 years, chiasmodontids were once again target of large taxonomic revisions, and an increase of over
40% in their known diversity. Such dramatic increase in species descriptions, however, had a downside: a
number of papers are extremely confusing, with bizarre misidentifications and erroneous diagnosis,
description of junior synonyms, and erroneous synonyms. Such papers were published by different
authors and resulted on a plethora of taxonomic problems. This paper critically reviews recent
contributions in an attempt to untangle the taxonomy of the family and hopefully provide improved
standards for forthcoming studies on Chiasmodontidae.



Mendez, Fausto R. (Instituto de Biologia. UNAM);

Effects of climate change on nesting of reptiles

Change in the global climate is promoting modification in various scenarios. Reproduction of reptiles
may be affected in several ways. We studied the nesting of three different reptiles and have found
different effects.      In       Sceloporus aeneus lizards, which were restricted to a maximum altitude
of 3100 m , because their nests get frozen at higher altitudes,          are     currently  hatching with
success      at    the 3500 m . Nesting in crocodiles       were negatively affected due that the intensity
of rainfall decreased      temperature    of the nests and cause       mortality of eggs. This effect was
opposite to increase in temperatures in the area. In addition , sea turtles seem to have a very stable
condition because of the long nesting season and the variability of substrate provides appropriate
conditions to maintain stability and allow maintaining the sex ratio balanced . The diversity of
the effects found in     these results show that   required more studies as in some cases the effects are
opposite to expected



Meredith, Helen (Zoological Society of London & Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology,
University of Kent); Griffiths, Richard (Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology, University of Kent,
Canada); Collen, Ben; Turvey, Samuel; Durant, Sarah (Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London,
Canada); Baillie, Jonathan (Conservation Programmes Department, Zoological Society of London,
Canada)

Improving the impact of amphibian conservation programmes

Developing and optimising strategies to mitigate extinctions of amphibian species presents opportunities
for the improvement of current and future conservation programmes. I aim to address three key areas
currently impeding effective interventions within and across international amphibian conservation
programmes, namely: (i.) examining global amphibian extinction trends to aid prioritisation of future
conservation effort; (ii.) investigating the relationship between perceived ‗success‘ in species recovery
programmes and scientific research on those species, and (iii.) evaluating the degree to which current
conservation programmes have been effective in reducing threats and extinctions. Amphibian extinction
trends will be assessed using Living Planet Index and IUCN Red List data, providing a global perspective
for subsequent species-specific studies.         Taking a wide variety of existing international amphibian
conservation initiatives as case studies (&gt; 30), I will analyse the degree to which conservation science
underpins these programmes, both in terms of published and unpublished materials, and will ascertain
the methods employed to disseminate project findings, identifying factors that promote and impede this
process.     I will critically compare current accepted programme evaluation techniques, and use these
evaluation methodologies to search for both project-specific and unifying indicators of ‗success‘ across
the case studies. In focusing on these three main areas, the research will hopefully meet the needs of




                                                                                                        477
conservation practice and priority-setting, aiding mitigation of the amphibian extinction crisis through
partnership with the Amphibian Survival Alliance and constituent bodies such as the Zoological Society of
London, IUCN, Amphibian Ark and the Amphibian Specialist Group.



Metro, Kevin (Ohio University); Lattanzio, Matthew; Miles, Donald (Ohio University, Athens, OH, United
States)

Yellows are choosy but oranges are not: intraspecific variation in female mate preference of tree
lizards, Urosaurus ornatus

Assortative mating is commonly invoked as the primary force maintaining variation in coloration among
polymorphic male phenotypes. Indeed, many studies have found support for this hypothesis indicating
that, at least among the most dominant phenotypes, like prefers like. However, within-individual variation
(e.g., asymmetry) in expression of color may affect mate choice decisions, thereby perturbing the
expected selective trajectories. The ornate tree lizard (Urosaurus ornatus) is a common lizard species
throughout the southwestern US. Males and females of this species are subdivided into multiple
phenotypes based on throat coloration (hereafter morphs). In this study we examined female mate choice
by the two most common female morphs (yellow and orange) for yellow, orange, and blue male lizard
morphs. We exposed individual females to two trials in a randomized order. Each trial consisted of paired
presentation of different male morphs, and trials lasted eight hours. During each trial, we scored the
frequency of visits to each male and an overall preference score (based on proximity to male enclosure).
We found that dominant males earned higher preference scores than subordinate males from both female
morphs, but these results were only significant for yellow females (P=0.027). Yellow females preferred to
associate with yellow males (P=0.0126) and against orange throated males (P=0.035), but exhibited no
preference for or against blue males (P=0.564). Orange females did not display any preference for or
against any of the male morphs (P>0.5). Further analyses indicated that asymmetry or variation in
multivariate expression of the blue abdominal coloration common to all male morphs was unimportant for
female choice (P>0.05). Our results for yellow females primarily support the dominance hierarchy within
U. ornatus at our study site: yellow males are highly aggressive and territorial, whereas orange males are
nomadic. Effectively, male morphs are recognized in a hierarchal order by yellow females based on their
throat color. The lack of detectable choice by orange females suggests that they mate randomly, which
may act to facilitate the maintenance of blue and orange male phenotypes.



Meuche, Ivonne (Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine); Linsenmair, K. Eduard
(Department of Animal Ecology and Tropical Biology, Biozentrum, University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany); Pröhl, Heike (Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany)

Female Territoriality in the Strawberry Poison Frog, Oophaga pumilio

Females of the Strawberry Poison Frog (Oophaga pumilio) are known to be aggressive toward other
females. However, the function of this behavior in females has not been identified. We hypothesized that
females are territorial, occupying and defending specific areas in defense of food resources. To test this
hypothesis, we calculated the position and size of core areas and home ranges for each female in the
study area and the frequency of aggressive and feeding behavior exhibited by females in these areas.
We provide evidence, for the first time, that females are territorial; they defend their core area against
other intruding females. To determine the potential resource defended by females, we examined
aggressive behavior associated with defense of mates, oviposition, and tadpole-rearing sites. We found



                                                                                                      478
no evidence that females defended areas with males, or that oviposition and tadpole-rearing sites were
limited and defended by females. Instead, our observations suggest that female territoriality is most likely
associated with the defense of feeding areas.



Meuche, Ivonne (Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine); Amézquita, Adolfo (Department
of Biological Sciences, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Columbia); Linsenmair, K. Eduard (Department
of Animal Ecology and Tropical Biology, Biozentrum, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany); Pröhl,
Heike (Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany)

How many frogs do you have to kiss to find a prince?

Female frogs have often been shown to exhibit preferences for certain male traits. However, very little is
known about behavioural rules females use when searching for mates. We investigated mate sampling
tactics in the territorial strawberry poison frog (Oophaga pumilio). We found no evidence that females
compared males by visiting and courting them. Instead females mated with the closest calling male
irrespective of his characteristics (e.g. acoustic and physical traits). Additionally for the first time we
conducted playback experiments in the natural home ranges of receptive females to test their preferences
for several call parameters: high vs. low call rate, high vs. low dominant frequency, near vs. far distance
between female and speaker. Females preferred the nearest speaker, but did not discriminate between
low and high call rates or frequency. These results in combination with our behavioural observations in
the field suggest that the distance to potential mates is the crucial criterion for mate choice in female
strawberry poison frogs. We discuss our results in terms of benefits and costs of mate sampling.



Meuche, Ivonne (Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine); Linsenmair, K. Eduard
(Department of Animal Ecology and Tropical Biology, Biozentrum, University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany); Pröhl, Heike (Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany)

Territoriality and acoustic communication between competing males of strawberry poison frogs

Territoriality is a behavioural strategy essential to the breeding ecology of many species in which male
reproductive success is limited by access to females. In the present study, we investigated the relative
importance of female availability and pressure caused by male intruders for the regulation of territory size
of male strawberry poison frogs, Oophaga pumilio. We show that males defended smaller territories in
areas with a high female density. Only males in good body condition were able to defend small territories
in areas of high female density. In contrast intruding pressure caused by competing males was positively
correlated with territory size. Our results also showed that males lowered their dominant calling frequency
during agonistic interactions. Because only males in good condition were able to produce very low
dominant frequencies, the observed decrease appears to be an honest signal containing information
about fighting abilities. Thus, the negative correlation between dominant frequency and mating success of
males found in previous studies seems to be the result of intrasexual competition between males rather
than a product of female preferences for low-frequency calls.




                                                                                                        479
Meyer, Leon (North West University); du Preez, Louis (North West University, Potchefstroom, South
Africa); Verneau, Olivier (CNRS-EPHE-UPVD, Perpignan, France)

Impact of invasive parasites on the biology and conservation of indigenous terrapins in South
Africa and France

Terrapins have been distributed across the globe in pet and food trade. The juveniles are attractive but
tend to lose their colours as they grow. This results in them being released into the environment where
they establish natural populations due to their ability to adapt to a broad range of habitats. Trachemys
scripta elegans , native to the USA, is one of these species that is used in the pet trade and is being
released. It‘s estimated that between 1988 and 1994 roughly 26 million specimens were exported
worldwide. Some countries banned turtle imports. Nevertheless, 3-4 million terrapin hatchlings are
exported each year. Terrapins of the genera Chrysemys, Graptemys, Trachemys and Pseudemys were
imported into France as pets and many were released. Trachemys became an invasive threat to
indigenous species, Emys orbicularis in some habitats, as they compete for resources because
Trachemys is bigger and more aggressive. The same happened in South Africa where natural
populations of Trachemys were documented near Durban and Pretoria and probably contributed to the
local extinction of Pelusios rhodesianus . A wide variety of Terrapins are infected with various parasites.
These parasites are transported with the terrapin wherever it goes. When terrapins are released and
natural populations are established, their parasites can escape and switch hosts to infect native species.
Evolutionary old parasitic relations rarely have unfavorable effects on the host, but when host switching
take place and new parasitic relations are formed, infections often are relentless with unfavorable effects.
Monogenetic flatworms known as polystomes are found all over the world where terrapins occur This
study will determine the extent to which invasive blood and flatworm parasites spread from invasive
American freshwater terrapins to native species in France and South Africa and determine the
conservation threats posed by them.



Michaelides, Sozos (Oxford University); While, Geoffrey (Oxford University, Canada); Bell, Celia
(University of Southampton, Canada); Uller, Tobias (Oxford University, Canada)

Human introductions create opportunities for intra-specific hybridization in the non-native range
of the common wall lizard, Podarcis muralis

Intentional and unintentional introductions of species into areas where they are not native can have many
ecological, conservational and evolutionary implications. For example, introductions from multiple sources
could create opportunities for hybridisation between previously isolated lineages. Although the
evolutionary importance of hybridization is widely recognised for plants, it is generally considered to be of
minor importance in animals. Here I report on a case study of how human introductions create
opportunities for hybridization in the common wall lizard Podarcis muralis. Wall lizards are native to
southern and western Europe. The species exhibits considerable variation in biometry and coloration
pattern resulting in the description of many morphological subspecies and at least eight genetically
distinct lineages in the native range. Wall lizards have been introduced to Germany, North America and
the United Kingdom (UK) where it has successfully established several populations. In this study, we
sampled 507 individuals from 23 non-native populations in the UK. We used mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
cytochrome b sequences to establish the origin of these populations. In addition, combining historical
information and genetic data we also attempted to partly reconstruct their introduction history. We
identified 12 unique haplotypes that were combined with 175 published sequences covering the native
distribution of the species. The UK haplotypes are nested within 5 distinct clades. Several populations
harbour haplotypes from more than one clade, suggesting introductions from multiple sources. Based on



                                                                                                         480
historical and genetic data, we suggest that the majority of populations established from the mid-1980s
derived from relocations of animals in the introduced range.

In summary, human introductions have created opportunities for hybridization between genetically and
morphologically distinct lineages in the non-native distribution of the species, with potential for further
hybridization as a result of natural or human-mediated dispersal. Further research using nuclear markers
will enable to test how founder events influence admixture and genetic diversity and their relationships to
phenotypic variation in the introduced populations.



Mickelson, Lindsay (Victoria University of Wellington); Nelson, Nicola (Victoria University of Wellington,
Canada); Towns, David (Department of Conservation (NZ), Canada); Cree, Alison (University of Otago,
Canada)

Corticosterone release in tuatara (Sphenodon punctatus): Patterns, influential factors, and
directions for future studies

Glucocorticoids (GCs) are steroid hormones secreted from adrenal tissues in all vertebrates. Short-term
increases in GC levels (acute and/or ‗stress response‘) are observed in individuals exposed to
challenging stimuli. These increases cause changes in behavioural and physiological factors that help
individuals cope with environmental challenges. Although GCs are often referred to as ‗stress hormones‘,
a certain level of secretion is essential for normal activities.  Nonetheless, GC secretion can be
suggestive of an organism‘s condition and level of stress.

Corticosterone (CORT) is the primary GC hormone in reptiles, including tuatara ( Sphenodon punctatus ).
Baseline CORT release in tuatara is relatively low; and in accordance with other vertebrate species, an
elevated ‗stress response‘ to capture/restraint is detected.     Variation in basal and ‗stress-response‘
CORT release in tuatara exists and studies examining patterns of CORT release, time-series of the
CORT ‗stress-response‘, and factors influencing CORT release are limited. Here we show patterns in:
1) baseline CORT release levels; 2) ‗stress-response‘ CORT release at several points during a 24-hour
time-series; and 3) factors such as sex, reproductive status, body condition, and temperature that
contribute to observed variation in CORT release. We confirmed that gravid females have significantly
higher baseline CORT release than non-gravid females and males, suggesting increased CORT release
in females during the nesting life-history stage. Furthermore, we observed a significant increase in CORT
release in males and non-gravid females during a 24 hour ‗stress-response‘ time series. Conversely,
gravid females did not exhibit a significant increase from baseline CORT release during the time-series,
suggesting a dampened ‗stress-response‘ during nesting.         A dampened ‗stress-response‘ has been
observed in other gravid reptiles during nesting events and implies modulation of CORT release to
support nesting success. Our results demonstrate how reproductive condition and nesting stage of
females play a role in observed CORT levels and we anticipate our findings will help direct further studies
of CORT release in tuatara.



Mickle, Paul (The University of Southern Mississippi); Havrylkoff, Jeanne-Marie; Peterson, Mark;
Grammer, Paul (The University of Southern Mississippi, Canada)

Comparison of ontogenetic and inter-basin geometric morphometrics of Gulf sturgeon (Acipenser
oxyrinchus desotoi)




                                                                                                       481
Gulf sturgeon are an anadromous fish that reproduce in northern Gulf of Mexico drainages. Population
genetic studies by both Dugo et al. 2004 and Stabile et al. 1996 suggest moderate to strong site fidelity
between these different drai nage populations. Up to this point molecular data has been the sole tool
for identifying these metapopluations. Within age classes, telemetry data from the Pascagoula provide
evidence that juvenile migrations are unique to sub adult and adult migration habitats as well as
distances. Geometric morphometrics were used to quantify differences in metapopulations as well as
age classes and help explain the lifehistory differentiation that is occurring. Forty-seven Gulf sturgeon
from six drainages were measured and analyzed representing various age classes.                  Principal
Components Analysis along with Multivariate Analysis of Variance revealed strong separation between
the different populations of Gulf sturgeon as well as the different age classes. Head shape and overall
surface area were the leading differences of both comparisons. These findings suggest body shape
selection may be occurring in relation to migratory life histories within natal drainages.



Mickle, Paul (The University of Southern Mississippi); Schaefer, Jake (The University of Southern
Mississippi, Canada); Adams, Susan (USDA-Forest Service, Canada); Slack, Todd (US Army ERDC,
Canada); Kreiser, Brian (The University of Southern Mississippi, Canada)

Life history and habitat use of the juvenile Alabama shad (Alosa alabamae) in northern Gulf of
Mexico rivers

In recent years Alabama shad have declined in abundance and been extirpated from much of their native
range with the Pascagoula River containing the last remaining population in Mississippi. Habitat
degradation and barriers to migration are considered contributing factors to range contraction.
Understanding and protecting the habitats that support Alabama shad is essential to preserving this rare
species. Physicochemical data was collected in three dominant habitat types (sandbar, open channel and
bank) used by Alabama shad in June and October in three Northern Gulf of Mexico drainages:
Pascagoula (2004-2007), Apalachicola (2007-2008), and Suwannee (2007-2008) rivers.               Akaike
Information Criterion was used to select models and identify parameters correlated with Alabama shad
presence within each drainage. Understanding the recruitment needs of Alabama shad can provide
important information in the management and conservation of this species.



Miguel, Madeline (Ohio Wesleyan University); Burtt, Edward (Ohio Wesleyan University, Canada)

Diversity of frogs at different elevations in wet forests in Costa Rica

Costa Rica is known for the high diversity and species richness among numerous taxa including its
anuran species. However some researchers believe that diversity will increase or decrease depending on
the elevation an organism inhabits. Blake et al . (Auk 117: 663-686, 2000.) an elevation gradient in the
diversity of tropical birds in Costa Rica. The avian elevational diversity gradient suggests that there may
be a similar diversity gradient among frog species. This is particularly likely since some elevations are
known to have greater diversity in general. To test this idea, we made species lists of the frogs found in
low, middle, and high elevations in Costa Rica. At each of three sites frogs were recorded along a
transect. The species of frog and the number of occurrences were recorded for each transect. The date
and time were recorded. In general, previous researchers have found that plant and animal diversity is
highest at mid-elevation. Smith et al . (Evolution 61: 1188-1207, 2007.) found the highest diversity among
hylid frogs at intermediate elevations of middle America. Our results suggest that the diversity of frogs
generally is highest at mid-elevation locations in Costa Rica.



                                                                                                       482
Miles, Donald (Ohio University); Meylan, Sandrine (Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Canada); Sinervo,
Barry (University of California Santa Cruz, Canada); Massot, Manuel (Université Pierre et Marie Curie,
Canada); Clobert, Jean (2Station d'Ecologie Expérimentale du CNRS à Moulis, Canada)

Covariation of dorsal pattern, locomotor performance and escape behavior across an ecological
gradient in the lizard Lacerta vivipara

Substantial attention has been devoted to understanding the factors that influence variation in locomotor
performance. Both intra- and inter-specific analyses demonstrate that habitat structure influences speed
andm endurance. The physical structure of perches may constrain performance, but the availability and
distance from refugia may also affect performance. In ectothermic organisms open habitats enhance
thermoregulatory opportunities, but a cost of enhanced risk of predation due to greater distances to
refugia. Thus, both physiological performance and escape tactics should be influenced by habitat. In
addition, the thermal milieu may affect dorsal patterning such that individuals occupying cooler
environments should have darker pigmentation than in more open environments. Relatively few studies
have examined the interaction between habitat structure, dorsal pattern, escape behavior and locomotor
performance. These traits are expected to covary with ecological gradients, and probably represent
coadapted trait complexes.        We measured locomotor performance and escape behavior during
locomotion for 18 populations of Lacerta vivipara during 2007 and 2008. The populations were arrayed
along an elevational gradient and differed in habitat structure. Individuals within and among populations
of the common lizard, Lacerta vivipara exhibit two dorsal patterns, reticulated and linear, that vary in the
amount of melanin pigmentation. More reticulated females occurred in open habitat at low elevation sites
and linear individuals predominated at high elevation, humid sites with higher vegetation cover. We
found significant geographic variation in performance, which we attributed to elevational and habitat
differences.    Locomotor performance, endurance and maximum velocity, was greater in linear than
reticulate females, but only during 2008, a cool, wet year. Escape behaviors covaried with morphotype
and habitat.     Reticulated females from open, disturbed habitats tended to reverse and stop more
frequently when running than linear females.          Linear females from closed habitats reversed more
frequently when running on the treadmill, which mimics their escape behavior in the wild. These results
suggest that individuals varying in dorsal pattern display performance differences that correspond with
habitat and thermal opportunities. We propose that the habitat and year dependent performance values
are more the result of phenotypic plasticity than selection.



Miller, Melissa M. (Auburn University); Willson, John D. (Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Canada); Romagosa, Christina M.; Guyer, Craig (Auburn University, Canada); Snow, Ray W.
(National Park Service, Canada)

Habitat associations of snakes in Everglades National Park, FL: an occupancy modeling approach

Everglades National Park (ENP) is a unique ecosystem that contains a diverse array of Ophidian species.
Understanding the habitat associations of snakes within ENP poses a challenge because snakes are
cryptic and often have low probability of detection. Because detection is often less than one, it is difficult
to reliably estimate the species presence/absence and habitat associations. Several studies have
examined snake assemblages in ENP in regard to select habitat types, however species-specific
detection probabilities were not incorporated into analyses. We analyzed the habitat associations of
snakes throughout all habitat types occurring in ENP using site occupancy (presence/absence) models
and species-specific detection probabilities. Specifically, we repeatedly surveyed 14 transects (5 km by 1
km) in ENP during 2010 and 2011 and assessed species presence/absence in relation to major




                                                                                                          483
vegetation types (mangrove forest, scrub, pineland savanna, prairies and marshes, shrubland, exotics,
water, and anthropogenically altered sites) using program PRESENCE. Agkistrodon piscivorus ,
Thamnophis sauritus , and Nerodia fasciata were widely distributed within ENP (occupancy near 100%)
but their detection was negatively correlated with scrub and exotics, scrub, and scrub and savanna,
respectively, likely reflecting lower abundances in these habitats. Detection probabilities of T. sirtalis and
Nerodia clarkii were constant and relatively low. Occupancy of T. sirtalis was negatively correlated with
prairie and marsh and occupancy of N. clarkii was positively correlated with forest habitat. Although
detection probability of Cemophora coccinea was relatively high, this species exhibited low occupancy
that was positively associated with scrub habitat. Understanding habitat associations of snakes is
necessary for effective management and conservation practices. Our results reflect the importance of
estimating detection probabilities and the probability of site occupancy for studies that aim to reliably
estimate habitat associations of cryptic, hard to detect species.



Minting, Peter (Institute of Zoology and University of Sussex);

Dynamics of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis infection in the natterjack toad (Bufo calamita)

The chytridiomycete Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) is a parasite of many amphibians, including
the natterjack toad ( Bufo calamita). In this study, an attempt was made to model Bd infection
dynamics in natterjack populations, in order to assess the scale of the threat posed by Bd to this
species. Analysis of capture-mark-recapture (CMR) data using program MARK suggested a weak effect
of Bd infection on adult natterjack survival. Bd infection scores increased in adults during spawning and
in toadlets following rain. Environmental factors (including immersion in water and salinity) strongly
influenced Bd swab test scores. The highest salinities recorded from coastal ponds used by natterjacks
were lethal to Bd in vitro, so transmission may be limited in brackish conditions. In contrast, low levels of
salinity boosted Bd growth. This may help explain the cause of death in infected amphibians, if Bd
growth and zoospore emergence results in a systemic loss of electrolytes. In captive experiments, Bd
killed natterjacks when infection reached a critical threshold but this threshold was rarely exceeded by
adult natterjacks in the wild. There was evidence of cryptic infection with respect to the DNA swab test
used to assess levels of Bd infection when toads were sampled in dry conditions. Swabs did not reliably
assess Bd prevalence but they mayhave been a good indicator of infection activity. The annual cycle of
Bd ‗prevalence‘ or infection activity in natterjacks was difficult to explain without overwintering adults
acting as cryptic reservoirs for Bd. The history of Bd in the UK is poorly understood but Bd isolated
from one natterjack population fell within the global panzootic lineage (GPL) of Bd thought to have been
spread by humans. Bd is widespread in the UK and eight natterjack populations have been infected with
Bd for at least four years. To date, no local extinctions of this species have been observed in response to
Bd infection.



Mitchell, Aimee (Aimee Mitchell);

Endangered turtle restoration at an urbanized site: A case study of Burnaby Lake Park, BC,
Canada

The Western Painted Turtle ( Chrysemys picta bellii ) is one of four Painted Turtle subspecies, whose
range in Canada extends fro m central Ontario to the Pacific coast. This subspecies is considered stable
throughout much of their range. However, the Pacific Coast Population is listed as Endangered by the
Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada (COSEWIC). This turtle faces many threats,



                                                                                                          484
which are amplified in a highly urbanized environment, including: decreased connectivity and loss of
habitat, road mortality, predation by dogs and urban wildlife, collection, competition with exotics and
disease from released pet turtles. Burnaby Lake has been identified as containing one of the largest
populations in the Lower Mainland region, and highlights the challenges associated with endangered
species recovery in heavily impacted areas. To mitigate threats at this site we installed a fenced beach at
a known nesting area that previously experienced high disturbance and predation rates, monitored
nesting activity, collected observational data on hatchling emergence and placed predator exclosures
over nests. In 2009, prior to beach installation, up to 15 nests of an unknown number laid were destroyed
by predators. Since beach installation in 2010, we recorded high use of the nesting beach by turtles, with
20 nests known to be laid in 2010 and 14 laid in 2011. In these 2 years following beach installation there
was an apparent reduction in predation rate, with only 1 nest (5%) recorded as predated in 2010 and 7
nests (50%) in 2011. All nests (100%, n = 7 in 2010 and n = 4 in 2011) where predator exclosures were
installed were not predated. Results thus far have indicated that nesting beach installation may reduce
overall nest predation rates by providing an area with increased protection from disturbance by people
and predators. However, disturbance by park users was still noted to cause some turtles to abandon
nesting attempts. Because of this, we recommend building a blind and shrubs to further limit disturbance
by people. Predation is also still a concern at a centralized enhanced nesting site where even one
predator could destroy many nests at over a short time period. To address this, multiple beaches could be
installed to spread out nesting activity and mitigate impacts of any single predation event. As an
alternative to additional beaches, a predator exclosure could be designed and installed that covers the
beach rather than individual nests.



Mitchell, Joseph (Mitchell Ecological Research Service LLC); Johnston, Gerald (Santa Fe Community
College, Canada); Thomas, Travis (Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, Canada); Lau,
Anthony; Suarez, Eric (University of Florida, Canada)

Population Structure of the Alligator Snapping Turtle (Macrochelys temminckii) at the
Southeastern Edge of its Geographic Range

The Alligator Snapping Turtle (Macrochelys temminckii ) is phylogeographically structured into three
lineages, but little is known about the population ecology of the most genetically distinct lineage which
occurs at the southeastern edge of the species range in the Suwannee River drainage. Unlike most
known       M. temminckii populations, the Suwannee River drainage population has never been
commercially harvested for food, although it had been subject to an unknown level of legal personal
harvest until 2009. We conducted a mark-recapture study of M. temminckii in the Santa Fe River, the
major Florida tributary of the Suwannee River, between 2004 and 2011. Using baited hoop traps and
hand capture while snorkeling, we captured 109 M. temminckii (25.7 % immature, 42.2 % adult female,
32.1 % adult male). All size classes between 51 mm and 623 mm straight-midline carapace length (CL)
were represented, and the adult sex ratio was 1:1. Adult males (CL 391 – 623 mm, mean = 528.5 mm;
mass 14.1 – 54.4 kg, mean = 33.7 kg,) were significantly larger than adult females (CL 329 – 492 mm,
mean = 424.0 mm; mass 8.2 – 25.0 kg, mean = 17.5 kg). Capture rates varied significantly among habitat
types (blackwater stream, spring influenced river, spring run, sinkhole pond), and habitat-associated
variation was observed for adult male and adult female body size. This study suggests current population
stability, but a relatively low population density and slow juvenile growth rates indicate the need for
continued protection of this genetically unique population.




                                                                                                       485
Mitchell, Nicki (The University of Western Australia); Hipsey, Matthew (The University of Western
Australia, Crawley, Australia); Michael, Kearney (The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VI, Australia);
Arnall, Sophie; McGrath, Gavan (The University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia); Kuchling,
Gerald (The WA Department of Environment and Conservation, Wanneroo, WA, Australia)

Linking dynamic energy budget theory and hydrology to select sites for the assisted colonisation
of Australia's rarest reptile

Assisted colonisation (the deliberate movement of species to climatically suitable regions) is an emerging
management tool that aims to prevent the extinction of populations that are unable to migrate in response
to climate change. If this strategy is deemed acceptable, how can suitable translocation sites be
identified? Correlative climate-envelope models, which are based on occurrence data, are of limited use
for species with restricted distributions. In contrast, mechanistic models hold considerable promise for site
selection. In this project we are integrating ecoenergetic and hydrological models to assess the longer-
term suitability of the wetland habitat of the world‘s rarest chelonian, the Western Swamp Tortoise
(Psuedemydura umbrina). P. umbrina is restricted to a single breeding population in the south west of
Western Australia, where a relatively rapid decline in seasonal winter rainfall has resulted in shorter
hydroperiods and reduced foraging and breeding opportunities for tortoises. Our mechanistic model
allows us to drive the dynamic energy budget of the tortoise based on hydrological projections of its
current habitat, and the process can be repeated across a range of future climates. The same model is
also a powerful tool for identifying novel habitats where tortoises could persist under future climates. Here
we present a preliminary screening model of suitable translocation sites for P. umbrina and in so doing
demonstrate an approach to that could serve as a template for guiding the assisted colonisation of other
threatened wetland species.



Mitchell, Timothy (Iowa State University); Warner, Daniel; Janzen, Fredric (Iowa State University, Ames,
IA, United States)

Maternal and abiotic influences on physiology and survival during hatchling painted turtle
(Chrysemys picta) hibernation

Hatchlings of many species of temperate turtles hibernate within the natal nest. Intriguingly, the
microhabitat of the maternally-selected nest site at the time of oviposition can predictably influence abiotic
conditions experienced within the nest months later during hibernation. Hatchlings are vulnerable to
lethal conditions in the nest during this stage, yet most research on nest-site choice focuses on egg
incubation. We conducted an 8-year study of the hibernation ecology of painted turtles (Chrysemys picta)
in western Illinois complemented with a laboratory experiment on yolk use as a function of hibernation
temperature. Specifically, we investigated how abiotic factors (temperature and precipitation) and
maternal factors (egg size and nest-site choice) impact offspring survival during hibernation, and
quantified the strength and form of selection acting on these maternal factors. We expect interactions
between precipitation and temperature (e.g., little snowfall accompanied by substantial subfreezing
temperatures) to be the primary abiotic predictors of offspring survival during hibernation. Additionally,
we expect larger neonates typically to have higher probability of survival, and so we expect to find
positive directional selection on egg size during most years. Because nest-site choice can predictably
influence hibernation nest temperatures, nest-site choice is likely under selection during some years as
well. Because residual yolk is the primary energy source for hibernating neonates, warmer conditions in
the nest could increase metabolism, compromising these essential energy stores. Thus, we expect
warmer hibernation temperatures to disproportionately reduce residual yolk stores, which could have
detrimental effects during dispersal from nests.



                                                                                                          486
Mitchell, Timothy (Iowa State University); Maciel, Jessica; Janzen, Fredric (Iowa State University, Ames,
IA, United States)

Sex-ratio selection influences nest-site choice in a reptile with temperature-dependent sex
determination

In oviparous taxa, nest-site choice is a maternal effect that influences the early life environment
experienced by developing offspring. By selecting nests with particular attributes, females can improve
survival and partially control developmental trajectories experienced by offspring. Theory predicts that
nest-site choice is a trait that may respond to sex-ratio selection in organisms with environmental sex
determination. By experimentally manipulating Chrysemys picta nests, we explore whether maternally-
selected nest sites differ environmentally from random sites, and what consequences any differences
have on offspring survival and sex ratio, because C. picta has temperature-dependent sex determination
(TSD). To do this, we split clutches between nests constructed in the maternally-selected site and a
random site nearby for incubation. Subsequently, hatchlings were redistributed for hibernation, such that
some spent both life stages in the maternally-selected nest, some spent both stages in a random nest,
and some spent one stage in each. This design allowed us to determine how nest-site choice affects
survival and development across both stages by decoupling summer and winter nest environments.
Maternally-selected nests received more solar radiation and were warmer than random nests during
incubation, yet egg survival did not differ significantly between treatments. Sex ratio, however, did
significantly differ between treatments; maternal nests produced a nearly 1:1 sex ratio, while random
nests were very male biased. There were not significant differences between treatments for temperature
measurements or survival during hibernation. This field study provides the first experimental evidence
that sex-ratio selection is an important component of nest-site choice in a species with TSD.



Miya, Masaki (Natural History Museum and Institute, Chiba); Satoh, Takashi P.; Nishida, Mutsumi
(Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Japan)

Undetected evolutionary radiation in the pelagic realm: A novel clade in the percomorph fishes as
revealed by mitogenomic analysis

Marine pelagic realm is the largest habitat on the Earth, comprising >99.9% of the world‘s water and
harboring diverse fishes from epipelagic to abyssopelagic zones. A recent mitogenomic study found that
some marine pelagic perciform taxa formerly placed in 4 different suborders (Percoidei, Stromateoidei,
Scombroidei, Trachinoidei) unexpectedly share a common ancestry, suggesting that future addition of
pelagic species from the percomorphs with unknown identity would further expand the limits of this
previously unrecognized clade. To confirm this prediction, we extensively assembled mitochondrial (mt)
and nuclear (nc) gene sequences from all percomorphs deposited in the database and analyzed the
unambiguously aligned sequences from 6 mt and 3 nc genes separately using ML method. The resulting
mt and nc phylogenies strongly suggest that 15 families across 6 percomorph suborders (the 4 suborders
listed above plus Icosteoidei and Scombrolabracoidei) share a common ancestry and these fishes are
found to be all dwellers in the pelagic realm occuring at various depths. Based on these preliminary
results, we further assembled mt genomic data from these selected taxa (29 spp. from the 15 families)
plus various percomorphs and outgroups (67 spp.; total = 96 spp.) and subjected the data to partitioned
ML analyses. The resulting phylogenies indicated that those selected taxa from the 15 perciform families
across the 6 suborders form a monophyletic group with 100% bootstrap probabitlies. These results
strongly suggest that there has been an evolutionary radiation in the pelagic realm that cannot be
predicted from previous taxonomy and classification in the percomorphs.




                                                                                                      487
Mockford, Steve (Acadia University); Smith, Duncan (Parks Canada Agency, Maitland Bridge, NS,
Canada)

Engaging local community in the conservation of herpetofaunal species it risk

Actions taken towards the conservation and recovery of species at risk must be based on a sound
scientific assessment of the species requirements and the threats to its survival. Ideally they will also
occur within a legal framework that supports conservation and recovery. However, neither sound science
nor enabling legislation will, on their own, affect actual conservation and recovery; this will require the
participation of the citizens who share space and/or resources with the species of concern. We describe a
collaborative approach to stewardship involving government, local ENGOs, and the academic community
in engaging the larger community in conservation. This program engages communities and the general
public in directed, hands-on stewardship activities contributing to the conservation and management of a
variety of species at risk in south west Nova Scotia, Canada. This approach enhances our ability to
conduct research, as volunteer stewards assist with data collection and project design, fosters
understanding within participants of the need to change social norms regarding how people use the
environment, and ultimately creates conservation leaders in our communities. This approach has
resulted in a volunteer program engaging more than 350 people annually, who contribute over 12,000
hours of their time to these projects each year. Over the past 10 years, the cumulative contribution has
been more than 100,000 volunteer hours directly enhancing understanding and protection of these
species and has resulted in a program that is increasingly directed by the communities involved.



Moen, Daniel (Stony Brook University); Irschick, Duncan (University of Massachusetts at Amherst,
Amherst, MA, United States); Wiens, John (Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, United States)

Convergence in jumping and swimming performance in assemblages of frogs from three
continents

Do factors related to previous evolutionary history influence the ability of a species to adapt to a novel
environment? Many studies of evolutionary convergence in morphology have demonstrated that often
this is not the case – species that share similar selective environments are more similar to each other
than to closely-related species that are ecologically different. Yet morphology often is not the target of
selection – instead it is selected upon indirectly via its role in whole-organism performance capacities,
which mediate use of the environment and thus fitness (e.g. escape predators, capture food). Thus a
broader understanding of how morphology relates to performance, as well as whether convergence
occurs in performance itself, is necessary to understand adaptation to new environments. We compared
jumping and swimming performance and morphology in frogs from three regions that contain lineages of
divergent evolutionary history – southwest China, the Colombian Amazon, and northern Australia. In
each location, species using various microhabitats were measured for performance in jumping and
swimming, as well as for morphology. We then tested whether these assemblages of species likewise
show similar morphology and performance, given that across regions species that use a given
microhabitat represent many independent evolutionary transitions to utilize it. This study will be among
the first to examine the evolutionary causes of variation in performance across frogs using different
microhabitats in different regions, as well as variation within different species of differing evolutionary
history that use the same microhabitat.




                                                                                                       488
Mohammadi, Shabnam (Utah State University); Hutchinson, Deborah (Coastal Carolina University,
Canada); Mori, Akira (Kyoto University, Canada); Savitzky, Alan (Utah State University, Canada)

The evolution of toxin resistance in toad-eating snakes

Toads are chemically defended by bufadienolides, a class of cardiotonic steroids lethal to most predators,
including many snakes. Bufadienolides bind to Na + ,K + -ATPase (NKA), inhibiting the protein‘s ability to
transport ions. In cardiocytes, this inhibition causes arrhythmia and severely increased contractile
strength, which, if prolonged, lead to death. However, several species of snakes are resistant to
bufadienolides and consume toads with no ill effects. Electrocardiography of one resistant species
reveals a distinctly different cardiac response to ingestion of toads than does a nonresistant species. The
physiological mechanism underlying this resistance is unknown. Since NKA is the target protein of
bufadienolides, and since it exists in multiple isoforms, it is likely that toad-eating snakes have evolved
mutations of NKA that lower their susceptibility to bufadienolides. We hypothesize that toad-eating snakes
possess isoforms of NKA with lower affinity to bufadienolides. Our goals are (1) to quantify the degree of
bufadienolide resistance in selected species of snakes and (2) to determine whether mutations occur in
the NKA gene (ATP1a1) of snakes that are resistant to bufadienolides. Superimposing the NKA
sequences on a phylogenetic tree reveals whether resistant NKA isoforms have evolved one or more
times. Here we present preliminary data on levels of bufadienolide resistance for selected snakes.



Molinia, Frank (Landcare Research); Narayan, Edward (Griffith University, Queensland, Australia);
Germano, Jennifer (San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research, Escondido, CA, United States);
Bishop, Phil (University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand)

Non-invasive hormone analysis for gender identification and monitoring reproductive function of
anurans

Reproductive technologies are valuable tools for understanding species-specific reproductive
mechanisms and are already in use for conservation applications like managing wildlife ex situ and
species recovery in situ. In recent years enzyme immunoassays of voided urine and/or faecal samples
have been developed to non-invasively measure reproductive hormone metabolite concentrations in a
few anuran species. Established initially in dimorphic model species, there are reports now of assigning
gender of monomorphic anurans, including a New Zealand-wide study of all captive Leiopelmatid frogs
and one from Perth, Australia where juvenile Geocrinia species could be sexed prior to translocation back
to the wild. Even more exciting has been the value of this technology for monitoring reproductive hormone
cycles over time. In a recent study, seasonal profiles established a winter or early spring breeding period
in Leiopelma pakeka, a species thought to undergo mating during summer. This technology will become
mainstream as it‘s adapted to even more amphibian species, but there are two emerging opportunities to
broaden the scope of use. Firstly, given corticosterone metabolites can also be measured in the same
way to monitor stress then the effects of other factors (e.g. disease, habitat quality, and manipulations
ranging from animal handling to exogenous hormone treatments for inducing spermiation or oviposition)
could be evaluated against normative hormone profiles to guide mitigation strategies for restoring normal
reproductive function as required. The second is a technical challenge, but if hormone measures could be
obtained on-the-spot and ideally in the field, then this will streamline management of both captive and
wild populations. Being able to reliably assign gender and monitor for optimal reproductive performance
means non-invasive hormone analysis will become a key tool for conservation of declining and
endangered amphibians.




                                                                                                       489
Monteiro, Stefanny Christie Gomes (University of São Paulo); Titon Jr., Braz; Assis, Vânia Regina;
Giorgi-Barsotti, Adriana Maria; Gomes, Fernando Ribeiro (University of São Paulo, Canada)

Calling rate and immunocompetence of the treefrog Hypsiboas albopunctatus

According to the model of parasite-mediated intersexual selection, variation in male ornament condition or
sexual display rate reflects degree of resistance to parasitism. In anuran natural choruses, calls that are
louder, longer, more complex, and/or emitted at higher rates are probably more easily detected and
attract more females. Although the maintenance of higher calling rates may enhance the mating chances,
calling effort is positively associated to plasma levels of steroids potentially immunossupressive, such as
testosterone (T) and corticosterone (CORT).

Our goal was to evaluate the association between calling rates, plasma levels of CORT and T, and
immunocompetence in males of a Brazilian treefrog ( Hypsiboas albopunctatus ) from a natural chorus.
We hypothesized that: 1) males show individual variation in calling rate, plasma levels of T and CORT,
and response to the phytohemaglutinin (PHA) challenge; 2) higher calling rates are positively correlated
to plasma levels of CORT and T, and negatively correlated to response to the PHA challenge. We
conducted focal observations for 30 minutes, followed by blood collection by cardiac puncture. In the lab,
plasma samples were frozen and males were subjected to a PHA skin-swelling assay, consisting of
intraderm injection 10 μ L of PHA (20mg/mL) into the hind-right paw and 10 μ L of saline into the hind-left
paw as a control. Paw thickness was measured at 0, 12 and 24 hours of injections with a dial thickness
gauge. PHA injection resulted in significant swelling at both time-points (F 2,28 =90,793, P &lt;0,001),
with the largest effect at 12h ( P = 0,001). A principal component analysis of five variables (calling rates,
density of males in the chorus, body mass, time of observation, and air temperature) resulted in three
components with eigenvalues higher than 1.0, with the second component (29,92% of the variation)
showing an inverse association between calling rate and time of observation. Individual variation in the
response to the PHA challenge at 12h was negatively correlated to the scores of this second component
(Pearson=-0,406, P=0,04). We concluded that males call at higher rates in the first hours of the night, and
show a lower level of response to the PHA challenge. Plasma levels of CORT and T, as well as the
leucocyte profile will be also analyzed for these individuals.



Mooi, Randall (The Manitoba Museum); Gill, Anthony (Macleay Museum and School of Biological
Sciences, Canada)

Evidence for relationships among gobioid fishes (Percomorpha: Gobioidei), with special reference
to 'basal' clades

Although the Gobioidei are one of the most convincingly defined monophyletic percomorph taxa, there
remains considerable uncertainty regarding internal relationships. Over the last 10-15 years, molecular
studies have put forward several topologies, but taxonomic sampling of the 270 genera and 2000 species
has been modest or inconsistent. Although there are suggestive patterns, proposed clades have not been
diagnosed by synapomorphies and are often contradicted by morphological evidence. Despite claims of
overwhelming problems, such as small size and pevalence of developmental truncation, we have found
that gobioid morphology provides an impressive array of variable characters that can be interpreted as
homologues and analyzed with some success to provide synapomorphies and hypotheses of relationship.
Using several suites of characters, particularly from the dorsal gill arches, ventral gill arches, and pectoral
girdle, we identify more than 75 synapomorphies from over 180 genera. We will present a sample of
these to examine basal (non gobiid) gobioid relationships, and some that inform relationships within the
Gobiidae. In particular, we address the basal few nodes and the position of the cave-dwelling Western



                                                                                                           490
Australian genus Milyeringa (recently suggested to be a member of the Asiatic freshwater family
Odontobutidae) and, using synapomorphies identified from hyoid and dorsal gill arches, establish that a
clade of temperate Australian and New Zealand taxa ( Grahamichthys and Thalasseleotris ) is the sister
group of the Gobiidae (the latter defined as gobioids with 5 branchiostegal rays).  We conclude that
morphology can and should play a central role in investigating gobioid relationships, and not simply
plotted on molecular topologies to identify ad hoc "supporting evidence."



Moon, Brad (University of Louisiana at Lafayette); Delahoussaye, A. James; Arnold, Tiffany (University of
Louisiana at Lafayette, Canada); Alvarado, Alexandra (Lafayette High School and University of Louisiana
at Lafayette, Canada)

Maximum sizes of amphiumas and bullfrogs in Louisiana archaeological middens

In recent archaeological surveys of some Indian middens from southern Louisiana, amphibian and reptile
bones have appeared in large numbers. In particular, bones from Three-toed Amphiumas ( Amphiuma
tridactylum ) and American Bullfrogs ( Lithobates catesbeianus ) are abundant from two middens, and
appear to represent specimens with larger body sizes than the maximum sizes reported in the literature
for these species. To estimate the body lengths of the largest specimens in the midden samples, we
measured several variables on each of the midden bones and compared them with the same
measurements taken on bones of museum skeletal specimens with known body lengths.                For the
amphiumas, some, but not all, vertebral measurements indicated that the midden specimens were slightly
larger than the maximum size of specimens reported in the literature. Similarly, for the bullfrogs, some
bones may have come from specimens that were larger than the maximum sizes reported in the
literature. Large specimens of these animals could have been important in the diet of the people from
those areas.



Morando, Mariana (CONICET-CENPAT); Avila, Luciano; Martinez, Lorena (CONICET-CENPAT,
Canada)

Checklist of lizards and amphisbaenians of Argentina: an update

Since Cei‘s (1986, 1993) monographs on reptiles of Argentina there has been a remarkable growth in the
number of researchers working on lizards of our country, and a corresponding increase about this
herpetofauna‘s knowledge. Later, Avila et al. (2000) presented an updated checklist as part of a
categorization work on lizards and amphisbaenians. The species number continued to grow notably in the
following years, particulary on the Phymaturus and Liolaemus genera; many new species have been
described, definition of many species and the taxonomic status and nomenclature of other species have
changed. This prompted to the elaboration of a new list presented in the VII Congreso Argentino de
Herpetología that took place in Corrientes city during 2006 (Avila et al. 2006). This list was quickly out of
date, thus we continued gathering information for the publication of a new updated list that is presented
here, summarizing all the new information available since Avila et al . (2000). There are 257 described
species, being Tropiduridae the most inclusive clade and Liolaemus the most diverse genera with 150
described species for Argentina. We present detailed information by family, genera, and geographic
distribution, and we compare the growth increase in almost 12 years since Avila et al. (2000) Although the
list will surely continue to grow during the next years, we consider it appropriate to present an updated list
that can be used by the scientific community in general, as well as by those dedicated to conservation
and natural resources management.



                                                                                                          491
Morando, Mariana (CONICET-CENPAT); Avila, Luciano; Perez, Cristian HF (CONICET-CENPAT,
Canada); Hawkins, Monty; Sites, Jack W (Brigham Young University, Canada)

How many Phymaturus (Squamata, Liolaemini) are there? A molecular assessment of flat lizards
on rock outcrops.

The lizard genus Phymaturus is widely distributed in Argentina between 25° to 45° south, and ranging
from Puna environments to extra-Andean and Precordillera mountain ranges, and high plateaus in
Patagonia.      In Chile its geographic distribution is relatively small, confined to the highlands of the
western slopes of the Andes. The genus includes 34 described species distributed in two clades: palluma
or northern group and patagonicus or southern group, and all appear to be restricted to rock outcrop
habitats with deep crevices. We analyzed 24 of the described species plus 25 candidate species using
two mitochondrial (cyt-b and 12S), four protein coding nuclear, and seven anonymous nuclear genes, and
present the first comprehensive molecular phylogenetic hypothesis for the clade. We compared results
obtained from concatenated analyses with results of one coalescent-based species-tree approach
(BEST), and with both methods we identified four main clades within the palluma group (mallimaccii ,
roigorum , verdugo , and vociferator), and five main clades within the patagonicus group (calcogaster,
indistinctus , payuniae , somuncurensis , and spurcus ). We found several instances of non-monophyly
with cyt-b, for which we discuss alternative hypotheses. We also found cases of incongruence between
mitochondrial vs nuclear data suggesting that past hybridization may have played an important role in this
group‘s diversification. We also found an area where hybridization may be an ongoing process. BEST
results are mostly congruent with the concatenated nuclear data, although with lower support values,
suggesting that in this case, this method is less influenced by hybridization than combined concatenated
analyses. We discuss the taxonomic and conservation implications of these results and how the future
integration of phylogeographic and morphological approaches will allow further testing of demographic
and biogeographic hypotheses.



Morando, Mariana (CONICET-CENPAT); Avila, Luciano (CONICET-CENPAT, Canada); Dawson, Amy
(Brigham Young University, Canada); Perez, Cristian HF; Sites, Jack W (CONICET-CENPAT, Canada)

Molecular Phylogeny of Homonota (Phyllodatylidae): yet another cryptically diverse gecko clade

The genus Homonota was described by Duméril &amp; Bibron in 1886 , and currently includes eight
described species: Homonota borellii , H. uruguayensis , H. fasciata, H. darwinii , H. underwoodi, H.
andicola , H. whitii &amp; H.rupicola and one subspecies of H. darwinii ( H. darwinii macrocephala ) . It
is distributed from 15º south in southern Brazil, Bolivia, Paraguay, Uruguay and Argentina to 54º south in
Patagonia, across multiple different types of habitats. In Chile there are three related species previously
considered as Homonota : Garthia gaudichaudii , G. dorbignyi , G. penai . Several morphological
systematic studies have been completed, but for three widely distributed species in Argentina (
Homonota darwini , H. underwoodi &amp; H. fasciata ), few data are available. No phylogeographic
studies or molecular phylogenetic hypotheses are available for the genus. The objective of this work is to
present a molecular phylogenetic hypothesis for most of the described species in the genus, plus eight
candidate species. We sequenced two mitochondrial genes (cyt- b &amp; 12S) and seven protein
nuclear coding and four nuclear anonymous loci, and implemented traditional concatenated analyses as
well as species tree approaches. We discuss the taxonomic implications of these results and how the
future integration of phylogeographic and morphological approaches will allow further testing of
demographic and biogeographic hypotheses.




                                                                                                       492
Morando, Mariana (CONICET-CENPAT); Avila, Luciano (CONICET-CENPAT, Canada); Baker, Eric;
Sites, Jack W (Brigham Young University, Canada)

Molecular phylogeny of the endemic South American lizard clade Leiosaurae

The clade Leiosaurae is distributed mainly in southern Argentina, with few representatives in Chile. This
poorly-known group includes three genera: Pristidactylus , Leiosaurus and Diplolaemus . Pristidactylus
includes ten species, four of which are associated with Nothofagus forests in Chile, while the six
Argentinean species range from along the eastern side of the Andes to the mountains of Cordillera and
Precordillera, extending across the flat dry Monte habitats, and along the Atlantic coast and reaching the
isolated meadows atop the Sierra de la Ventana. Significant differences in meristic characters distinguish
Argentinian from Chilean species of Pristidactylus . The genus Leiosaurus includes four described
species, three in northwestern Argentina ( L. catamarcensis , L. paronae, L. jaguaris ) and one in
Patagonia ( L. bellii ). The genus Diplolaemus includes four species, D. bibronii in coastal regions and
arid mesetas of southern Patagonia, D. darwinii also in southernmost Argentina and reaching small area
in Chile, D. sexcinctus in north- central Patagonian Argentina, and D. leopardinus associated with the
Andean slopes in northern western Argentina and a small area in Chile. Natural history knowledge of
these species is very scarce, and unresolved taxonomic problems remain. Some phylogenetic
hypotheses have been proposed based on morphological and mitochondrial characters, but with very few
representatives (Frost et al 2001), and morphological and myological characters (Abdala et al 2009). In
this work we include most of the described species (14 of 18) with representatives from their type
localities, and we use Urostrophus vautieri as the outgroup. W e used two mitochondrial and eight
nuclear genes (7749bp) to infer phylogenetic relationships. The phylogenetic hypotheses of the Bayesian
tree shows that Diplolaemus is monophyletic, with Diplolaemus darwinii as the most basal and very
distinct lineage, and D. bibronii sister to D. leopardinus . Leiosaurus is strongly supported as
monophyletic, with L. bellii as the most basal species and L. catamarcensis sister to L. jaguaris . While
we found evidence for the monophyly of the Argentinean Pristidactylus species, P. torquatus from Chile
is not recovered within this clade and is the sister taxon of Leiosaurus .     We discuss the taxonomic
implications of our results.



Morey, Steven (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service); Westphal, Michael (Bureau of Land Management,
Hollister, CA, United States)

Lure-choice tests reveal possible association between color preference and breeding season in
live-bearing surfperch.

Sensory biases are non-mating related preferences that can predispose an individual to choose mates on
the basis of color pattern alone. Studies on livebearing surfperch of the family Embiotocidae have
suggested the existence of sensory biases towards phenotypic traits that share aspects in common with
food items. We sought to extend the investigation into surfperch sensory biases by asking whether fish
will show color preferences for artificial lures in the wild. We conducted tests of lure choice on sand-
dwelling surfperch of the subfamily Amphistichinae, focusing on two closely-related sympatric species,
Amphistichus rhodoterus and Hyperpropospon ellipticum . Two lures that varied only in coloration were
presented simultaneously in 62 hour-long bouts in surf habitat. Colors were red, black, yellow, and
orange, and a composite color we called ―pumpkinseed‖. Lures were assayed by spectrophotometry to
determine the source of variation in color. For each capture we recorded species and color of the lure.
Initial analysis of 162 captures revealed a slight trend towards a preference for orange. However, when
data were analyzed from breeding season alone, we saw a dramatic increase in captures on orange.
Spectrally, orange most resembled yellow in reflectance, showing a translation in wavelength only. Red,



                                                                                                      493
black and pumpkinseed varied from orange both in reflectance and wavelength, complicating comparison.
Because orange is a disproportionately represented pigment in both species and in their potential prey
items, it is possible that we are detecting a sensory bias. While the breeding-period shift in color
preference suggests an interaction between mating and color choice, the relationship may be indirect,
e.g. fish foraging strategies may shift during the breeding season due to new energetic requirements.
Therefore more work is required to establish whether a true sensory bias exists. One shortcoming of our
method is low power to detect choice, requiring large sample sizes. Our spectral data suggests that we
can increase power by narrowing lure choices, e.g. to orange vs. yellow exclusively. Our ultimate goal is
to understand the evolutionary processes that underlie the radiation of the sand-dwelling surfperch and in
particular the role of color pattern and color preference in that radiation. Rigorously testing for an
association between lure preference, sexual preference and color pattern is one step towards that goal.



Morgan, Ray (UMCES-AL);

Stream nutrients: Relationships to fish and benthic assemblages in Maryland streams

One of the most pressing environmental problems for the 21 st century is the presence of excess nutrient
loading in aquatic ecosystems throughout the world, often resulting in ecosystem collapses, economic
damages and human health concerns. Small freshwater stream systems (first through third order) are not
immune to nutrient loading, resulting from anthropogenic influences such as agricultural practices and
runoff, wastewater discharge, atmospheric deposition, and both urban/suburban point and non-point
sources. I used the Maryland Biological Stream Survey (MBSS) database to examine both nutrient and
benthic macroinvertebrate data collected during the MBSS Spring Index period and fish assemblage data
from the MBSS Summer Index period for Maryland. Statistical analyses indicated that stream nutrient
levels (TN, NO 3, NO 2, NH 3 and TP) minimally affected fish assemblages in first, second and third order
non-tidal streams.     However, there were strong statistical relationships of nutrient effects to several
benthic macroinvertebrate parameters, including EPT numbers (especially Ephemeroptera density), with
significant biotic reductions when TN levels exceed 4-6 mg/L. Although multiple stressors are often
present in Maryland streams, nutrients remain an important stressor to biotic assemblages, and need
increased consideration in conservation of intolerant Maryland fish species and stream biodiversity. Best
management plan development, along with implementation for nutrient management, requires
acceleration in Maryland, and potentially the Chesapeake Bay watershed.



Mori, Akira (Kyoto University); Toda, Mamoru (University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara, Okinawa, Canada)

Live long with a small body: Growth and longevity of a Japanese pitviper, Ovophis okinavensis, in
the field

As a general rule, life span of mammals and birds increases with body size. This rule has been
interpreted as the physiological consequence of warm-blooded animals based on the concept of
physiological time, which is correlated with their metabolic rate. In the case of ectotherms, it is not so
simple because metabolic rate of cold-blooded animals largely varies with their body temperature.
Snakes comprise a specious taxon of ectotherms, having approximately 3000 species with the range of
the maximum body size from less than 200mm to more than 5m. Thus, snakes would be ideal subjects to
test the concept of physiological time in ectotherms in relation to body size. We investigated growth and
longevity of a Japanese pitviper, Ovophis okinavensis, based on a long-term, mark-and-recapture study
on Okinawa-jima, a subtropical island in the Ryukyu Archipelago. Ovophis okinavensis is a small, docile



                                                                                                       494
snake: mean snout-vent length of males and females in the study site are 430mm and 481mm,
respectively. This snake is a typical ambush forager, feeding on a variety of vertebrates. Our previous
study showed that O. okinavensis is active under low temperature with mean body temperature of 16.1 C.
We marked 248 males and 202 females during a 15-year survey. Among them 100 males and 98 females
were recaptured at least once, and a total of 321 and 263 recapture records were obtained for males and
females, respectively. Thirty-seven males and 33 females were collected over more than five years. The
longest span of recapture records within a single individual was 15 years and 2 months. We estimated
that both males and females take approximately 10 years to attain the mean body size of the population.
Average growth rate during this stage was 20-30mm per year. Both males and females continued to grow
for more than additional 15 years with a less growth rate (less then 10mm per year) until attaining
approximately 500mm and 600mm, respectively. Even after attaining these sizes, some individuals
survived for nearly 10 more years with a very slow growth rate (less than 5mm per year). Consequently,
we estimated the longevity of males and females as more than 30 and 35 years, respectively. Our results
indicate that O. okinavensis, which is categorized as a relatively small-sized species among snakes, has
comparatively long life span with very slow growth. The low preferred body temperature and the ambush
hunting method of O. okinavensis, which imply low metabolic rate of this snake, may be related to this
slow life style.



Moritz, Timo (Deutsches Meeresmuseum); Rüber, Lukas (Natural History Museum, Bern, Switzerland);
Britz, Ralf (The Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom); Schliewen, Ulrich K. (The Bavarian
State Collection of Zoology, Munich, Germany)

Young living fossils? - the age of the family Polypteridae

Cladistians, the family Polypteridae, represent the most basal branch of the actinopterygians. We
conducted the first phylogenetic analyses combining mitochondrial (2096 bp) and nuclear (2634 bp) data.
Both datasets are principally in accordance, with nuclear markers giving less resolution for phylogenetic
relationships. A possible mitochondrial introgression event revealed by cytonuclear discordance is
discussed. The presence of four major clades within the genus Polypterus is confirmed, as well as the
untenable nature of the currently applied sub-species concept. We subjected the data set to molecular
clock analyses in order to estimate node ages of the evolutionary history of this lineage with very limited
fossil record. Different sets of single or combined markers in various analyses yielded drastically
inconsistent results, with nuclear data producing node ages up to ten times younger than mitochondrial
data. A combined data set under a strict molecular clock model resulted in an age of 85.7 million years for
the family Polypteridae and 52.6 million years for the genus Polypterus. Even considering the high level
of uncertainty of the results, diversification of recent Polypteridae is dramatically younger than the
separation of the cladistians from the remaining actinopterygians.



Mougey, Krista (Texas Tech University); Perry, Gad (Texas Tech University, Canada); Lazell, James
(The Conservation Agency, Canada)

Ecology and Life History Characteristics of the Repatriated Rock Iguana Population of Guana
Island, BVI

The stout iguana (Cyclura pinguis) is a critically endangered West Indian rock iguana endemic to the
British Virgin Islands. The distribution of C. pinguis was limited to the single island of Anegada until
conservation concerns in the 1980s prompted the founding of several artificially reestablished populations




                                                                                                       495
on the islands of Guana, Necker, Norman, and Little Thatch. Despite their potential conservation value,
little is known about the natural history of these reestablished populations. For the past 9 years, we have
been studying the repatriated C. pinguis population of Guana Island. As part of this long term monitoring
effort, we have been conducting a mark-recapture study, tracking population trends and recording the
demographic, morphometric, and life history characteristics of this population. The Guana population was
founded with only 8 iguanas but has grown markedly in the past several decades. Since 2003, we have
captured, measured, and PIT tagged over 300 individuals. The sex ratio of captured adults is near 1:1,
with a slight female bias. Adults are known to be territorial, but it appears that following the initial nest
dispersal movement, juveniles and yearlings exhibit some degree of site fidelity as well. The height of the
daily active period is between 9:30 and 14:30, although larger individuals tend to begin sunning earlier
and stay active later than smaller individuals. Both within- and between- year growth rates are
significantly higher in the Guana population than in the head-started Anegada population. Hatchlings
found on Guana gain an average of 115 mm snout-vent-length within the first year of development, but
growth rates decrease with increased body size. The success of the Guana population offers insights
into the importance of island management and control of introduced mammals and provides a
geographically distinct conservation hedge for this critically endangered species.



Mougey, Krista (Texas Tech University); Anderson, Wesley; Henry, Emily; Perry, Gad (Texas Tech
University, Canada)

Ecology of the Texas Horned Lizard (Phrynosoma cornutum) Across Three Ecoregions of Texas

Over the past several decades, the Texas horned lizard ( Phrynosoma cornutum ) has undergone
precipitous population and range declines. The variation in life history characteristics reported in the
literature for P. cornutum suggests that geographically localized data may be critical to understanding
the ecology of the species and elucidating the causes of these declines. For the past eight years, we
have been monitoring three populations of Texas horned lizards from understudied portions of the
species‘ range. Two of these populations are located in central Texas, the first within a Texas Army
National Guard facility in the Cross Timbers ecoregion and the second on a private ranch within the
Edwards Plateau ecoregion. Our third study population is located in the panhandle region of western
Texas near the High Plains to Rolling Plains ecotone. We have measured and marked almost 700 lizards
across the three sites, but horned lizard densities at the two sites in central Texas appear to be much
lower than those of the west Texas population. Despite similarities in search effort, annually, an average
of seven times as many individuals are captured in west Texas. We noted a relationship between annual
precipitation and number of individuals captured on the west Texas site that is not as apparent in the
central Texas populations. Average snout-vent length (SVL) of adults varies among the three sites, as
does the magnitude of sexual dimorphism. Contrary to the published literature, we observed a trend of
increasing body size along the latitudinal gradient. Unsurprisingly, growth rate is significantly correlated
with SVL on all sites, with smaller lizards exhibiting higher growth rates than mature lizards. The timing of
various life history events such as spring emergence, mating, egg laying, and hatching is similar across
the three sites.




                                                                                                         496
Mougey, Krista (Texas Tech University); Cheek, Chris; Hlavaty, Shay (Texas Tech University, Canada);
Perkins, Becki (Texas Tech Univeristy, Canada); Peyton, Mark (Texas Tech University, Canada); Ryan,
Caitlin; Zavaleta, Jennifer (Texas Tech Univeristy, Canada); Boal, Clint (USGS Texas Cooperative Fish
and Wildlife Research Unit, Canada); Perry, Gad (Texas Tech University, Canada)

Vertical Structure Use of the Stout Iguana (Cyclura pinguis) on Guana Island, BVI

The stout iguana ( Cyclura pinguis ) is a critically endangered species endemic to the British Virgin
Islands. Until the 1980s, the distribution of the species was confined to the single island of Anegada, but
during that time, efforts began to restore populations of C. pinguis to other islands of the BVI such as
Guana, Necker, Norman, and Little Thatch. Little is known about the behavior or life history
characteristics of these reestablished populations that are found in localities with vastly different
landforms and vegetation than on Anegada. We therefore studied habitat utilization of the thriving Guana
population. We used the spool-and-thread technique to track the movements and vertical habitat use of 4
adult and 11 juvenile iguanas in October 2011. For each individual we tracked, we recorded the
categorical type of structures utilized (tree, rock, cement, and other vegetation), the heights attained, the
linear distance between structures, and the diameter at breast height for applicable vertical structures
more than 15 cm high. Our results showed that trees comprised a greater proportion of the structures
used by juveniles than adults (P&lt; 0.001) whereas rocks comprised a greater proportion of structures
used by adults than juveniles (P&gt;0.001). Juveniles climbed to a mean height of 2.38± 0.16 m while
adults climbed to a shorter mean height of 0.85± 0.22m. Our study revealed that stout iguanas use
vertical structures more frequently than was previously assumed, which suggests that vertical structure
composition should be a part of future management considerations regarding conservation efforts for this
critically endangered species.



Mucientes, Gonzalo (IIM-CSIC); Queiroz, Nuno (CIBIO, Vairão, Portugal); Humphries, Nicholas (MBA,
Plymouth, United Kingdom); Saborido, Fran (IIM-CSIC, Vigo, Spain); Sims, David (MBA, Plymouth,
Canada)

Movements, behaviour and habitat preferences of pop-up satellite tracked shortfin mako sharks
(Isurus oxyrinchus) in the North Atlantic

The shortfin mako shark (Isurus oxyrinchus) is a highly migratory, pelagic species with circum-global
distribution in tropical and temperate seas. This shark is commonly found in the Atlantic Ocean and are
taken as bycatch in longlining and gillnetting operations for tuna and swordfish (Xiphias gladius), activities
that have expanded rapidly during the last 20 years. High demand for fins and its good-quality meat mean
makos are now highly prized by fishers. But despite the high prevalence, economic importance, and
vulnerability of this species, little is known about its population dynamics and habitat-use. There is some
evidence from conventional tagging and fishery studies that complex population structuring and
movements may be contributing to recorded declines in the western Atlantic Ocean. Shortfin mako sharks
may remain faithful to particular regions, which together with males and females apparently segregating
into different regions for at least part of the year may result in differential exploitation of vulnerable
components of the population (e.g. mature females, juveniles) exacerbating declines. The aim of this
study is to elucidate for the first time the movements and behaviour of shortfin mako sharks from satellite-
linked electronic tagging and relate this to remotely sensed environmental fields to identify fine-scale
habitat preferences in the Atlantic Ocean. Pop-up archival transmitting (PAT) tags were deployed,
recording vertical and horizontal movements and temperature preferences of mako sharks tagged in
oceanic waters. Satellite tags were programmed to detach 30, 60, 90, 120 or 180 days after deployment.
A total of 16 makos (8 males, 8 females) were caught and tagged in North Atlantic waters, specifically, in



                                                                                                          497
northwest, southwest and east of the Azores islands from 2009 – 2011. Tagged sharks ranged from 120
– 255 cm (fork length). Mako sharks displayed different movement and residency patterns, including a
trans-Atlantic migration into western Iberia waters. Satellite tracked sharks also displayed deep diving
behaviour into cold water, with maximum recorded depths of 1064 m (5.8 ºC) with temperature
preferences ranging from 5.8 and 27ºC.



Muletz, Carly (University of Maryland); Lips, Karen (University of Maryland, Canada); Fleischer, Robert;
McDiarmid, Roy (Smithsonian Institution, Canada); Yarwood, Stephanie; Caruso, Nicholas (University of
Maryland, Canada)

It's a small world: geographic and taxonomic variation in the cutaneous microbiome of Plethodon
salamanders

Diverse communities of symbiotic         bacteria and      fungi thrive on the moist, nutrient rich skin of
amphibians. The fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) is a widely recognized skin pathogen that
causes disease, mortality and population declines in many amphibian species worldwide. Recent studies
have shown that the resident microbial community and certain cutaneous bacterial species can protect
the amphibian host from Bd. However, the geographic and taxonomic distribution of cutaneous bacteria
and fungi across amphibian species is not known. As part of a larger project we are quantifying changes
in Plethodon populations, the presence of Bd and the distribution of cutaneous microbes. We
hypothesized that the richness of cutaneous microbes would differ among amphibian species and that Bd
presence would be correlated with a less diverse skin microbial community, as low microbial diversity is
positively correlated with disease presence in several other systems. At each of our sites, spanning a
geographic range of 767 km in the Appalachian Mountains, we attempted to sample the microbial
community from members of both the P. cinereus species group and P. glutinosus species complex
using both culture and culture-independent (i.e., pyrosequencing) methods. In 2011, we sampled five P.
serratus , four P. teyahalee and six P. glutinosus in Great Smoky Mountains N.P., TN and three P.
glutinosus and ten P. cinereus at Catoctin Mountain Park, MD. We cultured a total of 97 bacterial
colonies and 33 fungal colonies from the 27 individuals; many of these morphospecies were found among
multiple individuals and populations. Plethodon cinereus had significantly fewer bacterial colonies (µ =
1.4, range 0-5) than either P. teyahalee (µ = 5.3, range 3-7: p = 0.030) and P. serratus (µ = 5.4, range
2-7: p = 0.013), but did not differ from P. glutinosus (µ = 3.9, range 0-7: p = 0.087). The number of fungal
colonies did not differ significantly among species across all sites (µ = 1, range 0-3: p = 0.095). We
detected Bd on two P. cinereus from Catoctin at low intensity (µ = 12.4 ZSE). Although sample size is
low, the low richness of bacterial morphospecies on P. cinereus supports the idea that diverse microbial
communities may offer protection from disease. We have begun genetic analyses to better characterize
the microbial communities, and will compare microbial communities among species, sites and seasons
with traditional culturing and new genetic methods. Our results will contribute to understanding how
microbial communities influence disease in amphibians.



Mull, Christopher (Simon Fraser University); Yopak, Kara (University of Western Australia, Canada);
Dulvy, Nicholas (Simon Fraser University, Canada)

Reproductive Strategy, Brain Size and Structure in Chrondrichthyans

Chondrichthyans have the most diverse array of life-history and reproductive strategies of any vertebrate
group, and also exhibit broad variability in the size and complexity of the brain and its major components



                                                                                                        498
(olfactory bulbs, telencephalon, diencephalon, mesencephalon, cerebellum and medulla). In vertebrates
brain tissue is expensive to produce and maintain and represents a major energetic constraint particularly
during development, and increased encephalization may be related to maternal investment. In mammals,
larger brains are correlated with increased maternal investment in the form of longer gestation time and
the duration of lactation. This leads to a hypothesis that brain size is related to maternal investment in
offspring. Here, we test whether additional maternal investment, beyond the provisioning of a yolk, is
associated with larger brain size across 146 species from 6 orders of chondrichthyans using classic and
phylogenetic comparative analyses. We have previously shown that body size has a profound influence
on brain size. Controlling for body size, we find that both reproductive mode (lecithotrophy and
matrotrophy) and reproductive investment (development time and litter size) can partially explain variation
in overall adult brain size. Matrotrophic species have larger brains across all body sizes, however,
contrary to the expectation derived from mammals, gestation length had negative influence on brain size
such that species with longer gestation typically had smaller brains and litter size had a positive influence
such that species with larger litters tended to have larger adult brain sizes. Reproductive investment had
a significant influence on the scaling of most major regions (telencephalon, mesencephalon, medulla and
olfactory bulb), while diencephalon and cerebellum were best predicted by brain mass alone. Our results
suggest a tentative link between reproductive mode and investment and brain size and organization that
is worth investigating further. We suggest the development of a more refined phylogeny, detailed
estimation of maternal investment, analysis of neonatal brain size and organization and measurement of
ontogenetic patterns of brain growth may strengthen our understanding of the reproductive investment-
brain development hypothesis.



Müller, Hendrik (Jena University, Department of Comparative Zoology and Evolutionary Biology);
Wilkinson, Mark (Department of Zoology, The Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, London SW7
5BD, United Kingdom, Canada)

Caecilian amphibians and neoteny

Neoteny is a widespread phenomenon in caudates, with nine out of the ten recognized families having
neotenic, or at least paedomorphic members. In contrast, neoteny is conspicuously absent in anurans
and the reasons for this have been frequently speculated upon. In anurans, neoteny seems to be
precluded by a lack of gonadal maturation before metamorphosis. In the few exceptions where tadpoles
with mature gonads have been reported, behavioural constraints have been put forward as likely
precluding a successful reproduction at the larval stage. Besides anurans, caecilian amphibians also lack
any obligate or facultatively neotenic forms and the reasons for an absence of neoteny are unclear. The
majority of caecilian species are either direct developing or viviparous, which most likely precludes
neoteny in any case. For species with aquatic larvae, it has been speculated that the larval period is too
short to allow for the evolution of neoteny. Available evidence, however, indicates that several species
have long larval periods of at least one year. Larvae of some species attain furthermore considerable
sizes and we have observed specimens of Ichthyophis sp. With fully developed ova that show indication
of only recent metamorphosis, which seems to indicate that developmentally, the evolution of neoteny
seems at least possible. We argue that the absence of neoteny in caecilians is best explained by
caecilian life history. All caecilians are characterized by internal fertilization and even species with aquatic
larvae are characterized by terrestrially deposited eggs guarded by the female, and the need for
terrestrial egg deposition seems to preclude successful reproduction at the larval stage.




                                                                                                            499
Müller, Hendrik (Jena University, Department of Comparative Zoology and Evolutionary Biology);

Questions and (some) answers in caecilian development and evolution

Compared to frogs and salamanders, caecilians show a remarkably rich diversity in different
developmental modes, ranging from the presumably ancestral condition of biphasic development with an
aquatic larva to different forms of direct development and viviparity. Especially over the last decade, a
number of new studies on caecilian reproduction and development have provided new and exciting
information. In my talk, I summarize the current state of knowledge on caecilian development, with an
emphasis on morphological development, and discuss the implications concerning caecilian evolution.



Müller, Hendrik (Jena University, Department of Comparative Zoology and Evolutionary Biology); Lukas,
Paul (Institut für Spezielle Zoologie und Evolutionsbiologie, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena,
Erbertstrasse 1, 07743 Jena, Germany, Canada); Beckmann, Felix (Helmholtz Zentrum Geesthacht,
Institute of Materials Research, Max-Planck-Straße 1, 21502 Geesthacht, Germany, Canada)

Skeletal development and metamorphosis in the shovel-nosed frog Hemisus marmoratus (Anura:
Hemisotidae)

The majority of exotrophic, biphasic developing anurans show a similar pattern of skeletal formation.
Chondrification usually commences during late embryonic or early larval development. The onset of
ossification however is more variable and seems to be influenced by phylogenetic and functional
constraints. The majority of taxa are characterized by a boost of skeletal ossification during late larval and
metamorphic stages. Some anurans, such as bufonid, are characterized by delayed ossification and a
shift of the ossification of cranial bones into the postmetamorphic period. Other species, like
Pyxicephalus edulis, exhibit a substantial degree of cranial ossification at the end of metamorphosis,
which is thought to be an adaptation to the extreme dietary habits in this particular species. To investigate
the influence of functional demands on skeletal ossification in anurans, we investigated skeletal
development in the shovel-nosed frog, Hemisus marmoratus . Also known as pig-nosed or snout-
burrowing frogs, species of Hemisus are found throughout sub-Saharan Africa in a number of different
habitats. All Hemisus are highly specialized, burrowing frogs and, in contrast to most other burrowing
frogs, burrow head first into the substrate and this behaviour is already present in freshly metamorphosed
froglets. We present first data on skeletal development in larval and metamorphic H. marmoratus .



Müller, Johannes (Museum f. Naturkunde Berlin); Hipsley, Christy (Museum f. Naturkunde Berlin,
Canada)

Uncovering amphisbaenian origins with fossils and genes

The Amphisbaenia is a clade of burrowing reptiles with snake-like bodies, reduced limbs and a highly
reinforced skull adapted for head-first digging. Due their highly autapomorphic morphology, the
evolutionary relationships of amphisbaenians have been historically difficult to decipher. A long-standing
phylogenetic hypothesis is a sistergroup relationship with Serpentes, based on their superficially snake-
like morphology. However, this view has been ruled out by molecular studies which instead propose a
closer relationship between Amphisbaenia and Lacertidae, an Old-World clade of terrestrial, fully limbed
lizards. We recently added fossil support to the latter hypothesis with the discovery of the Eocene lizard
Cryptolacerta hassiaca from the Messel Pit World Heritage Site in Germany. Cryptolacerta groups as




                                                                                                          500
sister taxon to Amphisbaenia, possessing a mosaic of lacertid and amphisbaenian features, indicating
that head-first burrowing evolved prior to limb loss and body elongation in this clade.

In addition to their controversial squamate affinities, molecular investigations also challenge previous
views of the ingroup relationships of Amphisbaenia. Morphological characters place Bipedidae, the only
amphisbaenian taxon with forelimbs, as sister to all other members of the clade. In contrast, molecular
studies propose the fully limbless Rhineuridae as the basal most group, implying that limbs either
reevolved in bipedids or that limb reduction occurred several times independently. Interestingly, the
molecular hypothesis is in accordance with the fossil record, which shows rhineurids as the oldest known
taxa. Current reinvestigations of well-preserved fossil amphisbaenians reveal that not only has limb loss
occurred several times within the clade, but that other features previously considered unique, such as the
fusion of orbitosphenoid bones in the skull and the reduction of bones around the eye, are homoplastic.
These findings emphasize the need for integrating data from extant and fossil amphisbaenians to gain a
comprehensive picture of the evolutionary history of this engimatic clade.



Murphy, Alexander (Ohio University); Morris, Molly (Ohio University, Canada)

Plasticity of Growth Rate in the High-Back Pygmy Swordtail, Xiphophorus multilineatus, in
Response to Social Context and Maternal Effects

Plasticity of Growth Rate in the High-Back Pygmy Swordtail, Xiphophorus multilineatus, in Response to
Social Context and Maternal Effects Alexander D. Murphy and Molly R. Morris Department of Biological
Science Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701

Growth rate is an important life history trait that is influenced by both genetics as well as environmental
factors. By examining the mechanisms that produce variation in growth rate, it is possible to determine
the extent to which variation in growth rate is adaptive. We analyzed plasticity of growth rate in the High-
Back Pygmy Swordtail, Xiphophorus multilineatus to determine the extent to which maternal effects
and/or social environment influenced juvenile growth rates as well as age and size at sexual maturity.
Virgin females that had been raised on either high (HQ) or low quality (LQ) diets were bred with males
from the largest size class of X. multilineatus males (Y-L). Fry were raised in individually isolated tanks
on the LQ diet. Broods were split by treatment, with 4 siblings placed in the ―control‖ treatment, and four
siblings in the ―exposed to larger male‖ treatment. Male fry were larger than female fry, and male fry with
moms on the high quality diet were larger at 14 days than male fry with moms on the low quality diet.
Exposure to large males influenced male age at sexual maturity but not size at sexual maturity, and this
influence of social environment was only detected for males whose mom‘s were raised on a low quality
diet. Females appear to have a similar pattern of maturing earlier if exposed to large courting males. Our
results suggest that mothers on LQ diets may be investing more in male offspring, and that both maternal
effects and social environment influenced age at sexual maturity. As individuals were more plastic in their
response to social conditions if they were raised on the same diet as their mothers, we discuss the results
in the context of transgenerational plasticity across two different environmental factors (i.e. diet and social
environment).




                                                                                                           501
Murray, Chris (Auburn University);

Diagnostic cranial variation between independent lineages of alligator snapping turtle
(Machrochelys temminckii)

The alligator snapping turtle (Macrochelys temminckii) has been under studied from an evolutionary
perspective until recently. Severe harvesting pressure has resulted in low densities across the species‘
distribution. Since recovery has been made possible, the species has been extensively examined from an
ecological perspective; however, recent investigations have elucidated the potential for independent
evolutionary lineages within the taxon. Current evolutionary investigations using molecular and
morphological datasets are underway. This study attempts to diagnose cranial synapomorphic characters
unique to independent lineages within the taxon and assist morphological description and identification as
these unique lineages are diagnosed. Here, a geometric morphometric approach is used to expound
upon traditional mensural and morphometric characters. Preliminary analyses reveal variation in maxilla
and palatine width, basisphenoid shape, and head length. Character variation among specimen groups is
consistent with previously hypothesized biogeographic barriers. Results need to be compared to
traditional molecular and morphological data analyzed in a phylogenetic context.



Musick, John (Va Inst Mar Sci); Cotton, Charles (Va Inst Mar Sci, Gloucester Pt, United States)

Bathymetric limits of chondrichthyans in the deep sea

Chondrichthyans are largely absent in abyssal (>300m) habitats in in most regions of the world ocean are
uncommon below 2000m. The deeper-living chondrichthyans include certain rajids, squaliforms and
holocephalans. Several hypotheses have been erected to explain the absence of chondrichthyans from
the abyss. These are mostly based on energetics: Deep-sea food webs are impoverished due to their
distance from primary production, and chondrichthyans, occupying the highest trophic levels, cannot be
supported due to entropy among trophic levels. We examine this hypothesis by comparing trophic levels,
calculated from dietary data, of deep-sea chondrichthyans with those of deep-sea teleosts.
Chondrichthyans were mostly above trophic level 4, whereas all the teleosts examined were below that
level. The potential prey field for both chondrichthyans and teleosts declines in biomass and diversity with
depth, but teleosts appear to have more flexibility in their feeding mechanisms and food habits.



Muths, Erin (US Geological Survey); Scherer, Rick (Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, United
States); Bosch, Jaime (Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales, Madrid, Spain)

Skipped breeding in common toads

Intensive monitoring can yield data that are useful in examining hypothesis-driven questions about
particular sites or populations of amphibians. Demographic data collected from apex site monitoring in the
western U.S. led to collaboration with Spanish colleagues to compare                       data from high
elevation toad populations at sites on two continents. Breeding is limited by energetic or environmental
constraints and in long-lived species it is sometimes prudent to skip breeding opportunities because of
current conditions. Environmental conditions may vary considerably across the geographic and
elevational range of a species and species whose life history strategies can respond variably to
environmental constraints are likely to maintain populations at the extremes of their ranges. Decisions as
to whether or not to breed offer such an opportunity to adjust life history to circumstances. We use
capture-recapture data to estimate the probabilities of survival and temporary emigration (i.e., skipped



                                                                                                        502
breeding) in a high-elevation population of common toads (Bufo bufo). We compared estimates within
species, to existing data on common toads at low elevations, and between toad species that share a
common and similarly stressful environment. We found that common toads at high elevations sites tend
to have high survival probability and high probability of skipping breeding relative to common toads at low
elevations, providing preliminary evidence of variability in this component of the common toad life history
strategy.



Myers, Edward (City University of New York, College of Staten Island); Burbrink, Frank (City University
of New York-College of Staten Island, Canada)

Comparative Phylogeography Across the Cochise Filter Barrier

The Western Continental Divide at the Cochise Filter Barrier has been shown to be a phylogeographic
break across a diversity of taxa within the warm deserts of North America. It is hypothesized that this
region is a contact zone between closely related species that were previously isolated from one another
during Quaternary glaciation in desert refugia. In spite of this barrier‘s importance in North American
biogeography and biodiversity, no study has simultaneously examined multiple species spanning this
region to investigate phylogeographic histories. Here we test for simultaneous divergence across four co-
distributed snake sister taxa ( Crotalus atrox lineages, Lampropeltis califoroniae - L. splendida ,
Trimorphodon vikinsonii - T. lambda , and within the genus Hypsiglena ) using mtDNA and hierarchiacal
approximate Bayesian computation models. Additionally we have utilized next generation sequencing, on
the Illumina GAIIx platform, to generate 100‘s of loci within the Lampropeltis getula complex group to
test for the timing of divergence as well as to address whether gene flow has accompanied speciation
across the Cochise Filter Barrier.



Nagy, Zoltan T. (Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences); Chifundera Kusamba, Zacharie (Centre de
Recherche en Sciences Naturelles, Lwiro, Dem. Republic of Congo); Loetters, Stefan (Trier University,
Trier, Germany); Kielgast, Jos (University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Canada)

Diversity of snakes and frogs in the DR Congo, the green heart of Africa

During the last two years, two major expeditions were conducted in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In 2010, four field sites between Kisangani and Bumba were surveyed along the Congo river and
tributaries. In the Congo basin we visited a wide variety of habitats; such as tropical rainforests, inundated
swamp forests and savannah-shrub land mosaics. In 2011, the Upemba and Kundelungu National Parks
were surveyed. This region is a patchwork of plains and plateaus varying from 700 to 1800 m in altitude,
dominated by grassland savannah, gallery forest and miombo woodland including a vast number of
springs, swamps and streams. In total, more than 1300 specimens of amphibians and reptiles were
collected representing around 60 and 70 species, respectively. Tissue samples were taken for genetic
analyses. As the first step in these extremely poorly known faunas, we used a DNA barcoding approach
to assist the survey of herpetological diversity. DNA barcoding was applied for species delineation
complementing morphological identification. Furthermore, we analyzed intraspecific diversity and tested
the possible isolating effect of large rivers on reptiles. In general, reptile species proved to be well
diverged and easy to delineate using mitochondrial sequences while intraspecific variation is usually low.
However, remarkable intraspecific divergence was found in skinks and in some snakes, notably in
scolecophidians. We also report the rediscovery of several frog species which were not encountered for
several decades.



                                                                                                          503
Nakae, Masanori (National Museum of Nature and Science); Shinohara, Gento (National Museum of
Nature and Science, Tsukuba, Japan); Miki, Katsuhiro; Abe, Masaaki (Kagawa Prefectural Fisheries
Experimental Station, Takamatsu, Japan); Sasaki, Kunio (Kochi University, Kochi, Japan)

Lateral line system in Japanese Spanish mackerel Scomberomorus niphonius (Perciformes:
Scombridae)

The lateral line system in Scomberomorus niphonius (Scombridae) was examined in detail to estimate
morphological adaptations for life in an oceanic environment. The canal system is composed of 6
cephalic canals (supraorbital with 6 canal neuromasts, infraorbital with 2 neuromasts, otic with 9 or 10,
preopercular with 5 or 6, mandibular with 12 or 13, postotic with 1, and supratemporal with 5 or 6) and a
single trunk canal with 234−243 neuromasts. Although the basic topographies of these canals are typical
of teleosts, the branching pattern of cutaneous tubes (i.e., secondary lateral line canals) becomes
extremely complex with growth. Ten groups of superficial neuromasts, comprising 9 cephalic and 1 trunk,
were recognized: nasal (1 neuromast), nostril (10−12), cheek (6−10), opercular (7or 8), preopercular
(7−10), postocular (3 or 4), parietal (4−6), supratemporal (1), predorsal (10 or 11), and trunk accessory
(36−43). Proliferation of superficial neuromasts in this species indicates that the neuromasts are not
always linked to a sedentary habit, and can be functional even in a rapidly swimming species.



Nakayama, Naohide (Kochi University);

Systematic Revision of the Deep-Sea Fish Genus Pseudonezumia (Gadiformes: Macrouridae), with
Comments on a Related New Genus

Pseudonezumia Okamura, 1970, a rare and poorly known genus of the family Macrouridae, occurs in
bathyal to abyssal depths of the world ocean. Because of their close resemblance, the genus has been
confused with Paracetonurus Marshall, 1973, and several species have been transferred back and forth
between the two genera. Examination of 137 specimens, representing almost all museum material known
to us, revealed that Pseudonezumia is a senior synonym of Paracetonurus, including five described
species and one undescribed form: P. cetonuropsis (Gilbert and Hubbs, 1916) distributed from Japan to
the South China Sea in 1651–2074 m; P. flagellicauda (Koefoed, 1927) distributed in the North Atlantic
and the southwestern Indian Ocean in 2085–3120 m; P. japonica Okamura, 1970 known only from Japan
in 1690–2005 m; P. parvipes (Smith and Radcliffe in Radcliffe, 1912) distributed in the Western Pacific in
1992–2308 m; P. pusilla (Sazonov and Shcherbachev, 1982) widely distributed in the Indo-West Pacific in
1380–2000 m; P. sp. represented by a single specimen collected from Mozambique Strait in 2220–2140
m. Pseudonezumia sp. is most similar to P. parvipes, but differs in having a lower count of 1st dorsal fin
rays (II, 7 vs. II, 8–11) and a first dorsal pterygiophore inserted between 1st and 2nd neural spines (vs.
between 2nd and 3rd neural spines). A nominal species, Echinomacrurus occidentalis Iwamoto, 1979,
was recently classified under Pseudonezumia (as a species of Paracetonurus), but it was moved back to
Echinomacrurus owing to its unique body scale structure and lateral line system. Additionally, a new
genus and species of grenadiers that is most similar to Pseudonezumia was discovered based on three
specimens collected from the Eastern Atlantic and the southwestern Pacific off the Kermadec Islands in
4500–4600 m. This undescribed genus is unique among the family in having the following combination of
features: orbit huge (39–43% of HL); anus situated immediately before anal fin origin; no light organ;
pelvic fin far forward of pectoral fin base, with 5 or 6 soft rays; first dorsal fin rays II, 6; spinules on body
scales rudimentary; branchiostegal rays 7.




                                                                                                             504
Nali, Renato Christensen (São Paulo State University); Prado, Cynthia (São Paulo State University,
Jaboticabal - SP, Brazil)

Call properties and social functions of notes in a gladiator treefrog endemic to the Brazilian
Cerrado

Studies on sexual selection and male territoriality using playback experiments are much more common
for temperate frogs, although the tropics harbor the greatest anuran diversity. The gladiator frog
Bokermannohyla ibitiguara is a hylid endemic to the Brazilian Cerrado and has a mixed advertisement
call, composed by long and short notes. Vocalizations and social contexts of their emissions have never
been studied before. Thus, herein, we describe the influence of male size and temperature on call
properties, and investigate the social contexts of the different notes of the call through direct observations
and playback experiments conducted in the field. Dominant frequency correlated negatively with male
body size, whereas long note duration correlated positively, and there was a weak correlation between
pulse rate and male body size. Air temperature correlated negatively with long note duration and
positively with pulse rate. Playback experiments with males showed that that they did not change the
proportion of long to short notes in the presence of an intruder (= playback), but rather they exhibited a
modulated call, where short notes become longer, with lower dominant frequency and more pulsated. We
interpreted this call as a territorial call. Our results suggest that dominant frequency and long note
duration might be under sexual selection by females, as they could potentially choose larger males with
better territories relying on such parameters. Our observations suggest that the long notes are more
attractive to females while the short notes seem to be the territorial component of the mixed call.
Moreover, the territorial call is a variation of the short notes of the mixed advertisement call. We also
describe the fight call emitted by males engaged in a combat, each one emitting one type of note. This is
the first description of a fight call for the genus Bokermannohyla.



Narayan, Edward (Griffith University); Molinia, Frank (Landcare Research, New Zealand, Auckland, New
Zealand); Cockrem, John (Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand); Hero, Jean-Marc (Griffith
University, Gold Coast, Q, Australia)

Amphibian corticosterone stress responses: applications for understanding global amphibian
declines

Studies on inter-individual variation in baseline and short-term corticosterone responses can provide a
great deal of information on animal‘s physiological reactiveness to environmental stressors. This field of
research has been lacking for amphibians. We describe and quantify variation in baseline and stress
induced urinary corticosterone metabolite concentrations in several amphibian species subjected to
experimental stressors. We applied adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) challenge in endangered Fijian
ground frogs (Platymantis vitiana), cane toads (Rhinella marina) and two native Australian frog species
(Great barred frogs, Mixophyes fasciolatus, and Stony Creek frogs, Litoria wilcoxii). We found strong
inter-individual differences between species in adrenocortical responses. Short-term capture and handling
caused significant rises in urinary corticosterone metabolites within 2-3 hours in both captive and free-
living frogs and toads. This allowed us to quantify the inter-individual variation in urinary corticosterone.
Corticosterone responses is generally a stable trait, evidenced from high statistical repeatabilities of
hourly and integrated corticosterone responses in captive adjusted toads that were subjected to repeat
handling (for 24 h on four separate occasions). Furthermore, integrated corticosterone responses were
also repeatable under field conditions. Using entirely novel concept of glucocorticoid thermal reaction
norms, we have recently discovered that both baseline and short-term corticosterone responses of toads
are affected by temperature. Both baseline and integrated corticosterone responses of the toads were



                                                                                                          505
lowered after thermal adjustment at 15oC while these response variables were much higher at 35oC. In
conclusion, non-invasive stress endocrinology studies have enormous ecological applications and these
tools can be integrated with evolutionary biology and disease ecology for understanding the dilemma of
global amphibian declines.



Nascimento, Juliana (Departamento de Biologia Funcional e Estrutural, Instituto de Biologia,
Universidade de Campinas, Brazil); Dias Lima, Jucivaldo (Centro de Pesquisas Zoobotânicas e
Geológicas, Instituto de Pesquisas Científicas e Tecnológicas do Estado do Amapá (IEPA), Brazil,
Canada); Suárez, Pablo (Laboratório de Citogenética, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade
Federal do Pará, Brazil, Canada); Bolsoni Lourenço, Luciana (Departamento de Biologia Funcional e
Estrutural, Instituto de Biologia, Universidade de Campinas, Brazil, Canada)

A high level of cytogenetic variation in Physalaemus ephippifer (Anura: Leiuperidae)

Physalaemus ephippifer is a leiuperid species that is found at the mouth of the Amazon River in Brazil
and possibly in Guyana. However, some questions regarding the geographic distribution of this species
exist, and the potential presence of undescribed species cannot be ruled out. Cytogenetic analyses of P.
ephippifer specimens from Belém-PA have shown an interesting heteromorphism of the nucleolar
organizer region (NOR) and C-banding in chromosome pair 8 that is exclusive to females. The presumed
Z and W chromosomes had a terminal NOR on the long arm, but the W chromosome differed from the Z
chromosome by the presence of an additional segment on the short arm. To provide additional
cytogenetic data for P. ephippifer ,        male specimens from Pará localities (Monte Alegre, Óbidos,
Alenquer, Curuá, Cedere I, Prainha) and Viruá-Roraima were analyzed cytogenetically. Chromosome
preparations were obtained from intestinal cell suspensions and subjected to conventional staining using
Giemsa, C-banding, DAPI-staining of C-banded metaphases, silver staining and FISH with the repetitive
DNA probe Pep194. All of the male karyotypes in the study were very similar, but a differential NOR
distribution pattern in the presumed sex chromosome pair 8 was observed among the populations. In the
karyotypes of the 6 males from Cedere I an NOR was located terminally on 8q , as in the karyotypes
already described for this species. In addition, a second NOR adjacent to the first was also present in this
chromosome pair.         The karyotypes of specimens from Prainha, Monte Alegre, Óbidos and Alenquer
showed an additional pericentromeric NOR on 8p that was not reported for the population of Belém
studied previously.       In the karyotypes of 1 male from Curuá and 4 males from Viruá, no terminal NOR
was present on 8q , but the pericentromeric NOR on the short arm of this chromosome was always
present. The FISH assays mapped the Pep194 repeat to the pericentromeric NOR of chromosome 8 in
the specimens from Prainha and Curuá and to the interstitial NOR on chromosome 8 in the specimens
from Cedere I. Interestingly, the distal NOR on 8q of specimens from the latter locality was not detected
by this probe, suggesting that the dynamics of the repetitive DNA Pep194 might differ between the
terminal and interstitial NORs of this karyotype. All of the variations described herein suggest a high level
of divergence among the populations currently identified as P. ephippifer.



Navas Iannini, Carlos Arturo (Department of Physiology - University of São Paulo);

Physiological ecology and conservation of amphibian anurans

Understanding the impact of environmental change on amphibians requires disciplinary integration and
bidirectional dialog between environmental, ecological and physiological sciences. This interaction is
important to unveil underlying mechanisms responsible for effects, detecting effects of environmental




                                                                                                         506
change before patterns emerge, evaluate potential for dispersion among fragments in remnant forest
matrixes, understand the role of physical variables as limiting factors, and modeling effects of climatic
change. In the specific context of physical variables as limiting factors, a typical approach has focused
physiological tolerances and safety margins which are used to predict impacts of environmental change.
Temperature has been a main variable studied in this context and work with lizards has been
inspirational, but research with anurans requires some caveats, some of which gain importance given that
scenarios of climatic change often combine increased temperatures and reduced rainfall. Some issues
are: i) temperature information at scales compatible with microhabitat are essential and not readily
available from databases ant broad scales, ii) hydroregulation is important to many species but that the
relative role of physiology and behavior may vary substantially, iii) thermoregulation in anurans is unique
an intimately linked to hydric balance, and iv) water balance interacts with thermal effects to affect
ecological performance. In this talk I illustrate briefly various contexts in which the interaction between
ecology and physiology may enhance theoretical basis for anuran conservation, and then focus more
specifically on issues i and ii above, as they will not be discussed in other talks of this symposium. I use
specific examples coming from two contrasting extreme environments, the Colombian paramos and the
Brazilian semi-arid Caatingas. I discuss the problem of scale in inferring data on anuran body
temperatures using as an example elevation gradients in the tropical Andes. In this context, I highlight the
role of elevation as a physical barrier in terms of exposure to extreme climatic events such as freezing. I
also highlight the interplay between water and temperature by illustrating strategies of hydroregulation
(water finding, water uptake and water conservation) in the anurofauna of the semi-arid Caatingas of
Brazil. In addition to the specific conclusions regarding these ecological settings, I conclude that much
more data is necessary to understand the role and scope of behavioral and physiological adjustments in
amphibian anurans.



Nelson, Nicola (Victoria University of Wellington); Miller, Kimberly (Monash University, Clayton, VIC,
Australia); Miller, Hilary (Monash University, Australia); Moore, Jennifer A. (Michigan State University,
East Lansing, United States); Mitchell, Nicola (University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia);
Cree, Alison (University of Otago, Dunedin, Canada); Allendorf, Fred (University of Montana, Missoula,
MT, Canada); Sarre, Stephen (University of Canberra, ACT, Australia); Keall, Susan (Victoria University
of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand)

Climate change and the role of assisted colonisation in the conservation of tuatara

Climate change poses a particular threat to species with fragmented distributions and little or no capacity
to migrate. Assisted colonization, moving species into regions where they have not previously occurred,
aims to establish populations where they are expected to survive as climatic envelopes shift. However,
adaptation to the source environment may affect whether species successfully establish in new regions.
Assisted colonization has spurred debate among conservation biologists and ecologists over whether the
potential benefits to the threatened species outweigh the risks to recipient communities. In our opinion,
the debate has been distracted by controversial examples, rather than cases where assisted colonization
may be a viable strategy. We present a case study for assisted migration of tuatara, an endemic New
Zealand reptile, including using extant populations as references, optimizing genetic variation, targeting
knowledge gaps through research, and considering host and recipient communities, while emphasizing
the importance of including the human community in the planning stage. When strategically planned and
monitored, assisted colonization programs could meet conservation, research, and advocacy goals, and
ultimately result in the establishment of long-term sustainable populations capable of persisting during
rapid changes in climate.




                                                                                                        507
Nestler, Jennifer (University of Iowa Department of Geoscience);

Identification of cryptic species using geometric morphometrics: an analysis of African
Crocodylus

The Nile crocodile Crocodylus niloticus currently has an extensive range throughout the African
continent and Madagascar, though fossils reveal a larger historical range included parts of the Sahara
Desert, Mediterranean coast, and Arabian Peninsula. Recent molecular studies have yielded genetically
distinct populations of C. niloticus , dividing African Crocodylus into C. niloticus and C. suchus .
However, morphological variation remains unassessed. A geometric morphometric analysis of cranial
variation in African Crocodylus demonstrates two distinct morphological groups are present. These
groups are more morphologically distinct from each other than they are from other members of the genus
Crocodylus , which supports the presence of a cryptic species complex. The morphometric analysis is
coupled with a geographic analysis that reveals the morphological variation is broadly bound by river
basins, with one group located in Northern and Western Africa and another in Southern Africa. However,
cluster analyses indicate that the two species overlap considerably in Central Africa. These results are
congruent with molecular analyses, supporting the methods employed herein as an effective way to
distinguish cryptic species. Because the vast majority of the skulls included in this analysis were collected
prior to the mid-20th century, this analysis provides insight to past population structure and can be used
to inform conservation efforts. The greatest potential for the survival of these species lies in a thorough
understanding of their evolutionary history, interrelationships, and biogeography.



Neuman-Lee, Lorin (Utah State University); French, Susannah (Utah State University, Logan, UT,
United States)

Effects of prenatal exposure to a flame retardant on survival and growth in juvenile Western
Terrestrial Gartersnakes (Thamnophis elegans)

Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), a flame retardant, are ubiquitous throughout the environment,
human, and animal tissues. While this contaminant has been examined in lab studies, little research has
been performed on wildlife. Few studies have focused on the impact these chemicals have in on offspring
due to in utero exposure or on reptilian species. Here, we present results on the effects of one of the most
bioaccumulative congeners, 2, 2‘, 4, 4‘ brominated diphenyl ether (BDE-47) on gravid Thamnophis
elegans and their resulting offspring. Gravid females were dosed every other week throughout the
gestation period. We subsequently examined the number of neonates born live, the sex ratio, their mass
at birth, and growth rate and survival over a three month period. This study provides evidence that BDE-
47 can negatively impact reptiles when exposed in utero.



Newby, Jennifer (Grice Marine Laboratory, College of Charleston); Shedlock, Andrew (College of
Charleston, Canada)

An examination of population genetic and social structure in the spotted eagle ray (aetobatus
narinari) found seasonally off coastal sarasota, fl

Recent global declines in chondrichthyan populations have risen as a major concern due to amplified
pressure from fisheries. The spotted eagle ray, Aetobatus narinari , is a cosmopolitan myliobatoid
recognized as near-threatened by the World Conservation Union however is not protected in U.S. federal
waters. A decreasing population trend, K-selected life history and primarily inshore, coastal habitat



                                                                                                         508
renders this species susceptible to over-exploitation by targeted fisheries, drift netting, and capture as
bycatch. Since 2009 large seasonal aggregations have been observed in the Gulf waters of Sarasota, FL.
Modest ecological data is available for A. narinari but almost no studies of fine-scale genetic structure
exist. We are presently investigating the molecular ecology of this A. narinari population using fin clips
from individuals sampled non-invasively across the region through the Mote Marine Lab, Sarasota, FL,
from April through November 2011. Genotypes of allele frequencies for 9 independent eagle-ray-specific
microsatellite loci are being employed currently to elucidate the population genetic structure and social
structure of eastern Gulf of Mexico (GOM) A. narinari . Standard tests for Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium,
null alleles and linkage disequilibrium as well as statistically significant patterns of geographic structure,
direction and scale of gene flow, and kinship among possible parent-offspring associations will be
discussed based on ecological, demographic and genetic data available.                 Synthesis of baseline
molecular data from the present study in the eastern GOM and comparison to subpopulations in the
Central Atlantic is expected to advance our global understanding of A. narinari vulnerabilities in this
region.



Newell, David (Southern Cross University);

Movement patterns of an endangered stream frog from sub-tropical eastern Australia

The conservation of threatened frogs is often hampered by a poor understanding of their movement
behaviour. Available knowledge for some species is entirely focused on their use of breeding sites.
Fleay‘s barred frog ( Mixophyes fleayi ) is one example where this needs to be resolved. This endangered
frog is restricted to rainforest streams in subtropical Australia. We used a combination of mark-recapture,
radio-telemetry and spool-tracking to describe its movement patterns and habitat use. This combination of
methods can provide insight into the movement of individual frogs over different temporal scales. Mark-
recapture revealed that male frogs displayed a high degree of site fidelity, remaining in close proximity to
the stream (mean 2.9 m ± 0.1). Seventy percent of recaptured males remained within 27 m of their initial
capture location over periods spanning more than 6 years. Spool-tracking revealed that males foraged
widely within the riparian forest (up to 55 m in a single night) but returned to the approximate location of
initial capture. Radio-telemetry revealed that females moved away from streams (up to 300 m) when not
breeding and were capable of large movements (&gt;400 m). Females often moved along roads and
walking tracks, and did not return to their initial capture location in the short-term. The pronounced use of
stream breeding sites by male barred frogs provides a robust basis for population monitoring. In stark
contrast, females spent relatively brief periods at the stream (for breeding) before dispersing into
surrounding forest. Indeed, they were rarely re-encountered after tagging. Conservation efforts that focus
only on breeding habitats may be inadequate for this highly endangered frog.



Nichols, Krista (NOAA, National Marine Fisheries Service);

What can genomics tell us about phenotypic plasticity in rainbow/steelhead trout?

In recent decades, advances in molecular biology and computational genetics and genomics have
enabled the interrogation of whole genomes to ask the questions of the genetic architecture of and gene
expression underlying complex traits. In non-model species of plants and animals, questions of both the
genetic architecture of complex traits and the response of organisms to environmental change or
differences are equally important in understanding how environmental perturbations could influence the
evolutionary trajectories of populations. In salmonid fishes, we are only just beginning to get a glimpse of



                                                                                                          509
the genetic architecture of complex traits such as rate of development, life history (age at sexual maturity,
migratory life history, and disease resistance), but very few studies have been focused on how genetics
and environment play a dual and interactive role in shaping expressed phenotypes. Arguably, the
consideration of and inclusion of environmental variables into genomics studies can be difficult. In this
review and perspective presentation, I will give an overview of work to date on the genetic architecture of
complex developmental phenotypes in Oncorhynchus mykiss (rainbow and steelhead trout), while
considering the way forward in answering the more complicated question of the genetic architecture of
plasticity in these types of ecologically relevant traits.



Nicholson, Abbigail (Southeast Missouri State University); Trauth, Stanley (Arkansas State University,
State University, United States); Beran, Bradley (Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau,
Canada); Rabe, Brian; Siegel, Dustin (Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau, United
States)

The Genital Kidney in Salamanders: Emphasis on Plethodontidae

Male salamanders utilize the cranial portion of their kidneys to transport sperm from the testis to the
Wolffian duct. In most salamanders (e.g., ambystomatids, cryptobranchids, rhyacotritonids, salamandrids,
and sirenids) the path of sperm is easily traced from the testicular duct, through the vasa efferentia, and
to the renal corpuscle, where sperm then traverse through the nephron and are stored in the Wolffian
duct until mating. In general, most of the regions of the nephron can be identified in these ―sexual‖
nephrons. Plethodontids are a little more perplexing. The majority of the plethodontid specimens we have
examined only have one vasa efferentia that exits the most cranial portion of the testis. In species where
more than one vasa efferentia exists, the more caudal duct terminates blindly. Contrary to previous
reports in spelerpines, this sperm transport duct does not appear homogeneous along its entire length.
The non-ciliated vasa efferentia clearly transitions into a ciliated duct in all plethodontids examined
histologically. A renal corpuscle with a glomerulus is often present adjoining the vasa efferentia with this
ciliated duct (e.g., Hemidactylinae). However, in some specimens (particularly bolitoglossines) the renal
corpuscle is often ―free-floating‖; i.e., the renal corpuscle is juxtaposed to where the vasa efferentia
transitions to a ciliated duct, but is not actually incorporated into the sperm transport apparatus. It could
be safely assumed that in these specimens the renal corpuscle in the cranial portion of the kidney is no
longer functioning, at least in terms of filtration of fluids into a urinary tubule. Moreover, the opposite
extremes also present themselves in taxa such as Dicamptodontidae, where the majority of nephrons
adjacent to the testes appear fully functional and have no connection to the testis. Consequently, in
ambystomatids and salamandrids, every vasa efferentia connects to a renal corpuscle, which then
transports sperm to the Wolffian duct via a nephron.



Nielsen, Stuart (University of Mississippi); Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University, Canada); Tolley, Krystal
(South African National Biodiversity Institute, Canada); Noonan, Brice (University of Mississippi, Canada)

Comparative phylogeography of three rock dwelling lizard species gives unparalled insights into
the speciation process in southern Africa.

We explored how geology, geography and changing climate have affected the distribution of organisms in
southern Africa, particularly for species spanning the arid/semi-arid Karoo biome. Using comparative
phylogeography, we explored patterns within three co–distributed yet distantly related, rock-dwelling
lizard species: the southern rock agama, Agama atra ; Bibron‘s gecko, Chondrodactylus bibronii ; and




                                                                                                         510
the Karoo girdled lizard, Karusasaurus polyzonus . All three taxa are saxicolous, greatly utilizing the
geologically complex, ancient, rock formations found throughout the subcontinent, yet differ in period of
daily activity, social structure, and microhabitat use, (although C. bibronii has been observed inhabiting
the same rock cracks with either K. polyzonus or A. atra ). In many regards C. bibronii could be
considered a ―rock generalist,‖ often living in rocky habitat unsuitable for either A. atra or K. polyzonus .
This habitat ―leniency‖ could potentially erase significant, informative genetic signal, as it would allow for
better individual dispersal throughout this species‘ range. In light of this, we theorized that there would be
a degree of shared evolutionary history across the subcontinent between the three, particularly at
recognized barriers of gene flow for other rock-dwelling organisms (e.g. the Knersvlatke plain) due to
shared distribution and gross ecological requirements. Employing multiple sources of genetic data (i.e.
mtDNA, ‗fast-evolving‘ nuclear DNA and single nucleotide polymorphisms) we asked: what is the structure
of ‗populations‘ within a species, and what are the geographic boundaries of those groupings; 2) are
these clusters/populations isolated (or conversely, is gene flow ongoing between them), and for how long;
and 3) how have climatic shifts affected species/population distributions? The species-specific patterns
granted unique insight into the processes of speciation in the poorly understood arid zones of the
southern hemisphere.



Niemiller, Matthew (Yale University); Fitzpatrick, Benjamin (University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN,
United States)

Speciation in subterranean plethodontid salamanders of the genus Gyrinophilus

The origin of cave-dwelling species has long intrigued students of evolutionary biology, as the roles of
isolation, selection, and gene flow during subterranean speciation are difficult to resolve. Two primary
hypotheses have been proposed to describe speciation in subterranean organisms: a climate-relict model
that posits allopatric speciation and climate change as the primary factor initiating divergence, and an
adaptive-shift model that proposes parapatric speciation driven by divergent selection between
subterranean and surface habitats. Our studies of obligate cave-dwelling species of Gyrinophilus
salamanders ( G. palleucus , G. gulolineatus , and G. subterraneus ) show that each form arose
independently from the primarily surface-dwelling G. porphyriticus . Morphological and phylogenetic
evidence support recent divergence of each cave form during the late Pliocene and Pleistocene
implicating a role for climate change. However, short branch lengths and discordant gene trees are
consistent with a complex history that also involves gene flow during divergence. Coalescent-based
analyses support continuous or recurrent gene flow between diverging subterranean lineages and their
surface-dwelling progenitor. Although subterranean founder populations may have originally been
isolated from surface source populations, we propose that surface and subterranean forms have
experienced repeated bouts of secondary contact, gene flow, and isolation during the Pleistocene, a
scenario we term the ―periodic isolation‖ hypothesis. These bouts continue today and have had varying
impacts on each subterranean lineage.



Niemiller, Matthew (Yale University); Miller, Brian (Middle Tennessee State University, Murfreesboro,
TN, United States)

The ecology of cave-dwelling Gyrinophilus salamanders (Caudata: Plethodontidae)

Aspects of the ecology and life history are not well known for most troglobitic (obligate cave-dwelling)
salamanders, which is due in part to difficulties in accessing their habitat and, in some cases, rarity of



                                                                                                          511
these species. Cave-dwelling populations of the plethodontid genus Gyrinophilus are no exception. This
genus includes three troglobitic species endemic to the Interior Plateau and Appalachian Ridge and
Valley of the eastern United States: the Tennessee Cave Salamander ( G. palleucus ), Berry Cave
Salamander ( G. gulolineatus ), and West Virginia Spring Salamander ( G. subterraneus ). Because of
relatively small distributions, presumed small population sizes, low reproductive output, and vulnerability
of habitat to alteration or degradation, all three of these species are of conservation concern. In contrast
to the strict troglobites, the congeneric Spring Salamander ( G. porphyriticus ) has a relatively large
distribution, and is not of similar conservation concern. This latter species frequently inhabits caves in
these regions, but is more often found in and around springs (thus, on the surface). Here, we present
information on demography, habitat use, diet, growth rate, life span, community associates, and
reproductive biology for each of the troglobitic species and for subterranean populations of G.
porphyriticus .     In addition, we discuss how the ecology and life history of each species relates to its
conservation status. Lastly, we suggest conservation practices that should be implemented to ensure
survival of these rarely seen species.



Niiro, Michael (Northern Illinois University); King, Richard (Northern Illinois University, Canada)

Predicting Climate-Change Induced Distributional Shifts in Great Lakes Region Reptiles

Climate change presents unique challenges to biodiversity policy makers and managers due to potentially
significant shifts in the geographic distribution of environmental conditions suitable for population
persistence. Reptiles may be especially vulnerable to the effects of climate change because of their
thermal dependence sometimes limited dispersal ability. The objectives of this project are to determine
the degree to which the distributions of 12 Great Lakes region reptile species are associated with climatic
variables and use this information to identify the projected future location of climatically suitable areas
under exiting climate change projections. Ecological niche modeling was performed in the program
Maxent using a subset of bioclimatic variables from WorldClim selected to reduce overfitting. Climate
layers were restricted geographically so that background localities included only areas adjacent to
occupied habitat. Presence data for the modeling were obtained from specimen records through
HerpNET, museum requests, and requests to state inventories. Models were based on current climate
data from WorldClim, and projected into the future using the HadCM3 climate change scenarios. Models
were generated for all 12 species, including Regina septemvittata, a natricine snake which currently
occurs throughout much of the eastern USA. Minor variations appeared between climate change
scenarios, but all scenarios showed the same trend of diminishing habitat suitability as time progresses.
By year 2080, much of the western portion of the current range is predicted to become climatically
unsuitable for R. septemvittata.



Noble, Daniel (Macquarie University); Wechmann, Kerrie (Macquarie University, Sydney, N, Australia);
Keogh, Scott (The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia); Whiting, Martin (Macquarie
University, Sydney, N, Australia)

Interactions between behavioral and morphological traits creates a complex fitness landscape for
the evolution of alternative reproductive tactics in a lizard

Alternative reproductive tactics (ARTs) are the result of correlational disruptive selection on suites of
morphological, physiological and behavioral traits. ARTs are most obvious when they occur in discrete
morphs with concomitant behavioral tactics. However, ARTs driven by behavior, in nondescript species



                                                                                                        512
lacking obvious phenotypic differences, are rare and poorly understood. Nonetheless, it is predicted that
disruptive selection for behavioral traits should occur in systems with strong sexual selection. We tested
for disruptive selection by establishing six breeding populations using 216 (108 males, 108 females)
individually marked lizards (Eulamprus quoyii), which we followed through the entire breeding season. We
quantified reproductive fitness for each male using 7 microsatellite DNA loci from 227 offspring born to 57
females. We found strong evidence for correlational disruptive selection between two behavioral traits
and one behavioral and morphological trait. Body size was the greatest contributor to the number of
offspring sired, however, all our behavioral traits (display rate, home range area, total days active and the
proportion of time moving and displaying) also significantly contributed to male reproductive success. Our
study demonstrates how correlational disruptive selection can generate mating polymorphisms and
underscores the important role of behavior in driving the evolution of ARTs.



Noble, Virginia (University of British Columbia); Stynoski, Jennifer (University of Miami, Canada);
Srivastava, Diane (University of British Columbia, Canada)

The effects of Oophaga pumilio tadpoles on bromeliad insect and protozoa communities

Phytotelmata collect rainwater and debris that provide nutrients for the organisms within. Some frogs
place tadpoles in phytotelmata, but the impact of tadpole presence on other members of the phytotelm
faunal community is not well understood. One anuran, Oophaga pumilio, feeds tadpoles for 6 weeks with
unfertilized eggs. Tadpole feces may provide additional nutrients that could augment protozoan
populations and consequently enhance the growth and development of their invertebrate predators. Here,
we investigated the effects of the presence of O. pumilio tadpoles on communities of mosquito larvae
(Culix jenningsi) and ciliates at La Selva, Costa Rica.      We predicted that nutrient inputs from tadpole
eggs and feces could increase ciliate abundance and therefore hasten development of mosquito larvae.
We manipulated the presence of mosquito larvae (present, absent) and tadpoles (large present, small
present, absent) in a factorial experiment in phytotelm-sized plastic cups filled with rainwater and a
constant amount of detritus (6 treatments, n=10). We considered the effect of tadpole development stage,
dividing tadpoles in to those below (―small‖) or above (―large‖) Gosner stage 30. For 6 weeks, we
collected ciliate samples and pH, took photos to measure growth of tadpoles and mosquitoes, and
monitored mosquito survival. Mosquito survival was higher in treatments with tadpoles, suggesting that
mosquito larvae benefitted from the nutrients provided by tadpoles. Surprisingly, we found that tadpoles
occasionally ate mosquito larvae, contrary to previous reports that O. pumilio tadpoles eat only eggs.
Large tadpoles ate more larvae than small tadpoles, suggesting that tadpole predation is developmentally
or size limited. Water pH and ciliate communities were also affected by the presence or absence of large
tadpoles and/or mosquito larvae. This study indicates that anurans may benefit mosquito larvae via
nutrient inputs, but that this effect can reverse when tadpoles become large enough to prey on the larvae.



Nopper, Joachim (University of Hamburg); Braskamp, Enzo (University of Hamburg, Hamburg, South
Africa); Lauströer, Balten; Ganzhorn, Jörg (University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany)

Habitat affinities and population characteristics of reptiles from arid south-western Madagascar

South-western Madagascar is exceptional in its reptile species richness with more than sixty species
occurring in the Tsimanampetsotsa National Park and its surroundings. The vegetation is very diverse,
depending on soil and land use type. The region is characterized by a mosaic of different forms of land
use growing into formerly undisturbed areas with growing needs of people living in the area. The mosaic



                                                                                                         513
contains areas of grazing (zebus and goats), agriculture (slash and burn), and charcoal production. We
aim to understand the origin of the mosaic for reptile distributions and population dynamics to arrive at
sustainable conservation (i.e. sustainable land use that will lead to a preservation of natural
communities). This also incorporates the determination of suitable indicator species of habitat
transformations. In this talk we will present results on the affinities of reptile species (including fossorial
species) towards certain (micro-) habitats and the role of land use systems on species distributions along
a transect of 60 km, stretching from west to east, covering agricultural used land, littoral forest, dry spiny
bush, dry forests and savanna. We will provide information on the constitution of certain reptile species by
analyzing morphometric data, and their variation between habitat types. These morphometric measures
might provide additional insights on the effects of habitat degradation and land use impacts on possible
indicator species that are not reflected in species compositions yet and thus might serve as an early
warning system.



Noronha, Carolina (University of São Paulo); Kohlsdorf, Tiana (University of São Paulo, Canada)

Muscle physiology and activity patterns in two closely-related species of gymnophthalmid lizards
endemic from Brazilian Caatingas

Morphology, physiology and behavior affect individual performance in specific ecological contexts.
Lizards from the Gymnophthalmidae family occupy a variety of habitats and exhibit remarkable
morphological and behavioral variation. Derived fossorial species present digit/limb reduction, snakelike
morphology, undulation as a major locomotor mode, and a shift to a nocturnal activity pattern. These
diverge from epigeal species, which present a full-limbed lizard-like morphology and are diurnal. Little is
known about the evolution of physiological aspects, especially related to muscle physiology, that correlate
with locomotion and behavior in specific ecological settings. In this scenario, we first performed a
preliminary investigation with two closely related species collected in the same area of the caatinga biome
(Bahia, Brazil): Vanzosaura rubricauda , a diurnal, epigeal, full-limbed species; and Calyptommatus
leiolepis, a fossorial snakelike species. Muscle physiology was accessed through quantification of the
maximal activity of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), an enzyme from the glycolytic pathway, from the axial
muscles, at 18, 24, 30, 36 and 42°C. Results were tested by an ANOVA with species and temperature
as factors. Enzyme activity increased with temperature in both species. LDH activity was greater in V.
rubricauda at 36 and 42°C, but Q10 values did not differ between species (Student‘s t-test). Furthermore,
we performed a video monitoring at constant temperature (24°C) with a 12:12h light/dark cycle, in order to
better describe the locomotor activity pattern of these two species. V rubricauda displayed a diurnal
(acrophase = 11h34) and intermittent daily activity pattern, while C. leiolepis was crepuscular
(acrophase = 17h57) with a lower amplitude but more continuous daily pattern. Previous studies reported
a higher running speed in V .rubricauda compared to C. leiolepis , which could be enhanced by a
greater proportion of glycolytic fibers, and therefore a greater LDH activity. An intermittent type of
locomotion, with fast burst, would also be favored by an enhanced anaerobic activity. Experiments with
different aspects of the muscle physiology and with more gymnophthalmids will allow a comparative
analysis of the physiological evolution associated with morphological, ecological and behavioral variation
in the clade.




                                                                                                           514
Nosal, Andrew (Scripps Institution of Oceanography); Lewallen, Eric (University of Toronto Scarborough,
Toronto, ON, Canada); Burton, Ronald (Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, CA, United States)

Low incidence of multiple paternity in leopard sharks (Triakis semifasciata) sampled from a
predominantly female aggregation in southern California, USA

Knowledge of reproductive behavior is critical for understanding population dynamics of elasmobranch
fishes. However, the ultimate and proximate causes of apparent mating systems are largely unresolved.
Here, the percentage of litters sired by multiple males (frequency of multiple paternity, FMP) was
determined for a sample of leopard sharks (Triakis semifasciata; n=19) captured from a predominantly
female (97.1%) aggregation in La Jolla, California, USA. Four polymorphic microsatellite markers were
isolated and developed from an enriched library constructed exclusively for T. semifasciata. These loci
were amplified in a population sample of 138 presumably unrelated individuals (including 19 mothers) and
found to exhibit moderate to high allelic diversity (9, 14, 16, and 18 alleles per locus, respectively) without
deviating from Hardy-Weinberg expectations. The probability of detecting multiple paternity (PrDM)
exceeded 0.99 for litters of 10 or more pups under varying degrees of paternal reproductive skew. That
is, the probability of a multiply sired litter not having at least three unique paternal alleles at any locus
(therefore being incorrectly identified as singly sired) was <0.01, thus demonstrating the power of the
developed suite of microsatellite markers. A total of 380 pups were genotyped from 19 litters (mean litter
size ± SD [range] = 21.6 ± 6.1 [11 – 33] pups). Only three of the 19 litters exhibited multiple paternity
(FMP = 15.8%), each with no more than two sires having equal reproductive success. These results
demonstrate that multiple paternity, and thus some degree of sperm storage is possible in this species.
However, the observed FMP is among the lowest reported for any elasmobranch fish. The low FMP for
T. semifasciata is not necessarily selectively advantageous or disadvantageous, but may rather be the
inevitable consequence of sex-biased reproductive behaviors: females avoid harassment (superfluous
mating attempts) by retreating to aggregation sites where males are largely absent.



Novosolov, Maria (Tel Aviv University); Meiri, Shai (Tel Aviv University, Canada)

Effect of island type on reproductive traits in lizards

Islands play a major role in understanding evolutionary processes and studying ecological changes. The
different geological origins of islands affect the characteristics of the new home of colonizing species.
Islands can be divided into three main geological types: (i) Oceanic (Volcanic & Coral); (ii) Continental;
(iii) Land bridge. Island types likely affect the nature of adaptation and speciation processes that take
place on it. Continental and land-bridge island environments are often similar to that of the continent they
were once part of. This makes them easier to populate and adapt to. On the other hand, Oceanic islands
start with a chaste environment. Some characteristics are shared between oceanic and continental
islands (lower rates of predation and lower number of competitors than corresponding mainland areas).
This allows successful colonizers to expend their niches. We hypothesized that species will show
difference in reproductive traits between different types of islands. To test this we assembled a database
containing 813 lizard species when 271 of them are insular endemic and 542 of them are mainland. We
collected their phylogenetic relationship, geographical ranges and the following life history traits: female
or adult mass, clutch size, brood frequency, hatchling mass and productivity. We tested for the effect of
geological type of the island on these traits controlling for mass, latitude. In addition we tested the effect
of island area and island age on reproductive traits. We then repeated the analyses accounting for
phylogenetic non-independence. We found that insular endemic lizards have smaller clutch size and
larger hatchlings than mainland lizards. However, no significant difference was found between the




                                                                                                           515
multiple geological types of islands. Brood frequency was found higher on continental than on oceanic
and land bridge islands. Productivity of insular endemic lizards was not effected by island type and wasn‘t
significantly different than productivity of mainland lizards. Moreover, we found that none of the
reproductive traits can be explained by island age. We found that evolution of reproductive traits of lizards
occurs regardless of island origin or its age of creation, this is in contrast of our hypothesis. It is possible
that lizard species which successfully colonize an island go through rapid change in reproductive traits in
order to accommodate it to the isolated environment. Between these changes we can find smaller clutch
size and larger brood frequency than found on the mainland. This may explain the lack of difference in
reproductive traits when comparing different types of islands. This may also be the reason why no change
was witnessed even on land bridge islands, which are the youngest islands of all types. These results
indicate that the different environments which are assembled due to islands‘ origin have no effect on
reproductive traits.



Nowak, Erika (Colorado Plateau Research Station); Sullivan, Brian (Arizona State University, Phoenix,
AZ, United States); Schuett, Gordon (Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, United States); Kwiatkowski,
Matthew (Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches, TX, United States)

How not to compare apples and oranges: terminology matters in translocation and re-introduction
programs

Translocation is a commonly utilized conservation method, primarily aimed at mitigation of human-animal
conflict by removal of an individual and its release in suitable nearby habitat. Over the past two decades
there have been a number of reviews of this method, from both theoretical and empirical perspectives.
There has been considerable confusion surrounding the definition of translocation, and related terms (re-
introduction; repatriation; relocation), in spite of generally recognized differences among conservation
biologists practicing re-introduction (i.e., movement of multiple individuals for conservation purposes) and
those practicing translocation (i.e., removal of a single, typically ―nuisance‖ individual, and its subsequent
release in historic habitat with a resident population of the target species). After reviewing semantic
aspects of all forms of introductions, including translocation, we present a simplified taxonomy of terms
aligning both theory and practice in this domain of conservation. We provide a perspective documenting
outcomes of these contrasting approaches, and the historical separation, in many instances, of the
respective paradigms within this subarea of conservation. We conclude that translocation as a
management practice has a low success rate when judged by effects on individuals, and by mitigation of
human-animal conflicts. We detail factors influencing low success rates in light of recent research on and
syntheses of squamate physiology and behavior, and suggest guidelines for both considering and
improving future translocation projects.



Nussear, Kenneth (US Geological Survey); Tracy, C. Richard (University of Nevada, Reno, Canada);
Medica, Phil (US Geological Survey, Canada); Field, Kim (US Fish and Wildlife Service, Canada); Esque,
Todd; Drake, Kristina; Corn, Steven (US Geological Survey, Canada); Marlow, Ron (University of
Nevada, Reno, Canada)

Experimental translocation of desert tortoises spanning two decades and three states

The southwestern United States is increasingly being impacted by human activities, fueled both by urban
development and associated infrastructure, and more recently with utility‑scale renewable energy
development. The Mojave Desert is the focus of much of this development, and is also home to many




                                                                                                            516
sensitive species, including Agassiz's desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii), which is threatened
throughout its range. Development disturbances within desert tortoise habitat create a management
dilemma, which balances the conservation of the species against the reality of habitat losses.
Translocation is frequently proposed as a minimization/mitigation strategy to move individual tortoises to
areas away from harm, although translocation has remained controversial due to a paucity of peer-
reviewed research on the topic, and also negative opinions of many stakeholder groups and the popular
press. Beginning in 1997, we initiated a coordinated research program designed to increase our
understanding of the conditions under which translocation could be conducted successfully for this
species. Our research has spanned nearly the entire range of the tortoise, with field sites extending from
St George Utah, to Barstow California, and a variety of habitat types and abiotic conditions. We have
progressively asked questions from the survivorship, reproductive behavior, and habitat use and site
fidelity of desert tortoises, whether time and treatment in captivity influenced success of translocation,
whether tortoises can be translocated to areas outside of typical habitat, and finally whether translocation
induces measurable physiological stress. Importantly we have simultaneously studied the responses of
resident and control populations of tortoises as well as translocated individuals. Collectively the results of
this research indicate that by all near-term measures, that translocation can be conducted successfully.
Translocated tortoises have similar survivorship, reproduction, and stress levels as compared to residents
and controls, and neither time in captivity, nor pre-release conditions of providing water and forage
influence these responses. Importantly, we did find that habitat use, and movements of translocated
tortoises differed from resident and control animals, sometimes dramatically, yielding important
management considerations for translocations of this species.



Nydam, Randall (Midwestern University);

Juarassic and Cretaceous-aged squamates of North America: initial experiments in diversity and
complexity

Much of the microvertebrate fauna known from the late Mesozoic of North America is based on
fragmentary/isolated remains recovered from bulk collection of fluvial-based deposits in Western Interior.
The identified fossil remains of squamates are mostly jaws, though other cranial and postcranial elements
are also present as are the rare articulated/associated skeleton. These remains are sufficient to assess
taxonomic and morphological diversity of the squamates and to evaluate the changes in faunal
composition and morphological complexity during the approximately 85 million years from the Late
Jurassic through the end of the Late Cretaceous. The earliest known squamate faunas are a ―Jurassic-
type‖ and are primarily composed of paramacellodid/cordylid-grade scincomorphans and primitive
anguimorphans. The dentitions of these taxa are relatively simple and the morphological diversity is low.
This ―Jurassic-type‖ fauna was relatively stable both taxonomically and morphologically from the Late
Jurassic through the Early Cretaceous. Near the beginning of the Late Cretaceous (following the
establishment of an intercontinental connection with Asia and the rise of angiosperms) there was a rapid
change in the North American squamates resulting in the establishment of a more taxonomically and
morphologically diverse ―Cretaceous-type‖ fauna. These taxa include the continued presences of
paramacellodid/cordylid-grade scincomorphans as well as new scincomorphans with highly specialized
dentitions (e.g., heterodonty in highly diverse chamopsiids, herbivory as well as mammal-like insectivory
adaptations in polyglyphanodontines, and apical specializations in contogeniids). Also present were
anguids (primarily the chisel-toothed Odaxosaurus spp.), xenosaurs (Exostinus and like taxa), several
taxa of helodermatid-grade and varanid-grade platynotans, snakes, and rare occurrences of iguanians.
With regard to distribution it appears that chamopsiids, contogeniids, and iguanians favored northern
latitudes, polyglypanodontines and snakes preferred the south with occasional northern incursions of both



                                                                                                          517
groups. Anguids, platynotans, and paramacellodid/cordylid-grade scincomorphans had no discernable
latitudinal preference. At the K/T boundary the



O'Connor, David (McGill University);

Phylogeographic trends among northeastern North American amphibians

Along an evolutionary and geological time scale, current species distributions across eastern North
America are a very modern occurrence. The Pleistocene Glaciation across the majority of North America
limited species to southern unglaciated refuges. I performed a review of phylogeographic studies of
amphibian species from across Eastern North America in order to assess and explore common trends of
historical dispersal and to highlight areas in which further research is required to improve our
understanding. In unglaciated regions of Eastern North America many anuran species are divided by the
Mississippi river, however there remained sufficient exceptions that this could not be classified as a
general trend. Current distributions likely arose from historical allopatric events, and not due to gene flow
reduction by the Mississippi river or Appalachian Mountains. For caudates, the primary barrier appears to
be the Appalachian Mountains and the Apalachicola river, not the Mississippi. This pattern does appear to
be significant however it may have arisen much earlier than the Pleistocene glaciation and be the result of
the Apalachicola river basin and not the Appalachian Mountains. For anurans in areas of North America
that were glaciated both the Mississippi and the Appalachians acted as geographic barriers. However the
east-west clade divisions likely did not arise from this reduced gene flow, but are the result of northward
expansion by populations from isolated southern refugia. As populations expanded northward, the Great
Lakes were a significant barrier, but once this had ben bypassed or traversed, many lineages made post-
glacial secondary contact. Furthermore, some anuran species demonstrated north-south patterns of
lineage distribution that is the result of post-glacial expansion. In this review of phylogeographic patterns,
we elucidate several challenges that must also be assessed. The first is that due to hybridization between
species, mitochondrial DNA may move between species in areas of range overlap, emphasizing a need
for multiple lines of evidence when determining species. While phylogeographic analyses have identified
several patterns of post-glacial dispersal and distribution, the generality of these patterns remains
questionable. Furthermore, despite being areas of post-glacial secondary contact, there is a general lack
of knowledge as to phylogeographic patterns in high latitudes and at the northern limits of species‘
ranges.



Oddone, Maria Cristina (Universidade Federal do Rio Grande); Bianchini, Adalto (Universidade Federal
do Rio Grande, Canada)

Inferences on in situ egg-laying behavior in genus Sympterygia from the Southwestern Atlantic
Ocean and implications on embryonic development

Oocyte encapsulation is a fundamental process that was conserved in Chondrichthyes after the
evolutionary divergence in so diverse and contrasting reproductive modes. Rajoids are strictly oviparous
producing substantially complex egg capsules for embryos protection during development. Genus
Sympterygia is endemic to the Southern Atlantic and Pacific South American shelves. Morphology of its
egg capsule is rather particular because of the presence of extremely long tendrils instead of regular
posterior horns, as in other skates. Females fix the sticky tendril ends to marine debris and immediately
swim around them to firmly entangle one paired egg capsules after the other, forming a capsule ―nest‖.
However, the reproductive behavior (as well as the embryonic development) of the genus has been



                                                                                                          518
poorly studied. In October 2009, a sampling program for skate egg capsules was started to quantify the
occurrence and diversity at Cassino Beach, a 220 km long beach in Southern Brazil. Every week, dry and
embryo-bearing egg capsules have been collected; the latter have been transferred and kept at the
Animal Care Room of the Physiological Sciences Building (FURG). Egg capsules of Rioraja agassizi
(monospecific genus) were the most abundant, followed by those of Sympterygia acuta and S.
bonapartei . Psammobatis and Dipturus were scarcely represented. Nests of S. acuta and S.
bonapartei bearing live embryos have been often found washed ashore over the Cassino Beach after
storms or during intense windy days. They are complex structures representing a microhabitat for a
significant number of invertebrates [Mollusca (Mytilidae, Donacidae and Mactridae); Crustacea (Cirripedia
and Caprellidae); Cnidaria (Campanulariidae)], macrophytes (Cyperaceae), macroalgae (Ulvaceae) and
even a temporary substrate for the development of vertebrate eggs [Pisces (Atherinopsidae:
Odontesthes sp.)]. Egg capsules in the nest assume the aspect of flowers in a bouquet, with most
capsules oriented vertically in the water column. This was proved to be more advantageous for the
developing embryos than capsules of other genera laying horizontally on the sea floor. In the nests, more
proper capsule ventilation and consequently better oxygen influx into the capsules occur. Parental care is
uncommon among chondrichthyans, but the egg-laying behavior described for Sympterygia may be
considered as such. A similar degree of complexity in the reproductive behavior has only been reported in
oviparous sharks.



O'Donnell, James L. (University of California Santa Cruz);

A multi-locus phylogeny of the anemonefishes (Pomacentridae: Amphiprioninae)

Coming Soon!



O'Donnell, Katherine (University of Missouri); Thompson III, Frank (USFS Northern Research Station,
Columbia, United States); Semlitsch, Raymond (University of Missouri, Columbia, United States)

Investigating the effects of prescribed fire on terrestrial salamanders in oak-hickory forests

Prescribed fire and timber harvest are anthropogenic disturbances that can have substantial effects on
forest ecosystems. Timber harvest often causes drying of the soil and leaf litter, making forests less
capable of supporting amphibian populations. Effects of prescribed fire on wildlife in general, and
amphibians specifically, are inadequately understood. Terrestrial salamanders are thought to play an
integral role in nutrient cycling and forest productivity, but may be negatively affected by disturbances that
alter their microhabitat due to their limited movement capacity and dependence on moisture. With
prescribed fire becoming common in forest management, it is essential to understand its effects on
wildlife. Thus, we investigated the effects of prescribed fire and timber harvest on terrestrial salamanders.
We were particularly interested in robustly determining the pre-treatment population size, and identifying
which factors best predict the abundance and detection of terrestrial salamanders. In spring and fall 2010-
2011, we conducted 5 repeated samples of 20 5-hectare experimental plots that were harvested or
burned in early 2012. We will continue sampling for 2 years post-treatment. We performed area-
constrained searches of natural cover and leaf litter, measured (SVL), and recorded the capture location
of salamanders (primarily Plethodon serratus). Terrestrial salamanders have notoriously low detectability;
thus, we used program unmarked, which fits hierarchical models of abundance for species subject to
imperfect detection. We recorded 1883 captures of P. serratus and 21 captures of other Plethodontid
salamanders (P. albagula, Eurycea longicauda). The average number of captures per 3m x 3m sample



                                                                                                          519
ranged from 1.6 (fall 2011) to 2.9 salamanders (fall 2010). Most salamanders (75%) were found
within/under leaf litter; the rest were either under rocks (11.4%) or woody cover (13.6%). Captures were
strongly correlated with recent rainfall; approximately 45% of the variation in captures-per-plot was
explained by the number of days since rain. Rainfall had the strongest influence on detection, while slope
and aspect contributed considerably to variation in abundance. Our results illustrate the importance of
accounting for imperfect detection when sampling wildlife. They also suggest that including leaf litter in
searches for terrestrial salamanders allows us to better understand their microhabitat choices. This
sampling method will enable us to detect any changes in microhabitat preference after prescribed fire and
timber harvest. Understanding responses of amphibians to prescribed fire and timber harvest is important
for developing more effective forest management plans; our results will enhance our ability to protect
forest biodiversity and improve wildlife habitat.



Ofori-Boateng, Caleb (Forestry Research Institute of Ghana); Oduro, William (Kwame Nkrumah
University of Science and Technology, Canada); Norris, Ken (Centre for Agri-environmental Research,
University of Reading, Canada); Rödel, Mark-Oliver (Museum für Naturkunde, Berlin, Canada)

Differences in the Effects of Selective Logging on Amphibian Assemblages in Three West African
Forest Types

Making generalizations about the impact of commercial selective logging on biodiversity has so far
remained elusive. Species responses to logging depend on a number of factors, many of which have not
been studied in detail. These factors may include the natural forest conditions (forest types) under which
logging impacts are investigated; but this question has so far remained unexamined. In a large-scale
replicate study we aimed at clarifying the relationship between logging and forest types on frog richness,
diversity, and assemblage composition. We contrast three distinct and naturally occurring forest types,
including wet evergreen, moist evergreen and semi-deciduous forests. Selectively logged sites were
compared with primary forest sites for each forest type. We found that the response of frog communities
to logging varies in different forest types. In the wet evergreen forest, richness was higher in logged forest
than primary forest, while diversity measures were not different between logged and primary forest sites.
In the moist evergreen forest, richness and diversity were higher in selectively logged areas compared to
primary forest habitats. In the semi-deciduous, logged forests were characterized by drastic loss of forest
specialists, reduced richness and diversity. These results indicate that the net effect of logging varies with
respect to forest type. Forest types that are characterized by adverse climatic conditions (i.e., low rainfall
and protracted dry seasons) are more likely to produce negative effects on leaf litter anuran communities.
For comparisons of the impact of logging on species to be effective, future research must endeavour to
include details of forest type, rainfall patterns, logging intensities, and rotation cycles.



Ogoanah, Sylvia (University of Benin, Benin City. Nigeria); Ehiosu, Kingsley (University of Benin, Benin
City. Nigeria, Canada)

Distribution of Anuran species in Iyanomo Rubber Research Institute, Benin City , Nigeria

Distribution of anuran species in Iyanomo Rubber Research Institute, Nigeria was studied by a
combination of handpicking and visual encounter survey method between March and October 2011.
Twelve species belonging to four families and ten genera were recorded. These include Bufo maculatus,
Afrixalus dorsalis, Hyperolius concolor, Leptopelis viridis, Hemisus marmoratus, Ptychadena bibroni, P.
mascareniensis, P. pumilio, Chiromantis rufescens, Silurana tropicalis, Hoplobatrachus occipitalis and



                                                                                                          520
Arthroleptis poecilonatus. The most abundant species was Bufo maculatus             (18.4%) while H.
marmoratus and P. mascareniensis recorded the least (5%). The species were distributed within four
sites situated in the Rubber plantation – pond, rubber, oil palm and plantain farms. The plantain farm
had the highest diversity (2.3) while the oil palm farm had the least (1.09). There was a significant
difference between pond and rubber and oil palm plantations (P &lt;0.05). Cluster analysis showed two
main clusters and one outlier. The work aims to reduce the gap in the knowledge of anuran species
diversity in Nigeria.

Key words: anuran diversity, distribution, Iyanomo, Nigeria



Ohmer, Michel E. (University of Otago); McKenzie, Kate; Daglish, Lisa (Department of Conservation,
New Zealand, Canada); Bishop, Phillip J. (University of Otago, Canada)

Long-term monitoring of the effects of endemic disease and predator exclusion on survival in a
population of threatened New Zealand amphibians

We have witnessed a dramatic decline in amphibian populations globally. While we can identify many
factors contributing to those declines, there is comparatively less evidence for the combined effects of
multiple stressors, particularly in wild populations. In New Zealand, two introduced threats have been
considered to be the leading causes of declines in endemic frog species: the fungal pathogen,
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), and mammalian predators (e.g. rats and mice). Utilizing a 5-year
mark-recapture dataset from a population of the endemic species Leiopelma archeyi , we investigated
the combined effects of disease and introduced predators on individual survival and population dynamics.
We applied multistate models in the program MARK to four 10 x 10 m grids of equal habitat quality re-
sampled twice yearly, all of which experience endemic levels of Bd infection and two of which were
predator excluded. Initial analyses indicate a reduction in survival probability (approximately 13%) in
infected frogs within predator-accessible grids. A similar reduction in survival was not observed in infected
frogs within predator-excluded grids. Analyses incorporating individual and time-varying environmental
covariates are currently underway. Recent work indicates New Zealand‘s endemic Leiopelmatid frogs
experience low susceptibility to Bd infection in the laboratory. However, the interaction of multiple
stressors, such as introduced predators and disease, may lead to reduced immunocompetence in this
species. Thus, investigations of the effects of multiple stressors within threatened populations, such as
this one, can better focus management decisions.



Okada, Sumio (Tottori University); Fukuda, Yukihiro; Yuki, Etsuko (TopOutImages, Canada); Okada,
Tamami (Mt.Hyonosen Forest Museum, Canada)

Field observations of parental care of egg masses by male Japanese giant salamanders, Andrias
japonicus

Although it is well-documented that male parental care occurs in Andrias japonicus and other
Cryptobranchid salamanders, no one has described how males actually care for eggs in breeding nests.
We recorded parental care behavior of male Andrias japonicus in one natural and one artificial nest in
Tottori and Hyogo Prefectures using a video camera between August and November, 2010. We analyzed
den masters‘ behavior over 6 days (34hrs total) and 5 days (29 hrs total) in the natural and artificial nest,
respectively, as percentage of total time observed displaying a given behavior per day. Parental care
behaviors were classed into four main categories: agitation (moving of eggs with head or body), tail




                                                                                                         521
fanning, feeding (eating of eggs, skin, etc.) and swaying (side-to-side male body movements). Agitation
was observed at a similar frequency in both nests (artificial nest: 9.6-19.8%, natural nest: 2.2-19.8%). In
the artificial nest, tail fanning was frequently observed, and averaged 30.6% (range: 12.6-46.2%). In
contrast, in the natural nest, tail fanning was observed an average of 0.2% (range: 0-1.2%). We observed
denmasters taking eggs out of masses with their mouths and we think that this behavior functions to
remove undeveloped eggs. We estimated water quality of both nests three times between July and
September, 2011. DO (dissolved oxygen) in the artificial nest was noticeably lower than in the center of
the adjacent stream (nest: 4.6-5.9 mg/L, stream: 8.6-9.2 mg/L), whereas DO in the natural nest was only
slightly lower than the center of the adjacent stream (nest: 7.7-8.5 mg/L, stream: 8.8-9.7 mg/L). We
hypothesize that lower DO levels in the artificial nest resulting from low levels of water inflow from the
adjacent stream led to the high frequency of tail fanning behavior by males. These behaviors likely help
facilitate the diffusion of oxygen into the egg mass, thereby preventing yolk adhesion and spread of fungi.
Our observations also indicate the need for future experimental studies of relationships between male
behavior and DO levels and egg mortality, and also for observation of post-hatching male behaviors.



Okada, Sumio (Tottori University); Okada, Tamami (Mt.Hyonosen Forest Museum, Canada); Felix, Zach
(Reinhardt University, Canada)

Natural History and Conservation Status of the Japanese giant salamander, Andrias japonicus in
the Chugoku Mountains

The Japanese giant salamander ( Andrias japonicus ) is one of the largest extant amphibians in the world.
Western Honshu Island, especially the Chugoku Mountains contains a major portion of A. japonicus ‘s
range. Although A. japonicus is threatened with extinction as a consequence of habitat degradation,
baseline data on population structure, size, and density are limited. We conducted mark-recapture and
radio-telemetric studies of A. japonicus to evaluate population demography, reproductive ecology
including breeding migrations, diet composition and dam impact within relatively natural and disturbed
habitats in the Hino River, Tottori Prefecture between 2001 and 2011. One section of the river, the upper
portion, was relatively undisturbed and ran through a wooded area, and the other section, the lower
portion, was more heavily disturbed and ran through an agriculturally-dominated area. Our results
revealed that adult A. japonicus are abundant in both the relatively natural and disturbed areas. Giant
salamanders in the lower portion were larger and heavier than those in the upper portion, and we
recorded fewer salamanders in small size classes (younger individuals) in the lower portion than the
upper portion. These data suggest that giant salamanders experience lower recruitment in the lower
portion than in the upper portion, possibly due to reduced availability of nesting sites and/or larval and
juvenile microhabitats as a result of habitat degradation. In the upper portion, females moved between
stream sections to reach nesting sites and spawn, and in the lower more disturbed portion many
salamanders used nesting sites within branch streams and migrated multiple directions within both main
and branch streams. Availability of spawning nests is relatively limited and nests are frequently destroyed
by disturbances such as floods throughout the study area. Because of the ephemeral nature and limited
availability of nests, A. japonicus must be able to migrate between sections to reach newly create nests.
In the lower portion however, the movements of many salamanders were interrupted by dams during the
breeding season. These data provide essential baseline information on an A. japonicus population
across a habitat gradient from relatively natural habitat to disturbed stream habitat flowing through
human-dominated areas.




                                                                                                       522
Okamoto, Taku (Center for Environmental Biology and Ecosystem Studies, National Institute for
Environmental Studies);

Recent taxonomic changes of the common skinks of genus Plestiodon (Scincidae, Squamata) on
the Japanese main islands, the Izu Islands, and far eastern Russia

The skinks of genus Plestiodon (formerly Eumeces ) in the Japanese main islands and far eastern
Russia had long been recognized as Eumeces latiscutatus (Hallowell, 1861), and the populations on
the Izu Islands, central Japan, had been treated as Eumeces okadae Stejneger, 1907 (e . g., Taylor,
1936; Uetz, 2011). However, several recent molecular systematic studies have clarified the followings:
the population of the Izu Peninsula (including the type locality of E. latiscutatus ) is distinct from those of
remaining parts of the entire Japanese main islands, and closely related to E. okadae (Motokawa and
Hikida, 2003); and the populations of eastern and western part of the Japanese main islands are
genetically distinct with reproductive isolation (Okamoto and Hikida, 2009). After the generic classification
has been revised (Smith, 2005; Brandley et al . 2005), the Japanese species are currently placed in
Plestiodon . Thus, the following three parapatric species should be recognized at present: Plestiodon
latiscutatus on the Izu Peninsula and the Izu Islands ( E. okadae is a junior synonym of it); P.
japonicus (Peters, 1864) on the western part of Japan; and an undescribed species on the eastern part
of Japan. Our recent taxonomic revision have clarified that these three species can be identified by
diagnoses of scale morphology and DNA barcode, and far eastern Russian population should be
conspecific with the undescribed species of the eastern Japan (Okamoto and Hikida, submitted).



Olave, Melisa (CONICET-CENPAT); Avila, Luciano; Sites, Jack W (CONICET-CENPAT, Canada);
Morando, Mariana (CONICET-CENPAT, Puerto Madryn, Argentina)

A well-supported species tree of the Eulaemus clade (SQUAMATA: LIOLAEMUS): Evidence of an
ancient radiation

The lizard genus Liolaemus is endemic to an extensive area of temperate South America and includes
235 recognized species. Since Laurent‘s (1983) morphological study, the genus has been divided into
two subgenera: Liolaemus (or the chiliensis group) and Eulaemus (or the Argentinean group),
distributed mainly to the west (Chile) and east (Argentina) of the Andes, respectively. Morphological and
mitochondrial characters have been used to propose phylogenetic hypotheses for different clades within
this genus, and most of these are based on incomplete taxon sampling and limited intraspecific sampling.
In this work we present the first well-supported molecular phylogenetic hypothesis for the clade
Eulaemus , based on 12 nuclear molecular markers (protein coding loci &amp; anonymous loci) as well
as two mitochondrial markers (cytb-12S; ~ 10,500 bp total). This clade includes 77 described species,
and we included multiple representatives from all larger groups within it, including new candidate species.
We analyzed the dataset using different species tree approaches (*BEAST, BEST, STEM and MDC) and
compare these results with traditional concatenated analyses. We also present fossil-calibrated
divergence estimates (using BEAST), and discuss a possible ancient radiation for most of the larger
Eulaemus clades.




                                                                                                           523
Olgun, Kurtulus (Adnan Menderes University);

Systematics and Phylogeny of Genus Ophisops (Reptilia:Sauria) in Mainland and Islands of
Turkey

Genus Ophisops (Snake-eyed Lizard) is represented by eight species world-wide. Only one of these
species Ophisops elegans is present in Turkey as well as is recorded from Israel, Lebanon, Syria,
Jordan, Iraq and Iran. This species was first discovered from Bakû by Ménétriés in 1832. Ophisops
elegans is very common in the Mediterranean ecological zone. But it is also distributed around the Irano-
Turanian ecozone. It can be seen in suitable biotopes from 400 meters below to and 1.100 meters above
sea level. Taking the previous studies carried out into consideration, evaluations on the taxonomic
status of the Ophisops elegans can be divided into the three time periods. First of these periods is the
studies accomplished up to 1978 and they suggests three subspecies for O. elegans . Second one
comprises the works carried out between 1978 and 1993 that suggests a fourth subspecies in addition to
existing three subspecies. At this period, it has been proposed that subspecies present in Turkey,
particularly in Lake District and South-eastern Anatolia region, need to be studied in detail. Lastly, studies
have been published from 1993 to date have put forwarded that it is not possible to solve the taxonomic
status of Ophisops elegans using only morphological characteristics. In order to resolve the taxonomic
status of this species, molecular systematic approaches could be very useful. In the light of this
information, specimens of Ophisops were collected from all over Turkey and some of the islands located
in Aegean Sea of the Turkish cost. Then various morfometric measurements and folidosis values were
taken and analysed statistically in order to determine the differences between populations from different
localities. Cyt b and 16S rRNA sequences of mitochondrial DNA of Ophisops specimens were
analysed to clarify taxonomical position of differentiated population and to construct a phylogenetic tree.
Based on the phylogenetic analyses, two main monophyletic groups (species taxon) of Ophisops have
been recovered in Turkey; one includes Artvin (Eastern Blacksea Region), Ardahan, Kars, Iğdır, Van,
Hakkari, Şırnak, Muş (East Anatolia Region), Mardin and Batman (Southeast Anatolia Region)
populations and the other comprises the remaining populations. There are a total of nine difrentiated
populations (subspecies taxon) beloning to these two monophyletic groups.



Oliveira, Adriele Karlokoski Cunha de (Universidade Federal do Paraná); Oliveira, Igor Soares de
(Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, Brazil)

Natural history and cytogenetic of Sphaenorhynchus surdus (Anura: Hylidae): an endemic frog of
Brazilian Southern Atlantic forest

Sphaenorhynchus Tschudi, 1838 is a genus with fourteen species and it is currently considered a sister
genus of Dendropsophus and Xenohyla. This genus is distributed throughout South America with ten
species restricted to the Brazilian Atlantic forest. Sphaenorhynchus surdus (Cochran, 1953) is one of
these species and it is distributed in the states of Paraná, Santa Catarina and Rio Grande do Sul, in
Southern Brazil. This taxon was recently divided in two species, S. surdus and S. caramaschii. However,
there is a lack of information about the biology of both species. Hereby we provide a description of natural
history traits and show preliminary data of cytogenetic for S. surdus. Information about this species is very
scarce and we provide the first karyotype approach for this taxa, as well as to the genus
Sphaenorhynchus. Our study was conducted in the Atlantic forest, in the Araucaria forest domain. We
conducted our surveys from August 2009 to July 2010. We collected data about activity patterns and use
of microhabitat. For the karyotype analysis we performed conventional staining to determine the
chromosome number and morphology, and location of the Nuclear Organization Region (NOR) by Ag-




                                                                                                          524
NOR staining. Sphaenorhynchus surdus was observed in exclusively nocturnal calling activity during
eight months (August 2009 to March 2010). The abundance of calling males was positively related with
temperature, an expected pattern for a Southern species. Sphanorhyncus surdus was observed in
permanent ponds on floating vegetation inside lentic water during calling activity, probably due to its
reproductive mode (presumably number 1). The karyotype of S. surdus comprises 24 metacentric and
submetacentric chromosomes with Fundamental Number (FN) equal to 48. Secondary constriction was
detected in the terminal region of both homologues of chromosome 11, which were detected as NOR.
The karyotype number of S. surdus is different of its sister genus Dendropsophus, which has 2n=30. This
is a preliminary approach of cytogenetic of S. surdus and further studies are necessary with more
resolute techniques to understand the karyotype evolution of the genus.



Oliveira, Igor Soares de (Universidade Estadual de Campinas); Toledo, Luís Felipe (Universidade
Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, Brazil); Rödder, Dennis (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander
Koenig, Bonn, Germany)

One more threat to frogs: a modeling approach

Currently, climate change is the focus for several studies, due its potential consequences on society and
global biodiversity. One of the main effects of climate change is global warming, which in turn, could
cause the sea level rising. The rise of the sea level may threat the terrestrial fauna, particularly species
with home ranges restrict to coastal zones. Among terrestrial vertebrates, several species of anurans
worldwide are distributed exclusively in these areas. Hereby we present a list of anurans potentially
threatened by sea level rising. We analyzed 5609 species available from the IUCN database, considering
only the species with available distribution maps and information about altitudinal distribution. We filtered
for those species with distribution from sea level up to 500 meters in altitude. Then we compared each
map with a six meters sea elevation scenario, selecting species with small range distribution areas and
distributed in future flooded zones. We identified 177 taxa of 30 families (3,15% of the species of our
dataset), under potential threat of flooding, with partial or total area loss, based on the present
distribution. Among these species, 65 are considered ―Data Deficient‖ (DD), 44 ―Least Concern‖ (LC), six
―Near Threat‖ (NT), 23 ―Vulnerable‖ (VU), 25 ―Endangered‖ (EN), and 14 ―Critically Endangered‖ (CR),
according to IUCN endangered species list. We found a difference of 113 species between taxa indicated
by IUCN database as threatened by flooding (64) and our results. Thus we indicate the sea level rising as
an important threat to anurans in the near future. Amphibians are already the most threatened animal
group, being affected mainly by pandemic diseases, pollution, habitat loss and fragmentation. One more
cause can severely accelerate the group decline, jeopardizing entire ecosystems, ultimately affecting
human society.



Oliveira, Igor Soares de (Universidade Estadual de Campinas); Pereira, Elder Ribeiro; Ribeiro, Vanessa
Maria; Vitule, Jean Ricardo Simões (Laboratório de Ecologia e Conservação, Canada)

Predation of alien invasive vertebrates on brazilian amphibians: report of two cases in the atlantic
forest hotspot

Predation, in the sense of an organism killing another for nutritional purposes, is probably as old as life
itself and has originated many times during the history of life. Amphibians are often preyed by
vertebrates, which in turn serve as meal for amphibians in a few cases. Natural dynamics of predator-prey
interactions may result in different effects on prey. However, invasive predators may cause decline in



                                                                                                         525
natural prey population. Rats are ubiquitous opportunistic predator, introduced in several islands and
continents, often pressuring native species. In a similar way, fishes are organisms largely introduced and
may to affect severely native populations. Herein we report two cases of predation on native frogs in
Atlantic forest hotspot. One individual of Rattus norvegicus was observed preying on an adult individual
male of Rhinella icterica. In the second case, a native Hypsiboas sp. was found in stomach contents of an
individual of Black Bass (Micropterus salmoides), a North American introduced fish. These observations
may indicate that native species are suffering direct interference by invaders, due to predation on native
prey or competition for the same niche as native predators. Invasive predators are one of the causes of
amphibian population decline worldwide. A possible negative impact of predation by introduced
vertebrates probably are further significant on anuran species than we can detect, once there are few
cases reported. Thus, studies with invasive species are needed to clarify its biology and its impacts on
native species, providing a more effective conservation.



Oliver, Lauren (Louisiana State University); Rittmeyer, Eric (Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge,
LA, United States); Kraus, Fred (Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Honolulu, HI, United States); Richards,
Stephen (Museum and Art Gallery of the Northern Territory, Darwin, NT, Australia); Austin, Christopher
(Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, United States)

Phylogeny and phylogeography of Mantophryne (Anura: Microhylidae) reveals cryptic diversity in
New Guinea

The island of New Guinea is one of only five high-biodiversity regions in the world and frog diversity is
exceptionally large on the island with more than 400 known species with many new species described
annually. The terrestrial frog genus Mantophryne is composed of four species, three of which have
narrow geographic distributions. In contrast, the fourth species, Mantophryne lateralis, is wide-ranging
and distributed throughout the lowland forests on the eastern half of the island. This broad range is
concordant with many other amphibian groups and thus makes M. lateralis a good initial candidate for
examining patterns of genetic diversity in eastern New Guinea. Here, we sequence 104 ingroup samples
for 3 mitochondrial and 3 nuclear loci to reconstruct the phylogeny of the genus and examine spatial and
temporal patterns of diversity. Biogeographic analysis suggests the genus may have evolved on the
eastern Papuan peninsula before dispersing west along the north and south coasts and east to the
D‘Entrecastaux and Louisidade archipelagos. Phylogenetic results show that M. infulata is more closely
related to the sister genus Hylophorbus and that the monotypic genus Pherohapsis is nested within
Mantophryne. The wide ranging M. lateralis is composed of at least nine geographically separated and
well supported lineages that represent putative species and these results imply that other amphibian
species with similar distributions might also contain cryptic diversity.



Oliver, Paul (The University of Melbourne);

Understanding the origins and diversification of a diverse continental fauna: insights from
downunder.

Despite a long history of isolation Australia has one of the most diverse squamate faunas in the world
(900+ species). It is only in last decade that a suite of molecular dating studies have provided a believably
accurate window into history of this fauna. Work to date has confirmed that the majority of lineages are
relatively recent overwater migrants from Asia; with only one lineage of geckos showing clear evidence of
persistence since the break up of Gondwana. Irregardless of biogeographic origins, it now also appears



                                                                                                         526
that diversity in all extent lineages is relatively young, current evidence suggests that at most ten extant
lineages were present more 30 million years ago.



Olker, Jennifer (Natural Resources Research Institute - University of Minnesota Duluth); Schoff, Patrick
(Natural Resources Research Institute - University of Minnesota Duluth, Canada); Wagner, Angela
(USDA ARS, North Central Agricultural Research, Canada); Guntenspergen, Glenn (USGS Patuxent
Wildlife Research Center, Canada); Johnson, Lucinda (Natural Resources Research Institute - University
of Minnesota Duluth, Canada)

Lessons learned from multiscale studies of somatic and gonadal development in two native
amphibian species

Aquatic organisms are exposed to a variety of stressors that may be benign individually but interact to
negatively impact health and survival of individuals and populations. Understanding how anthropogenic
and natural stressors interact in aquatic ecosystems is challenging because the complexity produced by
multiple stressors is not easily replicated in controlled experiments. We investigated multiple stressors
using a multiscale approach, with amphibians as models for wildlife populations and indicators of wetland
health. We assessed the range and distribution of landscape and within-wetland stressors across the
upper Midwest US, focusing on atrazine (a commonly used herbicide) and climate change for in-depth
investigations. Organismal responses included growth, development, and gonadal morphology in two
native frogs ( Rana pipiens and Rana sylvatica ) in field surveys and mesocosm experiments, which
were conducted 1) across a range of environmentally relevant atrazine concentrations, and 2) in
combination and interaction with accelerated pond-drying as an anticipated consequence of climate
change. Field analyses indicated that potential amphibian stressors were widely distributed across the
region, with few areas free of detectable atrazine. In mesocosm experiments, atrazine exposure altered
development and slightly reduced survival in both species, while accelerated pond-drying had no
independent or strong interactive effects. Testicular oocytes, which indicate potential endocrine
disruption, were found in experimental and field-collected specimens with no relationship to atrazine
concentration and significantly different prevalence between species. Lessons from this series of
investigations emphasize that effective understanding of the role of agrochemicals in amphibian
population declines and ecosystem impacts must include studies at multiple scales, combining controlled
experimental exposures and field observations using standard laboratory models as well as native
species.



Olson, Deanna (US Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station); Burnett, Kelly (US Forest
Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station, Corvallis, United States)

Aquatic-terrestrial connectivity designs in forests: funnels and chains across landscapes

Our managed forest landscape connectivity design targets headwater streams to create a web of
connections across the landscape, likely benefiting numerous forest-dependent species, especially
amphibians. In managed forests, stream-riparian management zones are used as foraging, breeding, and
dispersal habitat by a wide variety of species with both aquatic and terrestrial affiliations. Overland
dispersal of organisms between watersheds serves to connect populations of many taxonomic groups
among basins across forested landscapes. Small streams and their associated riparian areas are useful
points within a landscape for linking basins across ridgelines because such headwaters are frequent and
are in relatively close proximity to adjacent drainages. Riparian management designs that serve to




                                                                                                        527
―funnel‖ organisms to headwater areas where ―chains‖ of habitat across ridgelines are provided may aid
landscape-scale population connectivity. Landscape management considerations for placement of
headwater linkage areas include: 1) targeting connections at landscape nodes where three discrete
watersheds (―triads‖) join; 2) maintaining north-south, east-west, and elevational habitat connectivity in
the face of climate change; 3) incorporation of place-based disturbance regimes such as headwater
debris-flow-prone areas; 4) targeting connectivity areas to address sensitive species conservation
strongholds; and 5) geometric considerations at the forest-stand scale of a single project or proposed
timber sale, including managing habitats to connect adjacent forest ownerships, such as to connect
corners of checkerboard landscape blocks along diagonals. At finer spatial scales, management
approaches for habitat ―funnels‖ along riparian zones and ―chains‖ across ridgelines include retention or
restoration of forest structural components and green tree retention. Data from our headwater stream
amphibian studies in the U.S. northwest suggest that our ‗funnel and chain‘ linkage area design would
address forest fragmentation effects from timber harvesting and benefit multiple species.



Olson, Deanna (US Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station); Nanjappa, Priya (Association
of Fish and Wildlife Agencies, Washington, D.C., United States); Riley, Terry (Partners in Amphibian and
Reptile Conservation, Denver, United States); Breisch, Alvin (Partners in Amphibian and Reptile
Conservation, Altamont, United States); Conrad, Polly (Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation,
Logan, United States)

Herpetological Conservation Paradigms: The PARC Kaleidoscope

To encourage a more in-depth focus on the long-term goals of herpetofauna species and habitat
sustainability, Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation is exploring new paradigms of
conservation program implementation. Our historical partnership model engages government agencies in
formal memoranda of understanding, and other entities such as private industry, non-governmental
organizations, nature centers, educators, researchers, and individuals in informal volunteer liaisons. Our
rotating ―Year of‖ campaigns (2011−Year of the Turtle; 2012−Year of the Lizard; 2013−Year of the Snake)
are proving to have numerous benefits, on practical, sociological, and professional fronts. For our fast-
paced world, focusing on a single, annually-changing taxon piques and sustains public interest.
Additionally, our diverse professional workforce can address and develop tools effectively relative to one
set of topics at a time. Each year involves a different suite of partners and reaches out to different sectors
of the public, demographically and geographically. Emphasizing taxon-specific issues provides depth to
our campaigns. Raising awareness for conservation and research needs continues to yield resources to
expand capabilities in these dimensions after the ―year‖ ends. For instance, the earlier 2008−Year of the
Frog led by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums had a focus on disease issues and ex-situ
conservation, and this advocacy was leveraged by many others and has resulted in tremendous growth in
our global research capacity in these areas since 2008. Year of the Turtle (www.yearoftheturtle.org)
highlighted conservation and trade issues, with new regulatory emphasis emerging now for the
sustainable use of all herpetofauna. Year of the Lizard (www.yearofthelizard.org) is developing a strong
emphasis in both research and education in 2012, and Year of the Snake likely will be even more closely
focused on education in order to raise awareness for the most misunderstood reptile group. Our diverse
portfolio of activities is a conservation kaleidoscope, offering a colorful palette of tools and approaches.
We hope to expand our toolbox of approaches to match emerging topics.




                                                                                                          528
Olson, Deanna (US Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station); Leirness, jeffery; Cunningham,
Patrick (US Forest Service, Corvallis, United States); Steel, Ashley (US Forest Service, Seattle, United
States)

Riparian buffers and forest thinning: Effects on headwater amphibians after 5 and 10 years

The Density Management and Riparian Buffer Study of western Oregon, USA was initiated in 1994 to
assess: 1) upland forest density management approaches to accelerate development of late-successional
forest characteristics in managed federal forests; and 2) the efficacy of alternative riparian buffer widths
along headwater streams, in the context of upland thinning, to retain key aquatic resources. Instream-
and streambank-dwelling amphibians were monitored as part of the riparian component, using a
before/after/control methodology. We analyzed animal counts along 45 stream reaches at 8 study sites,
distributed from the foothills of Mount Hood to Coos Bay, Oregon from data collected in one year pre-
treatment and years 1, 2, 5 and 10 post-treatment. Using linear regression, we sought the simplest model
to explain the variability in post-treatment animal abundances at the reach scale, after accounting for pre-
treatment counts. Bank models analyzed all amphibians, all terrestrial-breeding amphibians, Plethodon
dunni and P. vehiculum. Instream models analyzed all vertebrates, all amphibians, stream-breeding
amphibians, Dicamptodon tenebrosus, and Rhyacotriton species. Streambank models included buffer
treatment, survey area, stream width, re-treatment count, and no. days post-treatment. Instream models
also included survey method, hand sampling or electrofishing. Along banks, pre-treatment counts alone
were adequate to explain variation in amphibian numbers, but there was support for a negative effect of
the narrowest buffer for all groups analyzed except P. vehiculum. For all species groups analyzed
instream, more complex relationships resulted, with important covariates including pre-treatment counts,
stream width, and buffers. Decreasing counts over time in reaches with the narrowest buffer were
evident.



O'Regan, Sacha (Simon Fraser University); Palen, Wendy (Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC,
Canada)

Extending the utility of species-specific data for amphibian conservation; using population data to
evaluate density-dependence and predict the relative vulnerability of species

Enigmatic amphibian declines have stimulated a tremendous amount of research into potential drivers of
decline. Over a decade of research, however, has revealed few predictive lessons that can be applied to
prevent declines in advance of their occurrence. We evaluated whether a population dynamics
framework, and specifically the presence of density-dependent bottlenecks in complex life cycles, can be
used to predict how resilient a population might be to perturbation by stressors in specific life-stages. We
investigated whether there are patterns between life-history traits and the strength of stage-specific
density-dependence (e.g compensatory, over-compensatory, depensatory) by summarizing published
studies where stage-specific densities varied experimentally or naturally. We quantified the functional
relationship between density and survival for as many species and life-stages as there were data
available by fitting a range of models to the data (e.g. Beverton-Holt, theta-logistic, compensation ratios).
The strength of density-dependence was compared across studies to evaluate correlations with life-
history traits and taxonomic groupings. We summarized 71 papers comprising 105 studies, and found
that 68% were conducted with fewer than 4 densities, the threshold required for fitting relationships
between density and survival. We identified a strong bias in life-history representation among the studies
(primarily larval, pool breeding, and temperate) that restricted the conclusions that could be drawn about
patterns between the strength of density-dependence and life-history traits. Ten studies were suitable for
model-fitting and comparison, and while they represent a limited sub-set of species and life histories, the



                                                                                                         529
strength of density-dependence can be used to evaluate the relative importance of stage-specific
stressors in each case. We conclude that the utility of using a population dynamics framework is currently
limited by the availability of data in the published literature, but propose that ecologists studying
amphibians consider contributing unpublished population and life-history data to centralized online
databases. Such information would accelerate our ability to evaluate threats to potentially even poorly
studied amphibian species, extending the value of individual studies and broadening the scope of
conservation efforts beyond species by species triage.



Orrico, Bill (Wildlife Conservation Society);

Color Recognition in a Captive Juvenile Cuban Crocodile (Crocodylus rhombifer) During
Conditioning

Although the structure of the modern crocodilian eye suggests the ability to see in a broad range of
colors, very little research has been done to understand the ability of crocodilian species to differentiate
between colors in a captive setting. A broader understanding of the visual ability of crocodilians will have
a significant effect on captive crocodilian husbandry primarily relating to modern enrichment and training
techniques employed by captive facilities. Using a juvenile Cuban Crocodile (Crocodylus rhombifer) The
Wildlife Conservation Society‘s Bronx Zoo facility conducted a study of color recognition and decision
making use of the animal‘s previously observed responses to positive reinforcement training. We
presented the animal with a choice between its regularly reinforced color target and a randomized
secondary color target and recorded how long it took for a ―choice‖ to be made. The crocodile showed an
ability to recognize its target, indicating the ability to differentiate between the choices given. This
aptitude to distinguish between different color targets can be very helpful in the husbandry and
conditioning of crocodilians, as well as providing insights into crocodilian cognitive abilities.



Ortega Andrade, Hugo Mauricio (Fundación EcoCiencia and Instituto de Ecología, A.C.); Cisneros-
Heredia, Diego (Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Colegio de Ciencias Biológicas y Ambientales,
Quito, Columbia)

Twenty-one years supporting research and conservation of threatened species in Ecuador based
on a research fellowship program

EcoCiencia, an Ecuadorian NGO, has developed a research fellowship program to promote conservation
projects in Ecuador since 1990:       Programa de Becas de Investigación para la Conservación        PBIC.
This program focuses on the promotion of biodiversity research and in-situ conservation actions
developed by young Ecuadorian investigators (both students and professionals). Since 2005, in
collaboration with Conservation International and other partner organizations, Ecociencia focused PBIC
on projects related with threaten species (under the ―Fernando Ortíz Crespo‖ Threatened Species
Initiative). So far, about 80 projects have been funded, dealing with several threatened species and their
habitats along continental and insular Ecuador. PBIC and its Threatened Species Initiative has been an
important support to herpetological research, with 13 projects developed by five young Ecuadorian
herpetologists since 2005. These projects have contributed with new information on the systematics,
ecology, population dynamics, biogeography, ethology, conservation status, and disease-related issues
of frogs of the families Centrolenidae (glassfrogs), Hylidae (treefrogs), Dendrobatidae (poison frogs), and
several species of lizards and crocodylians. In particular, for glassfrogs a great deal of information has
been produced, including the description of five new species, a revision of the anatomical and ecological



                                                                                                        530
characteristics of the family, and assessments of the impacts produced by habitat and climate changes
on their populations. Nowadays, EcoCiencia has partnered with Fundación Zoológica del Ecuador to
enhance the Threatened Species Initiative by incorporating into a program that aims to support the
conservation of threatened amphibians by including environmental education, institutional strengthening,
and government lobbying together with research and in-situ conservation. We hope to continue the
support of young scientific talents, and suggest that this program-model should be developed in other
countries.



O'Shea, Owen (Australian Institute of Marine science);

Bioturbation by stingrays at Ningaloo Reef,

Stingrays are an important part of the biomass of the fishes in shallow coastal ecosystems, particularly in
interreefal      areas. In these habitats, they are considered keystone species – modifying physical and
biological habitats through      their foraging and predation. Here, we quantify the effects of bioturbation
by rays on sand flats of Ningaloo Reef lagoon in Western Australia. We measured the daily length,
breadth and depth of 108 feeding pits over three 7-day periods, created by stingrays ( Pastinachus
atrus, Himantura spp. Taeniura lymma and Urogymnus asperrimus) in Mangrove Bay. Additionally, an
area of , 1km 2 of the lagoon at Coral Bay was mapped three times over 18 months, to record patterns
of ray and pit presence. Over 21 days at Mangrove Bay, a total of 1.08m 3 of sediment was excavated
by rays, equating to a sediment wet weight of 760.8 kg, and 2.42% of the total area sampled, or 0.03% of
the whole intertidal zone. We estimate that up to 42% of the soft sediments in our study area would be
reworked by stingrays each year. Based on a model predicting the probability of pit presence over time,
there was a 40% probability of ray pits persisting for 4 days before being filled in but only a 15%
probability of a pit being present after 7 days. Changes in pit volume over time were static, providing
evidence for secondary use. Our results imply that rays play an important ecological role creating
sheltered habitats for other taxa in addition to the turnover of sediments



Oswald, Heather (University of South Carolina); Waldron, Jayme; Welch, Shane (University of South
Carolina, Canada); Bennett, Steve (South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Canada);
Mousseau, Timothy (University of South Carolina, Canada)

Environmental Effects on Southern Two-Lined Salamander (Eurycea cirrigera) Nest Site Selection

Nest site selection is a critical process in the life history of amphibians directly influencing offspring
survival and fitness of the parent. Females use both abiotic (temperature, moisture, and site composition)
and biotic (presence of conspecifics, predators, and competitors) factors as cues to discriminate among
oviposition sites. In this study, we evaluated nest site selection of the Southern Two-lined salamander,
Eurycea cirrigera , in relation to a range of environmental conditions. We monitored nesting E. cirrigera
under coverboards at two seepage wetlands in the South Carolina inner Coastal Plain during the E.
cirrigera breeding season. For each coverboard, we recorded environmental and habitat data. We
analyzed photographs of nesting landscapes under coverboards and egg mass ( n =51) locations using a
GIS. We examined E. cirrigera nest site selection at two scales (seep and within coverboard) using
logistic regression and AIC model selection. We constructed a priori candidate models that included
abiotic and biotic predictors. Within board nest site selection was positively associated with flowing, free
water and negatively associated with distance to board edge. At the seep scale, nest site selection
appeared to be driven by water temperature and depth. Although Coastal Plain seepage wetlands are



                                                                                                        531
radically different from montane E. cirrigera habitats, seepages provide a unique combination of flowing
water and temperature regimes that provide suitable nesting habitats for E. cirrigera within an atypical
landscape.



Ota, Hidetoshi (University of Hyogo and Museum of Nature and Human Activities); Takeuchi, Misato
(University of Hyogo, Canada); Kawamura, Kouichi (Mie University, Canada); Oh, Hong-Shik (Cheju
National University, Canada); Orlov, Nikolai; Ananjeva, Natalia (Institute of Zoology, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Canada)

Systematics and biogeography of the soft-shell turtles, Pelodiscus sinensis sensu lato

The soft-shell turtles of the genus Pelodiscus are broadly distributed in East Asia, from southeastern
Russia through Korea and eastern continental China down to northern Vietnam in the eastern Eurasian
Continent, and several off-shore islands, such as Taiwan and the Main islands of Japan. Due to their
popularity as food materials in most East Asian countries, the soft-shell turtles have been artificially
transported, occasionally leading to establishment of feral populations. We have examined molecular
phylogeography of Pelodiscus sinensis sensu lato and related taxa. Our purposes are: (1) To create a
plausible hypothesis on the history of divergence, and natural and artificial dispersals in this group of
turtles in East Asia; and (2) to revise their taxonomic arrangement accordingly. Tissue samples from
approximately 250 specimens, representing nearly whole range of P. sinensis sensu lato and related
taxa, were subjected to sequencing of mitochondrial ND4 gene, and resultant data were subjected to
phylogenetic and network analyses along with additional sequence data available from free data-bases.
The results of the analyses demonstrated complicated genetic structure in several local assemblages of
the turtles, Japanese assemblages in particular, most likely as a result of artificial introduction of exotic
individuals to areas where native populations with unique haplotypes had occurred already. Conservation
implications of the present findings are also discussed.



Otani, Lye (Department of Biological Science - Federal University of São Paulo); Navas Iannini, Carlos
Arturo (Department of Physiology - University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil); Carvalho, José Eduardo
(Department of Biological Science - Federal University of São Paulo, Diadema, Brazil)

Does Exercise Physiology Differ Between Anuran Species From Continuous And Fragmented
Forested Habitats?

Habitat fragmentation is considered one of the main factors associated to amphibian population decline
worldwide. Among the complex causal relationship between these two processes, landscape connectivity
is an important factor for gene flow maintenance and thus important for populations persistence in
fragmented habitats. Therefore, our main hypothesis is that anuran species that are extinct in fragmented
habitats have lower locomotor capacity than persistent species. To test this hypothesis, we compared
morphological, physiological and locomotor performance traits of 3 different anuran species from the
genus Physalaemus and Leptodactylus that occur in continuous and fragmented habitats in two locations
of the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. In comparison with the forest specialists Leptodactylus notoakitites and L.
marmoratus, the species L. mystacinus is frequently found in open and fragmented habitats. In contrast
with the congenerics species studied, individuals of L. mystacinus have large body size, high endurance
capacity (i.e. number of jumps, maximal distance jumped and time until exhaustion) and maximum activity
of the metabolic enzymes citrate sintase and lactate dehydrogenase in the hindlimb muscles. It is
possible that such characteristics enable a greater movement among fragments or between fragments




                                                                                                         532
and the breeding sites. A similar pattern, however, could not be identified across populations of the same
species or across species within the genus Physalaemus. Differences among populations of the
fragmented habitat persistent species, Physalaemus cuvieri, seem dependent on the geographic location
and independent of landscape features. Moreover, individuals of P. cuvieri have intermediate body size,
endurance capacity and hindlimb muscles enzyme activity when compared with P. olfersii and P. spiniger,
the forest specialists species studied. Therefore, our hypothesis was corroborated for the genus
Leptodactylus and not for the genus Physalaemus. Our study highlights the importance of the relationship
between physiology, conservation and landscape ecology from the perspective of ability to circulate
across a fragmented forest matrix. However, whereas movement may be a key factor for some taxa,
other aspects such as tolerance to the matrix conditions may be more relevant. Therefore, we emphasize
the importance of an integrative approach to understand the complex relationship between forest habitat
fragmentation and anuran declines.(Financed by FAPESP)



Otero, Luisa (University of Puerto Rico); Huey, Raymond (University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United
States); Gorman, George (retired, Berkeley, CA, United States)

Habitat influence on annual reproductive cycle of Anolis cristatellus in Puerto Rico

At many Caribbean localities, different species of Anolis occupy open (sunny, hot) versus forest (shady,
cool) habitats [1, 2]. Open-habitat species thermoregulate carefully &amp; have high body temperatures (
T b ); forest species are thermoconformers &amp; have low T b [1, 2]. At some localities, however, a
single species occupies both habitats:, individuals in the open are thermoregulators &amp; relatively
warm, but those in shade are thermoconformers &amp; cool [3, 4].             What are the consequences of
living in thermally distinct habitats? A case in point involves A. cristatellu s, which occupies both open
&amp; forest habitats at Pta Salinas, Puerto Rico [3]. In the morning in summer, open A. cristatellus are
warm &amp; fast relative to forest lizards, but in the afternoon, open lizards are heat stressed &amp;
relatively slow [3]. Whether habitat also influences reproductive intensity &amp; cycles is unknown, but
likely, because temperature drives reproductive cycles in Puerto Rican Anolis [6, 7].      We are studying
female reproductive cycles of A. cristatellus at Pta Salinas. Every month we captured ≥ 15 females in
each habitat and determined reproductive condition. Females with ≥ one egg were classified as gravid [6].
We also recorded size (SVL), body and air temperature, perch height, sun exposure, and weather.            In
both habitats females had highest reproduction in summer and lowest in winter, a cycle typical of Puerto
Rican Anolis [6]. In every month, lizards in the open were warmer and more frequently gravid than were
forest females. Differences in winter months were striking: 37% of open females had eggs (N=70), but no
forest female did (N=57).      To our knowledge, such habitat-scale variation in reproduction at single sites
has not been documented for lizards. In any case, thermal habitat clearly alters reproduction (and
probably demography) of A. cristatellus at Pta Salinas. In particular, the forest appears suboptimal
because forest lizards have reduced reproduction every month. Climate warming might reverse that
disadvantage. [1] Ruibal, R. 1961 Evolution 15:98-111. [2] Rand, A.S. 1964 Ecology 45:745-752. [3]
Huey, R.B. 1974 Science 184:1001-1003. [4] Lister, B.C. 1976 Evolution 30:659-676. [5] Huey, R.B.
1983 In Advances in Herpetology &amp; Evolutionary Biology: Essays in Honor of Ernest E. Williams ,
A.G.J. Rhodin &amp; K. Miyata, Eds. Mus Comp Zool: Cambridge, MA. p. 484-490. [6] Gorman, G.C.
&amp; Licht, P. 1974 Ecology 55:360-369. [7] Licht, P. and Gorman, G.C. 1975 Copeia 1975:496-504.




                                                                                                         533
Owen, Dustin (Ball State University); Jacquemin, Stephen; Doll, Jason; Pyron, Mark; Lauer, Thomas
(Ball State University, Canada)

Age and rate of growth of freshwater drum (Aplodinotus grunniens) in the Wabash River, USA

Understanding age and growth characteristics is a key component of assessing population dynamics,
ecosystem status, and for imploring best management practices. The freshwater drum ( Aplodinotus
grunniens ) is a long lived, highly fecund, benthivore that comprises the largest geographic range of all
North American freshwater fishes. We analyzed otolith cross-sections to assess age and growth patterns
of 460 freshwater drum sampled from the Wabash River, Indiana. Our objective was to evaluate age
and growth patterns in relation to sex, size, position in the river system (upstream vs. downstream of a
large tributary) using the linearized von Bertalanffy growth model. Age ranged from 0 to 32 years and
length ranged from 68mm to 595mm. Growth patterns indicated that males exhibit faster growth rates
than females during the first few years of growth. However, females ultimately attain longer lengths and
display faster growth rates after age two. Position in the river system (upstream vs. downstream) was not
related to growth rates of either sex. We suggest that differences in growth rate may be attributable to diet
and sexual maturity energy cost. In addition, we suggest that overall rates of growth have been influenced
by hydrology and ecosystem processes.



Owen, Dustin (Ball State University); Islam, Kamal (Ball State University, Canada)

Physiological Impacts of Roads on Free-Ranging Copperheads (Agkistrodon contortrix)

Chronic stress has been linked to impaired reproduction, suppressed immunity, and neural cell death in
many vertebrate species.          While numerous studies have been conducted on birds and mammals,
comparatively few studies have been undertaken on reptiles. This paucity of data effectively limits the
capacity for and direction of potential conservation efforts. This project will implement a novel approach
for investigating whether anthropogenic disturbances influences the stress physiology in free-ranging
copperheads ( Agkistrodon contortrix ). The ecology and behavioral aspects of copperheads have been
extensively studied; their physiological reactions however, when exposed to road obstructions remain
undocumented. For 3 months (May, June, and July) in 2012, snakes will be captured from 3 study sites,
Yellowwood and Clark state forests, and Brown County State Park in southern Indiana. A control group
of snakes captured from nearby natural areas (found by walking within the area at least 100 m away from
the road), and a treatment group of snakes captured while crossing, attempting to cross, or have just
recently crossed a road will be collected.       Blood will be drawn and analyzed using an ELISA CORT
assay kit. There is a growing need to understand that, in addition to visible impacts (behavioral and
ecological) of the organism in response to human alterations of habitat, invisible effects (physiological)
may be equally important. A review of the literature indicates this is the first study to address this issue.
I will present data that will examine if crossing roads causes stress in snakes and thus, may offer a
physiological explanation for previously documented cases of roads as barriers to gene flow.             The
ramifications of this study should shed light onto the ever growing field of anthropogenic studies on
wildlife, but will take a new approach in observing the physiological impacts rather than behavioral. The
results of this study will provide a better understanding of roads as chronic stressors.




                                                                                                         534
Owens, Hannah (University of Kansas);

Niche Conservatism in Gadine Fishes

Niche conservatism, the tendency of the fundamental niche of a species to remain the same over time, is
a growing area of interest in a number of organismal groups. This study aims to test the hypothesis that
niche conservatism has led to a negative correlation between phylogenetic relatedness and niche
similarity in the subfamily Gadinae. The Gadinae is a group of marine fish that includes Atlantic, Pacific,
and walleye cod ( Gadus morhua, G. macrocephalus , and Theragra chalcogramma, respectively), as
well as Greenland, Polar, Arctic, and East Siberian cod ( G. ogac , Boreogadus saida, Artogadus
glacialis, and A. borisovi ), haddock ( Melanogrammus aeglefinus ) and whiting ( Merlangius merlangus).
These species are distributed throughout the Arctic and subarctic and occupy niches ranging from the
temperate benthos to the edges of Arctic sea ice; some sister species exist in close distributional
proximity, and others are geographically isolated. As a result of their economic importance, many of these
species are very well known and sampled throughout their ranges, resulting in a wealth of available
genetic and geographic information, and providing an ideal system in which to investigate patterns of
niche conservatism. Employing molecular phylogenetic data from GenBank, genetic similarity was
determined by calculating patristic differences between species based on several mitochondrial gene
trees, as well as a concatenated gene tree. Occurrence data from the Global Biodiversity Information
Facility database and the Russian Academy of Sciences Zoological Institute, in combination with
environmental data from NOAA‘s World Ocean Atlas 2009, were used to calculate ecological niche
similarity using both the niche overlap and background similarity tests provided by ENMTools. Resulting
patterns of niche similarity and genetic relatedness of species were complex, although allopatric sister
species tended to display a lesser degree of niche similarity to one another compared to sympatric
species. Although these results were born out by both niche overlap and background similarity tests, they
emphasize the great care that is necessary when attempting such a niche similarity analysis, from the
conception of the distributional range of a species through the interpretation of results.



Oyamaguchi, Hilton (UCLA); Smith, Thomas (UCLA, Los Angeles, United States)

Divergence along a Brazilian rainforest-savanna gradient and the role in generating diversity

Although a growing number of studies have shown that ecological speciation may be common, previous
work has largely used vicariant events to explain patterns of diversity in the Amazon rainforest. Evaluating
the relative roles of genetic drift and divergent selection is fundamental to understanding the mechanisms
of rainforest speciation, yet few studies have simultaneously examined these processes. Our research
investigates the relative roles of natural selection and genetic drift resulting in differentiation in the frog
Dendropsophus minutus examining populations from the Amazon rainforest and the Brazilian savanna
(Cerrado). Environmental differences between these habitats may result in contrasting selection
pressures and may, as a consequence, be important in speciation. To understand the effects of divergent
selection and genetic drift on intraspecific differentiation in D. minutus populations, we analyzed museum
and field data from both habitats. Multivariate analysis (PCA) of morphological data from museum
collections shows significant differences between habitats. Similar to museum specimens, PCA analyses
of morphological data collected in the field shows significant differences between Cerrado and
Amazonian populations. In addition, D. minutus calls show differences between these two habitats.
Finally, morphology analyses show that the divergence between habitat types is greater than within
habitat comparisons. This result suggests that natural selection along the gradient might be important in
generating intraspecific divergence between populations. This study demonstrates that the Amazon




                                                                                                           535
forest-Cerrado gradient may play an important role in the speciation process; and may have important
implications for conservation decision makers in this region.



Pabijan, Maciej (Jagiellonian University); Wollenberg, Katharina (Trier University, Trier, Germany);
Vences, Miguel (Technical University of Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany)

The influence of body size on diversification in anurans: a case study from Madagascar

The processes affecting species diversification may also exert an influence on patterns of genetic
variability within species. We evaluated the contributions of five potential explanatory variables affecting
rates of species formation (body size, reproductive mode, range size, microhabitat and skin texture) on
nucleotide divergence between populations and polymorphism within populations in the mitochondrial
16S rRNA gene for 40 species of frogs (Mantellidae) from two rainforest communities in Madagascar. We
find that with the exception of body size, none of the proposed factors correlate with regional
differentiation or levels of genetic variation within populations of mantellid frogs. However, we detected a
significant but weak (ca. 11% of the explained variation in nucleotide divergence) inverse relationship
between body size and divergence between populations, and in most cases a complete lack of haplotype
sharing between populations of small-bodied species. This implies considerable population subdivision
and low levels of gene flow in small and medium sized frogs. Lower vagility and shorter generation times,
both putatively associated with small body size, are hypothesized to be the proximate mechanisms
producing this pattern. The biological correlates of small body size may thus establish a basis for regional
genetic fragmentation, which in turn may accelerate rates of allopatric speciation in small-bodied frogs
relative to large species. Our results are corroborated by a recent phylogeny-based study in mantellids
that found a link between small body size and higher mtDNA substitution rates. Taken together, our
findings suggest a mechanism through which variation in body size might influence species formation and
thus has important implications for diversification rates in tropical amphibians and possibly other
vertebrate groups.



Page, Larry (Florida Museum of Natural History);

iDigBio, the National Resource for Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections (ADBC)

iDigBio, the National Resource for the NSF-funded "Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections" is
working to build the teams and infrastructure that are required to successfully digitize information in
biological collections throughout the U.S. iDigBio will provide core resources and coordination for the
national digitization effort, oversee implementation of standards and best practices for digitization, provide
a cloud computing environment for collections data, and plan for long-term sustainability of the national
digitization effort. As the national repository grows, iDigBio will work to improve the understanding and
appreciation of biodiversity, and of the collections that document biodiversity, by demonstrating the
connection between biodiversity and scientific and societal benefits.




                                                                                                          536
Palen, Wendy (Earth to Ocean Research Group, Dept. of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University);
Monteith, Zachary; Munshaw, Robin; Courcelles, Danielle; Atlas, William (Earth to Ocean Research
Group, Department of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Canada)

Ecological roles and population dynamics of Dicamptodon tenebrosus in stream ecosystems

In tributaries of the Pacific Northwest, coastal giant salamanders ( Dicamptodon tenebrosus ) often co-
occur at high densities with steelhead trout ( Oncorhynchus mykiss ) and are top aquatic predators in
many stream food webs. Nearly two decades of research has demonstrated the primacy of predation by
stream-dwelling fishes in structuring stream food webs. Despite achieving body sizes and total biomass
that can exceed that of fishes in many streams, the role of salamanders in these systems has received far
less attention. Over the past three years we combined experiments of stream food webs with surveys,
mark-recapture studies, and population dynamics models to estimate the strength of trophic interactions
and nutrient recycling by juvenile steelhead and coastal giant salamanders. Here we synthesize the
results of these diverse approaches to present an overview of the ecological roles and population
dynamics of D. tenebrosus in stream ecosystems. We find that the density and total biomass of stream
vertebrates is often strongly skewed, with D. tenebrosus biomass more than three times that of all
juvenile salmonids. Despite these differences, we estimate that the total amount of consumer recycled
nutrients (N, P) is dominated by juvenile steelhead (2x higher TN, 1.3x higher TP). Field-based
experiments in small tributaries where both species coexist suggest that terrestrial invertebrates directly
subsidize juvenile steelhead, constituting approximately 50% of prey biomass, but represent only a small
fraction of coastal giant salamander diets (&lt;10%). When terrestrial prey was experimentally reduced
over summer months, we found no changes in salamander growth rates but dramatic reductions in
steelhead growth. These patterns of resource use are supported by stable isotope samples from streams
containing both species, with D. tenebrosus populations deriving energy from more aquatic (algal)
sources (δ 13 C -25.5) compared to juvenile steelhead (δ 13 C -24.2). Despite the potential for release
from resource competition, we find that D. tenebrosus in streams without salmonids experience slower
growth rates, and using stochastic population dynamics models, estimate that these differences in growth
translate into smaller salamander populations that have a higher probability of extinction over a simulated
30-year time horizon. We conclude that anthropogenic changes in the relative abundance of coastal giant
salamanders and juvenile steelhead have the potential to alter stream food web dynamics and ecosystem
level nutrient availability.



Palmeri-Miles, Amber (Central Washington University); Irwin, Jason (Central Washington University,
Canada); Griswold, Trish; Browitt, Lisa (Walter Strom Middle School, Canada)

Middle School Students Conduct Conservation Research by Tracking Toads

Sixth, seventh, and eighth-grade students from Walter Strom Middle School in Cle Elum, Washington,
were an integral part of a Master‘s of Science project at Central Washington University (CWU) examining
movement patterns and home ranges of Western Toads ( Anaxyrus boreas ) near Snoqualmie Pass, WA
(USA). Students who participated in the ―Watershed Club‖ as part of CWU‘s Yakima WATERS program
(funded by a National Science Foundation GK-12 grant) had the opportunity to conduct fieldwork and
collect real data. These students learned to use Telonics TR-4 and Communication Specialist Inc. R1000
receivers with a Telonics RA-14 directional antenna to track Western Toads. Toads were outfitted with
radio transmitters (BD-2 or BD-2T Holohil Inc.) mounted on waist belts made of polyethylene tubing.
Approximately once a month, active participants in the Watershed Club were selected to conduct
fieldwork. These students used radio telemetry to locate toads in various habitats throughout three




                                                                                                       537
seasons in all weather conditions. Western Toads show great capacity for movement (e.g., &gt;3.5 km in
a week), use a wide variety of habitats, and show strong seasonal and annual site fidelity. Estimates of
Western Toads‘ home ranges were 0.002-1.346 km2 (n= 10). Due to the duration of this study (2 yr)
students were able to observe differences in seasonal habitat selection and movement patterns. In
addition to collecting data, students were filmed and interviewed while conducting fieldwork. A
documentary is being assembled that will be used to educate community members about the importance
of wildlife conservation and demonstrate Walter Strom Middle School‘s connection with local
environmental issues.



Palmeri-Miles, Amber (Central Washington University); Irwin, Jason (Central Washington University,
Canada)

Western Toad (Anaxyrus boreas) overwintering and hibernacula temperatures near Snoqualmie
Pass, WA, USA

Amphibians use a variety of methods to survive harsh winter temperatures. Some avoid freezing
temperatures by overwintering aquatically; others are freeze tolerant, and some species use
subterranean refuges. Because Western Toads ( Anaxyrus [= Bufo ] boreas ) are not freeze tolerant,
overwintering sites must buffer toads from freezing temperatures, although few studies have examined
overwintering in this species. We investigated the timing of A. boreas overwintering and movements
around overwintering sites, identified and described hibernacula, and measured temperatures
experienced by overwintering toads. Twelve A. boreas were radio tracked to hibernacula in 2009 and
2010 in the Snoqualmie Pass area of the Cascade Mountains of Washington State (USA). This area is
characterized by heavy snowfall (mean= 11 m annually) and snow is often present when toads breed in
mid-April to mid-May (weather dependent). Toads entered hibernacula between 5 October and 20
November. Spring emergence was more variable, ranging from 11 March and 1 June. Some toads made
distinct movements from summer foraging range to overwintering sites (0.074-2.3 km), while others
overwintered within their summer range. Distance moved to overwintering sites was not correlated with
size or sex. Hibernacula sites were located in a variety of habitats ranging from wetlands to upland
forests. Most toads selected pre-existing burrows and natural tunnels often adjacent to subsurface
streams, although others appeared to have burrowed directly into the soil. Communal overwintering (at
least 2 individuals) was observed at two sites. The two largest males and females were outfitted with
Thermochron iButton (DS1922L) attached to radio transmitter belts. Radio transmitter-iButton complexes
weighed 7.0-7.5 g (4.0-8.6% of body weight). To record environmental temperatures, additional iButtons
were placed at the entrances of hibernacula, and in nearby trees (2 m height). iButtons recorded
temperatures at 1.2 or 1.5 h intervals. The minimum temperature recorded amongst hibernacula was
0.13°C, although air temperatures reached -20.8°C. Toads‘ temperature data indicate that they emerge
from hibernacula, bask in the sun and retreat below ground before traveling away from overwintering
sites. A. boreas overwintering seems highly variable. Some toads traveled towards breeding sites to
overwinter, others overwintered within their summer range then traveled to breeding sites, yet other
mature adults did not breed at all.




                                                                                                     538
Palomares, M.L. Deng (Fisheries Centre, UBC); Bailly, Nicolas (WorldFish Center, Canada)

Documenting the marine biodiversity of island ecosystems through FishBase and SeaLifeBase

FishBase (www.fishbase.org) and SeaLifeBase (www.sealifebase.org), free-access online biodiversity
information systems on fish and other marine animals of the world, collate bits of data from published
sources into a structure that was originally designed to provide data for analyses by aquatic resource
scientists and managers. These two databases jointly have the potential to give a full coverage of the
marine life of the world‘s oceans and can become a strong ecosystem management tool, especially for
well-documented ecosystems. Both databases use valid species (scientific) names as the hook to all
information and are designed to provide checklists of species by locality, i.e., by ecosystem within a
country, by country, or by large marine ecosystem. Checklists contain, in addition to valid and nominal
species, common names used in several languages, the status of the species in that locality, where it is
found within the water column, and its largest recorded maximum length. Attached to each valid scientific
name is a suite of structured diagnostic and ecological data that characterize the species in general,
along with population-specific biological data (e.g., growth parameters, length-weight relationships, food
items, predators, details on spawning and reproduction, etc.). This suite of data represents the bulk of
information needed for an ecosystem approach to the management of exploited living marine resources
or the assessment of the biological and economic impacts of large marine ecosystems, as done, e.g., by
the Sea Around Us project. This contribution describes the process of this documentation exemplified
with checklists of marine vertebrates in island ecosystems. We also discuss a mechanism for the efficient
transfer of pertinent data to and from projects requiring the wide range of data stored in these two
information systems, e.g., for building Ecopath models.



Paluh, Daniel (John Carroll University); Saporito, Ralph (John Carroll University, Canada)

An experimental test of aposematism in the dendrobatid poison frog Oophaga pumilio using
moving clay models

Brightly colored frogs of the family Dendrobatidae contain alkaloid-based chemical defenses, which
appear to be utilized as an effective deterrent to predators. The conspicuous coloration of these frogs is
generally considered an aposematic signal to potential color-visioned predators. A previous field-based
experiment tested this hypothesis using stationary red clay model frogs and brown clay model frogs to
assess the natural predation rates of the dendrobatid frog Oophaga pumilio as a function of color at the
La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica. Predation rates on brown models were almost twice that of red
models, suggesting that predators avoided the brightly colored models. These results support the
hypothesis that coloration in O. pumilio is an aposematic signal. In the present study, we utilize similar
methods to further study aposematism in O. pumilio. Herein, we report the results of a field study in which
natural predation rates were measured for moving clay models of O. pumilio and brown frogs. Stationary
models may not provide realistic assessments of natural predation rates, as predators may be
‗suspicious‘ or not perceive motionless models as prey, and thus avoid attacking the models. Moving
models are likely to be more realistic, and therefore provide a better assessment of natural predator
responses. The results of our study will provide additional information on the function of aposematic
coloration in dendrobatid frogs.




                                                                                                       539
Park, Daesik (Kangwon National University); Kim, Ja-Kyeong (Kangwon National University, Chuncheon,
Kangwon, Korea)

Arginine vasotocin (AVT) induces the courtship behavior of male Hynobius leechii (Urodela,
Amphibia) without external stimuli

In Hynobius , the body undulation, a male stiffens his body intermittently so that his tail and the hind part
of this body move from side to side, is one of representative male courtship behaviors and both males
and females respond to the behavior via the mechanosensory system. During a mating, a male often
displays more than 100 times body undulation per 10 min over 2-4 hours. A recent study showed that
water currents generated by male body undulations function to attract females towards the site where she
can attach her egg sacs and also in male-male competition. In this study, we have investigated if arginine
vasotocin (AVT) induces the body undulation of male Hynobius leechii as it similarly functioned in
Cynops pyrrhogaster and Taricha granulosa and if it is, tried to determine which AVT receptor is
involved in the response. Breeding and non-breeding males intraperitoneally injected 100 ug AVT started
within approximately 10 min and highly, actively displayed the body undulation where any external stimuli
were not present. In a long-term study of the response, the effect by AVT persisted over 4 hours. When
injected 100 ug AVT 20 min after injection of AVT V1 receptor antagonist to the males, the frequency of
the body undulation was decreased. However, the suppressive effect by AVT V1 receptor antagonist was
not distinct when the males which were injected the AVT V1 receptor antagonist were allowed to interact
with a female. Injection of AVT V2 receptor antagonist did not induce any significant changes in the male
body undulation. Our results suggest that in this species, AVT might influence central motivational states
of male salamanders to start their body undulation unlikely known in other urodele species and the effect
is evoked through AVT V1 receptors. This study is supported by Kangwon National University.



Parker, Mickey (University of Arizona); Goode, Matt; Albert, Kristin (University of Arizona, Canada)

Using Fluorescent Powder Tracking to Observe Fine-Scale Movements of Gila Monsters
(Heloderma suspectum)

Radiotelemetry is a useful technique that can yield valuable data on the movement paths of animals,
especially secretive species. Despite its advantages, radiotelemetry yields no information regarding
movement paths and behaviors between successive relocations. However, fluorescent powder tracking
is a technique that can be used to observe such fine-scale movements. This technique involves applying
fluorescent powder to an individual, allowing it to move about its environment, and following the resulting
trail with a portable source of UV light. From 2008-2010, we used fluorescent powder tracking to observe
fine scale movements of Gila Monsters (Heloderma suspectum) in and around Stone Canyon, a
residential development in the foothills of the Tortolita Mountains near Tucson, AZ, USA. Stone Canyon
is a mosaic of land-use types, including natural and grazed Sonoran Desert habitat, an 18-hole golf
course surrounded by areas of highly irrigated desert vegetation, houses in various stages of
construction, and a network of roads. Because Gila Monsters have large home ranges and are capable
of moving hundreds of meters in a single bout of surface activity, they are very likely to encounter
anthropogenic landscape features as they move through Stone Canyon‘s urban matrix. Using fluorescent
powder tracking, we recorded the movement paths of 121 individual Gila Monsters and recorded them
using handheld GPS units. We found that the average total distance of these paths were over twice that
of their straight line distance, which has important implications for this species‘ behavioral and
physiological ecology. We will discuss characteristics of these movement paths, as well as behaviors we
were able to document using this technique that would not be possible using other methods. We will also




                                                                                                         540
discuss the conservation implications of our results as they pertain to making urban developments more
compatible with wildlife.



Parker, Scott (Coastal Carolina University); Murphy, Christopher (The University of Sydey, Canada);
Thompson, Michael (The University of Sydney, Canada)

Influence of the progesterone receptor antagonist mifepristone on uterine blood vessel
development and epithelial surface morphology in oviparous and viviparous Australian skinks

Many of the structural and functional changes to the uterus associated with maintenance of pregnancy
are controlled by steroid hormones such as progesterone. We tested the hypothesis that progesterone
regulates uterine blood vessel development and epithelial surface morphology in the oviparous skink
Ctenotus taeniolatus and the viviparous skink Eulamprus quoyii by treating females with the
progesterone receptor antagonist mifepristone at different stages of gestation. We used
immunofluorescent confocal microscopy and scanning electron microscopy to quantify uterine vascularity
and to describe uterine surface morphology during gestation. Overall, mifepristone treatment resulted in
increased uterine blood vessel proliferation in in C. taeniolatus but did not affect uterine vascular density
and surface area at any stage of pregnancy in E. quoyii . In contrast, there was no apparent effect of
mifepristone treatment on uterine epithelial surface morphology during gestation in gravid/ pregnant
females of either species. Both species exhibit distinct regionalization in shape of uterine epithelial cells
which may relate to different functional roles during gestation. Our comparative studies of these and
other species of Australian skinks suggest that differences in uterine sensitivity to progesterone during
gravidity/pregnancy may exist among species. Alternatively, variation in progesterone receptor amino
acid sequence could result in failure of mifepristone to effectively block binding of progesterone to its
receptor and thus account for differences in treatment effects observed among skink species.



Parkinson, Chris (University of Central Florida); Fenwick, Allyson (Univeristy of Central Florida,
Canada); Daza, Juan M. (Universidad de Antioquia, Canada)

Systematics, taxonomy and biogeography of New World pitvipers (Serpentes: Crotalinae)

Understanding the historical processes that have shaped the evolution of biotic assemblages is an
important aspect of evolutionary biology. An excellent, well-defined, model system for investigating
historical processes is New World pitvipers. These snakes, characterized by a distinct facial pit, are of
interest to several biological fields due to their medical and ecological importance. Resolving the
evolutionary relationships of the group is paramount as it informs an understanding of the evolution of
venom proteins and composition as well as the evolution of phenotype, behavior, natural history,
geographic range, and other aspects of pitviper biology. A taxonomy that differentiates distinct
evolutionary lineages facilitates communication on group members, as species binomials are the most
broadly utilized result of systematists‘ classifications. Because of long interest in pitvipers multiple
morphological and mitochondrial phylogenies have been generated, but taxon-comprehensive trees are
still lacking and key intra- and intergeneric relationships are still unclear. We generate the most taxon-
comprehensive phylogenies of New World pitvipers to date (N=114), evaluating 93% of currently-
recognized species through combining morphological (~100) and molecular (~4700) characters. We use
parsimony and model-based approaches to infer phylogeny and interpret the relationships in light of
geological and climatic events. Results indicate that numerous geological and biogeographic boundaries
have played a role in shaping pitviper diversity in the New World.Understanding the historical processes



                                                                                                         541
that have shaped the evolution of biotic assemblages is an important aspect of evolutionary biology. An
excellent, well-defined, model system for investigating historical processes is New World pitvipers. These
snakes, characterized by a distinct facial pit, are of interest to several biological fields due to their
medical and ecological importance. Resolving the evolutionary relationships of the group is paramount as
it informs an understanding of the evolution of venom proteins and composition as well as the evolution of
phenotype, behavior, natural history, geographic range, and other aspects of pitviper biology. A taxonomy
that differentiates distinct evolutionary lineages facilitates communication on group members, as species
binomials are the most broadly utilized result of systematists‘ classifications. Because of long interest in
pitvipers multiple morphological and mitochondrial phylogenies have been generated, but taxon-
comprehensive trees are still lacking and key intra- and intergeneric relationships are still unclear. We
generate the most taxon-comprehensive phylogenies of New World pitvipers to date (N=114), evaluating
93% of currently-recognized species through combining morphological (~100) and molecular (~4700)
characters. We use parsimony and model-based approaches to infer phylogeny and interpret the
relationships in light of geological and climatic events. Results indicate that numerous geological and
biogeographic boundaries have played a role in shaping pitviper diversity in the New World.



Passerotti, Michelle (NOAA/NMFS); Andrews, Allen (NOAA/NMFS, Aiea, HI, United States); Carlson,
John (NOAA/NMFS, Panama City, FL, United States); Wintner, Sabine (KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board,
Umhlanga Rocks, South Africa); Natanson, Lisa (NOAA/NMFS, Narragansett, RI, United States)

Age validation in sand tiger shark, Carcharias taurus, using bomb radiocarbon analysis

There is a great deal of ambiguity in the age and growth data of sand tiger shark (Carcharias taurus). Of
particular concern is the observed maximum age based on vertebral band counts. To address this
uncertainty, archival vertebrae of sand tiger sharks from both the north Atlantic and south Indian Oceans
were processed for bomb radiocarbon analysis in an effort to validate growth band periodicity and
longevity in the species. Vertebral centra from 10 individuals were chosen for analysis based on capture
date and size at capture, and sectioned to a thickness of 2mm using an Isomet low speed saw. One half
of the section was left at this thickness and mounted for micromilling, while the other half was sanded to a
thickness of 0.5mm and mounted for ageing. Age estimates for each shark were obtained by counting
growth band-pairs assuming annual band-pair deposition, and were used in conjunction with date of
capture to assign a year of formation for each band-pair. Thin sections were used to guide marking of
band-pairs on thick sections. A total of 36 growth band-pairs were milled from thick sections (n= 2 to 6 per
vertebrae) for Δ14C/δ13C analysis. The measured Δ14C values for band-pairs/formation years will be
compared with regional Δ14C reference chronologies including known-age porbeagle shark (Lamna
nasus) and hermatypic corals. This comparison will either validate age estimates or will provide evidence
for discrepancies in age from growth band counting. New estimates of age at maturity and longevity will
be used to update the productivity for this species, which current data estimates to be strikingly low (i.e.
population growth rates are negative) even in the absence of fishing pressure.



Pasukonis, Andrius (Universitaet Wien); Hödl, Walter (University of Vienna, Canada)

Homing behavior in territorial dendrobatoid frog Allobates femoralis

Dendrobatoid frogs exhibit some of the most complex spatial behavior of the amphibian world, such as
territoriality and tadpole transportation from terrestrial clutches to widely distributed deposition sites. High
homing performance of tadpole transporting adults is often assumed, but experimental evidence is



                                                                                                            542
lacking. Allobates femoralis is a common neotropical leaf litter frog. Males occupy vocally advertised
territories, which are used for oviposition by females. Tadpoles are later transported by males to aquatic
deposition sites, which are located tens to hundreds of meters away from the territory. Anecdotal
evidence suggests that artificially displaced males successfully home back to their territories from as far
as 300 meters within just a few days. To quantify the homing success and speed of A. femoralis, we
conducted a field translocation experiment. Multiple territorial males were displaced up to 800 meters and
their initial capture sites were revisited daily. Individually unique belly patterns allowed the identification of
recaptured males. We question if senses that are most familiar to humans, such as vision, hearing, or
olfaction alone can explain successful homing at this scale.



Paszkowski, Cynthia (University of Alberta);

Herpetological Conservation on Canadian Landscapes Altered by Industry

Industries based on the extraction of renewable and nonrenewable natural resources have long been
fundamental to the Canadian economy. Agriculture, forestry, hard rock mining, hydropower generation,
oil and gas extraction can have profound and lasting effects on terrestrial and freshwater habitats used by
amphibian and reptile species. The application of systems designed to classify and calculate threats
offers a promising approach for assessing the potential impact of industrial activities on individual species
over a broad geographical area, for example, at the provincial level. Integrated landscape management,
which recognizes the combined effects of multiple industries, offers a promising approach for conserving
multiple species simultaneously on a smaller, but still regional, scale.       Meaningful conservation of
individual populations of amphibians and reptiles on industrial landscapes often requires a mix of habitat
preservation, restoration, and creation. For many species, a lack of knowledge of their basic biology in
Canada still remains among the biggest threats to their persistence on landscapes shaped by resource-
based industries.



Pauly, Greg (Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County); Shaffer, H. Bradley (University of
California, Los Angeles, Canada)

Phylogenetic relationships and species boundaries among the musk turtles, with a focus on the
federally threatened Flattened Musk Turtle, Sternotherus depressus

The musk turtles include three largely allopatric species in the southeastern United States as well as the
more widespread common stinkpot, Sternotherus odoratus . Of particular note is the federally
threatened Flattened Musk Turtle, Sternotherus depressus , an endemic to the Black Warrior River
System of Alabama and whose range is completely encircled by that of the Stripe-necked Musk Turtle,
Sternotherus minor peltifer . Since its description as a distinct species in 1955, the Flattened Musk Turtle
has been treated both as a distinct species and as a subspecies of S. minor . Further, hybridization with
S. minor , possibly resulting from damn construction and habitat modification, has been suggested as one
potential threat to S. depressus . Here, we examine species boundaries and phylogenetic relationships
among Sternotherus species through analyses of nine nuclear and two mitochondrial genes. All
analyses strongly argue that S. depressus is a unique, strongly differentiated lineage that is well
deserving of species status. However, hybridization has been important in the history of this lineage with
evidence of both ancient and more recent hybridization. The former is suggested by discordant
mitochondrial and nuclear gene trees which mirror previous conflicts between allozyme and mitochondrial
DNA analyses. More recent hybridization is suggested between S. depressus and S. minor , and we



                                                                                                              543
examine whether this gene flow results from ongoing hybridization or recent historical processes. Lastly,
we consider evidence for recognizing S. m. minor and S. m. peltifer as distinct species.



Payne, Samantha (University of Guelph); Petrik, Jim; Vickaryous, Matthew (University of Guelph,
Guelph, ON, Canada)

Angiogenesis during tail regeneration: an investigation using the leopard gecko (Eublepharis
macularius)

As for many lizards, leopard geckos can self-shed (autotomize) their tails as an anti-predation strategy
and spontaneously regenerate a replacement. The regenerate tail forms from an aggregation of
proliferating, mesenchymal-like cells termed the blastema. Cells of the blastema ultimately give rise to
the replacement appendage, a multi-tissue structure including nerves, skeletal muscle and blood vessels.
To date, the role of angiogenesis during regeneration is poorly understood and limited to studies of
zebrafish and urodeles. We investigated angiogenesis throughout the process of tail regeneration in the
leopard gecko using a panel of common angiogenic markers including vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), and cluster differentiation 36
(CD36). The sequence of protein expression during regeneration corresponds with that observed during
embryonic angiogenesis. Early during regeneration, VEGF expression is widespread among cells of the
blastema, including endothelial cells of the newly sprouted capillaries. Maturation of these vessels is
characterized by the appearance of α-SMA immunopositive pericytes. As regeneration progresses,
tissues begin to differentiate and the once diffuse expression of VEGF becomes localized to blood
vessels. TSP-1 and its receptor CD36 are not expressed until the late stages of tail regeneration,
corresponding with the complete differentiation of tail tissues. Overall the organization and relative
distribution of blood vessels in the regenerate tail is comparable but not identical to that of the original
(e.g., the caudal artery of the original tail is replaced by one or more smaller vessels). To further explore
the role of TSP-1 during regeneration we administered a TSP-1 mimetic (the angiogenic compound ABT-
510) to late stage tail regenerating geckos. Our data indicates that the TSP-1 mimetic alters the
distribution and architecture of newly formed blood vessels. Our work suggests that angiogenesis has a
critical role in tail regeneration in the leopard gecko.



Paz, Andrea (Universidad de los Andes); Ibáñez, Roberto (Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute,
Canada); Lips, Karen R. (University of Maryland, Canada); Crawford, Andrew J. (Universidad de los
Andes, Bogotá, Columbia)

Testing the role of ecology and life history in structuring genetic variation across a landscape: A
comparative ecophylogeographic approach

Traditional hypotheses to explain phylogeographic structure and species diversity such as rivers,
mountains and refugia often fail to constitute general explanations for observed patterns, especially in
lower latitudes. Limits to dispersal may vary in strength according to organisms‘ intrinsic biology.
Ecological and life history variables may thus be important in explaining the observed patterns of genetic
variation. Amphibians are particularly tied to their environment and have a wide variety of life history
characteristics that may influence their ability to disperse or survive in novel environments.
Phylogeographic studies of Central American amphibians have revealed a variety of historical patterns
with little commonality among species. We developed a novel approach to elucidate the role of life history
variation in generating phylogeographic structure that may be a precursor to species formation. We



                                                                                                         544
sampled three amphibian communities in Panama. We employed DNA barcode data, the mitochondrial
genes COI and 16S, to quantify genetic variation among sites in 31 anuran species. To evaluate
congruence in divergence times between species we used HABC analyses in two comparisons between
the three localities in Panama. Simultaneous divergence between all species was rejected in both cases
however, congruence in divergence times between groups of species was found. We generated
ecological niche models for each species to estimate landscape resistance between localities. Ecological
and life history variables were used to evaluate their importance in explaining the observed genetic
divergence and congruence in divergence times. Preliminary results suggest that landscape resistance is
important in explaining genetic variation. The value of environmental factors in generating
phylogeographic structure and species diversity may thus be greater than usually thought and may
provide a more general explanation than physical barriers for the genetic patterns we observe.



Pearson, Marianne (University College London and The Natural History Museum);

Biogeographical history and radiation of early salamanders: A review

Living salamanders are represented by over 580 species within ten families, and are commonly found in
the Northern Hemisphere. Within this diverse and abundant clade of lissamphibians only two relatively
recent southward migrations into South America and Africa have been documented. The earliest
recorded fossil salamanders date from the Middle Jurassic (165 million years ago) and are known from
both Europe and Asia, with North American records beginning in the Late Jurassic. This distribution has
lead many workers to suggest a Laurasian origin for this group. However, discoveries of enigmatic
Cretaceous and Palaeogene salamander fossils in Bolivia, Sudan and Niger raise questions as to how
they might have arrived on the historically Gondwanan continents, and whether early salamanders, like
frogs, might once have had a more global distribution. After more than a century of morphological and
molecular analysis, some degree of consensus has been reached regarding the interrelationships of living
salamanders, although the position of some clades (e.g. sirenids) still remains controversial, in part
because of widely prevalent paedomorphosis. Incorporating fossil taxa into the phylogeny is more difficult,
but is crucial for an understanding of early salamander radiation and biogeography. Most fossil
salamander remains are incomplete but the discovery of exceptionally well preserved material from the
Late Jurassic/Early Cretaceous of China and Spain offers the potential for more rigorous phylogenetic
analysis.



Pearson, Monica (University of British Columbia); Mooney, P. (R.P. Bio, Canada)

Spotties vs. Bullies: Differentiation of Microhabitat Selection by Endangered Oregon Spotted
Frogs and Invasive American Bullfrogs in Shallow Water Wetland Habitats.

The Oregon Spotted Frog ( Rana pretiosa ) is a critically endangered species in Canada. Reintroduction
into historic and new habitats is essential for the survival and recovery of this species. However,
American bullfrog ( Lithobates catesbianus ) introductions to remnant Oregon spotted frog habitats have
been proposed as a direct cause of local extinctions, as both species are highly aquatic and bullfrogs are
known as aggressive predators of less sizeable frogs. Bullfrogs now exist across approximately 90% of
the historic Oregon spotted frog range in BC, and bullfrog control efforts have been largely ineffective. As
both Oregon spotted frog and bullfrogs prefer shallow warm slow-moving wetland habitats,
reintroductions of Oregon spotted frogs to areas with bullfrog presence must consider habitat selection of
both species, and restoration efforts must seek to provide appropriate habitat for Oregon spotted frogs



                                                                                                        545
while deterring high density colonization by invasive bullfrogs. Our paper describes a research project
that used radio-telemetry to identify and differentiate microhabitat selection of both Oregon spotted frogs
and bullfrogs in a shared habitat, and developed criteria for habitat modification and creation. Fifteen
adult Oregon spotted frogs and fourteen adult bullfrogs were tracked from June through September 2011
and microhabitat variables were measured at each frog location. Multivariate analyses were applied to
identify structural habitat variables significant to each species, and to contrast habitat selection between
species. In addition, microhabitat variables were measured across the wetland, which had been stratified
into habitat typologies through orthophoto analysis. Cluster analysis was used to confirm categorical
habitat typologies, and assess selection by frog species. Adults of the two species used different habitat
typologies, with endangered Oregon spotted frogs using shallower and more structurally complex sites
than the bullfrogs. Adult bullfrogs almost exclusively used deeper water with a low density of emergent
islands or hummocks and dominated by rooted floating vegetation. Habitat alterations to reduce bullfrog
densities should include water level controls that maintain depths that promote islands of clumped
emergent vegetation rather than rooted floating vegetation. Habitats designed to benefit Oregon spotted
frogs should provide a shallow yet complex topology with a high density of vegetation clumps and leafy
emergents. This project will inform the Canadian Oregon Spotted Frog Recovery Team‘s efforts to restore
Oregon spotted frog populations across its historic range in BC‘s Lower Mainland Region.



Pearson, Steven (Drexel University); Avery, Harold (Drexel University, Canada)

Competition between IUCN, near-threatened, red-bellied turtles (Pseudemys rubriventris) and
invasive red-eared slider turtle (Trachemys scripta elegans)

Invasive species affect populations and communities of wildlife worldwide through predation and
competition for limited resources. Globally, the invasive red-eared slider turtle ( Trachemys scripta
elegans ) may compete with native turtles for limited food, basking and other wetland resources. In the
mid-Atlantic region of the United States, the red-eared slider turtle is ecologically similar to the red-bellied
turtle (Pseudemys rubriventris). Red-bellied turtles have undergone population declines in wetlands
where red-eared slider turtles have been introduced. In anthropogenically degraded wetlands the
potential for competition may be greater between red-eared slider turtles and red-bellied turtles due to
extensive overlap for dietary resources and habitat use. We performed manipulative experiments with
juvenile turtles of both species to determine the underlying mechanisms of how red-eared slider turtles
may compete with red-bellied turtles for limited resources. Using mesocosms, we housed single and
mixed species groups at low and high densities to determine the mechanisms of competition for limited
dietary and thermoregulatory resources. We determined ingestion rates, growth rates and behavioral
interactions of turtles to determine whether red-eared slider turtles outcompete red-bellied turtles for
limited dietary and thermoregulatory resources. Preliminary results indicate that the growth rate and
ingestion rates of red-bellied turtles can be suppressed when housed with red-eared slider turtles under
limited resource conditions. Understanding the mechanisms of competition between red-eared slider
turtles and red-bellied turtles will allow us to understand the long term impacts of the red-eared slider
turtle invasions on ecologically similar native species.




                                                                                                            546
Pechmann, Joseph (Western Carolina University); Tupy, John (Western Carolina University, Canada);
Sisson, Michael (North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission, Canada); Baxley, Danna (Kentucky
Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources, Canada); Thurgate, Nicole (University of Adelaide, Canada);
Murphy, Michael (The Nature Conservancy, Canada); Whitfield, Steven (University of South Dakota,
Canada)

Demography and supplemental juvenile recruitment for the endangered dusky gopher frog, Rana
sevosa

We studied the population dynamics of Rana sevosa from 1996-2012 at Glen‘s Pond, Harrison County,
MS, USA using a drift fence with pitfall traps, mark-recapture, and egg mass counts. The pond held
water long enough for natural metamorphosis of tadpoles during only four years: 1997 (221 juveniles
metamorphosed), 1998 (2488 metamorphosed), 2008 (171 metamorphosed), and 2010 (60
metamorphosed). We and our colleagues supplemented natural juvenile recruitment by maintaining pond
water levels with well water in 2001 and 2005, producing 172 juveniles, and by raising tadpoles in tanks
adjacent to the pond from 2002-2012, producing &gt; 2500 juveniles. The mean number of egg masses
observed in years when breeding occurred was 35 during the first six years of the study, dropped to 21
during the next six years, and increased to 40 during the last five years. No breeding occurred during
three of 17 years due to low water levels. Age at first reproduction for individuals reared in tanks
averaged 3.1 years and ranged from 2-5 years for males, and averaged 3.5 years and ranged from 3-7
years for females. Larval rearing conditions influenced age at first reproduction. The number of breeding
seasons which an adult participated in during its lifetime averaged 1.8 and ranged from 1-6 for males, and
averaged 2.1 and ranged from 1-5 for females. Only 8% of males and 25% of females documented to be
alive skipped breeding during any year in which other gopher frogs bred. The population would likely
have gone extinct during the 1999-2007 dry period without the supplemental juvenile recruitment provided
by human management.



Peloso, Pedro (American Museum of Natural History); Forlani, Maurício (University of Richmond,
Canada); Motta, Ana Paula (Museu Nacional do Rio de Janeiro, Canada); Gaucher, Philippe (CNRS,
Canada); Sturaro, Marcelo (Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi, Canada)

A taxonomic assessment of the frog genus Chiasmocleis in the Amazon river basin, with report of
three unnamed species

The humming-frog genus Chiasmocleis Méhely, 1904 is the most speciose (25 valid nominal species)
and is distributed in Panama and Tropical South America east of the Andes. The genus lack of a
phylogenetic framework and this results in systematic works to be based on a geographical perspective,
rather than on evolutionary relationships. Based on analysis of discrete external morphology,
morphometrics, and acoustic data we provide an assessment of populations occurring on the Amazon
river basin. Preliminary results suggests we recognize thirteen species to occur in the area of study, of
which 10 are previously known [ Chiasmocleis albopunctata (Boettger, 1885) , C. anatipes Walker and
Duellman 1973, C. avilapiresae Peloso and Sturaro, 2008, C. bassleri Dunn 1949, C. devriesi Funk
and Cannatella 2009, C. hudsoni Parker 1940, C. magnova Moravec and Köhler 2007, C.
shudikarensis Dunn 1949, C. supersilialbus Morales and McDiarmid 2009, C. ventrimaculata
(Andersson 1945)], and three considered new species. New species ―A‖ was previously confounded with
C. ventrimaculata and is widespread over western Amazonia, in Peru, Bolivia and Brazil (state of Acre).
New species ―B‖ is similar to C. hudsoni but shows a strikingly distinct color pattern and a unique
advertisement call. It is known from few localities in the Guiana Shield, in French Guiana and Brazil (state




                                                                                                        547
of Amapá). New species ―C‖ is knows from a couple of localities on eastern Amazonia, near the city of
Belém, Brazil (state of Pará)



Penner, Johannes (Museum für Naturkunde Berlin - Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and
Biodiversity); Barej, Michael F. (Museum für Naturkunde - Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and
Biodiversity, Berlin, Germany)

Biogeographical patterns of West African amphibians - searching for causes in time and space

The detailed distribution of many amphibians is rarely known. Especially in tropical regions fine grained
information is lacking. Furthermore, the reasons for the observed patterns are even harder to unlock. One
way to close these gaps is via environmental niche modelling (ENM). Our study area, the forests of
Upper Guina are one of the worlds hotspots and therefore of special importance. We used ENMs to
model the distribution of all West African amphibian species, hence including Upper Guinea . The
resulting pattern of diversity is compared against major barriers (altitude and rivers) as well as against
patterns derived from phylogenetic data for selected families. Explanations are searched for all species in
the selected niche parameters used in the ENMs but also in parameters not modelled. Unfortunately, all
identified important and unique areas in the region experience an ever increasing pressure from habitat
alteration and destruction. Gained results are compared against the current set of conservation areas,
depending on their formal status. In our opinion a regional conservation plan is urgently required.



Penniket, Sophie (University of Otago); Cree, Alison (University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand)

Variation in life-history traits with elevation in a nocturnal, viviparous gecko

Bergmann‘s rule describes an increase in body size with increasing altitude and decreasing temperature;
however, recent studies suggest that the reverse pattern holds for the majority of lizards studied. Lizards
are generally smaller at higher elevations, possibly due to benefits of an increased surface area allowing
for faster heating during sun basking. However, this explanation does not necessarily apply to species
that do not sun-bask. For a nocturnal species, it is possible that a small body size at high elevations is not
advantageous. We investigated the relationships between altitude, temperature, and body size in the
Otago-Southland gecko ( Woodworthia ―Otago-Southland‖), a primarily nocturnal, viviparous gecko from
southern New Zealand. Adult and juvenile geckos were measured from seven sites with mean elevations
of 54-1039 metres above sea level, and environmental temperatures were recorded using data loggers.
Reproductive frequency of females (which have the potential to reproduce annually or biennially) was
also examined. We observed a significant increase in body size with altitude, the opposite pattern to that
in most diurnal lizards. Female size at maturity, maximum size of adult females and males, and size at
birth were all larger at higher elevations and lower temperatures. Reproductive frequency showed no
significant trend with elevation or temperature; however, it was clear that not all females reproduced
annually. These results contrast with those found in other studies, suggesting that, for this nocturnal
lizard, large body size at high elevations is advantageous. Possible benefits include larger energy stores
to manage the challenges of reproduction and of inactivity over longer winters, and the better
conservation of heat afforded by larger sizes.




                                                                                                          548
Pereira, Isabel (University of São Paulo); Carvalho, José (Federal University of São Paulo, Canada);
Navas, Carlos (University of São Paulo, Canada)

Physiological and behavioral strategies in Brazilian anurans from the semi-arid: implications for
water balance

The Brazilian Caatinga is a semi-arid bioma characterized by the limited rains, high temperatures and
unpredictable timing of the rainy season. Although such conditions would seem harsh for anurans,
several species are found in this biome. These species exhibit notoriously different strategies for avoiding
hydric stress during the long dry season (usually ten months). Individuals of Pleurodema diplolistris and
Physalaemus albifrons (Leiuperidae), and Proceratophrys cristiceps (Cycloramphidae) bury themselves
in the Caatinga soil. These frogs exhibit lower activity during this phase, but do not remain immobile, and
can even perform a vertical migration in the substrate. During the rainy and reproductive season
individuals of these three species exhibit intense vocal activity and share a similar microhabitat. We
conducted a comparative study on blood plasma osmolality and locomotor behavior to investigate the
influence of water balance in the muscle performance of these anurans during reproductive phase. Our
results indicate that P. cristiceps and P. albifrons show similar plasma osmolality, hematocrit and
locomotor performance. However, P. diplolistris display higher plasma osmolality (280mmol/kg ±14) than
the other species observed ( P. albifrons , 224mmol/kg ±21 and P. cristiceps , 228mmol/kg ±15), even if
they exhibit similar seasonality. P. diplolistris develops higher speeds (0,38m/s±0,06) compared with P.
albifrons (0,25m/s±0,04) and P. cristiceps (0,21m/s±0,09). It is possible that P.diplolistris takes some
advantages of the higher plasma osmolality as a physiological mechanism to preserve the locomotory
performance during aestivation. This work contributes for the understanding of the physiological and
behavioral strategiesin anurans form the semi-arid. Supported by: FAPESP



Pérez i de Lanuza, Guillem (University of Valencia); Font, Enrique (University of Valencia, Canada);
Carazo, Pau (University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain)

Colours of quality: structural and pigment-based chromatic signals predict different performance
traits in male wall lizards (Podarcis muralis)

Colour signals comprise a rich diversity of anatomical and physical mechanisms that open many different
avenues to communication. Animal colours result either from the differential absorption of light by
chemical compounds (i.e. pigment-based colours), or from differential scattering of light by integumental
nano-structures (i.e. structural colours). Both structural and pigment-based colours can be costly to
produce and maintain, and have been shown to inform about a variety of individual quality traits. The
distinct nature of the developmental and physiological mechanisms underlying structural vs. pigment-
based colourations seems to offer opportunities for signalling about different quality traits that vary at
different time scales. For example, many of the pigments involved in pigment-based colour production,
such as carotenoids, are directly derived from the diet and/or seem to play a direct role in vital
physiological functions (e.g. immunocompetence and free radical scavenging). This suggests that purely
pigmentary colours may be more adequate honest indicators of short-term physiological-dependent traits.
In contrast, structural colour signals may seem better suited as indicators of more stable traits depending
on long term developmental changes. Male wall lizards ( Podarcis muralis ) exhibit two different types of
conspicuous colour patches: throat and belly colorations are pigment-dependent, and include orange,
yellow and white (i.e. absence of pigment) colours, while blue outer ventral scales (OVS) on their flanks
have their peak of reflectance in the UV range, and are structural in nature. We investigated whether
throat and OVS colour variables are good predictors of male body condition index (a relatively labile trait)
and/or male bite force (a relatively stable trait that strongly depends on head size in lizards). Our results



                                                                                                         549
show that pigment-based colour variables (i.e. throat chroma) strongly associate with body condition,
whereas bite force seems to be exclusively related to OVS chroma and hue measures. These findings
lend support to the idea that pigment-based and structural colours are ideally suited to signalling about
different male characteristics.



Pérez i de Lanuza, Guillem (University of Valencia); Font, Enrique; Monterde, Juan Luis (University of
Valencia, Canada); Carazo, Pau (University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain)

Sexual selection drives the evolution of sexual dichromatism in lacertid lizards

Sexual selection has often been invoked as a major force in the evolution of secondary sexual traits,
including sexually dimorphic colouration. Previous studies have shown that display complexity and
elaborate ornamentation in lizards are associated with variables that reflect the intensity of intrasexual
selection. However, these studies have relied on techniques of colour analysis based on human – rather
than lizard – visual perception, and have focused on iguanians, a clade of lizards that communicate
primarily using visual signals. Here, we use visual modelling to quantify sexual dichromatism considering
the overall colour patterns of lacertids, a group of scleroglossan lizards. We then use a comparative
phylogenetic approach to investigate the relationship between sexual dichromatism and body size
dimorphism (as an index of intrasexual selection). Sexual dichromatism is positively associated with size
dimorphism, suggesting that conspicuous colouration in male lacertids may have evolved in order to
improve opponent assessment under conditions of intense male-male competition. Our findings provide
the first evidence for the coevolution of sexual dichromatism and size dimorphism in lacertids and suggest
that the prevalent role of intrasexual selection in the evolution of visual signals is not restricted to the
iguanian lineage, but rather seems to be a general trend in diurnal lizards.



Perkins, Susan (American Museum of Natural History); Amato, George; Feinstein, Julie (American
Museum of Natural History, Canada)

Collections in the 21st Century: an overview of issues in storing samples for genomic analysis
with an emphasis on the AMNH collection.

Repositories of frozen tissues and genetic isolates from the world's organisms represent an invaluable
resource for the study of biodiversity and evolution. However, best practices for the establishment,
organization, and maintenance are necessary if these collections are to have utility. The Ambrose Monell
Cryo Collection for Molecular and Microbial Research was established at the American Museum of
Natural History in New York in 2001 and quickly rose to prominence as one of the world's major frozen
tissue collections. With a current holding of 70,000 tissues and a capacity for up to one million tissues,
we are poised to continue to grow and expand this important resource. Critical to the value of this
collection are the following attributes. The facility is a ―state of the art‖, passive, liquid nitrogen system
ensuring best preservation of samples and protection against power failure. All of the samples are
accessioned with complete collecting, metadata and permit information. Curation of the collection allows
for retrieval of any sample within minutes and, facilitates the loaning of thousands of samples each year.
In terms of herpetological diversity, this collection holds over 9,500 samples representing 1,231 species.
Samples range from recent, comprehensive, population level, field collections numbering in hundreds of
individuals to DNA samples extracted from the Museum‘s traditional, historical collections including 100
year-old type specimens. Examples from recent herpetological research on cryptic diversity in




                                                                                                          550
crocodilians, using recently collected and historical samples will be used to illustrate the value and
importance of frozen tissue repositories for biodiversity and evolutionary studies.

Perkins, Susan (American Museum of Natural History);

Value-added collections: Detection of parasites in herpetological museum specimens.

It has been casually estimated that each vertebrate species is host to between one and ten "macro"
parasite species and innumerable microbial symbionts and pathogens. Thus, each specimen in a
collection may, in fact, be several specimens in one. Depending on the method of preservation, these
parasites or symbionts may be preserved intact or may just have their genetic material preserved along
with that of the host and can be detected and studied. Blood parasites may be particularly well captured
in tissue collections given that their presence is not confined to a particular organ. The malaria parasites
of lizards are extremely diverse, with over 100 described species from all over the planet. However, it is
certain that this number is a gross underestimate of the true diversity of these parasites. The sampling of
these taxa has also been largely opportunistic and so may result in skewed perceptions of biodiversity
and evolution of the group. Here, I will present results from PCR-screening of lizard specimens from
Vietnam and other areas as well as similar molecular detection work on other herpetological samples
such as turtles and snakes, many of which indicate that several undiscovered taxa are present in these
hosts. However, I will also offer a strong cautionary note about the reliance on PCR alone as a detection
method and encourage all collectors to endeavor to take appropriate samples in the future to allow for
proper parasite detection and description.



Perry, Gad (Texas Tech University); Farmer, Michael (Texas Tech University, Canada)

Reducing risk of invasives via policy in the pet trade

Invasive species, whether herpetofaunal or ones that affect herpetofauna – are increasingly common, and
many are unlikely to be eradicated. Moreover, the social and economic factors that result in the majority
of these introductions are here to stay. Thus, there is urgency in devising ways to identify causes and
effectively manage invasive species as a chronic and broad problem, rather than an acute and species-
or location-specific one. Data from the US and the Caribbean help identify factors contributing to the
problem, which include – but are far from limited to – the pet trade. Standard responses, such as
belatedly banning pythons in        Florida    after they have become broadly established, are rarely
operationally effective and often result in poor public relations and unintended consequences. We
propose a decentralized approach that includes identifying particularly risky behaviors and locales,
employing the precautionary principle in making decisions, and empowering local communities to act as
both sentinels and first responders. Funding would come through a tax on the pet trade, with taxation
level to vary based on actual performance. Thus, instilling effective practices and responsible conduct
would result in reduction of the tax, whereas incidents of costly problems would result in penalties - a tax
increase. Funds would primarily be used to train and support local prevention, monitoring, and response.
Prevention could take the form of encouraging pet stores to take back unwanted animals, for example.
Monitoring would include volunteers, such as regional herpetological societies, as first responders who
may be called to deal with a found animal, and utilizing wildlife rehabilitation centers as well as, when
appropriate for a community, fire departments, police, and animal control professionals. Response would
mobilize some of the same people to identify the cause of an incursion and eliminate incipient populations
before they become problematic. This process also addresses problems originating beyond the pet trade.




                                                                                                        551
Peskov, Andrey (Institute of Ecology of Volga river Basin of Russian Academy of Science); Pavlov,
Alexey (Volzhsko-Kamsky National Nature Biosphere Reserve, Canada); Garanin, Valerian (Kazan
Federal University, Canada); Bakiev, Andrey; Malenyov, Andrey (Institute of Ecology of Volga river Basin
of Russian Academy of Science, Canada)

On hybridization of genus Vipera in the Volga River basin

In the first decade of the XXI century, it was widely accepted by most herpetologists that three Vipera
species inhabit the Volga River basin, the longest river in Europe. These include the adder V. berus ,
Nikolsky‘s viper V. nikolskii , and east steppe viper V. renardi . Both V. berus and V. renardi are
represented by nominal subspecies, whereas V. nikolskii is monotypic. The V. berus and V. nikolskii
belong to the berus complex, and the V. renardi to the ursinii complex. Here we present that the
Volga River basin is inhabited only by two species: V. berus , with subspecies V. b. berus and V. b.
nikolskii , and the species V. renardi , with subspecies V. r. renardi and V. r. bashkirovi . In the last
few years, our research together with our collaborators, U. Joger, N. Stümpel (Germany) and O.I. Zinenko
(Ukraine), showed that based on vipers‘ external morphology, ecological data, properties of venoms and
DNA analysis, natural hybridization of the above mentioned taxa occur, and result in fertile hybrids.
Hybridization range of V. b. berus and V. b. nikolskii covers several areas in the Middle Volga River
Region, and the specific distribution needs to be elucidated. Meanwhile, the most similar populations to
V. b. nikolskii are found at the borders between the Volga River and the Don River basins. Viper venom
from those populations has peptide composition typical to V. b. nikolskii , while the venom composition in
other parts of the Volga River basin is typical of V. b. berus . Most obvious populations of V. b. berus
are located in the north and the east of the Volga River basin. Natural hybridization between V. berus
and V. renardi is a unique and local phenomenon. The early described subspecies, Bashkirov‘s viper
V. r. bashkirovi , is likely a result of the hybridization between V. berus and V. renardi. Populations
concerning the subspecies are found in a sympatric area of these two species (Tatarstan Republic,
Samara and Ulyanovsk region; Russia). Most populations from the sympatric area, in Russia, and all the
populations out of the sympatric



Pessier, Allan (San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research);

Disease Considerations and Risk Assessment for Amphibian Reintroductions and Translocations

Global amphibian declines and the rapidity in which they have occurred has resulted in expansion of
survival assurance populations as a conservation strategy for threatened species. The goal of assurance
populations is to reintroduce species to the wild when the original cause of population declines has been
mitigated and increasingly these captive populations are the last representatives of a species. Therefore,
the need to consider disease as a limiting factor to amphibian reintroductions has reached a heightened
level of importance.        Many of the most devastating examples of amphibian population decline are
linked to anthropogenic introduction of the amphibian chytrid fungus and this highlights the need to
reduce the risk of infectious diseases in the management of reintroduction and translocation programs. It
is nearly impossible to design programs that are completely free of disease risk, but risk can be reduced
by careful planning and adherence to recommendations for risk mitigation. One of the biggest risks for
introducing detrimental infectious agents into wild amphibian populations via a reintroduction or
translocation program is exposure of reintroduction candidates to other amphibians from outside their
native range.To avoid this risk the ideal reintroduction candidates are housed in long-term isolation from
cosmopolitan amphibian collections.The need for pre-release disease testing in a reintroduction or
translocation program and the extent of the screening procedures needed is dependent on a risk
assessment. Risk assessments and disease testing are usually simple and minimal for animals kept in



                                                                                                      552
long-term isolation and become much more complicated and extensive for animals exposed to a
cosmopolitan collection. Besides consideration of how animals have been housed a critical element of a
risk assessment is assembly of disease information from the source captive populations and the wild
populations at reintroduction sites. This information is gathered by necropsy examination of animals that
die and targeted testing such as PCR for specific pathogens of interest (e.g. the chytrid fungus or
ranaviruses). In general, if an identical pathogen is present in both the captive and wild populations, the
presence of that pathogen should not impact the decision on whether to reintroduce captive animals to
the wild. However, this decision becomes more complicated when acknowledging that currently used
tests for the chytrid fungus or ranaviruses cannot always discern between different strains of these
pathogens. Development of better guidelines to assist program managers and veterinary consultants in
making risk assessments and disease testing protocols are in progress.



Peterson, Bill (NOAA, National Marine Fisheries Service); Mantua, Nate (University of Washington,
Canada); Kosro, Mike (Oregon State University, Canada)

An evaluation of freshwater and marine habitat cues for migrating salmon - to what degree are
they coherent?

Waples and Douglas pose several questions to ponder relative to this symposium and this talk addresses
one of their questions: ―For species like salmon (and birds) that migrate between different environments,
adaptive plasticity requires high cue reliability (e.g., freshwater cues that trigger smolt migration must
reliably predict optimal times to enter the ocean). What effects will climate change have on cue reliability
and adaptive plasticity?‖ The general idea behind our talk is (1) are the cues which trigger migration from
freshwater (FW) towards the ocean (OCN) in spring correlated with cues that indicate that the ocean is
ready to receive the fish? That is, is the initiation of spring in FW correlated with initiation of spring in the
OCN? In our talk we will be looking at a collection of different measures relevant to the timing of ―spring‖
in both freshwater and the northern part of the California Current system:

snowmelt timing in western US rivers

coastal upwelling and coastal sea level

seasonal shifts in coastal current from coastal radar

the timing of the appearance of cold salty water at depth as a result of the initiation of upwelling

zooplankton community changes from hydrographic surveys

We will also attempt to generate other temperature-based measure of terrestrial spring, something like
"initiation of growing season/date of the last frost" for western OR/WA. Finally, we will consider how these
measures might change under different climate change scenarios and speculate as to how salmon might
respond to various scenarios.




                                                                                                             553
Peterson, Cheston (Florida State University); Grubbs, Dean (Florida State Univeristy Coastal and
Marine Laboratory, Canada)

Investigating the trophic ecology of sharks and teleost fishes in the Florida Big Bend using stable
isotope analysis

The Florida Big Bend supports a high diversity of sharks and teleost fishes, but the region is poorly
studied to date. This study aims to describe the trophic ecology of the sharks and large teleost fishes in
one of the world‘s largest and most pristine seagrass beds. This area, nearly 300km in length, is
bordered by important hard bottom habitat that acts as an intermediary between nearshore nursery areas
and offshore adult habitats. White muscle biopsies were collected from most fishes caught during an
annual gillnet and longline survey of the system from 2009 to 2011. Nitrogen stable isotope analysis was
used to describe the general trophic ecology of the sharks and large teleost fishes over four continuous
regions of the Big Bend. Biopsies were collected in ontogenetic series from the most abundant shark
species and many teleost fishes, and will be used to investigate potential shifts in diet and trophic level
related to ontogeny. Carbon and sulfur stable isotope analysis will be used, when possible, to describe
sources of primary productivity in the Big Bend region, with special regard to two separate regions split by
the input of the Suwannee River. Data presented are preliminary.



Peterson, Christopher (SSAR); Dawson, Graham (SSAR, Canada)

The Effects of Predator Presence and Prey Size on Norops humilis Foraging Decisions

Predation-aware foraging has been observed across a variety of taxa. In this study, we examined if the
anole, Norops humilis, altered its foraging patterns in the presence of a predator and whether that
response is mediated by food profitability. The study was conducted during September 2011 at the La
Selva Biological Station, a 1500 ha forested reserve located in Heredia Province, Costa Rica. We used
Lycosid spiders of varying sizes (1.3 – 4.9 mm cephalothorax width) as prey and an 11 mm Cupiennius
sp.spider (Araneae: Ctenidae) as the predator; members of this family are known to prey upon N. humilis.
We presented individual N. humilis with prey spiders of varying sizes and recorded if they attempted to
feed. In half of the trials, the predatory spider was present near the Norops. There were significantly
more anole strikes in the absence of a predator (14 strikes without predators vs. 3 with predators present;
chi^2 =10.9032, d.f. = 1, p = 0.0010). Prey size (cephalothorax) width had no significant effect on N.
humilis decision to strike (chi^2 = 0.05876, d.f. = 1, p = 0.8494) in the absence of predators. However,
when a predator was present, the spiders struck were significantly larger than those that were not struck
(chi^2 = 4.0857, d.f. = 1, p= 0.0432). This suggests that N. humilis respond to predator presence by
reducing foraging activity, but are willing to risk predation to acquire higher value food (larger prey items).



Peterson, Mark (University of Southern Mississippi); Slack, William T. (US Army ERDC, Canada);
Grammer, Paul O.; Havrylkoff, Jeanne-Marie; Mickle, Paul F. (USM, Canada)

The threatened Gulf sturgeon, Acipenser oxyrinchus desotoi, is an anadromous species inhabiting
coastal drainages along the northern Gulf of Mexico from the Pearl River, LA through the Suwannee
River, FL, where it reaches its maximum abundance. Western populations use multiple components of
the habitat landscape ontogenetically during their life history. We have examined Gulf sturgeon
movements since 1997, first by manual tracking, but since 2008 by acoustic array technology. Gulf
sturgeon have differential use of coastal watersheds and adjacent marine environments. For example,




                                                                                                           554
adults (&gt;1250 mm FL) are detected in rivers (detected a mean of 5.3d) and then move through
estuaries (detected 7.1d) to barrier islands (detected 14.1-20.9d) to feed in associated benthic habitats in
winter periods (Sept-Dec) and return mainly to natal rivers in spring (Jan-April) for either spawning
(March-April) or holding (Feb-Sept) for the summer period. In contrast, some sub-adults (891-1250 mm
FL) use the same adult temporal movement pattern to feed on barrier islands (detected 3.0-9.5d) but
smaller sub-adults appear to use estuaries (detected 19.9d) and nearshore habitats (detected 7.3d) for
feeding before all sub-adults move back upriver to the summer holding areas. Compared to up river sites
(detected 6.3d), juveniles (304-890 mm FL) spend considerable time in estuaries (detected 18.7d) and
nearshore habitats (detected 4.3d) year-round, theoretically feeding. Little is known about juvenile Gulf
sturgeon in western populations. Results of our efforts provide new data on sub-adult and juvenile
movement in Mississippi Sound, and complete our understanding of this river-estuary-barrier island
pathway for most life stages. We view this anadromy pattern in a metacommunity context defined as "a
set of local communities that are linked by dispersal of multiple potentially interacting species" (Holyoak et
al. 2005). We discuss the importance of maintaining the integrity of this linkage for Gulf sturgeon recovery
in light of impact to other anadromous species in the region, like Alabama shad, Alosa alabamae and
skipjack herring, A. chrysochloris which exhibit a similar life history pattern, but replace barrier island
habitats for open marine environments since they are filter feeders.



Pettingill, Kaitlyn (University of Texas at Tyler); Dunithan, Ashley; Ford, Neil; Williams, Lance (University
of Texas at Tyler, Tyler, TX, United States)

Ecology of Aquatic Communities in the Neches and Sabine Rivers, Texas

We compared fish and mussel community structure in the Neches and Sabine Rivers of East Texas, two
rivers with similar geology and biogeographic history. Biota were collected on the Sabine River, between
Lake Tawakoni and Toledo Bend Reservoir, and on the Neches River, between Lake Palestine and B.A.
Steinhagen Reservoir. Fish data were collected using a Smith Root electroshocker throughout a 200m
reach. Mussel data were collected in 50m transects using one-hour tactile searches. Fish species
richness was higher in the Sabine River and evenness and diversity were both higher in the Neches
River. Mussel richness, evenness, and diversity were all higher in the Neches River. Nonmetric
multidimensional scaling showed sites for the fish data were separated by river and longitudinal position.
In contrast, mussels from the lower Sabine River and the Neches River are more closely related than
sites from the upper Sabine River. These results may be explained by differences in habitat, stream size
and impacts of reservoirs.



Phillips, Nicole (Murdoch University); Chaplin, Jennifer; Morgan, David (Murdoch University, Murdoch,
WA, Australia); Peverell, Stirling (Queensland Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries, Cairns,
WA, Australia)

Stock structure in the Indo-West Pacific Pristis sawfishes: the importance of habitat use in the
evolution of sex-biased dispersal

A number of elasmobranchs across different families exhibit sex-biased dispersal. However, the selective
pressures that favor the evolution of sex-biased dispersal in elasmobranchs are not well understood and
sex-biased dispersal has been assessed in too few species for a clear pattern(s) to emerge. This study
provides the first evidence of sex-biased dispersal in sawfishes and demonstrates how such dispersal
may vary with habitat usage in Indo-West Pacific species. The Freshwater Sawfish, Pristis microdon,



                                                                                                          555
which utilizes freshwater rivers as juveniles and marine/estuarine waters as adults, was found to have
male-biased dispersal in Australian waters. In contrast, P. clavata and P. zijsron, which spend their entire
lives in marine and/or estuarine waters, are genetically structured in northern Australian waters. The use
of freshwater rivers as juveniles by P. microdon suggests that the evolutionary history of this species in
Australian waters was potentially very different to those for P. clavata and P. zijsron and may have
influenced the evolution of sex-biased dispersal in the former, but not the latter, species.



Phillis, Corey (Earth to Ocean Research Group, Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University); Pearse,
Devon (Fisheries Ecology Division, Southwest Fisheries Science Center, NOAA National Marine
Fisheries Service, Canada); Moore, Jonathan (Earth to Ocean Research Group, Biological Sciences,
Simon Fraser University, Canada); Garza, Carlos (Fisheries Ecology Division, Southwest Fisheries
Science Center, NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service, Canada)

Dam evolution: Rapid evolution of fish migration in response to novel river barriers

Animal migrations are amazing phenomena that connect disparate habitats, exerting large influence over
recipient ecosystem dynamics. However, migrations may also make populations more vulnerable to
anthropogenic impacts such as blockage of migration corridors. A population‘s fate in the face of a novel
threat depends on the adaptive potential of the underlying traits that control migration. Salmonid
populations express a range of migration tendencies, including partial migration. Dams are threats to
migratory salmonids across their range; where dams bisect partially migratory populations their
persistence upstream requires adoption of the completely resident form. Whether fish in these
populations undergo migrations is dependent on the genetic and or environmental conditions. Here we
examine the evolutionary response and demographic consequences of selection against migration in
partially migratory populations. To test the potential for adaptive evolution in response to migration
barriers we performed a common garden experiment with a pair of partially migratory rainbow trout
populations recently isolated by a barrier waterfall. We found that above barrier offspring expressed the
migration phenotype at a significantly lower rate. Furthermore, expression of the migratory phenotype
was conditional on exceeding a threshold body size, and this threshold was larger in the above barrier
population. We propose that this is an evolutionary response to directional selection in favor of threshold
sizes larger than can be attained in a normal growing year. As a result, the above barrier population
persists due to selection for thresholds that favor the resident form, yet likely maintains some cryptic
genetic variation for migration should conditions change. Thus, rapid evolution can provide population
resilience to barrier creation. We use these results to parameterize a model to simulate demographic and
evolutionary consequences of dam creation and removal. These simulations predicted that population
size decreases following dam construction due to the loss of individuals that migrate out of the system
and due to the removal of the more fecund migrant adults. We find that, assuming heritability of the
threshold size trait, populations can persist--albeit at a lower size--via rapid evolution to the resident state.
Following dam removal, re-evolution of the more productive, migratory populations can occur. However,
depending on the parameters, this re-evolution of anadromy occurs over longer timescales--if at all.
These results not only have important management implications for salmonid recolonization efforts, but
also inform understanding of how migratory species in general may respond to changes in landscape
connectivity.




                                                                                                             556
Phochayavanich, Ratchata (Biological Science Program, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University);
Khonsue, Wichase (Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
Thailand); Kitana, Noppadon (Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Canada)

Distribution Pattern of Amphibian Affected by Check Dam Installation in an Ephemeral Stream at a
Tropical Deciduous Forest

Check dams have been constructed in a large number as tools for water and soil management in many
countries throughout the world, including Thailand. Many physical factors have been reported to be
changed after the check dam construction. However, only a few reports are available on effects of check
dam on biotic component, especially on animals living in the area. Since amphibian is sensitive to water
and moisture change, the distribution pattern of amphibian was selected as monitoring parameter in this
study. Distribution patterns of amphibian in an ephemeral stream at a deciduous forest were studied
before and after check dam construction at Chulalongkorn University Forest and Research Station at Nan
province, northern Thailand. Ten replications of 5 transects including 1 stream transect and 4 terrestrial
transects (5, 10, 25, and 50 meters from the stream) were used to monitor the amphibian. The survey
were conducted every month for 2 years and data of April 2009 to March 2010 and May 2010 to February
2011 were represented as pre- and post-check dam periods, respectively. There were 15 amphibian
species found in pre-check dam period and 14 species found in post-check dam period. Among these
species, 12 species were commonly found in both periods. The distribution pattern of each common
species were compared among 5 transects in each periods (pre- and post-check dam) by Kruskal-Wallis
test with nonparametic Tukey-type multiple comparisons at p≤0.05. The physical factors including
hydroperiod, water depth, and number of water body were also collected and compared during these
study periods. Although, physical factors related to water were significantly different between pre- and
post-check dam periods, the distribution patterns of 8 common species were similar between pre- and
post-check dam periods. However, the distribution patterns of 4 amphibian species significantly changed
from ―equal‖ distribution among 5 transects in pre-check dam period to ―dense‖ at the stream habitat in
the post-check dam period. These results strongly indicate that the distribution patterns of some
amphibian species were affected by the check dam. The distribution patterns of these 4 amphibian
species could be applied as a sensitive indicator to detect effect of the check dam on biotic component at
the population level in the future.



Pickard, Alexandria (Guy Harvey Research Institute, Nova Southeastern University, FL 33004 USA);
Wetherbee, Brad (Guy Harvey Research Institute, Nova Southeastern University, FL, and the University
of Rhode Island, RI, USA, Canada); Nemeth, Richard; Kadison, Elizabeth; Blondeau, Jean (University of
the Virgin Islands, St. Thomas, Virgin Islands, USA, Canada); Shivji, Mahmood (Guy Harvey Research
Institute, Nova Southeastern University, FL 33004 USA, Canada)

Characterization of shark movements on a mesophotic Caribbean coral reef and temporal
association with fish spawning aggregations

Fish spawning aggregations (FSA) are often composed of hundreds to thousands of individuals and
represent the primary source of annual reproductive effort for many species. Migration of sexually mature
adults from home sites to spawning grounds for reproduction is predictable in location and timing. Fish
spawning aggregations may also play an important role in ecosystem function. For example, grouper
spawning aggregations can represent a huge concentration of fish biomass, which fluctuates on a
seasonal basis. As such, they may represent a potentially important prey source for large predators,
including sharks. Moreover, their large-scale reproductive migrations connect various habitats and local




                                                                                                      557
food webs within the larger ecosystem.      This study   aims to determine how populations migrating to
FSA sites function within the ecosystem, by examining the relationship between movement patterns of
apex predators (sharks) and multi-grouper species at two FSA sites along the southern shelf edge of St.
Thomas, US Virgin Islands. We test the hypothesis that increased shark presence will be detected at FSA
sites during grouper spawning seasons. To determine shark presence at spawning aggregations, three
species of sharks (tiger, lemon and Caribbean Reef) were tagged with acoustic transmitters (VR13, 16).
Their movements were monitored over five years using an array of Vemco receivers (VR2) deployed at
spawning sites and at locations spanning a stretch of deep reef approximately 100 km in length.
Receiver data will indicate if shark frequency at spawning areas is correlated temporally with grouper
spawning seasonality, diurnality or species. Results will increase knowledge of shark reliance on FSA
sites and how they utilize the mesophotic reef system as a whole, for habitat and prey.



Pickett, Evan (University of Newcastle); Stockwell, Michelle; Bower, Deborah; Garnham, James; Pollard,
Carla; Clulow, John; Mahony, Michael (University of Newcastle, Callaghan, N, Australia)

Growth, survival, uncertainty and the impact on viability of a remnant population of a threatened
frog

Since the detection of the global amphibian decline, there has been call for long-term demographic
studies, as they are crucial to understand temporal fluctuations in amphibian population and to quickly
detect declines. Population viability analysis (PVA) has been increasingly used for these purposes
throughout many taxa, however the use of long-term data to produce PVA models for amphibians is rare.
We conducted long-term mark recapture on one population of an endangered frog and short-term mark
recapture on a further two populations to determine the temporal and spatial variability of vital
demographic rates. Using these vital rates, we constructed a matrix population viability model
incorporating parametric uncertainty and temporal variability in R. PVA was used to predict the most
powerful vital rates for affecting population persistence as well as modelling management actions and
determining the effort required to reduce uncertainty within the model. Female survival had the greatest
impact on predictions of population persistence, but growth rate of individuals to maturity, which is
naturally variable on a spatial scale, also increased population persistence. Increasing fecundity
(juveniles per female) increased population persistence, but had less power. This was also seen in the
projected use of captive breeding to enhance the populations as an increase in population persistence
required large effort. The PVA model showed a large level of uncertainty in predicted outcomes due to
the incorporation of sampling variance. A 4-fold decrease in sampling variability was required to decrease
model uncertainty, indicating amphibian PVA are unlikely to be useful for direct predictions of persistence,
and therefore restricted to comparison of management actions.          This PVA modelling has enabled
comparison of scenarios to rioritise research and management efforts for these populations. Using
program R allows flexibility in model construction and easy sharing of code, and we recommend the use
of this PVA code as a starting point for future PVA models on amphibians.




                                                                                                        558
Pierce, Benjamin A. (Southwestern University); McEntire, Kira D.; Wall, Ashley E.; Harren, Jenifer W.
(Southwestern University, Georgetown, TX, United States)

Population Size, Movement, and Reproduction of the Georgetown Salamander, Eurycea naufragia,
a Species of Conservation Concern in Central Texas

The Georgetown salamander, Eurycea naufragia , is an endemic, neotenic salamander that occurs at
only 15 sites in central Texas. Rapid urbanization throughout its range places all known populations at
risk and the species is currently being considered for listing under the Endangered Species Act. Little is
known about its natural history or ecology. We conducted mark-recapture studies at two sites in the
summer of 2010. Estimates from the mark-recapture studies indicate that each population consisted of
only about 100-200 adult salamanders. Recaptures of marked salamanders over an 18-month period
demonstrated that marked salamanders exhibited high site fidelity, most being recaptured within 5 m of
the point of initial capture. Examination of salamanders for the presence of eggs suggests that
reproduction occurs primarily during winter and spring months. These studies provide basic ecological
information that can be used to develop a long-term conservation plan for the species.



Pike, David (James Cook University); Huang, Wen-San (Department of Zoology, National Museum of
Natural Science, Taiwan, Canada)

Sea turtles (indirectly) induce behavioral evolution in a terrestrial lizard

Animals display an astonishingly wide diversity of parental care tactics that ultimately enhance offspring
survival, but we do not understand how and why such behaviors evolve. We show that sea turtles
(indirectly) induce the evolution of maternal care in a terrestrial lizard, a cascading trophic effect mediated
by egg-eating snakes . By nesting on land, sea turtles provide a highly seasonal food source for egg-
eating snakes. When turtle eggs are scarce, snakes migrate inland and consume lizard eggs. Female
lizards have responded to snake predation by remaining at the nest during incubation and actively
deterring snakes from eating their eggs. When erosion prevented sea turtles from laying eggs at one of
our study sites, snakes stopped foraging on the beach and increased their foraging efforts at an inland
lizard nesting site. This was followed by a decrease in snake body mass, and a &gt;50% reduction in
survival, suggesting that the snake population is too large to persist on lizard eggs alone. These patterns
imply that sea turtles indirectly induce maternal care in a lizard by increasing mesopredator abundances,
empirical evidence that predation can trigger the evolution of parental care from a non-caring state.



Pilgrim, Melissa (University of South Carolina Upstate); Farrell, Terence (Stetson University, Canada)

The effects of spatial scale and habitat heterogeneity on the isotopic composition of
herpetofauna.

We tested the validity of the stable isotope approach for determining differences in pigmy rattlesnake (
Sistrurus miliarius ) diet composition among three Florida populations. We collected scale clips from 186
rattlesnakes captured in the study populations (65 Hog Island individuals, 62 Jones Island individuals,
and 59 Uplands individuals). We determined the stable carbon and nitrogen isotope ratios for each scale
clip (δ 13 C values ranged from -18.1 to -23.9 and δ 15 N values ranged from 4.3 to 8.4). Hog Island
average δ 13 C values (-20.8 ± 0.13) were significantly enriched relative to Jones Island and Uplands
average δ 13 C values (-22.3 ± 0.13 and -22.1 ± 0.12, respectively). Average δ 15 N values of each
population were significantly different from one another (Hog Island = 6.2 + 0.08; Jones Island = 6.9 +



                                                                                                           559
0.07; Uplands = 5.8 ± 0.10). To evaluate what portion of the observed variation in scale tissue isotope
values was related to differences in food sources, we built an isotopic profile of potential prey items for
each population. We collected 992 prey items, representing 10 amphibian, 8 reptile and 7 mammal
species. Prey δ 13 C values ranged from -31.1 to -14.5‰ and prey δ 15 N values ranged from 0.3 to
7.0‰. When trying to link observed variation in snake isotope values to differences in diet composition,
our interpretations were complicated by spatial variation in prey abundance and within-species spatial
variation in prey isotopic composition. Our work emphasizes that use of stable isotopes as trophic
indicators in natural systems is most accurate when sources of variation in the isotopic baseline (i.e., food
sources) of the system are quantified.



Pilliod, David (US Geological Survey);

Automated Pattern Recognition Program for Leopard Frogs

Identification of individual animals is needed for studying population demography and movement patterns
and is the basis for mark-recapture analyses. Animals with unique body markings (e.g., coloration or
stripes) are easily identified by the human eye from photographs. Photo-matching provides a non-
invasive alternative identification method but has been limited to small datasets because of time and
effort requirements of manual searches. To improve photo-matching for research purposes, Identifrog
software was developed. Identifrog uses a spot-pattern recognition algorithm to identify individual
northern leopard frogs (Lithobates pipiens) using images of their dorsal spot pattern. The algorithm
consists of multiple reduction steps that reduce false matching images at each step. The system returns
the top ten ranked individuals as closest matches along with a classification of these into ‗probable‘
versus ‗not so probable‘ categories. The classification serves as an indication whether the query
individual was previously captured or not. Identifrog was tested on a dataset of 200 individuals, with a
total of 854 images. Identifrog identified 95% of the true matches in the top ten and classified 87% of the
true matches as ‗probable‘ in the top ten. Depending on the discriminators, the system classified 77-84%
of individuals new to the database as ‗not so probable‘ matches. Future versions of this software will
adapt the spot-pattern recognition algorithms for other spotted animals by either adding or removing
reduction steps suitable for animal identification.



Pinto, Nelsy (Universidad de los Andes); Calderon, Martha (Universidad Nacional, Canada); Crawford,
Andrew (Universidad de los Andes. Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute.Círculo Herpetológico de
Panamá, Canada); Miralles, Aurelien (Centre D¿Ecologie fonctionnelle and Evolutive., Canada);
Ramírez-Pinilla, Martha (Universidad Industrial de Santander, Canada)

Revealing complex biogeographical relationships in the Northern Andes: A perspective using
molecular phylogeny of Mabuya lizards

Ecological and historical hypotheses have been proposed to explain high Neotropical species diversity.
Comprehensive understandings of the factors that generate Neotropical diversification require
phylogenetic and phylogeographic hypotheses of organisms coupled with a knowledge of their ecological
restrictions and dispersal abilities. We evaluated phylogenetic relationships among all 27 known species
of skinks in the genus Mabuya (sensu stricto) and related diversification patterns with geographic and
climatic barriers. Mabuya is distributed from Mexico to Bolivia and the Caribbean islands. Our geographic
sampling was especially dense in Colombia, located in the center of this distribution, and the principal
results are focused in the north of the Andes. Molecular phylogenetic inference was based two



                                                                                                         560
mitochondrial markers (12S and cytochrome b) and three nuclear genes (Rag2, NGFB and R35) combing
new and previously published data and utilizing parsimony, Bayesian and maximum likelihood criteria.
We also reconstructed ancestral areas based on parsimony and a likelihood model of evolution of
geographic range, dispersal, local extinction and cladogenesis (DEC). Our results suggest that
diversification in the Neotropical genus Mabuya began approximately in the Middle Miocene.
Diversification of Mabuya seems to have been caused by vicariant events and climatic change. For
instance, splitting time between the eastern and western Amazonian basin is congruent with divergence
time between M. bistriata y M. altamazonica. Our data support the hypothesis that the late Miocene and
early Pliocene was a period that played an important role in the generation of biological diversity in the
north of the Andean region. The northern Andean mountains are divided in at least two distinct lineages
(1) the Oriental, Caribbean and Occidental clade and (2) the Central, Occidental and Oriental clade. This
distributional pattern, the time of diversification clades and the time of uplifting of the Andean mountains
in the north suggest that diversification within the populations in the Andean region may be was triggered
by climatic changes that occurred during the Pleistocene. Therefore, we conclude that the actual
distributional pattern of Mabuya provide new evidence for the relative importance of these historical
processes (climatic cycles and vicariant events) in shaping the assembly of Neotropical biota.



Pirani, Renata (Universidade Federal de Viçosa); Nascimento, Luciana (Pontifícia Universidade Católica
de Minas, Belo Horizonte, Brazil); Feio, Renato (Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa, Brazil)

Similarity of amphibians in mountainous areas in southeastern Brazil

The Brazil is a country that has many mountains range. Among which highlight Espinhaço and Matiqueira
located at southeastern Brazil. The first is covered by Cerrado and Atlantic Forest formation, and one of
the largest Camp Rock formations of Brazil. The Mantiqueira mountain range is influenced by the Atlantic
Forest domain. Used the Sorensen index to verify the similarity in species composition of anurans from
different localities at both mountain ranges complexes. They are: Uaimií State Forest (FLOE Uaimií)
(20º29‘S, 43º57‘W), Serra do Ouro Branco Park (20º31‘S, 43º41‘W), Itacolomi State Park/Tripuí
Ecological Station (20º29‘S, 43º30‘W), Serra do Cipó National Park (PNSC) (19º17‘S, 43º35‘W), Reserva
Particular do Patrimônio Nacional da Serra do Caraça (RPPN Serra do Caraça) (20º05‘S, 43º29‘W)
located in Espinhaço, and Serra do Brigadeiro State Park (PESB) (20º43‘S, 42º28‘W), Ibitipoca State
Park (PE Ibitipoca) (21º40‘S, 43º52‘W) and Serra do Caparaó National Park (PARNA Caparaó) (20º26‘S,
41º47‘W) in Mantiqueira. A cluster analysis by the unweighted average method (UPGMA) was performed
to determine the existence of locations with similar species composition and the clusters were defined by
at least 40% similarity. The localities that are part of the southern portion Espinhaço, known as
Quadrilátero Ferrífero (FLOE Uaimií, Itacolomi State Park/Tripuí Ecological Station, Serra do Ouro
Branco Park and RPPN Serra do Caraça) form a cluster, corroborating the hypotheses that this region
form a unit of relief the Espinhaço mountain range that harbor endemic and unique species. Some
species with distribution in different mountain ranges (Espinhaço and Mantiqueira) (e.g. Hylodes babax),
explain a greater similarity of the fauna of PESB and PARNA Caparaó with the Quadrilátero Ferrífero
clade. The northern portions (Caparaó/Brigadeiro) and meridional (Ibitipoca) of the Mantiqueira mountain
range communicates with the high plains of the Espinhaço mountain range through a continuous altimetry
around 800m, joining the region of the PE Ibitipoca (Mantiqueira) to the Quadrilátero Ferrífero
(Espinhaço). The PNSC was least like the location of the study area. Even though it is located in the
Espinhaço mountain range, the Serra do Cipó is part of a different zoogeographical unit than FLOE
Uaimií.




                                                                                                        561
Pittman, Shannon (University of Missouri-Columbia); Connette, Grant; Semlitsch, Raymond (University
of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, United States)

Effects of habitat composition on movement and optimal dispersal strategies in juvenile spotted
salamanders (Ambystoma maculatum)

Natal dispersal is a critical movement phase for many species, particularly those that undergo
ontogenetic habitat shifts. Behavioral strategies of natal dispersers in response to human-altered habitat
have far-reaching implications for functional connectivity and local population dynamics. Juvenile pond-
breeding spotted salamanders ( Ambystoma maculatum ) are forest-dependent and exhibit considerable
variation in natal dispersal behaviors such as speed of movement, path linearity, and settlement
propensity. We released 200 recently-metamorphosed salamanders in 3 different habitat types (mature
forest, grassland, and 5-year old clearcut) and followed their movements for 1-3 nights. We used these
empirical data to parameterize spatially-explicit, individual-based movement models to investigate the
effects of landscape composition on dispersal success. Specifically, we investigated how distance of natal
wetland from forest and the size of terrestrial buffer zones affected optimal movement and settlement
strategies of dispersing salamanders. Habitat type affected path linearity (P=0.05), with salamanders
moving straighter in low-quality (grassland) habitat. Movement of salamanders in forest habitat was
adequately described by a correlated random walk model (CRWDiff=0.595, P=0.1617, n=84). Results
from our movement model indicated that the size of buffer zone affected the optimal responsiveness of
juveniles to microhabitat. Continuous forest and large buffer zones favored straighter movement paths
and less attention to microhabitat, while smaller buffer zones favored more tortuous paths and high
settlement propensity. All edge simulations favored high settlement propensity and more tortuous paths.
These results indicate that juvenile movement is affected by habitat type and that modified landscapes
may favor alternative dispersal strategies.



Plank, Susanne (ElasmoTech Labs); Winston, Steven (ElasmoTech Labs, Canada)

Photo identification using modern feature recognition and classifiication

Photo identification has been used as a tool for biological research for several decades as a non-invasive
method for recognizing study animals, and has been utilized across a wide range of taxa from marine
mammals to invertebrates. Though the matching process began as a manual search through a catalog of
collected photographs, it has now mostly been supplanted by computer-assisted criteria matching or
pattern recognition programs.            Despite these advances, programs still require manual
identification/confirmation of the programs' highest ranked candidate matches. We have created a new
image analysis program using updated computer science algorithms to not only strongly match photos
containing the same individual, but identify groups that share similar physical characteristic. Here we
present data on initial tests with an inanimate object (coins). We haphazardly selected 100 United States
pennies used as a ―knowledge base‖ in 4 experiments. In Experiment 1 illumination and angle of the
photo remained controlled, in Experiment 2 illumination was varied, in Experiment 3 angle was varied,
and in Experiment 4 illumination and angle were varied in randomly selected combinations. Each of these
knowledge bases was subsequently tested with 4 conditions: control, varied illumination, varied angle,
and varied illumination/angle. Each of these subsets consisted of 10 randomly selected US pennies from
the knowledge base (rephotographed under experimental conditions), 10 haphazardly selected novel US
pennies, one novel Canadian penny, and one novel US dime. Each of the 4 experiments (4 knowledge
bases with 4 subsequent tests) was computed for 64 million iterations (16 million iterations per sub-test).
US dimes and Canadian pennies resulted in outgroup placement from the US pennies without error. A




                                                                                                       562
total of 4 images had false positives during the analysis iterations, but for no more than 2 of the 16 million
iterations per test, giving very strong support for the end result. All test pennies were correctly matched
with their knowledge base counterparts without error despite most test photographs having a different
illumination and/or angle from the original knowledge base photograph. The preliminary results of this
analysis are highly encouraging not only for the individual identification of highly patterned species but for
those species lacking easily distinguished patterns. We soon hope to test this program on coastal
California elasmobranchs.



Platenberg, Renata (Virgin Islands Division of Fish and Wildlife);

The coqui, the treefrog, and the toad: a tale of three invaders in the U.S. Virgin Islands

Amphibian populations are highly vulnerable to species invasions, and insular populations more so.
Introduced species can have varying levels of impact, depending on predation, overlap of habitat,
breeding sites, and diet, and the capability of introducing diseases. The U.S. Virgin Islands are situated
on the Puerto Rican Bank in the Caribbean Sea and have a long history of species introductions and
other human impacts. Three species of amphibians have become established and are now widespread
and abundant: the Cane Toad Rhinella marina , native to South America, The Cuban Treefrog
Osteopilus septentrionalis , native to Cuba, and most recently the Puerto Rican Coqui Eleutherodactylus
coqui , native to Puerto Rico but not the Virgin Islands. These three species have different ecological
impacts on native amphibians. The larger, more distant, and more aggressive invaders consume larger
prey and utilize deeper sources of standing water for breeding than do native species, while not seeming
to include the natives as important prey items. The diminutive E. coqui , however, utilizes the same
microhabitats, reproductive sites, and prey as native frogs and is believed to be the vector for the
introduction of the chytrid fungus into the U.S. Virgin Islands. Thus, the smallest and most local invader
turns out to have the biggest impact on the native frogs.



Pluta, Jennifer (Metropolitan College of Denver); Quinn, Jessica; Gagliardi-Seeley, Jennifer
(Metropolitan College of Denver, Canada); Bakker, Aaron (Metropolitan State College of Denver, Denver,
CO, United States)

Is male mate choice equally important as female mate choice in the monogamous, biparental
Convict Cichlid (Amatitlania nigrofasciata)?

In many species, choosing a high-quality mate or a high-quality breeding site can increase one‘s
reproductive success.        Previously, we set out to determine whether female mate choice in convict
cichlids (Amatitlania nigrofasciata) was based on mate quality or breeding site quality. We created 3
compartments in a tank and placed a male in each outer compartment, leaving the center compartment
as a neutral. Our experimental design isolated the males in their compartments with dividers that had
holes large enough for the smaller female to swim to each compartment. In the experimental group, only
the small male received a breeding site. In the controls, the males were of equal size and one male was
randomly given a breeding site. We were unable to conclude anything from this experiment, because
most of the females stayed in the neutral compartment; thus, no choice was made.             This led us to
investigate whether male choice is equally important as female choice.            Since convict cichlids (
Amatitlania nigrofasciata) are serially monogamous and biparental, it is quite possible that both male and
female choice is important. We are repeating the above experiment with an addition of another female;
thus, there will be two isolated males and two free-swimming females in each tank. We hypothesize that



                                                                                                          563
pair-bond formation will occur more often than the previous experiment since both males and females will
be involved in the mate choice process.



Pollock, David (U Colorado School of Medicine); Castoe, Todd (U of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO, United States); de Koning, AP Jason (U Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United
States); Secor, Stephen (University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, United States); Feschotte, Cedric
(University of Texas at Arlington, Canada)

Snake Evolutionary Systems Genomics

Snakes represent an outstanding vertebrate model for studying the evolution of unique and extreme
phenotypes and adaptation, presenting an exciting system for linking changes at the molecular level with
phenotypic novelty and diversity. They also provide an excellent system for studying the synergistic
interactions that various levels of biological organization (i.e., proteins, gene expression, genome
structure) may have on generating adaptive phenotypes. Here we show evidence for extreme adaptation
from the level of genes through the level of genome structure that may have collectively contributed to the
evolution of extreme phenotypes in snakes. This will include evidence for adaptation and molecular
convergence in metabolic proteins, and evidence for major changes in repeat element composition that
may have altered snake genome evolution.



Pompert, Joost (Falkland Islands Fisheries Department); Pierce, Graham (Aberdeen University,
Canada); Brickle, Paul (Falkland Islands Fisheries Department, Canada); Arkhipkin, Alexander (Falkland
Islands Fisheries department, Canada)

A comparison of the life history strategies of the Falkland skate (Bathyraja macloviana) and the
joined-fin skate (Bathyraja cousseauae) using age estimations from caudal thorns.

Life history parameters for the Falkland skate, Bathyraja macloviana and the joined-fin skate Bathyraja
cousseauae from specimens caught in waters around the Falkland Islands are presented, with age and
growth estimates derived from 496 and 357 caudal thorn samples respectively. Bathyraja macloviana
were aged to 14 years, whereas B. cousseauae were aged to 20 years. Growth between the two species
was very different, with the von Bertalanffy growth model (K= 0.21, L∞=60.6cm Lt) best describing B.
macloviana, and the Gompertz growth function best describing B. cousseauae (G=1.937, k=0.178,
L∞=124.5 cm Lt-). In both species the females are heavier at size than the males, and females reach a
slightly larger size. Age increments were validated using two techniques: an oxytetracycline tag-
recaptured B. cousseauae that had been at liberty for 2½ years, and edge analyses of a subsample of
young specimens.

Sizes and ages at 50% maturity derived from maturity stages are also presented. For female B.
macloviana this is 50.2cm Lt and 7.0yrs, for males 46.0cm Lt and 6.8yrs. For female B. cousseauae these
values are 96.7cm Lt and 10.3yrs, for males 91.4cm Lt and 9.0yrs.

Of the 16 skate species that occur in the Falkland fishery, 8 have to date been age-assessed, with the
new life history information on these 2 species providing further insight into the inter-assemblage
dynamics. With an increasing amount of ageing studies completed stock management models can be
refined.




                                                                                                       564
Pompert, Joost (Falkland Islands Fisheries Department); Pierce, Graham (Aberdeen University,
Canada); Brickle, Paul (Falkland Islands Fisheries Department, Canada); Arkhipkin, Alexander (Falkland
Island Fisheries Department, Canada)

Reproductive strategies of two species of skate (Bathyraja macloviana and Bathyraja cousseauae)
inhabiting the Falkland Islands shelf; a comparison

The reproductive strategies for the Falkland skate, Bathyraja macloviana and the joined-fin skate
Bathyraja cousseauae from specimens caught in waters around the Falkland Islands are presented.
LM50 as derived from reproductive organ development are compared with those derived from maturity
stages. For female B. macloviana these are 48.7-52.2cm Lt, for males 46.9-47.6 cm Lt, for male B.
cousseauae the values are 90.9-92.7cm Lt. These LM50 values compare well with those derived from
maturity stages and are attained at a relatively large size of 75% and 77% of Lt-max respectively. The
fecundity of both species is low, at around 7 for B. macloviana and around 21 for B. cousseauae. Of all
samples examined, one hermaphrodite B. cousseauae was noted.

Both species display ontogenetic changes with depth, with juvenile B. macloviana present at and over the
shelf break, and all other size and maturity classes present mainly on the shelf. Juvenile B. cousseauae
are also mainly present at the shelf break, but as specimens grow and mature they migrate to deeper
water, returning to shallower water to spawn on the shelf break. Both species also display spawning
seasonality, with B. macloviana spawning primarily in spring and summer months, and B. cousseauae
primarily spawning in winter and spring months.

Energy investment into reproduction for females of both species is shown by a clear increase in HSI with
size, and a decreasing HSI as the animal enters the reproductive phases at LM50, with concomitant
increases in GSI.

Dimensions of egg capsules are presented, with the mean capsule length (excluding horns) for B.
macloviana 75.4mm, and for B. cousseauae 125.9mm.

The new life history information on these two species discovered by this study improves the
understanding of the reproductive biology of these two species, and will help with refining the stock
management models. It will also assist with the study of other species in the skate assemblage in the
region.



Pömpner, Nadine (Institut für Spezielle Zoologie und Evolutionsbiologie, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität
Jena); Beckmann, Felix (Helmholtz Zentrum Geesthacht, Institute of Materials Research, Max-Planck-
Straße 1, 21502 Geesthacht, Germany, Canada); Müller, Hendrik (Jena University, Department of
Comparative Zoology and Evolutionary Biology, Jena, Germany)

Development of the skull and cranial musculature in Hemidactylium scutatum (Caudata:
Plethodontidae)

The four-toed plethodontid salamander Hemidactylium scutatum has a wide distribution throughout
Eastern North America. Phylogenetically, emerging consensus resolves H. scutatum as the sister taxon
to the direct developing bolitoglossine plethodontids. Hemidactylium differs from most other plethodontid
salamanders by having terrestrial egg deposition and an aquatic larval with a very short larval period.
Reflecting its phylogenetic position, the life history of H. scutatum is somewhat intermediate between
spelerpine plethodontids with aquatic eggs and comparatively long to very long larval periods and
bolitoglossine plethodontids with complete terrestrial direct development. To determine potential life



                                                                                                      565
history effects on morphological development, we studied the development of the skull and cranial
musculature in H. scutatum from the late embryonic period through metamorphosis. Compared to other
biphasic developing salamanders, H. scutatum develops most similar to spelerpine salamanders and we
found few differences in their larval development. The basal plate, forming part of the ventral, posterior
chondrocranium, is less extensively developed in H. scutatum than in spelerpines, which might be
attributable to the short larval lifespan. Another difference is the presence of a somewhat reduced
ceratobranchial IV in H. scutatum , which is absent in spelerpine plethodontids. In all other aspects, larval
development in H. scutatum resembles that of spelerpine plethodontids.



Popescu, Viorel (Simon Fraser University); Kissel, Amanda (Simon Fraser University, Canada);
Pearson, Monica (Balance Ecological, Canada); Palen, Wendy (Simon Fraser University, Canada);
Govindarajulu, Purnima (BC Ministry of Environment, Canada); Bishop, Christine (Environment Canada,
Pacific Wildlife Research Centre, Canada)

Habitat selection by Oregon spotted frogs (Rana pretiosa) in British Columbia, Canada

The Oregon spotted frog ( Rana pretiosa ) has been extirpated from 90% of its original range in North
America, and is restricted to three remnant breeding populations in Canada. The current Oregon spotted
frog recovery strategy in British Columbia focuses on habitat protection activities at breeding sites, and
establishing new populations at restored or recently created wetlands using captive-bred frogs. An
important assumption is that current habitat protection activities are suitable for protecting mobile and
highly aquatic adults, about which little is known. Here, we evaluated seasonal and annual variation in
adult Oregon spotted frog habitat use and selection using radio-telemetry of 41 captive-bred individuals
introduced to two extant breeding sites in 2009 and 2010. In addition to tracking individual frogs, on
average 1-2 times per week, we collected data on habitat attributes at telemetry and paired random
locations. A key challenge required that we identify comparable habitat attributes that transcended site-
specific differences in wetland vegetation that often make direct comparison of habitat suitability difficult.
As such, we developed ecologically-based ‗functional groups‘ of submerged and emergent vegetation
types and habitat characteristics (e.g., culm, floating debris, floating mats, etc.), and used a model
selection approach to evaluate the level of support for a range of models. In particular, we used two
different quantitative methods. First, we performed a 2nd order habitat selection analysis (i.e., at the
population level) using a Euclidian distance-based approach. Second, we used ‗functional group‘ percent
cover data from 1-m2 plots at paired telemetry and random locations in a generalized mixed effects
modeling framework to identify microhabitats preferred at a finer spatial scale. We found that movements
of Oregon spotted frogs were limited and that at the population level frogs selected for complex habitats
with emergent vegetation that formed continuous submerged root mats. By contrast, the use of less
complex habitats, including open water, shrubs, and bushy grasses were not well supported. Given that
the two study sites are highly modified by human activities, yet support persistent Oregon spotted frog
populations, our results provide support that current recovery actions aimed at establishing additional
populations at restored or created wetlands may be successful if sites include complex habitats identified
in this analysis.




                                                                                                          566
Portik, Daniel (University of California, Berkeley);

Counter-current faunal exchanges across the Arabian Peninsula: Patterns from varanids and
toads

Faunal exchanges between Africa and Asia, driven by climatic oscillations and the availability of land
bridge connections, have resulted in patterns of admixture across Northern Africa, the Arabian Peninsula,
and throughout much of the Middle East. The Arabian Peninsula and the Red Sea have a complex
geological history, and varying levels of connectivity with Africa have allowed for scattered vicariance
events and uneven periods of potential dispersal opportunities. The dynamic geology of the formation of
the Red Sea and associated dates of major events leads to several hypotheses that can explain current
distributional patterns of fauna around the Middle East. These hypotheses are testable in a phylogenetic
framework using divergence time estimates. I investigate these patterns in African monitor lizards (
Varanus ), focusing on one species group ( V. albigularis ) that displays a disjunct Afro-Arabian
distribution. I also investigate these patterns in a toad complex ( Duttaphrynus [= Bufo ]) distributed
across the Horn of Africa (Somalia), the Arabian Peninsula (Yemen, Oman), and the Middle East (Iran,
Afghanistan, Pakistan). By comparing these newly generated data sets to previously conducted studies, I
attempt to summarize major biogeographic patterns and shed light on the complex history of the Red Sea
region.



Portillo, Frank (University of Texas at El Paso); Greenbaum, Eli (University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso,
United States)

Systematics of Leptopelis (Anura: Arthroleptidae) from the Itombwe Plateau, eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo

Leptopelis, a genus of Central African treefrogs, includes 52 species that live in tropical forests and
savannas. Currently, only two species of Leptopelis are known from the poorly explored Itombwe Plateau
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). Itombwe is renowned for its rich and endemic
amphibian fauna, including: Xenopus itombwenesis, Chrysobatrachus cupreonitens, Laurentophryne
parkeri and at least three species of Arthroleptis. Within the framework of a larger Leptopelis phylogeny,
we examined the evolutionary relationships of 27 samples of Itombwe Leptopelis by sequencing two
mitochondrial (16S and cyt b; 1100 base pairs [bp]) and two nuclear (RAG1 and c¬-mos; 1400 bp) genes.
These DNA sequence data were analyzed with maximum parsimony in PAUP* 4.0b, maximum likelihood
in RAxML v7.2.6 and Bayesian inference in MrBayes v3.1. For Bayesian inference, the appropriate
model was inferred using jModelTest.           We used multiple morphological characters and male
advertisement call data to examine species boundaries in distinct lineages identified from our molecular
phylogeny. Results indicated that several distinct lineages deserve recognition as new species and
demonstrate the importance of the Itombwe Plateau as a center of endemism.



Portnoy, David (TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY); John, Gold (Texas A&M University, Canada); Cummings,
Nancie (National Marine Fisheries Service, Canada)

Is connectivity related to adult reproductive behavior? A comparison of population structure in
two protogynous groupers in the U.S. waters of the Caribbean Sea

Relationships between larval duration (dispersal potential) and connectivity (realized dispersal) in marine
fishes have been examined in a number of studies; few studies, however, have examined possible effects



                                                                                                       567
that adult reproductive behavior may have on realized dispersal. To that end, we examined gene flow
among four localities in U.S. waters of the Caribbean Sea, using nuclear and mitochondrially encoded
markers, in two protogynous groupers: the aggregate spawning red hind, Epinephelus guttatus , and the
single-male, harem-spawning coney,          Cephalopholis fulva .    These two species are important
components of the shallow water grouper complex in U.S. Caribbean fisheries. Sample localities were
offshore of Puerto Rico (west and east coasts), St. Thomas, and St. Croix. For both species, spatial
partitioning of genetic variation differed between marker types, with a stronger signal of population
structure detected in coney. Analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA) and pairwise exact tests of
homogeneity (microsatellites) for both species indicated differences between samples from St. Croix and
St. Thomas, as well as St Croix and the west coast of Puerto Rico. In coney, the analysis also indicated
differences between the sample from the west coast of Puerto Rico and samples from the east coast of
Puerto Rico and St. Thomas. Comparable analyses with mtDNA indicated homogeneity among all four
samples of red hind and indicated that for coney the sample from St. Croix differed from the others.
Bayesian estimates of migration (long-term and contemporary), based on microsatellites, indicated that
the direction of ‗overall‘ gene flow in coney parallels the predominant direction (east to west) of current
flow in the region. These results are consistent with a relationship between larval drift and realized
dispersal. The mtDNA based heterogeneity in coney suggests a barrier to gene flow associated with the
species preference for shallow water habitats and the deep Puerto Rican trench that separates St. Croix
from the other sites. Territorial behavior by males and associated female-skewed sex ratios observed in
protogynous groupers support the hypothesis that females may be the dispersive sex, and that the lack of
congruence between nuclear-encoded and mitochondrial markers stems at least in part from female-
mediated gene flow. Our results indicate that adult reproductive behavior can effect realized dispersal in
marine fishes.



Portnoy, David (TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY); Conway, Kevin; White, Macaulay; Gold, John (TEXAS
A&M UNIVERSITY, College Station, TX, United States)

Searobin hybridization revisited: molecular insights on the reported hybrid zone between
Prionotus alatus and P. paralatus in the northern Gulf of Mexico, inferred from external
morphology

Searobins of the tribe Prionotini are common inhabitants of shallow coastal areas throughout the western
central Atlantic, including the Gulf of Mexico (Gulf). Searobins are notoriously difficult to identify and as
such frequently misidentified. Difficulties encountered during the identification of two species (Prionotus
alatus and P. paralatus) collected from the northern Gulf in the area of Mobile Bay are suggested to be
the result of hybridization between the two species in this area. This hypothesis, based on existence of
―intermediate‖ individuals possessing external morphology of both P. alatus and P. paralatus, has yet to
be tested with appropriate genetic data. We utilized sequence data from two mitochondrial and one
nuclear gene obtained from a large number of individuals of both P. alatus and P. paralatus, identified
using morphological characters, from throughout their range, including the area of interest in the northern
Gulf, to assess whether there is genetic evidence to support the hypothesis of hybridization between the
two. Preliminary results reveal low levels of genetic variation between P. alatus and P. paralatus at the
loci examined. Phylogenetic analyses of 11 members of the Prionotini and appropriate outgroups
recovered P. alatus and P. paralatus as a monophyletic group but failed to group individuals of each
taxon together within this clade. These data are consistent with the hypothesis that P. alatus and P.
paralatus are only recently diverged or are morphotypes of the same species associated with coral rubble
or terrigenous mud bottom habitats of the eastern and western Gulf, respectively.




                                                                                                         568
Poulter, Russell (University of Otago);

Fungicidal suppression of Batrachochytrium

Almost a third of all amphibian species are threatened with extinction. Although a major threat is habitat
loss and degradation, chytridiomycosis, a disease caused by a pathogenic fungus Batrachochytrium
dendrobatidis , has been shown to cause sudden and severe population declines in numerous species.
The proposed global action plan to mitigate the global decline in amphibians includes investigation into
drugs against Batrachochytrium . There are several methods for treating captive frogs infected with
Batrachochytrium but no methods for treating wild amphibian populations that are infected. Although
captive breeding programmes can sustain small populations of threatened species, over a number of
generations there is likely to be loss of genetic variation. In addition, many species cannot be bred in
captivity and their continued existence therefore relies on remediation of their environment by
suppressing the Batrachochytrium . We have been experimenting with various fungicides in laboratory
and semi-natural contexts in the search for protocols that may suppress Batrachochytrium in the wild.
We have used as our experimental amphibian, the Australian Southern Brown Tree Frog, which is
introduced into New Zealand and is now widespread. We have concentrated our attention on protocols
that will be readily implemented; for example, the protocol must be effective, cheap and ecologically
benign. We have developed a protocol that will, we believe, suppress Batrachochytrium in the wild and
which can be used to remediate large areas sufficient to support refuge populations of endangered
amphibian in sufficient numbers to be sustainable in the long term.



Powell, Brian (Duke University); Leal, Manuel (Duke University, Canada)

Brain Evolution Across the Puerto Rican Anole Radiation

Patterns of brain evolution have been widely studied across vertebrates, with the bulk of studies using
mammals and/or birds. Within these groups, species occupying different habitats have been shown to
have divergent neuroanatomy, particularly differences in the relative size of different brain structures,
correlated with differences in habitat size or structure. We examine the pattern of allometric scaling
across the telencephalon, dorsal cortex, dorsomedial cortex, medial cortex, dorsal ventricular ridge,
medulla, and cerebellum in six species of Puerto Rican Anolis lizards, which are grouped in three
distinct ecomorphs according to interspecific differences in structural habitat preferences. The differences
in habitat preferences are accompanied by morphological and behavioral adaptations for effective used of
each habitat type. However, our results challenge this trend and demonstrate a lack of convergence in
the relative size of different brain structures between species using similar structural habitats. We found
differences in the relative volume of the medulla across species, suggesting mosaic evolution in this
structure. Overall brain volume explained between 92.5% and 99.7% of the variance in volume of each of
the brain regions measured, and 93.7% and 98.5% of the variance in volume of each component
measured within the telencephalon. This pattern of brain allometry is generally consistent with concerted
brain evolution, with the exception of the medulla. Concerted brain evolution has also been observed in
mammals and cartilaginous fishes, and its presence in Anolis lizards provides additional evidence
supporting the hypothesis that concerted brain evolution might result from a conserved pattern of brain
development common to all vertebrates.




                                                                                                        569
Powell, Larry (Dept. of Biological Sciences); Russell, Anthony; Jamniczky, Heather; Hallgrimsson,
Benedikt (University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada)

Ontogenetic and sexual shape variation in the skull and horns of the Greater Short-horned lizard,
Phrynosoma hernandesi.

Morphological disparity in the phrynosomatid genus Phrynosoma is strongly associated with variations in
cranial structure. We use geometric morphometric analysis to explore size-associated shape change in
the skull of the Greater Short-horned Lizard, Phrynosoma hernandesi , as a basis for a more
comprehensive study of cranial morphological evolution in this genus. Females of P. hernandesi exceed
males in adult body size, this difference resulting from an early truncation by males of a common body-
size growth trajectory, suggesting that males will display morphological progenesis relative to females.
Three-dimensional reconstructions of the skulls of a sample covering the ontogenetic size ranges for both
sexes of this species, from over the range in Canada, were recovered from μ-CT scans. A suite of
landmarks (Bookstein‘s Type 1 and Type 2) covering the dorsal and occipital aspects of the cranium and
the bases and tips of the squamosal, parietal and supraocular horns, were applied to the reconstruction
sample. After Procrustes fit, landmark data were subjected to multivariate regression against log centroid
size and the regression residuals subjected to principal components analysis and discriminant analysis in
order to test for sexual shape dimorphism in cranial features. Positive allometry relative to log centroid
size is displayed for most cranial and horn features. Ontogenetic changes in landmark coordinates
indicate that the squamosal and parietal horns typical of Phrynosoma are iterative homologues,
displaying some developmental independence from the bones bearing them. Sexual shape dimorphism in
horn development and skull shape are not supported. This suggests that cranial heterochrony among
Phrynosoma species is important in producing morphological disparity in this evolutionary radiation, for
which phylogenetically-based geometric morphometric methods will be a fruitful means of investigation.
We present evidence concerning the roles of cranial modularity and integration in the evolutionary
radiation of Phrynosoma .



Prado, Cynthia (Universidade Estadual Paulista); Nali, Renato (Universidade Estadual Paulista -
UNESP, Rio Claro, SP, Brazil); Zamudio, Kelly (Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States); Haddad,
Célio (Universidade Estadual Paulista - UNESP, Rio Claro, SP, Brazil)

Asymmetries in natural selection on males and females and the evolution of sexual size
dimorphism in frogs

Sexual size dimorphism (SSD), the difference in body size between adult males and females of a
species, varies in animals from extreme male-biased to female-biased. A general macroevolutionary
pattern in the distribution of SSD was summarized by Rensch‘s rule, which states that, within lineages,
SSD decreases with size when females are the larger sex, and it increases with size when males are the
larger sex. Exceptions to this rule have been found primarily in female-biased lineages. In anurans,
females are larger than males in 90% of the species, but the size differences between the sexes are quite
variable. Male territoriality, female fecundity, and breeding pattern (explosive or prolonged) are possible
selective forces influencing body sizes of males and females. In this study we gathered data from 158
anuran species from 12 families and investigated whether anurans follow Rensch‘s rule. Furthermore,
using Phylogenetic Independent Contrasts we tested the hypotheses: (1) that the variation in SSD among
species is dictated primarily by evolutionary changes in female size; (2) changes in female body size
correlate with changes in fecundity; (3) explosively-breeding species show stronger selective advantage
for increased female fecundity– and therefore for female body size increase – than species with
prolonged breeding, and (4) that species with male territoriality have stronger pressure for male body size



                                                                                                       570
increase and therefore SSD decrease. We found that anurans did not follow Rensch‘s rule. Our results
corroborated hypotheses 1 to 3, although the difference in fecundity pressure for prolonged and explosive
breeders was only marginally significant. Male territoriality did not explain differences in SSD. Although
female size correlated with SSD, it was true only for small species, suggesting that fecundity increase –
therefore body size increase – is probably a stronger selective pressure for small species, likely because
large females are already capable of producing huge numbers of eggs. Even though many unquantified
ecological and behavioral traits certainly impact SSD, our study presents a broad evolutionary view of
patterns of sexual size dimorphism and targets of selection in frogs. Studies on natural history of frog
species are crucial to elucidate specific ecological and behavioral mechanisms influencing SSD at the
level of individual selection.



Pramuk, Jennifer (Woodland Park Zoo);

Curating a different kind of collection: the use of zoo animals in research.

Curating living specimens shares much in common with curating museum collections. Zoos and
museums alike face the challenges of managing ever-larger databases while seeking funding and
expertise necessary for managing these data. Of particular concern to those curating living collections
and captive populations are data related to lineages (e.g., studbooks) and their management. Given the
high visibility of individual animals housed in living institutions, zoos and aquariums also must adeptly
manage issues related to animal welfare and potential fallout from visitor perceptions related to their use
in research. For that reason it is especially critical for zoos and aquariums to form proficient committees
for evaluating research proposals. Increasingly, institutions that manage living collections are partnering
with universities and natural history museums for museum deposition, behavioral, and other studies.
These partnerships can provide a unique synergy and new research opportunities related to
conservation, improving animal husbandry and welfare, and understanding natural history. The
challenges and benefits of developing partnerships between museums and living institutions will be
discussed.



Pratt, Harold (Mote Marine Laboratory); Heist, Edward (Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, IL,
United States); Pratt, Theo (Mote Marine Laboratory, Summerland Key, FL, United States); Carrier,
Jeffrey (Albion College, Albion, MI, United States)

Sexual conflict in the nurse shark, Ginglymostoma cirratum: five compensatory behaviors

Different animal sexes often have differing reproductive goals and unequal investments which result in a
continuing conflict of interests. In the annual nurse shark mating season at the Dry Tortugas, Florida,
sexual conflict is both striking and conspicuous. Males attempt to force copulation by orally grasping or
attempting to grasp the chosen female‘s pectoral fin. Females vigorously thwart 94.1% of male mating
attempts (n=1280) by Refuging, by Avoiding and by cooperative Pectoral Shielding. In group mating
events (6.2 % of total events observed), males counter these female maneuvers with two cooperative
behaviors of their own; the Simultaneous Caudal Grab and Blocking. As many as seven males have been
observed to pursue a selected female, circle into position and compete to grasp the female‘s pectoral fins
to coerce her to mate. In most large group matings observed, one attendant, non-competitive male
facilitates male mating from the very first encounter by positioning himself in front of the mating sharks
limiting their forward motion. Videography reveals that this male‘s helping role (Blocking) is determined
even before the pectoral grasp is attained, or before the identity of the copulating male in the event is



                                                                                                       571
decided by contest. Thus males may choose a helping role on the mating grounds. The ‗Simultaneous
Caudal Grab‘ permits two males to work together to move an Avoiding female into deeper water. Group
courtship results in a copulation at least 40 % of the time (n = 86). Male and female cooperation may
have evolved as a reciprocal altruism and not kin selection as microsatellite genotype analysis reveals
low levels of relatedness. Refuging and Pectoral Shielding are mutualisms probably derived from
schooling.



Pratt, Shane (University of Manitoba); Rutherford, Pamela (Brandon Univeristy, Brandon, MB, Canada);
Koper, Nicola (University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada); Wiseman, Dion (Brandon University,
Brandon, MB, Canada)

The effect of anthropogenic cover on habitat choice of the Endangered Northern Prairie Skink

The Northern Prairie Skink (Plestiodon septentrionalis) is Manitoba‘s only lizard species and is federally
listed as Endangered. Previous research indicates that Prairie Skinks are very secretive, rarely surface
active, and commonly are located under artificial cover. Artificial cover can alter many biotic and abiotic
factors in the natural environment and could provide false habitat data of the study species. The
objective of this study is to determine the effect of anthropogenic cover on the habitat choice and
behaviour of the Northern Prairie Skink. In this project 10 adult Prairie Skinks were fitted with radio
transmitters in summer 2012 at CFB Shilo, Manitoba, Canada. Individuals were tracked every 4 hours.
Habitat data was taken within one meter of each location and at three random points within 5 meters of
each location. The habitat data was collected within a 1m by 1m square plot and included: air
temperature, surface temperature, cover temperature, cover type, cover thickness, percent vegetation
and bare ground, and distance to nearest forest edge. Habitat data also were collected using an
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) with a high definition (8-10 cm resolution) and near infrared (NIR) digital
camera. We calculated the normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) in order to increase the
probability of discriminating between differing land cover/vegetation types. A formal classification
accuracy assessment was conducted by comparing the actual land cover/vegetation type with that
determined through NDVI classification. Finally, Prairie Skink captures were overlaid onto the land
cover/vegetation classification to determine habitat selection for this species. This research provides
valuable information on how the coverboard sampling technique affects habitat selection and behaviour of
Northern Prairie Skinks.



Preest, Marion (The Claremont Colleges); Ward, Matthew (Pitzer College, Claremont, United States);
Thomas, Poon (The Claremont Colleges, Claremont, United States)

Chemical Prey Luring in Jackson's Chameleons: Time's Fun When You're Having Flies

Many animals go to extraordinary lengths to obtain prey. For example, some turtles and snakes use their
tongues or tails as lures, angler fish use a long, bioluminiscent filament extending from their head as a
lure, and the assassin bug lures spiders into their own web by plucking at the silk and mimicking the
vibrations produced by trapped insect prey. Chemical attraction of prey is also known. Bolas spiders
appear to attract prey with a pheromone and then swing bolas-like webs to capture them. The lizard,
Podarcis lilfordi, feeds on insects attracted to the pungent smell of a plant (dead horse arum). Here we
report on an investigation of the use of a chemical lure in Jackson‘s chameleons (Chamaeleo jacksonii).
In an unpublished Ph.D. thesis in 1966, P.W. Ogilvie describes a ―white, foul smelling viscous substance
at the angle of the jaw‖ of animals in the genus Chamaeleo. He reports having observed animals in the



                                                                                                       572
field wiping their jaws from side to side on branches and capturing flies that landed near the area where
the wiping occurred. Our work has repeated and confirmed some aspects of Ogilvie‘s work, as well as
building on it. We performed a detailed dissection of the temporal pouch of Jackson‘s chameleons. We
also extracted material from the pouch and ran the sample through a gas chromatograph-mass
spectrometer. These tests revealed the presence of compounds that are both volatile and odiferous and
possibly similar to insect pheromones. T-maze tests with house flies revealed that flies are attracted to
the temporal pouch material. We also confirmed the presence of the temporal pouch in preserved
specimens of 13 other species of chameleons in the genus Chamaeleo. Some authors have speculated
that the material contained in the pouch serves a function in territory marking and/or predator deterrence.
While it may play these roles, our results and those of Ogilvie, suggest that it may serve a role in chemical
luring of prey.



Preininger, Doris (University Vienna); Sztatecsny, Marc (University Vienna, Vienna, Austria); Hödl,
Walter (UniversityVienna, Vienna, Austria)

Pirates in Borneo and India: Hoisting a flag before or instead of the attack? Acoustic and visual
signaling in stream dwelling frogs

While anurans are well known for acoustic signaling, intraspecific communication may involve multiple
cues or signals in many more species than previously thought. For instance, when noise interferes with
calls, visual signals may act as an additional or a complementary mode of communication. Foot-flagging
as a striking form of visual signaling behavior has evolved in at least in 15 species from 5 different
families mainly living along fast-flowing streams generating continuous broadband background noise. To
better understand the role of foot-flagging as a visual signal component, we studied 3 Asian species from
2 different families and performed cue-isolation experiments in the field.

The Bornean species Staurois parvus and S. guttatus avoid acoustic interference of ambient stream
noise by using call frequencies less masked by the background and utilize accompanying visual displays
to signal the readiness to defend calling sites. Micrixalus saxicola from the Western Ghats of India occurs
along less noisy streams and acoustic signals are rather masked by chorus noise from conspecifics than
by abiotic noise. Micrixalus saxicola use a variety of visual signals including foot-flagging and tapping
during male-male agonistic behavior. Receiver responses from acoustic- vs. bimodal playback
presentations provide evidence that the vocal sac acts as an additional visual cue. The comparison of
stream living anurans from different habitats should help us to better understand possible selection
regimes favoring the evolution of multimodal communication in anurans.



Price, Stephen (Institute of Zoology);

Versatile pathogens in a world on the move: defining amphibian risk from ranavirus

The Frog Mortality Project (FMP) has collated reports of unusual amphibian mortality in the UK since
1992. The result is an extensive database spanning two decades and containing information on
approximately 5000 mortality events from many parts of England as well as Wales. Ranaviruses were
confirmed as the aetiological agent in a number of FMP recorded mortality events. Introduction to the UK
seems likely to have been via North America with ornamental fish, exotic amphibians, humans, birds and
insects all mooted as possible agents implicated in the introduction, spread, or both.




                                                                                                         573
Preliminary visualisation of disease spread in the UK points to a patchy distribution, with reporting shifting
from geographically isolated to widespread. The FMP database can be filtered conservatively for reports
consistent with ranavirus disease. Here, I will present the three basic outputs of a spatial epidemiology
study: (i) a description of the spatial patterns of ranavirus incidence in the UK, (ii) analysis of these
patterns, and (iii) evaluation of contrasting models of ranavirus emergence, e.g. climate change as a
modifying effect on an endemic pathogen versus spread via human-mediated translocations.



Prohaska, Bianca K. (University of New England); Tsang, Paul C.W. (University of New Hampshire,
Canada); Driggers III, William B.; Hoffmayer, Eric R. (National Marine Fisheries Service, Mississippi
Laboratories, Canada); Sulikowski, James A. (University of New England, Canada)

Potential Utilization of Steroid Hormones Extracted from the Skeletal Muscle Tissue of the Spiny
Dogfish (Squalus acanthias), the Little Skate (Leucoraja erinacea), the Atlantic Sharpnose Shark
(Rhizoprionodon terraenovae), and the Atlantic Stingray (Dasy

Currently, circulating levels of plasma steroid hormones have been used as a non-lethal method to
determine reproductive maturity and reproductive cycles in elasmobranchs. However, this method can
prove problematic to perform on large and/or endangered species, because of difficulties involved with
specimen handling.        These constraints make it imperative for new techniques to be developed for
studying the reproductive biology of elasmobranchs. Previous work conducted on other vertebrates has
shown that steroid hormones can be successfully extracted from muscle tissue. The process of collecting
muscle tissue samples is quick, minimally invasive, and may be conducted without removing the animal
from the water, facilitating its use on larger, and/or endangered species of elasmobranchs. The focus of
this presentation will be the development of a valid method for extracting steroid hormones from the
skeletal muscle tissue of the lecithotrophic aplacental viviparous spiny dogfish, the oviparous little skate,
the placental viviparous Atlantic Sharpnose shark, and the matrotrophic aplacental Atlantic stingray. For
each species 40 females are currently being collected from the Gulf of Maine, and the Gulf of Mexico and
will consist of 10 immature individuals, to act as control replicates, 10 early-gestation individuals, 10 mid-
gestation individuals, and 10 near parturition individuals. Sample collections of spiny dogfish, little skate,
Atlantic sharpnose sharks, and Atlantic stingray began in October 2010, and the remaining samples will
be collected throughout the following year. To verify the use of this tissue for reproductive analysis,
steroid hormone levels extracted from skeletal muscle tissue will be compared to the concentrations and
patterns of those same steroid hormones extracted from plasma, via radioimmunoassay. Preliminarily, the
results suggest that a trend exists between the concentrations of steroid hormone levels in the plasma to
those in the skeletal muscle tissue.



Pröhl, Heike (Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine);

Behavioral ecology and sexual selection in strawberry poison frogs, or how a frog became a star?

The evolution of mating strategies and mating systems is an integral part of sexual selection theory.
Mating strategies normally vary between the sexes and depend on ecological factors as well as the
operational sex ratio (OSR). Strawberry poison frogs are an ideal study model for answering questions on
how ecological factors affect the reproductive behavior and the strength of sexual selection because they
inhabit a variety of different habitats and show geographic variation in ecology and behavior. Moreover
the species is toxic, aposematically colored, and displays diurnal activity. Here I will summarize the
results of multiple studies conducted during the last years aiming at a better understanding of how



                                                                                                          574
ecology affects the behavior of these frogs. I will show that males and females are territorial and
aggressive. Since females provide most parental care the OSR is usually male biased. Therefore males
compete for females and defend territories in areas with high female density, which also provide ideal
calling places and food resources. Females defend the core areas of their home ranges against other
females, probably also for defending food sources. The defense of food resources, which are rich of
insects containing toxic alkaloids may be important for aposematism as an anti-predator strategy. Female
home ranges overlap with territories of several males among which they choose for mating. Female
mating strategy, male mating success and the levels of sexual selection in males vary between
populations and years depending on the OSR. The OSR in turn is influenced by resource distribution,
climate and predation. When the OSR is more male biased females are choosier, variance in male mating
success is higher and sexual selection is more intense than in less male biased situations. I will discuss
the influence of ecological variables on territoriality, mating system and sexual selection in strawberry
poison frogs and highlight the importance for further research investigating variation in behavior in time
and space.



Puente-Rolón, Alberto R. (Universidad Interamericana en Arecibo); Vega-Castillo, Sondra I.
(Universidad de Puerto Rico, Canada)

Comparison of Body Size and Body Condition of Free-Ranging and Cave-Associated Epicrates
inornatus in the Northern Karst Region of Puerto Rico

Species gather energy from the chemical potential energy in food and have to allocate the garnered
resources among maintenance, growth, reproduction, and storage. Recently, snakes have been
identified as a good group for research on this topic. The objective of this study is to compare the body
condition of free-ranging boas, Epicrates inornatus, with those associated with caves. For each snake, I
determined sex, snout-vent length (SVL), tail length, and weight. Relative tail length, stoutness and
regressions were used to analyze the data. A body-condition index was calculated as the residual scores
from the regression of the natural logarithm of body mass against that of body length. Distribution of
sizes showed that snakes associated with caves are smaller than those that are not associated with
caves. Snakes associated with caves have longer tails relative to SVL than do free-ranging snakes.
Free-ranging males were in better condition than were free-ranging females, whereas in caves females
were in were in better body condition than were males. Possibly E. inornatus may experience an
ontogenetic shift in niche, with caves sustaining a particular cohort. Caves may serve as a source for
snakes in the surrounding forested areas. The fact that snakes of this species rely on multiple habitat
types throughout their lifetimes has major implications for conservation. In order to ensure the
persistence of the populations of this endangered snake, a landscape analysis focusing on caves with a
resident population of snakes and which is connected with forested habitat, needs to be performed. This
kind of study will allow managers to identify natural corridors and new important areas for conservation
that will benefit the species.



Puky, Miklos (Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Centre for Ecological Research, Danube Research
Institute);

Amphibian road mortality: a key factor in conservation on crowded continents

The effect of linear infrastructure, primarily road networks, has recently been realised as a multi-factor
threat for amphibians. Populations of several species got extinct due to increased traffic, e.g. Pelobates



                                                                                                      575
fuscus in Hungary. It is an increasing trend all over in Europe, in the UK, for example, three times more
Bufo bufo populations have gone extinct because of this factor since 2000 compared to before 2000. A
diversity of measures is applied to counter-balance this phenomenon. Besides road signage,
compensation ponds and temporary mitigation measures, permanent structures, green bridges, fauna
passages and toad tunnels and fences have been built at least at 2,000 sites in in Canada, the US, New
Zealand and at least in 20 European countries from Portugal to Lithuania. However, due to unproper
planning, construction or the lack of maintenance many of them do not function well. Besides their
improvement, the low cost modification of already existing culverts may also have an important role in
lowering the effect of roads on amphibian populations. A new area of interest and research in this field
are gulley pots, which cause an annual death of 1-3 million anurans a year in the Netherlands only.
Different materials are being investigated to provide escape routes from those traps, while in Switzerland
a standard has been accepted on what measures to apply to help amphibians out from those traps.
Public participation is an increasing element in conservation, as such, toad rescues are becoming more
popular both in North America and in Europe. They are, however, far from only being an education
activity. In the UK alone, 1,002,746 common toads were rescued from road traffic by volunteers in the
past 30 years. The priorities of such activities should be enlargened though, besides focussing on
common species dying on roads in large numbers, rare species should also be given priority when
decisions are made in what areas to solve this problem first.



Puky, Miklos (Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Centre for Ecological Research, Danube Research
Institute); Tóth, Mihály (University of Debrecen, Department of Hydrobiology - Varangy Akciócsoport
Egyesület, Canada); Kéri, András (University Eötvös, Department of Physical Geography - Varangy
Akciócsoport Egyesület, Canada)

Herpetological projects with volunteers and the general public in Hungary: citizen science and
environmental education improves the status of herpetology

The study and conservation of amphibians is a research area in which volunteers participate for decades.
In Hungary it started in the 1980s with toad rescues over roads and ad hoc translocation projects
including highly conflicting areas between humans and herps such as swimming pools in villages and
snake nesting areas under motorways. By today, the number of volunteers participating in toad rescue
campaigns increased and many people are also active in less demanding herp-related citizen science
activities such as mapping species distribution by sending photos with the indication where they were
shot to Varangy Akciócsoport Egyesület, a 27 year old NGO working in amphibian and reptile
conservation, research and education. It is important to know, though, that data sent in clearly reflects the
target groups reached. A herpetological mapping photo survey, for example, has a characteristic bias
towards popular anurans occurring also in gardens, such as Hyla arborea, if it involves the general public
versus it contains more mountain species along tourists paths if the primary data collectors are tourist
organizations with most of their activities carried out away from settlements and holiday resorts. In any
case when scientists work with volunteers, however, easily understandable protocol and data validation is
needed, and if the organizers fail to make these steps, more difficult changes had to make later, as
another organization experienced it facing a high number of obviously incorrect herpetofauna species
determination by its volunteers. In some cases, where there is a strong educational elements, it may be
advisable for scientists to give the lead in that sub-project for educators, as it turned out to be often the
best way while making local frog concerts in Hungary and Ukraine. As a consequence of citizen science
becoming more common and the increasing number of volunteers in monitoring and research programs,
the most active participants even launch their own herpetological projects. Successful programs with
volunteers, however, need to follow some rules: participants have to be informed and trained about what



                                                                                                         576
to do, they need to be informed about the results and, for example in road-related projects, their safety
should also be a high priority. With no doubt volunteers can successfully be involved in data collection,
however, species determination and data analysis are still predominantly the field for professionals even if
modern programs may change the situation fast in the future.



Puky, Miklos (Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Centre for Ecological Research, Danube Research
Institute); Toth, Viktoria (2University of West-Hungary, Institute of Silviculture and Forest Protection,
Canada); Lakatos, Ferenc (University of West-Hungary, Institute of Silviculture and Forest Protection,
Canada); Tóth, Mihály (University of Debrecen, Department of Hydrobiology, Canada); Mester, Béla
(University of Debrecen, Department of Ecology, Canada); Bíró, Péter (Hungarian Academy of Sciences,
Centre For Ecological Research, Balaton Limnological Institute, Canada); Ács, Éva (Hungarian Academy
of Sciences, Centre For Ecological Research, Danube Research Institute, Canada); Velekei, Balázs
(University of West-Hungary, Institute of Silviculture and Forest Protection, Canada)

Phylogeographic pattern, parasite load and fluctuating asymmetry of Zootoca vivipara in Hungary

The Eurasian common lizard, Zootoca vivipara (Lichtenstein, 1823), ranging from Ireland to Japan is
the lizard with the largest distribution area on Earth. It has several subspecies/clades, some with
extremely large, others with more limited distribution areas. The phylogenetic relationships of the
viviparous and oviparous haplogroups of the species describing clades living only in Central Europe were
described earlier. The present poster discusses their distribution in Hungary together with their
ectoparasite load and front leg asymmetry. Samples were collected from eight locations. Total DNA was
extracted from small tissue samples of the tail with Sigma GenElute Genomic DNA Kit, using
manufacturer‘s protocol. Two target genes were selected for the phylogenetic analysis: a partial
sequence (appr. 300 bp) of the protein encoding cytochrome b ( cyt b ) and a partial sequence (appr. 500
bp) of the non-protein coding 16s. In the first step we analysed the cyt b sequence of 33 individuals.
The alignment of the cyt b sequences was performed with ClustalX and corrected by eye. The
recognized clades including several haplotypes were estimated in MEGA software package (version 5.0).
Sequences of four Lacertid species were downloaded from the GenBank and were used as outgroups.
Maximum likelihood analysis of the data revealed a congruent overall topology that is characterized by six
main groups: the PA haplogroup is present in the northwestern, the VH haplogroup in the central part of
the country. The other samples collected from the northeastern part of Hungary are in the contact zone of
VB and VU haplogroups and were divided into four groups. Our study supports the model of four
haplogroups being present in the Carpathian Basin, however, also shows questions to be answered
related to the contact zone of VB and VU haplogroups. The parasite load of Z. vivipara varied between
populations with the actual habitat as a main determining factor. Males have a nearly three times higher
parasite load than females while juveniles were slightly less infected than adults. No population level
fluctuating asymmetry trend was revealed among the populations studied.



Pupo, Fabio (Museu Nacional/ UFRJ); Britto, Marcelo (Museu Nacional/UFRJ, Canada)

Neuroanatomy of the family Callichthyidae (TELEOSTEI: OSTARIOPHYSI: SILURIFORMES): the
brain as a new source of morphological characters.

Callychthyidae is composed by Callichthyinae and Corydoradinae, both morphologically distinct and
monophyletic. Although the consensus regarding family monophyly is about 80% of their species
currently included in the genus Corydoras , remains poorly known concerning their relationships.
Despite of the vast amount of osteological information about Teleostei, the knowledge about the



                                                                                                        577
phylogenetic implications of the anatomy of the central nervous system are sparse since it is an untapped
source of characters. The aim of the present study is the morphological description of the central
nervous system of Callichthyidae providing new characters that may elucidate phylogenetic questions for
this group. Ten characters were raised as follows: shape of nasal organ (elliptical, circular); number of
lamellae in the nasal organ (more or less than 20); positioning of the olfactory bulb in relation to the
telencephalon (sessile, stalked); anterior margin corpus cerebelli in relation to the posterior margin of
the telencephalon (in contact, posterior); lateral margin of the telencephalon (curved, straight); the
presence of the lobus facialis (absent, present); shape of the lobus facialis (with lateral projection, with
dorsal projection); exposure degree of the lobus facialis (exposed, covered by the corpus cerebelli );
position of the swim bladder in relation to the lobus vagi (in contact, distant); shape of the posterior
margin of lobus inferior hypothalami (curve, with invagination). These character states were polarized
and optimized on the current phylogenetic hypotheses of the family based on morphological characters
suggest that representatives of Callichthyinae are oriented by mechanoreceptors and Corydoradinae are
oriented by visual receptors. The parsimony analysis indicates that the central nervous system has
important features to enhance the studies, bringing more resolution to current hypotheses of phylogenetic
reconstruction, especially for the family, genus and groups of fish.



Purrenhage, Jennifer (University of New Hampshire); Veysey, Jessica; Babbitt, Kimberly (University of
New Hampshire, Canada)

Relative Impacts of Hydroperiod and Terrestrial Habitat Buffers on Juvenile Amphibian
Recruitment in Vernal Pools

Vernal pool-breeding amphibians may be particularly vulnerable to local extinctions due to the generally
limited protection of vernal pools and adjacent upland habitat. These species‘ complex life histories
increase their vulnerability to habitat alteration and should inform management strategies that emphasize
a strong terrestrial component, in addition to the traditional focus on aquatic habitat conservation.
Forested terrestrial buffers surrounding pools may provide some protection for vernal pool-dependent
species. However, few existing studies have tested the efficacy of forest buffers, let alone the relative
efficacies of different buffer sizes. From 2004 through 2009, we monitored populations of two vernal pool-
associated species – wood frogs ( Lithobates sylvatica ) and spotted salamanders ( Ambystoma
maculatum ) – at 11 vernal pools in central Maine, following a standard drift fence and pitfall trap protocol.
Pools were assigned to one of three forested buffer treatments: 30-m buffer, 100-m buffer, and &gt;1000-
m buffer (reference). We examined population-level (sex ratio, population size, and juvenile recruitment)
effects of forested buffer treatments, in addition to the effects of variation in key environmental factors
(e.g., hydroperiod) known to influence amphibian population dynamics. Here we present our findings of
the relative influences of these anthropogenic and natural factors on juvenile recruitment of wood frogs
and spotted salamanders, and discuss the conservation implications for vernal pool-breeding amphibians.




                                                                                                          578
Putman, Breanna (San Diego State University); Lind, Craig (University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR,
United States); Taylor, Emily (Cal Poly State University San Luis Obispo, San Luis Obispo, CA, United
States)

Does size matter? Factors influencing the spatial ecology of the Northern Pacific Rattlesnake
(Crotalus oreganus oreganus) at different temporal scales

The spatial ecology of animals is influenced by a combination of factors, and it is often difficult to separate
their effects. Home ranges and movement distances are commonly calculated for rattlesnakes in the
genus Crotalus, but these parameters are highly variable within and among populations and species. I set
out to determine the factors influencing Northern Pacific rattlesnake (Crotalus oreganus oreganus) spatial
parameters at several different temporal scales: within a 14-month tracking period, among seasons, and
within seasons. I found that males had larger home range sizes, made longer mean daily movements,
and moved longer total distances than females during the 14-month period. Also, during this time, body
size was not related to home range size or movements within each sex, but this effect was sensitive to
sample size. Among seasons, males moved longer distances than females during the spring reproductive
season but this effect disappeared during the summer post-mating/foraging season. There was also a
negative effect of body size on movement distances for males and a positive effect for females during
summer, but not during spring. Within the spring reproductive season, males with larger body sizes made
their first long distance mate-searching movement sooner than smaller males. Finally, within the summer
foraging season the sex, body size, and body temperature may influence both fine-scale movement
patterns and surface activity time. This work shows that in C. o. oreganus sex may be the most important
factor influencing movement patterns as males search for sedentary females during the mating
season(s), but other factors may have an effect at finer scales.



Pyron, Robert (GWU);

Divergence-Time Estimation Using Fossils as Terminal Taxa and the Origins of Lissamphibia

Were molecular data available for extinct taxa, questions regarding the origins of many groups could be
settled in short order. As this is not the case, various strategies have been proposed to combine
paleontological and neontological datasets. The use of fossil dates as node-age calibrations for
divergence-time estimation from molecular phylogenies is commonplace. In addition, simulations suggest
that the addition of morphological data from extinct taxa may improve phylogenetic estimation when
combined with molecular data for extant species, and some studies have merged morphological and
molecular data to estimate combined-evidence phylogenies containing both extinct and extant taxa.
However, few if any studies have attempted to estimate divergence times using phylogenies containing
both fossil and living taxa sampled for both molecular and morphological data. Here, I infer both the
phylogeny and time of origin for Lissamphibia and a number of stem tetrapods using Bayesian methods,
based on a dataset containing morphological data for extinct taxa, molecular data for extant taxa, and
molecular and morphological data for a subset of extant taxa. The results suggest that Lissamphibia is
monophyletic, nested within Lepospondyli, and originated in the late Carboniferous at the earliest. This
research illustrates potential pitfalls for the use of fossils as post-hoc age constraints on internal nodes,
and highlights the importance of explicit phylogenetic analysis of extinct taxa. These results suggest that
the application of fossils as minima or maxima on molecular phylogenies should be supplemented or
supplanted by combined-evidence analyses whenever possible.




                                                                                                           579
Quadros, Ana (Instituto Butantan);

The Ophiofauna of Botucatu

Throughout the analysis of the collections JJ, CEVAP, IBSP, ZUEC and UEL, a study on the ophiofauna
of Botucatu was made. We present a preliminary list of the species of snakes here found, with small
comments on their natural history. The number of specimens studied was 943. We registered, for
Botucatu, 51 species of snakes, distributed in 31 genera and 6 families. The families here found were
Anomalepididae (1 spp.), Boidae (1 spp.), Colubridae (7 spp.), Dipsadidae (32 spp.), Elapidae (3 spp.)
and Viperidae (7 spp.). The analysis of the relative abundance shows that Dipsadidae was the most
abundant family, with n=425 (44,83%), followed by Viperidae, with n=388 (40,93%), Boidae, n=62
(6,54%), Colubridae, n=57 (6,01%), Elapidae, n=15 (1,6%) and, at last, Anomalepididae, with n=1 (0,1%).
The five more representative species were Crotalus durissus (n=135, 14,31%), Oxyrhopus guibei (n=123,
12,8%) Bothropoides jararaca (N=121, 12,6%), Bothropoides neuwiedi (N=95, 9,88%) and
Sibynomorphus mikani (N=65, 6,76%). A higher number of individuals collected was registered for the
months of january to april that, together, sum up to almost 50% of the total. The months of june to
september registered a lower number of individuals. The spacial distribution analysis shows that a higher
number of snakes was found on the country areas of Botucatu (n=270, 41,54%), specially on pastures.
Due to the lack of studies of Botucatu‘s ophiofauna, this list is probably underestimated. It is mandatory
that future studies approaching this group and its ecological components on this region are made, using
appropriate sampling methodologies, in order to form an accurate list of the species of snakes of
Botucatu.



Queiroz, Nuno (CIBIO - University of Porto); Humphries, Nicolas (Marine Biological Association of the
United Kingdom, Plymouth, United Kingdom); Mucientes, Gonzalo (IMM ¿ CSIC, Vigo, Spain); Sousa,
Lara (CIBIO - University of Porto, Vairao, Portugal); Sims, David (2Marine Biological Association of the
United Kingdom, Plymouth, United Kingdom)

Behaviour, critical habitat and fisheries interactions of pelagic sharks in the North Atlantic Ocean

Surface longlines are widely known to interact with several marine predators and are linked with declines
in targeted and bycatch species in the open ocean, including seabirds, turtles, tunas and sharks. Many
large pelagic predators, such as blue Prionace glauca and mako sharks Isurus oxyrinchus, are of current
conservation concern because of their vulnerability to overfishing and rapid declines in populations.
Management of pelagic shark populations is poorly developed and takes little account of behavioural
characteristics such as spatial and temporal movements and distributions. Recent studies show that
some species remain faithful to particular regions with males and females segregating into different
regions for at least part of the year. This raises the issue of whether fisheries concentrate in key critical
areas where, for example, the majority of a population aggregate for feeding or mating opportunities, or
where important components of a population choose to remain. Consequently, we need to know the
extent to which fisheries overlap with different components of blue and mako shark populations in space
(both vertically and horizontally) and time. Using vessel monitoring system (VMS) data from Portuguese
and Spanish surface longliners operating in the North Atlantic and recorded movements of blue and mako
sharks from satellite-linked pop-up (PAT) tags, we aimed at identifying and characterising critical habitats
of these species, for testing the extent of space-use overlap with pelagic fisheries, and thus, investigate
the vulnerability of sharks to bycatch mortality. Geolocations and behaviour of individual sharks were
related to high-resolution maps of environmental variables (e.g. sea surface temperature, frontal
boundaries, sea altimetry and productivity) to quantitatively characterise the preferred habitat and, using
GIS technology and geostatistics, the degree of spatial and temporal overlap of shark distributions,



                                                                                                         580
including migrations, with the spatial extent and density of satellite-tracked longlining fishing vessels was
quantified. Longlines were deployed over an extensive area from 0 – 60ºN and 2 – 62ºW, with fishing
effort generally concentrated in three wide-ranging areas in the North Atlantic. Tracked sharks also
occupied a broad geographical area, but displayed high space-use of specific regions over 90 to 180
days. Our results indicate that different segments of the blue shark population may be facing differential
risk from spatially heterogeneous longlining effort, depending on which geographical regions are occupied
at specific times. Preliminary results on the space-use overlap between oceanic-tagged sharks and the
longlining fleet operating in North Atlantic waters will be presented.



Ramesh, Rasika (Department of Natural Resources Management, Texas Tech University); Griffis-Kyle,
Kerry; Perry, Gad (Department of Natural Resources Management, Texas Tech University, Canada)

An Amphibian's Dilemma: Wetland Site Selection and Community Assemblages in an Urbanized
Setting

The extent of urbanization has increased dramatically over the past century, causing significant
alterations to the landscape. Rapidly expanding city boundaries and runoff from urban and industrial
areas restrict the availability of natural areas for amphibian use. Hence, improving our understanding of
amphibian populations in urbanized settings is critical to their long-term conservation. Our study focuses
on suitability of available urban wetlands for amphibian use and reproduction in the city of Lubbock,
located in northwest Texas. Amphibian ecology within urban centers of the Southern High Plains remains
poorly explored; this project is the first of its kind in the region. A mid-size city with a population of
229,573, Lubbock is an ideal system for urban amphibian studies. Ephemeral wetlands characteristic of
this landscape have been extensively modified for storm water drainage, agriculture, and construction of
roads, buildings, neighborhoods, and recreational environments. A semi-arid climate with frequent
extremes such as prolonged droughts, together with urbanization, could have an adverse effect on
resident amphibians. We gathered baseline data to assess amphibian presence, species richness, and
species-specific preferences based on site-specific (water quality, percentage of emergent vegetation,
presence of fish) and landscape-scale variables (road density in a 500m buffer, nearest wetland
distance). Between March and October of 2011, we sampled 23 urban lakes in Lubbock after rain events
using a combination of audio surveys, visual encounter surveys, and larval pipe sampling and dip netting
surveys, to document amphibian species presence. Of the 13 species that occur in this region, we
detected five: Gastrophryne olivacea, Anaxyrus speciosus, Lithobates catesbeiana, Spea bombifrons
and Pseudacris clarkii . We found amphibians at seven lakes and tadpoles at four of these lakes. We
found significant negative effects of road density on amphibian species presence and richness (p ≤ 0.05).
We also detected significant negative effects of pH on amphibian species richness (p ≤ 0.05). Negative
impacts of these two factors were also observed specifically on P. clarkii presence (p ≤ 0.05). We will
complete a second season of sampling in 2012. This data is critical for prioritizing lakes in amphibian
conservation strategies and to indirectly monitor ecosystem function in urban wetlands.



Ramirez, Edward (University of Akron);

Gecko Digital Hyperextension: Exploring Diversity and Ecological Applications

The mechanics of gecko adhesion have been tested extensively at the micro- and nanoscopic scale.
However, relatively few studies have examined the adhesive system at the whole organism level. One
feature that has been overlooked in particular is gecko digital hyperextension. The first objective of this



                                                                                                         581
study was to measure the hyperextension of the digits of three different species and test for correlations
between hyperextension and kinematic variables such as duty factor. We tested the hypothesis that
digital hyperextension measurements are significantly different between species. The second objective
was to explore ecological applications to hyperextension by running geckos across substrates of varying
surface roughness. We tested the hypothesis that the sprint speeds of species with greater
hyperextension would vary less across substrates of different roughness. Our study provides insight on
the diversity of gecko adhesion and on how species thrive in different habitats. The results of this
experiment can also contribute to engineering applications, such as synthetic adhesives and robotics.



Randall, Lea (Calgary Zoo); Smith, Des; Jones, Breana (Calgary Zoo, Calgary, AB, Canada); Prescott,
Dave (Sustainable Resource Development, Red Deer, AB, Canada); Moehrenschlager, Axel (Calgary
Zoo, Calgary, AB, Canada)

No evidence of non-assisted northern leopard frog (Lithobates pipiens) recovery in southern
Alberta, Canada

Background/questions/methods: Dramatic decreases in northern leopard frog (NLF) abundance and
distribution were first reported in western Canada and the USA in the 1970s and 80s. As a result of this
decline, the western boreal/prairie populations of NLF are designated as Special Concern by the
Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada (COSEWIC) and Threatened under the
Alberta Wildlife Act. Recovery efforts have primarily focused on reintroducing NLFs to historical portions
of their former range. Recovery efforts are hampered by the fact that little is known about the population
dynamics and current distribution of NLF in this region. To address this knowledge gap we conducted
repeat visual surveys over three summers at 68 sites spanning 90,000 km2 of southern Alberta. Sites
were selected based on historical observations of NLF and those predicted to be suitable habitat. We
used occupancy modeling to explore the population dynamics of northern leopard frogs (NLF) in southern
Alberta.

Results/conclusions: Using AIC we compared models that allowed occupancy, and extinction/
colonization to vary with equilibrium models. Only the top model had a ∆AIC<2 indicating substantial
support and comprised 57% of the AIC weight. This model was an equilibrium model with constant
occupancy and constant rate of colonization/extinction suggesting that NLF occupancy over the course of
our study was stable. While we are cautiously optimistic that the population distribution of NLFs is not
continuing to decline, there is no evidence that they are recovering in their former range.



Randrianantoandro, Christian (Madagasikara Voakajy); Andriantsimanarilafy, Raphali (Madagasikara
Voakajy, Antananarivo, Madagascar); Jenkins, Richard; Griffiths, Richard (Durrell Institute of
Conservation and Ecology, Kent, United Kingdom)

Conservation and sustainable use of chameleons in madagascar

In Madagascar, 76 species of chameleons in the genera Brookesia , Calumma, and Furcifer are
described. These species are distributed in different habitat types from savannah grassland to the primary
humid or dry forests across an elevational gradient from sea level to the highest mountains. Chameleons
are important for ecotourism and trade but not well known by Malagasy people. Recent initiatives have
been undertaken to improve the conservation and sustainable use of these species. Red List
assessments of all Malagasy chameleons in 2011 identified 41 of the 76 species to be threatened. The
major threat identified is loss of habitat due mainly to selective logging and bush fires. Priority species for



                                                                                                           582
research and conservation were identified. Research is underway to determine the distribution areas of
the most threatened chameleons in the protected areas network in Madagascar. Only four large
chameleon species - Furcifer lateralis, Furcifer oustaleti, Furcifer pardalis, and Furcifer verrucosus -
have received quotas for the legal trade since 1994. A better understanding of illegal chameleon trade
was obtained after meetings with Malagasy operators and a pet market survey in Thailand. All recorded
imports to Thailand are reported as captive-bred animals from Lebanon and Kazakhstan. Some activities
were undertaken with the CITES authorities to re-evaluate all Malagasy chameleons for trade. Initially,
Furcifer campani was identified as an additional species that could support moderate harvest. This
species is easy to identify using identification guides. Public awareness, environmental education in
primary schools and student training were carried out to improve the knowledge and awareness of
Malagasy people concerning chameleons. Despite recent progress in research and conservation,
significant challenges remain to ensure the long-term conservation and sustainable harvest of
chameleons in Madagascar.



Rato, Catarina (CIBIO - Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Geneticos Campus
Agrário de Vairão); Carranza, Salvador (Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC-UPF), Barcelona, Spain);
Perera, Anna; Harris, David James (CIBIO - Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos
Geneticos Campus Agrário de Vairão, Vairao, Portugal)

When selection deceives phylogeographic interpretation in two Mediterranean geckos, Tarentola
mauritanica and Hemidactylus turcicus

First mtDNA phylogenetic and phylogeographical studies on the geckos Hemidactylus and Tarentola,
revealed a lack of diversity for this marker within the European populations of H. turcicus and T.
mauritanica, contrary to the divergence obtained in North Africa. These patterns of mitochondrial
divergence led researchers to assume that the European populations of both these geckos were the
result of a very recent colonization, possibly human-mediated due to their frequent association to
anthropogenic environments. However, evolutionary assumptions based only on one type of molecular
marker can be greatly misleading; mtDNA not only reveals just the matrilineal side of the story, but the
use of only one marker makes it impossible to assess if the patterns obtained are due to selection or
stochastic events (i.e. if they are due to processes affecting only part or the whole genome). Therefore, in
this work we aimed to understand which kind of processes have shaped the mitochondrial genome of the
European populations of both T. mauritanica and H. turcicus, using not only mtDNA but also nuclear
markers. The first approach consisted in the integration of phylogenetic with population genetic analyses,
followed by the assessment of selection constraints within the mitogenome of T. mauritanica,

Within the European populations of both T. mauritanica and H. turcicus the nucleotide diversity obtained
for the nuclear markers is significantly higher compared to the values observed for the mtDNA. Also,
neutrality tests detected selection on the mtDNA, but not on nDNA. Therefore, in the northern
Mediterranean populations of both these species, the lack of mitochondrial nucleotide diversity observed
is not the sole result of a recent colonization, but also due to selective forces acting only on the
mitochondrial genome.

The mitogenome study performed here, discovered that each clade of T. mauritanica inspected, presents
different evolutionary patterns as revealed by the nucleotide diversity patterns and selection constraint
analyses; both European (Clade A) and Iberian (Clade B) clades have been subject to a loss of
mitochondrial polymorphism, which in Clade A was due to selective forces, while in Clade B the pattern is
consistent with a bottleneck effect; the pattern observed in the southwestern Moroccan clade seems to be
coherent with adaptation of certain mtDNA variants due to positive selection. Surprisingly, there is an



                                                                                                        583
incredible heterogeneity of genetic divergence across the protein-coding genes of the T. mauritanica‘s
mitogenome; the highest peaks were obtained for ATP8 and ND5, making these genes as ideal to infer
about phylogenetic relationships of closely related Tarentola.



Ream, Joshua (University of Alaska Fairbanks);

An alternative, valuable and underutilized tool in herpetology: application of Local Ecological
Knowledge (LEK) to support research and management in Alaska

Six native species of amphibians occur within the state of Alaska, yet basic information on their
distribution, abundance and population health remains largely unavailable. This is typically due to the
financial and logistical constraints of research in a vast, sparsely populated region. Local Ecological
Knowledge (LEK) is increasingly recognized as a valuable and valid tool in the study of game species in
the North but it has rarely been applied to non-game species or specifically to herpetofauna. This study
considers the ability of LEK to aid in the acquisition of critical baseline ecological data for amphibians by
exploring the nature and extent of herpetological familiarity within local communities as well as the
frequency of human-amphibian interactions on the landscape. It also explores a subset of LEK,
Indigenous Knowledge (IK), as it relates to the Kiks.adi Clan of the Stikine Tlingit Indians, which identifies
the Boreal Toad (Bufo boreas) as its major crest. I report here on the use of mailed questionnaires and
semi-structured interviews to access the herpetological LEK of the community of Wrangell, Alaska located
at the mouth of the Stikine River Valley, a recognized biodiversity hotspot in Alaska. Preliminary data
suggests that human-amphibian interactions in the region are frequent, that LEK can enhance baseline
occurrence datasets for local amphibians and that amphibians are important as cultural, recreational, and
aesthetic ecosystem services in Wrangell. The study resulted in extensive observational datasets for
several species, substantially expanding existing knowledge of Stikine amphibians. This suggests that
LEK may be a valuable, underutilized asset to amphibian researchers in Alaska.



Reddy, Deran (University of the Witwatersrand); Hosie, Margot (University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa)

A morphological study of the lung of the nile crocodile using 3D serial section computer
reconstruction and scanning electron microscopy

The anatomy of the Nile crocodile lung was studied in order to document its morphology. This was done
in order to try and understand how crocodiles alter their physiology and facilitate ethological behavior
such as prolonged submergence under water. Techniques used included 3D computer reconstruction
using routine H&E serial histological sections and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of lung tissue and
latex casts. It was found that the lungs of the Nile crocodile display immense heterogeneity. This was
attributed to the high degree of regional internal subdivision of its parenchyma via three strata of septa;
primary secondary and tertiary. The cranial regions of the lungs display the greatest levels of internal
subdivision. The middle and caudal regions of the lungs display lower levels of internal subdivision
respectively. For the purposes of this study, the lungs were also divided into dorsal and ventral halves.
The ventral regions of the lungs; cranial, middle and caudal; were found to be more internally subdivided
than their dorsal counterpart regions. 3D computer reconstructions and SEM and demonstrate this
clearly.3D computer reconstructions and SEM of the lung also illustrated interfaveolar pores. In both the
dorsal and ventral regions of the lung, these were found to be prominent in the cranial regions decreasing
in a caudal direction. Conversely, in both the dorsal and ventral regions of the lung, smooth muscle was



                                                                                                          584
found to be prominent in the caudal regions decreasing in a cranial direction. SEM also revealed that cilia
are present within the actual gas exchanger, unlike any other vertebrate studied so far. These findings
corroborate the results of Farmer and Sanders (2010) which illustrates that air flow in the alligator lung is
unidirectional. The smooth muscle of the caudal regions of the lung control the rate and direction of air
flow to the cranial regions of the lungs where gas exchange occurs most effectively. The interfaveolar
pores facilitate the sharing of air between faveoli, terminal gas exchange units of the reptilian lung, to
maximize gas exchange as required. The cilia present traps dust and foreign particles which ensures that
the air reaching the terminal gas exchange units are ―clean‖. This facilitates a more effective gas
exchange procedure. Scanning electron micrographs of the lung also revealed an intriguing surface
topography and unique architecture. This provides insight into the pulmonary evolution of the reptilian
lung.



Reed, Heather (Acadia University); Mockford, Steve; Herman, Tom (Acadia University, Canada)

The Science of Stewardship: Species at Risk & Habitat Recovery on Private and Public Lands

Protected areas are unable to counteract global biodiversity loss, and the recent proliferation of
environmental law is an unsuitable mechanism to deal with the majority of loss occurring outside
protected areas. Landowners and resource users lack a mechanism to understand the cumulative
impacts (beneficial or detrimental) of individual decisions. Although landowner and community
stewardship is required to achieve species and habitat recovery – little peer reviewed information is
available specific to ‗how‘ conservation stewardship is achieved. Though many conservation initiatives
exist in Canada and globally – not all key stakeholders are willing or able to be involved. This begs the
question, if recovery science is identifying threats to, and actions for, recovery without addressing the
human dimensions required for stewardship to take place - what is? This is of particular importance in
Nova Scotia where &gt;70% of provincial lands are privately owned. This research directly addresses
gaps that exist between conservation science, regulations, and programs for more than 40 endangered
and threatened species in Nova Scotia- and the measurable behaviour change (stewardship) required to
recover them. An extensive trans-disciplinary literature review, and interviews with formal agencies and
community groups who develop, deliver, or support volunteer based conservation stewardship programs
was undertaken with the goal of finding synergies between the literature and current practice. The result
is a framework of the conservation stewardship-process, which was investigated and evaluated. The
framework identified core concepts embodied in the stewardship process such as: translating research
information into landowner/public knowledge, knowledge application to navigate the decision-making
process, and transformation of decisions to targeted and measurable behaviour change. Additionally, the
interviews identified key elements (group structure and management, internal/external communication,
and program development and evaluation, etc.) that lead to the delivery of successful program with
longevity and the ability to influence social norms (conservation behaviours) at local scales. The
framework was evaluated with a mixed-methodology that included Principle Component Analysis, and
Grounded Theory approach. The framework was translated into a simple tool for use by organizations in
evaluating and designing effective conservation programs for species and habitat recovery and
management.




                                                                                                         585
Reed, Robert N. (U.S. Geological Survey); Rodda, Gordon H. (U.S. Geological Survey, Canada); Siers,
Shane R.; Savidge, Julie A. (Colorado State University, Canada)

Setting the stage for damaging invaders: Do assignations of potential invaders as low risk ignore
ecosystem consequences of invasions?

Risk assessments for invasive species typically focus on (1) the probability of a species establishing in a
recipient location and (2) the probability that the species will cause ecological or economic impacts. In
these risk assessment schemes, organisms that fail to receive high risk ratings for both elements are
often rated fairly low in terms of overall risk. However, such schemes assign risk at a species-by-species
level, without consideration of potential ecosystem-level consequences of the establishment of seemingly
low risk species. One such consequence could be that a low risk species, once established, aids the
establishment or increases the impacts of a second, more damaging species. We illustrate this possibility
using data on vertebrates on Guam, where the native avifauna has been largely eliminated by the
invasive brown treesnake ( Boiga irregularis ). Of the remaining vertebrate prey items available to brown
treesnakes on Guam, approximately half of the lizards and all of the terrestrial mammals are themselves
introduced. Using data from historical surveys, complete removal plots, snake necropsies, and other
projects, we demonstrate that current snake densities are largely tied to the availability of exotic
vertebrate prey. Exotic prey historically helped sustain snake populations at high levels even while bird
populations were being depleted on Guam, which facilitated the island-wide extinction of many bird taxa.
Furthermore, the introduction of new prey species to Guam is ongoing and these introductions could
bolster snake populations, making snake control more difficult. Apart from rodents, none of the exotic
prey species currently consumed by brown treesnakes would be assigned a high risk rating when
subjected to most formal risk assessment schemes. Low risk species can thus set the stage for the
establishment of high risk species, and by subsidizing the high risk species can increase its ecological
impacts and make it more resilient to control efforts. Such considerations are as yet not incorporated in
formal risk assessments for potential invaders.



Refsnider, Jeanine (Iowa State University);

Environmental and evolutionary constraints on nest-site choice in a reptile with temperature-
dependent sex determination

Female ability to match nest characteristics with environmental conditions can influence offspring survival,
quality, and sex ratio in species with temperature-dependent sex determination. Adjustment of nest
characteristics such as shade cover and nest depth may provide a mechanism by which organisms can
track climate change. However, constraints on availability of suitable habitat or morphology may limit the
extent to which such adjustment is possible. I studied resource selection of shade cover over nest sites
by painted turtles (Chrysemys picta) in populations at the center and southern edge of their range to
determine whether nesting habitat is limited at either site. I also used several measures of female body
size and nest characteristics to predict nest depth in both populations. I found that while turtles in both
populations selected nest sites that were shadier than average available sites, overall resource selection
differed between the populations, which was likely due to differences in vegetation structure between
sites. Further, accessible, highly-shaded nest sites are limited at the southern site, demonstrating an
environmental constraint on adjustment of nest-site choice in this population. I found that female body
size, and, to a lesser extent, clutch size, are important predictors of nest depth. Nest depth in painted
turtles appears to be constrained by female body size because smaller females have shorter rear limbs
with which to excavate the nest cavity. Females from the southern site constructed deeper nests than




                                                                                                        586
females from the central site, and females from the southern site also appear to be constructing nests
with depths closer to their maximum physical capability compared to females from the central site. These
results suggest that southern females may have less capacity to compensate for a warming climate by
constructing deeper nests than females from the center of the species‘ range. Because evolutionary
constraints on female body size limit the extent to which nest depth can be adjusted, shade cover over
nest sites may be the component of nest-site choice that is most adjustable in response to climate
change. By maintaining a range of shade cover options in nesting areas used by turtles, plasticity for
choice of shade cover over nests can be expressed, and thereby potentially allow turtles to minimize
skews in offspring sex ratio caused by climate change.



Reichling, Steve (Memphis Zoo);

Progress and Challenges in Returning the Louisiana Pine Snake into Restored Habitat

 A partnership between zoos, academia, state and federal agencies to conserve the Louisiana pine
snake ( Pituophis ruthveni ) has launched a reintroduction effort.           Captive-bred snakes are being
released into tracts of restored habitat within the historic range of the species. Suitable release snakes
are difficult to acquire, and previous experimental reintroduction showed that acclimation and survival in
natural habitat can be poor in captive-bred P . ruthveni .        Consequently, it is essential that released
snakes be closely monitored for evaluation and improvement of the program‘s effectiveness. Due to the
species‘ unique biological and husbandry attributes, the steady release and subsequent monitoring of
sufficient numbers of propagules presents significant challenges.



Reider, Kelsey (Florida International University); Donnelly, Maureen (Florida International University,
Miami, FL, United States)

Are peccaries contributing to the amphibian and reptile declines at La Selva Biological Station,
Costa Rica?

Populations of the highly diverse leaf litter-dwelling frogs and lizards within the nature reserve at La Selva
Biological Station in Costa Rica have declined by 75% over the last 35 years. The causes of these
worrisome declines are unknown, but likely include synergistic effects of multiple stressors that include
infectious diseases and changes to the quality and/or quantity of the leaf litter habitat. One factor that
could affect the leaf litter habitat is an apparent increase in the size of the collared peccary ( Pecari tajacu
) population within the La Selva reserve. Peccaries are medium-sized, pig- like, terrestrial mammals that
travel in large groups and can create disturbances in the leaf litter and soil. Peccaries may affect the
breakdown of leaf litter, the cycling of nutrients, and the availability of food and habitat for animals that
live in the leaf litter. I tested the hypothesis that peccaries are contributing to the ongoing leaf litter
amphibian and reptile declines at La Selva by comparing the abundances of amphibians and reptiles
inside fenced peccary exclusion plots to paired, open control plots. If peccaries were contributing to the
amphibian and reptile declines at La Selva, I expected to find fewer amphibians and reptiles in the control
plots where peccaries had access. However, I encountered significantly more individual amphibians and
reptiles on control plots than inside peccary exclusion plots ( t = -3.408, P = 0.000653). My results
indicate that peccaries are not one of the stressors contributing to the amphibian and reptile declines at
La Selva.




                                                                                                            587
Reilly, Sean (UC Berkeley); McGuire, Jim (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, Canada)

Comparative phylogeography of reptiles & amphibians from the Lesser Sunda Islands, Indonesia -
testing the stepping stone hypothesis in a two-way filter zone

The Lesser Sunda Islands occupy the area between Java and New Guinea and form a set of ―stepping
stones‖ for taxa dispersing between the Oriental and Australo-Papuan biogeographic regions. This area
of Indonesia has been termed ―Wallacea‖, and it is putatively one of the best examples of a two-way filter
in the world. If these islands are acting as stepping stones, then this should be evident in the topology of
molecular phylogenies for taxa that have colonized them. Taxa dispersing from Asia eastward through the
archipelago should have their most basal lineages associated with the westernmost islands, and the most
derived lineages associated with the easternmost islands. The reverse pattern would be expected for taxa
dispersing from Australia or New Guinea. Here we use phylogenies from multiple species of lizards,
snakes, and frogs that are co-distributed across the Lesser Sunda Islands to test the ―stepping stone‖
colonization hypothesis. Our results indicate that these islands are not acting as stepping stones, and that
more complicated colonization scenarios are needed to produce the observed phylogenies. However,
there are some repeated patterns that emerge across taxa suggesting the occurrence of a common
vicariance or dispersal mechanism tied to historical geological forces or pervasive ocean and wind
currents.



Reinke, Beth (Indiana University); Burnside, Andrew; Fitzpatrick, Kara; Lawing, A. Michelle; Polly, P.
David (Indiana University, Canada)

Comparative analysis of body size, diet, and growth of the painted turtle, Chrysemys picta,
between eutrophic and oligotrophic waters

Bodies of water in the United States are increasingly being affected by the anthropogenic introduction of
nutrients. Eutrophic bodies of water have a high level of nutrients and high productivities which alter plant
and algal growth and could potentially affect the diets and growth rates of vertebrates. Freshwater turtles
in eutrophic sites may consume more protein because of the high productivity of the environments.
Conversely, they may consume more plant matter because of the availability of plant resources and the
difficulties of consuming mobile prey in dense macrophytic growth. We captured Chrysemys picta from
eutrophic and oligotrophic bodies of water to determine if water productivity affects size, diet, and growth
rates. We found that C. picta male and juvenile plastron lengths are significantly different by water
quality (p=0.028 and p=0.013, respectively), and that the percent carnivory of C. picta female‘s diet is
significantly influenced by water quality (p=0.002). Additionally, we found that mature turtles in waters of
different productivities do not have significantly different growth rates (p&gt;0.05), but juveniles do have
significantly different growth rates (p=0.043). We suggest that water quality be assessed in future studies
of freshwater turtles and other aquatic vertebrates, as it can have significant impacts on size, diet, and
growth.



Relyea, Rick (University of Pittsburgh);

Putting the ecology back into ecotoxicology

To understand the effects of pesticides on non-target organisms such as amphibians, the traditional
approach is to conduct single-species lab experiments. Growing evidence has made it clear that this
approach can produce limited insights because it removes the organisms from their ecological context.



                                                                                                         588
The reality is that amphibians live in communities that contain a wide range of environmental stressors
and an abundance of indirect effects that can have both positive and negative effects on amphibians. As
a result, if we wish to understand how pesticides can affect amphibians, we need to examine their
performance when returned to their natural ecological context. In this symposium, I will highlight my
group‘s research on how natural stressors and indirect effects, combined with changing abiotic
conditions, can dramatically affect our understanding of how pesticides affect amphibians. While the
insights are focused on the aquatic communities in which many larval anurans and caudatans live, the
principles apply to all of the communities in which all stages of amphibians live.



Reshetnikov,    Andrey       (Ecology&Evolution     Institute);   Manteifel,   Yuriy;   Kiseleva,   Elena
(Ecology&Evolution Institute, Canada)

Behavioral responses of anuran tadpoles and the fish rotan to a low molecular weight metabolite

Ammonia (NH 3 ) is a final product of tadpole nitrogenous metabolism. This low molecular weight
metabolite is present as background in water of natural aquatic sites. Kiesecker et al. (1999)
demonstrated that larvae of North-American amphibian species Rana aurora avoid zones with increased
concentrations of conspecific excretions and ammonia. We found similar behavioral reactions in larvae of
three European anurans ( R. temporaria, R. arvalis , and Bufo bufo ). We assumed that amphibian
larvae may use information about gradient of ammonia concentration as a signal for avoidance of the
invisible alarm source. We determined differential sensitivity of anuran larvae to ammonia in experimental
conditions with various b ackground concentrations of NH 3 . This characteristic varied in the studied
species, being higher in the frog R. temporaria, than in the toad B. bufo . This inter-species
difference may be well explained by ecological features: in contrast to the frog, the toad larvae have
diverse antipredator mechanisms (noxious substances in the skin and alarm pheromone, excreting from
damaged skin) and hence they are less dependent on the reactions to ammonia.            Thus, tadpoles of
examined anurans are capable of using ammonia as a cue for intra- and interspecies communication.
We also found avoidance of high ammonia concentration by invasive fish rotan Perccottus glenii .
However, communicative role of ammonia for this fish is still discussed. In general, communicative role of
simple substances is perspective for further investigation of chemical communication in amphibians, fish
and other aquatic animals. A mmonia may be regarded as one-component nonspecific disturbance
pheromone. We suppose that the dynamics of ammonia concentration may act as chemical cue in
diverse biocenological interactions.



Reshetnikov, Andrey (Ecology&Evolution Institute);

Interactions between native amphibians, reptiles, and the invasive fish Perccottus glenii

Various aspects of interactions between European amphibians, reptiles and the invasive fish rotan,
Perccottus glenii Dybowski, 1877 (family Odontobutidae), also known as Amur or Chinese sleeper, were
studied. This fish is native to the Far East region of Eurasia and was transported for the first time into
Europe one hundred years ago. Since the beginning of the 20th century, non-native populations of rotan
have been recorded in Russia, Mongolia, Kazakhstan, Belarus, Ukraine, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia,
Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, Serbia, Bulgaria, Croatia , Romaniaand Moldova. The expansion of this
species is continuing and could potentially spread to Western Europe and North America. Investigations
of rotan-amphibian and rotan-reptile interactions were performed using multi-year ecosystem monitoring
of amphibian breeding sites in the region of Glubokoe Lake Biological Station (GLBS), Moscow Province,



                                                                                                      589
Russian Federation. Research included regular expeditions to several regions of the Russian Federation
and experimental approaches under laboratory conditions at the GLBS. Results show rotan are capable
of colonising small water bodies – favourable breeding sites of native amphibians. In general, rotan
negatively influence amphibian temporary assemblages in ponds and other aquatic sites. Breeding
success of most amphibian species is absent in small pond-like water bodies inhabited by rotan. However
vulnerability of native amphibians to predation of rotan may depend on season, limnological
characteristics of a waterbody, structure of ecosystem, systematic position, behavior and ontogenetic
stage of the potential prey objects. The most vulnerable are larvae of Triturus and Lissotriton newts as
well as larvae of Rana and Pelophylax frog species during their summer development in small shallow
water bodies where native predatory fish species are absent. The inter-ecosystem impact of aquatic
invaders on reptiles has evaded the attention of investigators and hence may be underestimated.
Evidence of both direct and indirect interactions of rotan and European semi-aquatic reptiles was recently
obtained.



Reyes, Catalina (University of British Columbia); Fong, Angelina (Macquarie University, Sydney,
Australia); Milsom, William (University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada)

Peripheral arterial chemoreceptors in reptiles and their role in cardiorespiratory control

Vertebrates respond to respiratory stimuli such as low oxygen and high CO2 by adjusting cardio-
respiratory variables to maintain blood gas homeostasis. Arterial chemoreceptors responsible for sensing
these stimuli have been well studied in mammals, but are relatively unknown in lower vertebrates. In
particular, the mechanisms underlying O2-sensing, the O2 stimuli that trigger cardio-respiratory
responses (arterial O2 tension or content) and the reflex roles of different receptor groups remain
unknown. The phylogenetic trend appears to be a reduction in the number of chemosensory areas from
fish to reptiles to mammals. It has been hypothesised that multiple chemoreceptive sites may be
advantageous for reptiles that regulate blood gases by changing ventilation and/or the degree of cardiac
shunt (fraction of blood re-circulated through the systemic or pulmonary circulations). Three functional
chemosensory areas have now been identified in the carotid artery, aorta and pulmonary artery of turtles
and snakes. All three chemosensory areas have putative oxygen sensing cells innervated by the Vagus
nerve and with similar neurochemical content as in fish and mammals. In snakes, stimulation of aortic
and pulmonary chemoreceptors increases ventilation and reduces cardiac shunt, while carotid
chemoreceptors are primarily involved in ventilatory control. Our work confirms that reptiles have multiple
chemosensory sites with different reflex roles (respiratory or cardiovascular), and suggests that the O2-
sensing structures are highly conserved among vertebrates. Funded by NSERC Canada.



Reynolds, R. Graham (University of Massachusetts Boston);

Conservation Genetics of West Indian Boas

In the Caribbean, West Indian boas represent a diverse and ecologically important group of poorly-
studied large snakes. The boid genus Epicrates contains nine species in the West Indies, several of
which are listed as threatened or endangered, while the status of the others remains unknown. The Turks
Island Boa ( E. chrysogaster ), endemic to the Turks and Caicos Archipelago, has been the subject of a
recent intensive conservation, ecological, and genetic study. The Puerto Rican boa ( E. inornatus ),
endemic to the island of Puerto Rico, is fairly well studied from an ecological perspective; however no
conservation genetic studies have been undertaken. The Virgin Islands boa ( E. granti ) is found in



                                                                                                       590
eastern Puerto Rico and the U.S. and British Virgin Islands, and is the subject of a reintroduction
campaign that is increasing numbers and establishing new populations, though no conservation genetic
studies have been conducted on this species. Knowledge of standing genetic variation within and
between populations of species is important in designing conservation strategies. Here I report on our
work to evaluate genetic diversity in Turks Island, Puerto Rican, and Virgin Islands boas in a conservation
and evolutionary context.



Reynolds, R. Graham (University of Massachusetts Boston);

Invasion of Puerto Rico by a Giant Constricting Snake

Invasive species are among the top three causes of global biodiversity decline, and understanding their
means and avenues of introduction and establishment is important for regional conservation and
management. Recently, much attention has been given to the establishment of giant constricting snakes
outside of their native ranges- particularly in the Everglades of Florida, USA. Boa constrictors ( Boa
constrictor ), native to Central and South America, a few continental islands, and some of the Lesser
Antilles, are locally established in south Florida, and are also establishing damaging invasive populations
on the islands of Cozumel and Aruba. Puerto Rico has a thriving exotic reptile trade, and some of these
species, such as Green Iguanas ( Iguana iguana ) and Red-Eared Sliders ( Trachemys scripta elegans )
have become established throughout the island. Giant constricting snakes, including Burmese ( P.
molurus ) and Reticulated ( Broghammerus reticulatus ) Pythons, Dumeril‘s Boas ( Acrantophis dumerili ),
and Boa Constrictors ( B. constrictor ), are regularly found across the island yet until recently none had
become reproductively established. Here we provide the first substantial report of Boa constrictors
establishing an invasive population on the island of Puerto Rico, and using genetic methods we show that
this population was recently founded from a single introduction of closely related individuals instead of
ongoingrelease of propagules.



Richards-Hrdlicka, Katy (Yale University);

Using qPCR to detect the EIP, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis, in fluid-preserved amphibian
museum specimens

Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis       is a fungal pathogen driving many amphibian species extinct.     For
some species, the only place they can be found is in natural history museum collections. Harnessing
molecular tools to uncover this pathogen‘s date of arrival and movement throughout a region and through
time will prove useful to broader B. dendrobatidis research.         However, it has remained difficult to
access B. dendrobatidis DNA from within preserved host tissues, especially specimens that were
originally fixed in formalin. I describe two methods to extract and detect, via qPCR, B. dendrobatidis
DNA in herpetological natural history collections.    Both extraction methods use a DNA-binding matrix,
either a magnetic bead resin or a silica-membrane, that retains and separates the extracted DNA from
potentially qPCR-inhibiting contaminates.        Nine positive control specimens enabled initial method
optimizations, but coincidently limited empirical comparisons between each extraction method.
Therefore to test each method, a pilot study involving 164 formalin-fixed amphibians from Connecticut,
either having been originally fixed in the 1970‘s or 2000‘s, were swabbed and samples extracted by one
of the two presented methods. Each method successfully extracted B. dendrobatidis DNA; of the 164
specimens tested, 37 were found Bd -positive, including 6 specimens (representing 3 caudate species)
from 1968. The results suggest that these methods and qPCR are well suited to assess Bd presence



                                                                                                       591
but not to assign zoospore loads in preserved specimens.        Further research would benefit from a
comparison between the extraction methods to determine which yields more DNA or is more sensitive to
low zoospore loads or degraded DNA.      Recommendations for choosing and using these methods as
well as sampling herpetological natural history collections for B. dendrobatidis DNA detection are
provided.



Richardson, John (University of British Columbia);

Disconnections of riparian-associated amphibians from dispersal routes resulting from forest
harvesting in Pacific coastal ecosystems

Coastal forests and aquatic ecosystems of southern British Columbia are host to over a dozen amphibian
species and concern over impacts from forest harvesting has motivated many studies. A meta-analysis
of the effects of leaving riparian forest buffers shows that even that is not sufficient to maintain amphibian
densities, with densities in riparian reserves being about half of that in unharvested forest. The
standardized effect size of this difference did not show any evidence of becoming smaller with increasing
reserve size across the range of widths normally left after forest harvesting. However, the mechanisms
and the relative magnitudes of changes to those processes due to forestry impacts are difficult to detect
from passive surveys.        We have used a series of experimental approaches to try to determine how
amphibians respond to forestry practices in terms of movements, growth, and demography. Tracking of
several species has shown that some species can respond adaptively to being reciprocally ―transplanted‖
between habitat types (harvested versus unharvested) and appear to react according to predictions to
perceived differences in their local habitats.       To further evaluate the potential costs to growth and
survival of being in harvested or unharvested areas, we have done enclosure experiments with a
common salamander species. These experiments found that harvested areas, even with supplemental
food, resulted in lower growth and survival rates in summer, but there were no detectable differences
through the autumn period.        Pronounced seasonal differences with dry, warm summers and cool, wet
autumns presumably account for the observed variation in outcomes. Additional studies of amphibian
populations in experimental riparian management treatments have shown only very small differences in
amphibian relative abundances between treatments and controls in autumn, and within two years after
forest harvesting there were no summer differences in relative abundances either. Understanding the
mechanisms from forest practices that impact amphibians from forest practices, and particularly their
movements, should help in developing means to ameliorate the effects.



Richards-Zawacki, Corinne (Tulane University);

Selection and the rapid evolution of color polymorphism in Panamanian poison frogs

The strawberry dart frog ( Dendrobates pumilio ) exhibits an amazing array of color and pattern variation
in and around the Bocas del Toro archipelago of Panama. These frogs are toxic suggesting that their
bright coloration acts as a warning to would-be predators (aposematism). However, recent laboratory
studies have also demonstrated that color is important in female mate choice and male-male agonistic
interactions. While imprinting has not previously been reported in frogs, the unusual form of parental care
exhibited by D. pumilio could allow for learning of mate choice and/or agonistic behavior during the larval
stage. To better understand the origin of color pattern preferences and their role in the diversification
process, we tested the hypotheses that (1) preferences are learned through imprinting, and (2) that




                                                                                                          592
females within a natural polymorphic population show evidence of color-assortative mating. Our results
could help to explain the persistance and stability of color polymorphisms in this and other species.



Richmond, Jonathan (US Geological Survey); Barr, Kelly (US Geological Survey, San Diego, Canada);
Backlin, Adam; Fisher, Robert (US Geological Survey, Canada)

Genetic erosion at the margin of a species' boundary: A case study on the threatened California
Red-legged Frog (Rana draytonii)

Management of marginal populations is particularly challenging due to natural processes that typically
affect such populations (i.e. reduced gene flow, smaller size, etc.) as well as ‗unnatural‘ process related to
urbanization, anthropogenic-induced fires, pesticides, competition with invasive species and others. This
clash of phenomena is highlighted in southern California, where recent fires and other disturbances have
created new concerns for threatened taxa; however, few studies have studied the genetic consequences
of modern disturbances such as fire in this landscape. Using microsatellites and mtDNA sequence data,
we studied the geographic structuring and diversity of the threatened California Red-legged Frog ( Rana
draytonii ) at the southern range limit in California, where populations have rapidly extinct since the
1960s. We found that isolated populations at the southernmost sampling sites form distinctive clusters
within a larger southern phylogroup, and that genetic diversity and admixture substantially increase in
populations that are closer to the species ‗core‘ in California‘s central Coast Ranges. For populations in
which the fire history is known, we show although census sizes notably decreased in post-burn sampling,
no clear loss of genetic diversity could be directly attributed to any major fires. We used use approximate
Bayesian modeling to show that reductions in effective population size predate the fires in all cases. For
one population, we traced the bottleneck to a catastrophic dam break in 1928 and provide evidence that
reduced effective size was likely due to a founder event, given that remnant dam infrastructure is
responsible for creating the current frog habitat in the canyon.



Richter, Stephen (Eastern Kentucky University); Denton, Robert (Ohio State University, Columbus, OH,
United States); Drayer, Andrea; King, Susan (Eastern Kentucky University, Richmond, KY, United
States); Biebighauser, Thomas (United States Forest Service, Morehead, KY, United States)

Adaptive management and the science behind improving constructed wetlands for amphibians

Most natural wetlands have been lost in the United States and other industrialized nations, and wetlands
constructed to replace them typically do not provide the functions and biological communities of original
wetlands. We have been studying ridge-top wetlands in the Daniel Boone National Forest, Kentucky, that
are natural or have been constructed for habitat enhancement, not for compensatory mitigation. Over the
past 24 years, the management focus for these wetlands shifted from game animals to rare bats, and
most recently to amphibians. We have compared habitat characteristics of multiple types of constructed
wetlands and their amphibian communities to those of natural wetlands and discovered interesting
patterns in amphibian distribution and wetland characteristics. Broadly, there are different amphibian
communities that use constructed wetlands compared to natural wetlands, and these differences can be
predicted by habitat factors such as hydroperiod and canopy cover. We know that construction method
affects amphibian species composition and have been working closely with the Forest Service to
incorporate our data into refining management practices and construction protocols. We then study the
resulting constructed wetlands. The presentation will provide data through the first three iterations of this




                                                                                                          593
adaptive management strategy and highlight the successes of a cooperative relationship between
researchers and managers.



Riemann, Jana Carina (University of Hamburg); Ndriantsoa, Serge Herilala; Raminosoa, Noromalala R.
(University of Antananarivo, Antananarivo, Madagascar); Rödel, Mark-Oliver (Museum für Naturkunde
Berlin, Berlin, Germany); Glos, Julian (University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany)

Biodiversity loss due to habitat fragmentation? The case of frogs in Madagascar

Habitat fragmentation is a process that may lead to the loss of biodiversity, i.e. to species-depleted
communities in fragments. Various phenomena are associated with habitat fragmentation, e.g. the
reduction in the total habitat area, an increasing ratio of edge to interior habitat, and the isolation of one
forest fragment from others. Matrix habitat, i.e. the non-forested area in between patches of natural forest
habitat, might have a key influence on community structures in a fragmented landscape as it might or
might not act as a corridor for dispersal, or it might even be suitable habitat per se for some species. In
our study we aim at understanding how patterns of amphibian diversity depend on fragmentation
related properties of amphibian habitat such as forest fragment size and matrix quality, and how local
extinctions depend on functional components of diversity.        Our study site is the Ranomafana National
Park (RNP) and its surroundings, a mid-altitude rainforest ecosystem in Eastern Madagascar that is
exceptional in its amphibian diversity (&gt; 100 species). We determined species richness and
composition along transects distributed along streams (community of stream breeding frogs) and in
terrestrial parts (community of frogs that reproduce independent from running water) that were spread
over three major habitat types: RNP (control area), forest fragments, and matrix (i.e., secondary
vegetation, matrix streams, rice fields, banana plantations). We found no differences in total species
richness and local species richness (i.e., SR per transect) along stream transects between RNP,
fragments and matrix. Hence species richness of stream dependent frogs was not affected by
fragmentation. However, local species richness along terrestrial transects decreased with increasing
degradation, with most species found in RNP and least in the matrix. Species turnover between RNP and
fragments was similar as between RNP and matrix, as well as between fragments and matrix, an entirely
unexpected result. Beside a relatively consistent community along streams, each habitat type comprises
unique species. Therefore we hypothesize that amphibian communities in RNP, fragments and matrix
sites differ in functional diversity, and that the functional groups from which species are lost are non-
random.



Rifai, Lina (Indiana University Kokomo);

The effects of desertification on lizard communities in Jordan

Over the last century the earth‘s temperature has increased and is predicted to rise further in the near
future. However, very little is known, in particular, about how this will affect extreme climates, such as arid
environments. Previous studies have shown that desert communities respond differently to climate
change than communities from more temperate and humid regions.                 In this study we examined the
effects of desertification on lizard communties in a Middle Eastern desert. This study took place in the
Eastern Desert of Jordan, where we identified more and less desertified sites and analyzed lizard
community structures. Our results show that lizard abundance increased while the Simpson's diversity
index decreased with increasing temperatures and decreasing humidity. During the hottest and driest
time of the day the most abundant lizard species found was Acanthodactylus opheodurus , which is a



                                                                                                           594
highly specialized desert species. This specialist was found at all of our sites. Other more generalist
species, were mostly found during the cooler and more humid times of the day. Our results indicate that
asgeneralist species disappear with increasing desertification, the diversity of lizard communities
decreases.



Rigby, Cassandra (Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries and Aquaculture & School of Earth and
Environmental Sciences, James Cook University); Simpfendorfer, Colin (Centre for Sustainable Tropical
Fisheries and Aquaculture & School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, James Cook University,
Townsville, Australia)

Habitat associations of deepwater chondrichthyan life history traits

Life history traits are important indicators of the productivity of a species, and its ability to tolerate fishing
pressure. Using a variety of life history traits (male and female traits of maximum size, size at maturity,
age at maturity, longevity, growth rate and size at birth) from a wide range of chondrichthyans we
demonstrate that there are life history differences between shelf, oceanic and deepwater habitats. This
included deepwater species having lower growth rates, later age at maturity and higher longevity than
both shelf and oceanic species. This analytical review used a larger suite of species than previously
assessed and also undertook an examination of deepwater species life history traits associated with
depth and geographic range. We examined the patterns in life history traits by depth (upper, mid and
deep slope), region (North and South Atlantic, North and South Pacific) and latitudinal zone (Polar,
Temperate and Tropical). North Atlantic female deepwater chondrichthyans were found to have
significantly higher growth rates and lower longevity than those in the South Atlantic and size at birth was
smallest in species inhabiting the deeper slope habitats, Polar to Temperate zones and the North Atlantic
region. There was a trend for both male and female chondrichthyans of lower growth rate, later age at
maturity and higher longevity with increasing depth. However this trend was not significant when
phylogenetic relatedness and size were taken into account which suggests that differences in species
composition and size among habitats can drive these trends and stresses the importance of accounting
for these to clearly determine the influence of habitat on life history traits. These associations of life
history traits with habitat, both among deep, shelf and oceanic species and within deepwater species will
be discussed within the context of ecological theories and conservation strategies.



Riley, Julia (Laurentian University); Tattersall, Glenn (Brock University, Canada); Litzgus, Jacqueline
(Laurentian University, Canada)

Should I stay of should I go? Influence of environmental factors on Chrysemys picta hatchling
overwintering strategy

In northern temperate areas, Chrysemys picta hatchlings spend their first winter either aquatically after fall
emergence from the nest, or terrestrially within their natal nest chamber with subsequent spring
emergence from the nest. The occurrence of these two strategies varies among populations throughout
the species‘ range, and temporally within the same population; however, the factors that determine the
strategy employed by a given clutch in nature are not well understood. Subzero nest temperatures above
-4 ºC can be survived by hatchlings using freeze-tolerance or supercooling, but lower nest temperatures
like those found in the temperate north, can only be survived in a supercooled state. If overwintering
strategy maximizes winter survival and is cued by environmental factors, then northern hatchlings should
remain in nests when the environment promotes supercooling. Clutches that overwinter in-nest should, as
previous research has shown, experience lower fall nest temperatures, soil moisture and vegetation



                                                                                                              595
cover, higher nest soil organic content, and smaller nest soil particle size (all characteristics that promote
overwinter survival in a supercooled state) than clutches that experience fall nest emergence. We are
testing this hypothesis over two field seasons in Algonquin Park, Ontario. Over both 2010-11 and 2011-
12, 52 C. picta nests were caged and a data logger was placed in each to record temperature. Soil
texture was quantified for each nest. Nest microhabitat variables were recorded at oviposition and
monthly during incubation. In the fall of 2010, 12% of the nests emerged. From April to May 2011, spring
emergence was monitored and overwinter survival was 41% (N = 18 clutches). In the fall of 2011, 50% of
the nests emerged; overwinter and spring emergence data are currently being collected. Of the
environmental factors examined to date, none appear to influence overwintering strategy; however,
additional environmental factors, such as percent oxygen, are currently being monitored. Knowledge of
hatchling C. picta overwintering strategies is predominately based on laboratory studies; our study will
contribute to understanding this phenomenon in nature.



Riley, Julia (Laurentian University); Litzgus, Jacqueline (Laurentian University, Canada)

To Conserve and Protect: Evaluation of a turtle conservation tool, nest caging

Conservation biology‘s primary goal is to mitigate anthropogenic impacts on natural ecosystems. It follows
that conservation tools themselves should not be detrimental to target species. Subsidized predators can
push turtle nest depredation to unnatural levels. Nest caging, a widely-used conservation technique,
counteracts this by protecting nests and promoting recruitment. Despite these benefits, shortcomings
have been identified. Entrapment in cage wire can cause mortality, and anecdotal evidence suggests that
some nest caging methods may reduce incubation temperature which may in turn have deleterious
consequences for hatchling development. The first goal of this study was to examine the effects of nest
caging on the nest micro-environment. The second goal was to determine if nest caging has an effect on
hatchling fitness. In 2010 and 2011 in Algonquin Provincial Park, Ontario, Painted Turtle ( Chrysemys
picta ; N = 86) and Snapping Turtle ( Chelydra serpentina ; N = 89) nests were assigned to one of three
treatment groups or a control: above- or below-ground wire cages, wooden-sided cages, or no nest cage,
respectively. A data logger was placed in each nest to record incubation temperature, and canopy and
vegetation cover were measured. Once hatching occurred, incubation duration, hatching success, and
proxies of hatchling fitness were quantified. Temperature, hatching success, and frequency of
deformities did not differ among treatments. Hatchling body condition and locomotor performance differed
significantly among treatments. Some nest caging types incurred fitness consequences for hatchlings;
however, above-ground cages were found to have the most positive influences on fitness in both species,
indicating that they should be the cage style of choice. Evaluation of conservation techniques is crucial
for effective recovery of at-risk species in order to comprehend their long-term population-level
implications, and maximize project efficiency, funds, and impacts.




                                                                                                          596
Rinaldi Colli, Guarino (Universidade de Brasilia); Garda, Adrian (Universidade Federal do Rio Grande
do Norte, Canada); Wiederhecker, Helga (James Cook University, Canada); Gainsbury, Alison (The
University of Texas at Austin, Canada); Costa, Gabriel (Universidade Federal da Paraíba, Canada);
Pyron, R. Alexander (The George Washington University, Canada); Vieira, Gustavo (Universidade
Federal da Paraíba, Canada); Werneck, Fernanda (Brigham Young University, Canada)

Microhabitat variation explains local-scale distribution of terrestrial Amazonian lizards in
Rondônia, Western Brazil

We investigate the role of ecology and phylogeny on the association between lizard abundance and
microhabitat variables in an Amazon rainforest site. Using pitfall trap arrays, we collected data from 349
individuals belonging to 23 lizard species. After accounting for spatial autocorrelation and using a
Canonical Correspondence Analysis (CCA), we found that lizard captures were significantly associated
with microhabitat variables,

which accounted for 48 percent of the observed variation. Further, a Canonical Phylogenetic Ordination
(CPO) indicated that microhabitat variables are more important in determining the distribution of lizard
species than phylogenetic relationships among species. Termite nests, canopy openness, and tree
circumference were strongly associated with the number of captures of certain lizard species. Our results
confirm autecology studies of individual lizard species for which data are available. We suggest that
maintaining heterogeneous forested microhabitats should be a central goal for sustaining a high lizard
biodiversity in Amazon rainforests.



Rinaldi Colli, Guarino (Universidade de Brasilia); Françoso, Renata; Machado, Ricardo; Nogueira,
Cristiano (Universidade de Brasília, Canada)

Predicted climate change effects on lizards in the Brazilian Cerrado hotspot

Through local extinctions and distributional shifts, climate change is a potential menace to biodiversity,
especially when associated with habitat degradation. Because of ectothermy, climate changes can affect
lizards populations in several ways, including reduced foraging time and increased metabolic costs of
growth, maintenance and reproduction, leading to reduced population growth. We investigated changes
in suitable areas for the potential occurrence (SAPO) of Cerrado lizards in response to climate changes
predicted for 2050. We also investigated changes in the potential occurrence of lizards in Cerrado
conservation units. Climate changes predicted for 2050 will imply in substantial loss of SAPO for Cerrado
lizards, either confining ranges to the actual limits of Cerrado or to South America. Combined with trends
of human occupation, our simulation indicates that predicted climate changes will drastically reduce
SAPO of lizards in Cerrado within half a century.



Ringler, Eva (University of Vienna); Ringler, Max (University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria); Jehle, Robert
(University of Salford, Salford, United Kingdom); Hödl, Walter (University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria)

The genetic mating system and analyses of reproductive success in Allobates femoralis

Dendrobatoid frogs hold an extraordinary position within anuran amphibians due to their elaborate and
complex reproductive behaviour. While their courtship behaviour and parental care is well documented
from behavioural observations in the field and laboratory, comprehensive data on mating systems and
underlying genetic population structures is scarce. Throughout the prolonged breeding period, males of



                                                                                                       597
the pan-Amazonian dendrobatoid frog Allobates femoralis are highly territorial; females are iteroparous
and show strong site fidelity. Courtship and mating takes place inside the male territories. The a im of my
dissertation was to assess the genetic mating system and to investigate the distribution and determinants
of male and female reproductive success across an entire A. femoralis population. Through molecular
parentage analyses of two successive generations of adult individuals a highly polygynandrous mating
system was identified. A high percentage of the males and females in the population produced progeny
which survived until adulthood. Reproductive success was significantly associated with territory
occupation in males, but not related to the size of a territory or to body size in both sexes. Parentage
assignments of one offspring generation at two different life history stages were used to identify patterns
of parental relatedness on reproductive success in A. femoralis . Females mainly chose their mating
partners within a radius of 20 m. Mean pairwise relatedness coefficients of successful reproducers did not
differ from random mating but had a lower variance than expected by chance, suggesting optimal
reproductive output at intermediate genetic divergence. The number of effective mating partners per
female increased with the number of spatially available candidate males, and the number of offspring per
female increased with the number of mating partners. We hypothesize that the benefits of multiple mating
outweigh the costs of in- and outbreeding depression, and consequently precluded the evolution of
‗choosy‘ mate selection in this species.



Ringler, Max (University of Vienna); Ringler, Eva; Hödl, Walter (University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria)

Supplementation of reproductive resources for amphibian conservation: Artificial tadpole sites for
Allobates femoralis (Aromobatidae)

Dendrobatoid population sizes have been shown not to be generally regulated by food availability and
supply, while the supplementation of reproductive resources resulted in a significant demographic and
behavioural response. However the influence of added reproductive resources on the genetic population
structure and the distribution of reproductive success has not been studied so far. In a 4-year population
scale experiment in Allobates femoralis we could show that artificial pools can serve as sites for tadpole
deposition and that the addition of the pools led to a significant increase in population size. Density
increase of offspring was negatively correlated with distance to the pools, while adults that lived longer
than one breeding season showed no behavioural response to the new reproductive resources.
Parentage analyses revealed that most of the population increase was due to an increase in the
autochthonous reproductive rate. The new reproductive resources had no influence on the genetic
population structure, as reproductive success increased equally throughout the population for males and
females. Thus, all males and females in the population produced more adult offspring when the artificial
pools were available. Eggs and tadpoles are generally recognized as the most vulnerable stages in the
amphibian life cycle with typically only a small fraction of offspring surviving into the early post
metamorphic stage. Dendrobatoids face this situation by providing some sort of parental care to their
offspring, which consists at least of tadpole transport to suitable bodies of water. Our experiment
indicates that the supplementation of suitable habitats for the tadpole stage results in a significant
increase in population size, most likely due to a decreased mortality from desiccation, insufficient food
supply and predation. Beside general threats like habitat destruction and degradation, climatic change
and disease, several dendrobatoid species are threatened by illegal, uncontrolled poaching for the pet
trade. Our experiment suggests that reproductive resource supplementation can be an effective measure
to increase or stabilize population size. Of specific importance is the absence of any detrimental effects
on genetic population structure. Therefore we want to advocate the approach to be implemented in
population management plans to enable the sustainable use of natural dendrobatoid populations and to
restore endangered populations to their original size.



                                                                                                          598
Rios, Nelson (Tulane University); Bart, Henry (Tulane Univeristy, Belle Chasse, LA, United States);
Bentley, Andy; Wiley, Edward (Kansas University Natural History Museum, Lawrence, KS, United States)

BOSS, Biological Object Search Service: An Overview of the Architecture and Features of the
FishNet2 Search Engine

On April 22, 2010 an explosion on the British Petroleum Deepwater Horizon Oil Platform resulted in the
release of large quantities of crude oil into the northern Gulf of Mexico. The ability of ecologists and other
scientists to assess the impacts of the spill on the Gulf of Mexico ecosystem depends critically on the
availability of baseline data on the composition and structure of biotic communities in the region under
natural conditions. Natural history museums have the ability to provide much of this information as they
contain data on biological resources spanning hundreds of years to the present. The FishNet2 network is
a collaborative effort among fish collections around the world to share and distribute data on specimen
holdings. Over the past year a number of developments have been made to address the needs of
acquiring baseline data from FishNet2 in response to such temporally &amp; geographically defined
events as the BP Oil Spill. Specifically, we have improved upon the data harvesting architecture, added
geospatial query capabilities, improved result summaries, made significant changes to the UI and
produced an API to facilitate third party integration. The underlying architecture for FishNet2 has been
generalized as the Biological Object Search Service allowing us to create instances applicable to other
taxonomic networks. HerpNet2 is an example of such an instance utilizing the same architecture.



Rios, Nelson (Tulane University);

Technology and Innovation in Herpetology and Ichthyology Collections: Digitization of Collection
Data and Collaborative Multi-Institute Projects.

There are an estimated 3 billion biological specimens housed in museums and herbaria around the world.
The past decade has seen significant efforts focused on digitization and mobilization of these specimens
resulting in the development of numerous software applications for data capture, enhancement and
analysis. It has also led to the establishment of data-sharing portals, such as the HerpNet, FishNet and
the Global Biodiversity Information Facility. Despite the success of these networks, the data often
present inconsistent taxonomic and geographic assignments across and within collections. Furthermore,
a significant amount of data still exists solely in hard copy form, inaccessible from the Internet. This
presentation will focus on current impediments to digitization of collection data and discuss existing and
potential technologies for ―collaborative digitization‖ that can be used to overcome these hurdles.



Ripley, Matthew (Southeastern Louisiana University);

Exploring Herpetological Distribution Changes Associated With Climate Change Over A
Latitudinal Transect Using Temporal Species Richness Trends

Climate changes over the past several decades have had drastic effects on the landscape of the eastern
North America. These alterations have translated to changes in the distribution of fauna over latitude and
elevation. While individual species shifts have been studied over wide ranges and globally, there has not
been sufficient work on studying a change in overall richness over a latitudinal transect. This study
examines how species richness has changed over the past several decades along a latitudinal transect in
comparison to climate changes. Using anurans, squamates, salamanders, testudines, and crocodilians,




                                                                                                          599
historic and current locality data will be used to chart distributions to determine species richness changes
temporally in comparison to latitude.



Rittmeyer, Eric N. (Museum of Natural Science, Louisiana State University); Austin, Christopher C.
(Museum of Natural Science, Louisiana State University, Canada)

One Species or Two? Integrating genomic and morphological data to delimit species in the
Crocodile Skinks (Tribolonotus pseudoponceleti complex)

Species are a fundamental unit in biology, critical to a wide variety of studies in nearly all subfields of the
life sciences. Despite this importance, determining the status of populations as conspecific lineages or as
independent evolutionary lineages (i.e. species) is a far from trivial task, particularly if the populations are
morphologically similar (i.e. cryptic species) or recently diverged. Genetic data, particularly from
numerous independent loci, represents a powerful tool for testing hypotheses regarding the taxonomic
status of divergent populations; however, other types of data, such as morphology and ecology, also
provide critically important information regarding such hypotheses. Here, we integrate genomic and
morphological data to examine the divergence between populations of Tribolonotus pseudoponceleti
(Squamata: Scincidae) from the islands of Buka and Bougainville in Papua New Guinea. In a recent study
examining the phylogeny of the Crocodile Skinks ( Tribolonotus ), Austin et al. (2010) found these
populations to be reciprocally monophyletic and relatively deeply divergent (~4.7% divergent at
mitochondrial ND4 and cytochrome b loci), despite the close proximity of the islands (separated by a
narrow channel of only ~100 meters) and their connection during periods of lower sea level, such as
during Pleistocene glacial cycles. We used next-generation sequencing to collect a genomic scale
dataset of several thousand loci for five samples from each of Bougainville and Buka, as well as two
outgroup samples of the sister species, T. ponceleti . We applied isolation with migration models to
estimate the levels of gene flow and timing of divergence between the Bougainville and Buka populations,
as well as genetic clustering algorithms (Structurama) to elucidate population genetic structure in the T.
pseudoponceleti complex. This genomic dataset is combined with multivariate statistical analyses of a
morphological dataset consisting of several meristic and mensural characters scored for specimens
spanning the distribution of the        T. pseudoponceleti      complex. Together, these genomic and
morphological data allow for a thorough examination of the divergence between these populations, and
enable robust inferences regarding the processes driving their divergence, and the taxonomic status of
these populations as divergent but conspecific lineages, or as distinct species.



Rivas, Jesus (New Mexico Highlands University); Thorbjarnarson, John (Wildlife Conservation Society,
Canada); Muñoz, Maria (Universidad Simon Bolivar, Canada)

The data versus the model: An anaconda's tale about growth rate, survival, and demography

Our understanding of demography and growth rate of long living snakes has increased by leaps and
bounds thanks to long term studies in a few taxa. However, data from the tropics have not been as
abundant, particularly regarding South American species. Here we present data from a 19-year long mark
and recapture study on green anacondas from a location in the Venezuelan llanos. We collected data
from 917 captures (444 females and 473 males) and re-caught 210 in an area of approximately 2500 h.
Average female mass was 19 kg while average male mass was 5.9. We modeled the anaconda
population using MARK (CJS model). The estimated population size is 394 anacondas with 286 males
and 108 females. The apparent contradiction between the data from the field and the results of the model



                                                                                                            600
falls into place when considering the length of the study and other aspects of anaconda biology. Due to
their larger size, females are easier for us to find. This is why they seem to be almost as abundant as
males in the raw data, in apparent contradiction with the results of the model. Females experience lower
survival (65%) than males (77%) from year to year. This difference in survival explains the male biased in
the estimated population. The higher mortality among females is surprising because males never
outgrow predators of the area (spectacled caimans, large cats, foxes, female anacondas) and suffer high
mortality while looking for receptive females in the breeding season. Females face few predators once
they have reached reproductive size and do not seem to be exposed to predators as much during the
mating season. Females grow faster than males (0.038mm/day vs 0.017mm/day) which explains the
observed sexual size dimorphism. Females tackle larger, more dangerous prey and this difference in prey
choice likely contributes to their larger growth rate. However, risk of injury and even death while attacking
a large prey also may be associated to their lower survival. The population of female anacondas seems to
be under an unusual kind of bottom-up regulation. This study emphasizes the need for comprehensive
long term studies that address all aspects of life history, including input from both field work and
theoretical models, as the best approach to gain a complete understanding of the animal's ecology.



Robbins, Travis (Penn State); Langkilde, Tracy (Penn State, University Park, United States)

Native predator eats invasive toxic prey: evidence for increased incidence of consumption rather
than aversion-learning

Contemporary adaptation of native prey species to invasive predators has been relatively well
documented, but that of native predators to invasive prey has received less attention. Because the level
of impact an invasive species will have on its predators versus its prey will determine changes in
community trophic structure, it is important to understand how native predators respond to novel prey.
Here we examine the response of native fence lizards to the invasion of red imported fire ants, a novel
toxic prey. Examining invaded and uninvaded lizard populations, we tested whether or not aversion-
learning occurs in juvenile fence lizards over successive feedings (within lifetime), how previous fire ant
exposure may affect avoidance behavior (over generations), and whether population differences are
consistent when prey choice exists. We also examine rates of phenotypic divergence in traits associated
with the native species as both predator and prey. Aversion-learning did not occur in either population.
Instead, the incidence of fire ant consumption increased over both successive feedings and generations.
Lizards from the fire ant invaded population had a higher propensity to eat fire ants than fire ant-naïve
lizards, even when given a choice between prey items. We found greater phenotypic divergence in traits
associated with the native species as predator on, versus as prey to, fire ants. Although the strategy of
eating these novel toxic prey can impose survival costs in the short term, over the longer-term, eating fire
ants may cost little or even benefit survivors.



Robbins, Travis (Penn State); Mushinsky, Henry (University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, United
States); McCoy, Earl (University of South Florida, Tampa, United States)

On juvenile intrinsic growth and survival of lizard populations along a fine scale temperature
gradient: a reciprocal transplant approach

To understand the evolutionary and ecological significance of geographic variation in life history traits, we
must understand whether the patterns are induced through plastic, extrinsic or adaptive, intrinsic
responses. The eastern fence lizard, Sceloporus undulatus , exhibits a reverse Bergmann‘s cline in body



                                                                                                         601
size at fine geographic scales and Bergmann‘s cline at larger geographic scales. Population differences
in life history traits such as growth and survival must explain these resulting geographic trends in body
size and appear to be dependent on geographic scale. To begin examining how, and at what scale, life
history tactics change from exhibiting plastic (null model) responses to that of adaptive responses, small
scale reciprocal transplant experiments were conducted between populations that experience a 1° C
difference in their monthly average temperatures. Two separate reciprocal transplant experiments were
conducted along the latitudinal/environmental temperature gradient of the Florida peninsula. One
experiment used populations of the S. undulatus , exhibiting reverse Bergmann‘s cline in body size, and
the other used populations of its sister species the Florida scrub lizard ( S. woodi ), exhibiting no cline in
body size. In S.undulatus , larger adult body sizes in the southern population were not a result of faster
extrinsic juvenile growth rates, although potential activity periods were greater in the southern
environment. Rather, population-specific, intrinsic, differences in juvenile growth rates and survival
explained the body size differences. The adaptive differences in juvenile growth rates between
populations were masked, however, by plastic responses to the environment. In S. woodi, similar adult
body sizes between the north and south populations could be explained by faster intrinsic and extrinsic
juvenile growth rates observed in the northern population. We did not observe greater potential activity
periods in the southern environment and juvenile survival was not different between populations. In S.
woodi , the similarity in adult body sizes between populations is likely a result of adaptive responses. The
null hypothesis that plastic, extrinsic juvenile growth rates and survival would explain body sizes was not
supported in either species. Even on fine geographic scales there appears to be complex relationships
among environmental temperatures and trade-offs among life history traits of Sceloporus lizards.



Roberts, Dale (University of Western Australia);

Polyandry: the next jump in the social behaviour of anurans

Since the late 1970‘s, studies on frogs have been an integral part of the revolution in studies of sexual
selection. Those studies have focused on species where a female mates with a single male and female
choice and male competition interact to determine mating outcomes.          However, at least since Darwin
there have been reports of frogs engaging in polyandrous matings: multiple males mating simultaneously
with a single female. Using both direct observational data and inference from patterns of testis mass,
and development of the male reproductive tract I will demonstrate that polyandry is widespread and
occurs in a variety of forms. For example, Rhacophorid frogs have a very high frequency of polyandrous
species but simultaneous polyandry has been reported in 7 frog families. Comparative data show that
sperm competition arising from polyandry has been a strong factor selecting for larger testis mass in
several lineages. Across species there is also compelling evidence of elaborate modifications of the male
reproductive tract in many polyandrous species and, that secretions from the vesicula seminalis may
positively affect sperm performance. Using the Australian frog fauna I will also argue that polyandry might
have profound effects on the evolution of anuran size and call structure and may allow novel speciation
processes, e.g. sexual conflict, to drive frog evolution. My goal is to convince you that polyandry is a
seriously understudied feature of frog biology that will have the same pervasive effects it has in many
other animals. I urge you to look again at that ―mistake‖ where three males amplexed a single female or
the egg masses were so close together that sperm might have crossed a boundary: these might be
deliberate mating tactics – used by either sex!




                                                                                                          602
Roberts, Mark (University of South Carolina); Arendt, Michael (South Carolina Department of Natural
Resources, Canada); Owens, David (College of Charleston, Canada); Schwenter, Jeffrey; Segars, Albert
(South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Canada); Quattro, Joseph (University of South
Carolina, Canada)

Loggerhead sea turtle (Caretta caretta) serum testosterone and genetic data collected over twelve
years reveal disproportionate gender contributions of nesting regions to a subadult foraging
ground.

A large subadult feeding assemblage of loggerhead sea turtles ( Caretta caretta ) exists off the
southeastern coast of the United States. Here we examine loggerhead sea turtle mtDNA haplotype data
and serum testosterone data collected during eight summers spanning a twelve year period (2000, 2001,
2002, 2004, and 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011) to estimate the temporal stability of nesting beach contributions
to this mixed stock feeding aggregation.         In addition, this unique combination of genetic and serum
testosterone data in subadult sea turtles will allow for a gender specific analysis of nesting beach
contributions to subadult foraging grounds.        This gender based approach to mixed stock analyses is
especially critical in sea turtles as nesting rookeries have highly variable sex ratios; not utilizing a gender
based approach can mask the importance of rookeries that would be undervalued based on rookery size
alone.     We anticipate overall findings congruent with a previous single-year analysis that demonstrated
a disproportionately large contribution from the nearby nesting populations relative to more distant
populations.         Further, we anticipate that the uneven nature of nesting beach gender production will
increase this disproportionate contribution when only one gender is considered in the mixed stock
analysis.     These findings will be discussed in the context of a warming climate further changing the
relative importance of nesting beach contributions to overall reproductive success, particularly as it
relates to the smaller loggerhead nesting beaches of the northwest Atlantic ocean.



Rocha, Carlos Frederico (Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro); Diego, Guedes; Monique, Van
Sluys (Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil); Carla C., Siqueira
(Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil); Cristina V., Ariani (Universidade do
Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil); Davor, Vrcibradic (Universidade Federal do Estado do
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil); Mara C., Kiefer (Universidade Federal Fluminense, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil); Mauricio, Almeida-Gomes (Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil); Vitor N. B., Borges-Junior (Universidade do estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil);
Pablo, Goyannes-Araújo (Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil)

Visual search of amphibians in Atlantic Forest areas of Brazil: What is the best time of day to
conduct the sampling?

In general, anurans tend to be nocturnal, though diurnal activity is characteristic of some groups. Studies
show that frog activity may be inferred based on the quantities of individuals collected at different periods
of the day during large-scale field surveys. We evaluate what the best period of the day to conduct
amphibian sampling in nine Atlantic Rainforest areas in southeastern Brazil, based on intensive field
surveys. At each locality we employed similar sampling effort during diurnal, crepuscular and nocturnal
transects (1412 transects in 706 sampling hours). Data provided richness of frogs active at each period of
day and species specific abundance of active frogs at each period. We pooled data from all localities for
each period and estimated the proportion of frogs of each species active at each period based on the
total number of individuals and on the number of species found during all surveys for that period. We
recorded a total of 814 individual frogs from 68 species. Mean species richness was highest at night
(~11), intermediate at dusk (~7.9), and lowest during day (~4.0). Total number of individual frogs found
(pooled species) was highest during night (53.1%) and lowest during day (14.4%). Analyzing each



                                                                                                           603
species separately, the number of individuals recorded was consistently higher at dusk and night for most
species. Our study evidence a trend for crepuscular and nocturnal activity for most Atlantic Rainforest
frogs, with few species having primarily diurnal habits. Those results may favor future studies of
autoecology and conservation with specific species.



Rocha, Luiz (California Academy of Sciences); Robertson, Ross; Lessios, Harilaos (Smithsonian
Tropical Research Institute, Canada)

Allopatric speciation with gene flow and peripheral isolation in Damselfishes (genus Stegastes)

Stegastes is a diverse genus of damselfishes associated to coral and rocky reefs in tropical oceans.
Most species are solitary territorial herbivores that aggressively defend their feeding grounds, but a few
are gregarious and feed on plankton. Juveniles are usually brightly colored and common in the aquarium
trade. We sampled all 38 nominal species while scuba diving or snorkeling and preserved tissue samples
in ethanol. Standard laboratory procedures were used to obtain sequences of one ribosomal RNA gene
(16s) and one mitochondrial DNA gene (ATPase). As part of the phylogenetic analysis, we performed
maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses. The monophyly of the genus was
rejected in all analyses. The genus appears to be split into two main groups, one clade (clade I)
containing all Atlantic and eastern Pacific (indicating that this radiation originated from a single invasion of
the Atlantic before the closure of the Isthmus of Panama) as well as some Indo-Pacific species, and a
second clade (clade II) containing only Indo-Pacific species. Species of the genus Microspathodon form
the base of clade II, whereas species of Plectroglyphididon are present in both clade I and II. Additional
taxon sampling is necessary to revise the current nomenclature. Cryptic speciation was also detected
within many widely distributed species, the most notable case being Stegastes fasciolatus , which seems
to be comprised of four different species. Even though ongoing speciation seems to follow an allopatric
pattern, several instances of gene flow were detected between incipient and or young species. There is
also an apparent pattern of peripheral speciation, with all populations in isolated islands or archipelagos
belonging to separate clades.



Rödder, Dennis (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig); Ahmadzadeh, Faraham
(Department of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Management, Environmental Sciences Research Institute,
Shahid Beheshti University, Canada); Carretero, Miguel A.; Harris, David J.; Freitas, Susana N. (Centro
de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, Universidade do Porto, Canada); Rödder,
Dennis (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Bonn, Germany); Perera, Ana (Centro de
Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, Universidade do Porto, Canada); Böhme,
Wolfgang (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Canada)

Inferring the effects of past climate fluctuations on the distribution pattern of Iranolacerta
(Reptilia, Lacertidae): evidences from mitochondrial DNA and species distribution models

A variety of different methods are available for investigating the effects of past climate fluctuation on
biota. Among them, molecular phylogeographic and species distribution modeling approaches have been
shown to be especially useful tools to trace past climate induced modifications of species' geographic
distributions. Comparing the results of both analytical approaches are here combined to better
understand the influences of past climate changes on the fragmented distribution pattern of the lizard
genus Iranolacerta, that currently ranges the northwest and central Zagros Mountains of Iran. While I.
zagrosica is restricted to few localities and cannot be modeled, the distribution modeling of I. brandti
suggested a large region of unfavorable habitat between Azerbaijan and the central Zagros Mountains



                                                                                                            604
populations. For the phylogenetic perspective, both species display deep genetic separation predating
likely the Pleistocene. However, limited genetic diversity across this divided range of I. brandtii, imply that
the current separation is recent. Deeper genetic divergences were, nevertheless, uncovered within
Azerbaijan. Since no recent geological events explain these results, the most likely explanation for such a
distribution pattern is due to past climate fluctuations. Both sources of evidence suggest that during the
last glaciation the Azerbaijan and Zagros populations of I. brandtii were connected, and the current
pattern was shaped with their disconnection in the early Holocene. Further studies may identify potential
glacial refugia for other species in this biodiverse region.



Rödder, Dennis (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig);

Niche stasis in invasive herps? The role of accessible climate space in invasion success

Several amphibian and reptile species have successfully established invasive populations around the
globe and successful management often requires estimates of invasion risk for a given region. The use of
species distribution models (SDMs) to predict potential distributions of species including invasion
potentials is steadily increasing. A necessary assumption when projecting such models throughout space
or time is that climatic niches do not change, at least in contemporary time frames. However, recent
findings of niche shifts during biological invasion of particular plant and animal species have indicated that
this assumption is not categorically valid. One reason for the detected niche shifts may relate to the
selection of predictive variables used for modeling. Another reason may be related to evolutionary
responses. In this talk, I provide examples of studies addressing differences in climatic niches in the
native and invasive ranges of amphibians and reptiles. I highlight which variables are more ‗conserved‘ in
comparison to more ‗relaxed‘ variables (i.e. subject to niche shift) and how they influence transferability of
SDMs through space and time. Using quantifications of available climate spaces I discuss whether these
niche shifts are likely to represent methodological artifacts or evolutionary responses. Most studies
indicate that the degrees of niche similarity and conservatism vary greatly among the predictive variables.
Some shifts can be attributed to active habitat selection, whereas others apparently reflect variation in the
availability of climate conditions or biotic interactions between a species native and invasive ranges.
Patterns suggesting active habitat selection also vary among variables. These findings evoke
considerable implications on the transferability of SDMs over space and time, which is strongly affected
by the choice and number of predictors. The incorporation of ‗relaxed‘ predictors not or only indirectly
correlated with biologically meaningful predictors may lead to erroneous predictions when projecting
SDMs - and ultimately to unreliable assessments of invasion risk. I recommend thorough assessments of
invasive species' ecology for the identification biologically meaningful predictors facilitating transferability.



Rödel, Mark-Oliver (Museum fuer Naturkunde Berlin);

West African amphibians: diversity, threats and future

Globally the biodiversity of the Afrotropics is probably among the least well known. West Africa is no
exception from that rule. Although amphibians of this region were intensively studied, in particular since
the 1960s, we continuously added new and spectacular discoveries throughout the last 20 years. This
process is still far from being completed. In the first part of the talk I will summarize our findings and
pinpoint on the major gaps that still exist.        Unfortunately, biodiversity in the region suffers from a
constantly increasing exploitation of natural resources (i.e. conversion of habitats to agricultural land,
logging, mining, bush meat trade), as well as from changing climatic conditions. To uncover the potential



                                                                                                             605
effects of these environmental changes, amphibians are an especially valuable group of organisms. In the
second part of my talk I will highlight the known responses of West African amphibians to these
challenges and outline what we may deduce from their evolutionary history (biogeography, life histories)
concerning their future.



Rodriguez, David (Cornell University); Becker, C. Guillerme (Cornell University, Canada); Pupin, Nadya
C.; Haddad, Celio F.B. (Universidade Estadual Paulista, Rio Claro, Canada); Zamudio, Kelly R. (Cornell
University, Canada)

Historical distribution of the frog-killing fungus in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest

Across the globe, amphibians are declining at alarming rates. Habitat loss, pollution, and climate change
are major drivers of these declines, but amphibians also have to contend with the disease
chytridiomycosis, which is caused by the frog-killing fungus ( Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis [ Bd ]). The
fungus causes an epidermal infection that disrupts osmotic balance and can lead to death in susceptible
amphibians. The global spread of the fungus is most likely the result of anthropogenic movement,
although regional patterns of spread are less understood. The Atlantic Forest in southern Brazil harbors a
large number of endemic species, yet it has been reduced to less than 16% of its original extent. Other
studies have confirmed the presence of Bd within the Atlantic Forest, but catastrophic declines and
extinctions have not been well documented like those in Panama, California, and Australia. We sampled
Brazilian museum accessions representing nine frog families with varying breeding strategies and used
quantitative PCR to determine the historical prevalence and distribution of Bd in southern Brazil. We
also use internal transcribed spacer (ITS1) sequences to infer the population genetics of Bd over space
and time.



Rohr, Jason (University of South Florida); McMahon, Taegan; Halstead, Neal; Raffel, Thomas
(University of South Florida, Canada); Johnson, Steven (University of Florida, Canada)

Effects of the pesticides atrazine and chlorothalonil on amphibians

Although chemical contaminants have been implicated in amphibian declines, few contaminants cause
enough direct mortality at ecologically relevant concentrations to drive declines, suggesting that, if there is
a direct link, it is caused by understudied chemicals or that any link could be indirect and perhaps
mediated by contaminant effects on infections.        Infections are particularly important because many
amphibian declines are associated with diseases, such as chytridiomycosis, which is caused by the
pathogenic chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd). Here, we present evidence that the
understudied but most commonly used fungicide in the US, chlorothalonil, causes significant amphibian,
macrophyte, gastropod, algal, zooplankton, and Bd mortality well below field concentrations. Moreover,
the dose-mortality relationship for amphibians was non-monotonic.           We then use a meta-analytical
approach to reveal that exposure to atrazine, the second most commonly used herbicide and pesticide in
the US, is consistently associated with immunomodulation and elevated infections in amphibians. In
dose-response studies on Bd, atrazine reduced Bd growth rates suggesting that it might temporarily
reduce the risk of Bd infections. However, early-life (1 week) exposure of amphibians to the expected
environmental concentration of atrazine (~102 µg/L) was associated with significant immediate and long-
term (7 weeks after atrazine exposure) increases in amphibian mortality due to Bd, independent of when
the atrazine exposure occurred during development. Our findings indicate that atrazine must be present
to kill Bd, but only has to have been present in the past to cause persistent increases in the risk of Bd-




                                                                                                           606
induced amphibian mortality. Hence, our results support the hypothesis that the net effect of atrazine
could increase the threat posed by Bd, but clearly the effects are complex and we encourage further
investigations into the role of this widespread herbicide in amphibian health. Overall, this work highlights
the need to examine understudied chemicals for direct effects on amphibians and for more research on
the role of contaminants in mediating changes in host-symbiont interactions.



Rohr, Jason (University of South Florida); Halstead, Neal (University of South Florida, Canada); Liu,
Xuan (Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Canada); McMahon, Teagan; Raffel, Thomas;
Venesky, Matthew (University of South Florida, Canada)

The role of climate, vegetation, non-amphibian hosts, introduced hosts, and trade in shaping the
global chytridiomycosis pandemic

Recent worldwide declines of amphibians have been linked to the spread and/or emergence of
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), a fungus that causes amphibian chytridiomycosis. Many factors
have been implicated in the spread and/or emergence of Bd. Here I will present a series of studies that
include laboratory experiments, local and regional surveys, and national and global analyses that explore
how climatic variation, amphibian and non-amphibian hosts, vegetation, introduced species, and
international trade have shaped the chytridiomycosis pandemic. Our studies establish the importance of
both fundamental niche factors (e.g. climate variation and vegetation), host diversity including alternative
hosts (e.g. crayfish), and propagule pressure factors (e.g. introduced host species and international trade)
to the global distribution of Bd. I will discuss the implications of each of these groups of factors for the
management of chytridiomycosis.



Rojas, Bibiana (Deakin University);

Treefall gap invasion by Dendrobates tinctorius: a case of responsible parenthood

Treefall gaps, like any other kind of habitat disturbance, can act as evolutionary forces generating
adaptations in the life histories of the organisms affected. Gap formation, colonisation and role in forest
dynamics have been extensively studied but little is known about their effects on animal ecology and
behaviour beyond species counts. Most studies have focused on the differences in species richness and
composition in gaps older than six months compared to closed forest, but little is known about breeding
adaptations to invading fresh treefall gaps. Dendrobatid frogs are diurnal rainforest dwellers with an
elaborate parental care that consists of clutch attendance and tadpole transport to treeholes and other
phytotelmata, which have been shown to be a limited resource. Dendrobates tinctorius is known
anecdotally to invade treefall gaps. I studied the invasion of six natural treefall gaps by D. tinctorius in a
healthy, undisturbed forest in French Guiana in order to test experimentally the hypothesis that males
might go immediately to fresh gaps in search for new sites for tadpole deposition. I compared the latency
to occupancy and tadpole deposition rate in artificial pools placed in fresh gaps (less than 24 hours old) to
those away from gaps. I found that the latency to occupation and the rate at which tadpoles are deposited
in fresh gaps were significantly shorter and higher, respectively, than in the closed forest, thus proving the
importance of rearing sites in the colonization of treefall gaps. I discuss these results in the light of
possible benefits for the development and survival of tadpoles and of how selection could favour the best
parental decisions. These results offer new insights to our general understanding of thebiology of
invasions.




                                                                                                          607
Roje, Dawn (American Museum of Natural History);

Phylogenetic placement of flatfishes (Percomorpha: Pleuronectiformes) and the phylogenetic
utility of three new molecular markers

Flatfishes (order Pleuronectiformes) are a group of approximately 650 species in 14 families that, like
most other marine teleosts, begin life as bilaterally symmetrical larvae. As they mature, they undergo a
remarkable metamorphosis in which one eye migrates across the dorsal margin of the cranium resulting
in their definingThe placement of Pleuronectiformes within the species-rich Percomorpha has been
elusive. To test both the monophyly of flatfishes, as well as the phylogenetic placement of flatfishes within
Percomorpha, a phylogenetic analysis was carried out on a molecular dataset. DNA sequences (totaling
approximately 5,200 bp) from the nuclear protein-coding loci Rhodopsin 1 (Rho), ring-finger protein 213
(RNF213), trans-membrane protein 22 (TMEM22), suppressorof cytokine signaling 6 (SOCS6) and beta-
1,3-galactosyltransferase 6 (B3GALT6) were generated for 140 species from 10 flatfish and 26 non-
flatfish families. TMEM22, SOCS6 and B3GALT6 are all single-exon genes (SEGs) that have not been
used as phylogenetic markers. To test for congruence six phylogenies (one for each marker and a
concatenated, total-evidence dataset) were analyzed using maximum likelihood methods and compared
using the approximately unbiased (AU) and Shimodaira-Hasegawa (SH) topology tests. The results of
those tests suggest that the signal provided by Rho is incongruent with those from the other datasets.
The recovered topologies suggest that Pleuronectiformes is not monophyletic, and comprises two major
lineages: one most closely related to the monotypic Nematistiidae (rooster fish), and another to Toxotidae
(archerfishes). The implications of this topology on the evolution of bilateral asymmetry will be discussed,
as will the potential for characters of larval morphology to provide additional support for the phylogenetic
placement of flatfishes.



Romagosa, Christina (Auburn University); Guyer, Craig (Auburn University, Canada)

Global wildlife trade and biotic homogenization

The wildlife trade is an important economic activity that creates global movement of millions of individuals
annually. This anthropogenic transport of wildlife is a major threat to biodiversity by depleting wild
populations and introducing invasive species, disease, and parasites. As a major pathway for species
introductions and depletions, the live vertebrate trade contributes to this process of biotic homogenization.
The transport, introduction, and extinction of species have been shown to be non-random processes
among higher taxonomic groups. Use of data describing trade in live vertebrates, lists of species of global
conservation concern, and records of successful vertebrate introductions provide a framework to explore
the relationship between trade and species introductions and extinctions. Data on vertebrate species
transported to and from the United States were used for a synthetic review of US trade in live vertebrates
over 30 years and its contribution to biotic homogenization. Trade-related dynamics have led to changes
in species used for trade, individual quantities of those species traded, and their geographic origin.
Vertebrate families that are traded preferentially are also more likely to contain species that have
established nonindigneous populations or are threatened with extinction. The importance of trade in
homogenization of vertebrates suggests that additional efforts should be made to prevent introductions
and extinctions through this medium.




                                                                                                         608
Roosenburg, Willem (Ohio University);

Should I Stay or Should I Go: Facultative Neonate within Nest Overwintering in the Diamondback
Terrapin

I studied facultative neonate within nest overwintering in the Diamondback terrapin, Malaclemys terrapin,
in Chesapeake Bay.        The Poplar Island Environmental Restoration Project is rebuilding an island in
Chesapeake Bay where raccoons and foxes are absent.              Therefore, nest survival rates exceed 80%
annually and we can evaluate hatchling emergence strategies in a natural setting.                Our project
documents approximately 200 nests per year and 20-35% of nests overwinter as live hatchlings that
emerge in the spring; the remainder emerge in the fall.         Within nest survivorship and hatchling lipid
levels do not differ between fall and spring emerging nests.          We also evaluated the effect of nest
oviposition date, soil composition, soil bulk density and the presence of ice-nucleating agents between fall
and spring emerging nests. Only soil bulk density and the presence of ice nucleating agents differed,
with fall emerging nests having higher freezing points (more ice nucleating agents) and lower bulk
density. Interestingly, the difference in freezing temperatures between fall and overwintering nests was
on either side of the survival threshold for prolonged exposure to freezing temperatures for terrapins
(Baker et al., 2006). Our findings suggest that hatchling terrapins use environmental cues to determine
emergence timing.



Rose, Jonathan (Graduate Group in Ecology, UC Davis); Todd, Brian (Dept. Wildlife, Fish &
Conservation Biology, UC Davis, Canada)

Predicting invasion risk of non-native watersnakes in western North America using environmental
niche models

When introduced outside their native range, snakes are capable of having devastating impacts on
ecological communities throughpredation on, and competition with, native species. The northern
watersnake ( Nerodia sipedon ) and the banded watersnake ( N. fasciata ) are both generalist, semi-
aquatic snakes native to eastern North America and have been introduced to California where they are
currently established. These species pose an additional threat to California‘s endangered fish and
amphibians as a novel predator, and may inhabit a niche similar to that of threatened gartersnakes of the
genus Thamnophis . We geo-referenced over 1,000 occurrence points for these species from the
scientific literature and online databases, and used Maxent to create ecological niche models to project
areas of suitable climate in western North America for these two species. We also measured the spatial
overlap of the projected range and similarity of the climatic niches inhabited by these two species to those
of California‘s native gartersnakes, to assess the risk they pose as potential competitors for these
species. We found that both N. fasciata and N. sipedon have the potential to spread in the west, due
to extensive climatic similarity between their native and invaded ranges. Based on our model results, we
suggest that N. fasciata is likely to spread throughout the Central Valley of California where it may
compete with the threatened giant garter snake, T. gigas .            N. sipedon is more likely to spread
throughout northern California and the Pacific Northwest. We discuss the implications of our models for
the management of these introduced species, and recommend immediate action to prevent further
spread from their current, localized populations.




                                                                                                        609
Rosen, Philip (Universityof Arizona); Schwalbe, Cecil (USGS Southwest Biological Science Center,
Canada); Caldwell, Dennis (Caldwell Design, Canada); Hall, David (University of Arizona, Canada)

Collaborative conservation successes for native leopard frogs of the southwestern USA

Ranid frog conservation in the American Southwest faces 3 primary biological challenges: (1)eliminating
harmful non-native animals; (2) finding warm waters or non-susceptible populations for chytridiomycosis (
Bd ) resistance; and (3) sustaining landscape scale metapopulations. Dispersal of non-native animals and
pathogens puts a premium on landscape-level efforts and thus cooperation with multiple landholders,
public and private. Regulatory issues can limit and facilitate efforts, particularly with special-status
amphibians. Conflicts and synergies exist with sportfish and other native species. However, most land-
use modes can be reconciled with ranid conservation. We focus on 4 case studies from Arizona involving
Chiricahua Leopard Frog ( Rana [ Lithobates ] chiricahuensis ; CLF; a federally threatened species) that,
over two decades, provide successful models and cautionary notes: Case 1 (San Bernardino Valley)
demonstrated that private ranches are suitable conservation areas, benefitting ranchers and frogs, while
highlighting concerns that discouraged private participation. Case 1 also highlighted difficulties with
bullfrog control in complex environments; international boundaries; leopard frog disease and dispersal;
and complications with native fish needs. In Case 2 (Altar Valley), a large National Wildlife Refuge
facilitated landscape-scale success with CLF recovery, while highlighting bullfrog dispersal from adjoining
ranches. Initially contentious public-private and public agency disagreements imposed heavy costs on
participants, even as recovery succeeded. Fortuitous funding and perseverance reversed this, yielding
total elimination of exotics from valley waters and a robust CLF metapopulation. In Case 3
(EmpireValley), a large National Conservation Area is facilitating landscape-scale recovery
implementation for native aquatic vertebrates. Challenges include Bd management; bullfrog removal;
increased non-native fish populations on private ranchettes; and permitting and timeliness issues for
cooperating conservationists and public agencies. Cooperation of private entities reflects successes in
Cases 1 and 2. In Case 4 (Pajarito Mountains), extensive public agency cooperation is facilitating bullfrog
eradication across a landscape with large aquatic complexes. This ongoing effort by NGO, university,
state, and federal agencies‘ personnel is enlarging successful recovery zones that facilitate
metapopulation function of native frogs and defeat bullfrog metapopulation dynamics. Private assistance
has been strong, but sportfish and crayfish challenges remain on public lands. Success throughout the
Case 4 region would meet federal criteria for Recovery Unit 1 (of 7) of the Chiricahua Leopard Frog, a first
step toward de-listing. Similarly active restoration efforts are occurring in other recovery units.



Rosenblatt, Adam (Florida International University); Heithaus, Michael (Florida International University,
North Miami, FL, United States)

Ecological roles and individual specialization of American alligators revealed by stable isotope
analysis and movement patterns

Understanding the movement and feeding patterns of top predators is crucial for understanding their
ecological roles and how these roles may become altered as climate change continues. However, the
movement and feeding patterns of top predators have been primarily examined at the population scale,
assuming that all of the individuals in a population behave similarly. Recent research has shown that
individual behavioral specialization is more common than usually assumed and that specialization could
affect population, community, and ecosystem dynamics, ecological roles, and require novel conservation
strategies for proper management. Using stable isotope analysis and movement tracking we studied the
prevalence of individual specialization in a population of American alligators ( Alligatormississippiensis)
and how it could impact the ecological roles of these toppredators in a subtropical estuary. We found that



                                                                                                        610
individual alligators were capable of long distance movements over short time periods and adopted one of
three distinct movement tactics that were linked to variation in diets. The adoption of a particular tactic
was associated with tradeoffs between access to food resources and likely salt stress. Also, one of the
movement/feeding tactics indicated that alligators may act as vectors of nutrient transport between
marine and brackish waters. The use of this tactic, however, varied with salinity of the estuary, suggesting
that anthropogenic changes to freshwater delivery likely have modified, and will continue to modify, their
ecological role. We further found that alligators consumed prey at lower trophic levels than we
hypothesized, and that this may have been caused by past human impacts. Ultimately, our results show
that alligators can vary widely in their movement and feeding patterns, with some possibly transporting
nutrients within ecosystems and acting as simultaneous stabilizing top-down forces in disparate habitats.
However, other individuals may fill different roles in the environment. These varied roles will most likely
change as habitat restoration (in the form of increased delivery of freshwater to theestuary) and sea level
rise continue, but the degree and direction of change will be difficult to predict on an individual level.



Ross, Julie (Florida Gulf Coast University); Allman, Phil (Florida Gulf Coast University, Fort Myers,
United States); Winters, Colleen (Towson University, Towson, United States)

Genetic structure of a gopher tortoise, Gopherus polyphemus, population on a barrier island in
southwest Florida, USA

This study examines the genetic structure of an island gopher tortoise population in southwest Florida.
Understanding the genetic structure of this threatened species is becoming increasingly important since
development pressures continue to fragment populations and force individuals to be relocated. This
project uses species specific microsatellite analyses to determine the genetic structure of the Marco
Island population as well as gene flow across the island. Marco Island is a barrier island in southwest
Florida (USA) approximately 1 km from the adjacent mainland. Zooarchelogical evidence suggests that
gopher tortoises have inhabited the island since before the island became separated from the mainland
approximately 4000 years BP (Frantz and Quitmeyer 2005). We hypothesized that the Marco Island
population will be a single population with no evidence of a bottleneck. Our results indicate that the Marco
Island population is a single population that does not show evidence of subdivision within the population.
We found significant deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in six of the loci. An FIS of 0.412 was
determined using FSTAT which suggests evidence of a bottleneck in the population (FIS =0 no
inbreeding; FIS=1 inbreeding). However MICRO-CHECKER detected null alleles in several loci which
may explain the deviations from HWE rather than a bottleneck event. The island population will later be
compared to an adjacent mainland population for a greater understanding of the genetic structure of the
gopher tortoise populations in southwest Florida.



Rothermel, Betsie (Archbold Biological Station); Castellon, Traci (Archbold Biological Station, Venus, FL,
United States)

Contrasting patterns of Gopher Tortoise habitat use and burrow size distributions in Florida scrub
and mesic flatwoods

In peninsular Florida, pine flatwoods and xeric scrub comprise the majority of suitable upland habitat for
the Gopher Tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus), which is a candidate for listing under the U.S. Endangered
Species Act. Relatively little is known about the factors influencing densities, habitat use, and
demography of Gopher Tortoises in these non-sandhill habitats. We surveyed burrow densities and



                                                                                                        611
assessed vegetation cover in scrub and flatwoods (including pine plantations) at a 42,900-ha military
training range in south-central Florida. Despite a history of frequent fires, the cover of grasses and forbs
was significantly lower in scrub than in flatwoods. However, the density of active burrows was higher in
scrub than in flatwoods, where food was abundant but burrows were patchily distributed and often
flooded. The overall densities of non-abandoned burrows in scrub (1.96/ha) and flatwoods (1.37/ha) were
comparable to other scrub and flatwoods sites in Florida, but generally much lower than reported for
sandhill sites. The relatively low abundance of food may explain low population densities in scrub, via
potential effects on clutch size, growth rate, age at maturity, and/or juvenile survival. To clarify patterns of
habitat use, we mapped burrows and monitored 45 adult tortoises with radio telemetry in two reference
populations over a 22-month period. Tortoises in scrub tended to occupy the same burrows for longer
periods and used fewer burrows overall. Contrary to our expectations based on food availability, female
home ranges were smaller in scrub (mean minimum convex polygon size 2.39 ha ± 0.73 SE) than in
flatwoods (4.96 ha ± 2.47 SE). In flatwoods, tortoises switched burrows frequently and multiple tortoises
used the same burrows, suggesting saturated soils and seasonal flooding may hinder construction of new
burrows. Importantly, burrow sizes in the flatwoods monitoring site were highly skewed toward older age
classes; only 5% of burrows in flatwoods were juvenile-sized (< 14 cm), compared to 29% of burrows in
scrub. Our results raise intriguing questions regarding Gopher Tortoise ecology and source-sink
dynamics in these sub-optimal and poorly studied habitats. Research is especially needed to investigate
nest success in relation to flooding, abundance of fire ants, and other conditions in mesic flatwoods.



Roussos, Stephanos (Texas Tech University); Tomovic, Ljiljiana (University of Belgrade, Canada);
Dimaki, Maria (Goulandris Natural History Museum, Canada); Strauss, Richard; Densmore, Llewellyn
(Texas Tech University, Canada)

Morphology and genetics of the nose-horned viper (Squamata:Viperidae) in the Cycladic
archipelago, Greece

The nose-horned viper ( Vipera ammodytes ) is distributed throughout the Balkan Peninsula, and in
Greece there are 14 insular populations in the Cyclades which were all connected at the end of the last
glacial maximum. Combining morphometrics and genetic analyses allowed us to assess the evolutionary
effects of insular isolation and fragmentation on these insular viper populations and consequently it
supports that they be considered evolutionary significant units that need to be preserved and monitored.
Using multivariate statistics we analyzed seven taxonomically important morphological features from 744
adult specimens from across the species‘ range, to investigate the morphological variation between the
three subspecies V. a. ammodytes, V. a. montadoni, V. a. meridionalis and the insular populations in the
Cyclades. Preliminary analyses of genetic variation, using mitochondrial DNA from 35 insular specimens
representing 11 islands, allowed us to assess relationships among the insular populations, and to the
mainland conspecifics. Our morphometric analyses show that the Cycladic individuals are dwarf forms,
and they possess taller horns and snouts than the mainland conspecifics. Further studies of population
genetics, morphology, and ecology of V. ammodytes are warranted to unveil more complex evolutionary
effects of insular isolation and fragmentation on old world viperids.



Rovito, Sean (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, UC Berkeley); Parra-Olea, Gabriela (Instituto de Biología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Canada); Wake, David (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, UC
Berkeley, Canada)




                                                                                                            612
Unraveling the history of a radiation: systematics of tropical bolitoglossine salamanders from
multilocus sequence data

Only a single clade of salamanders, the bolitoglossines (family Plethodontidae) reached the Neotropics,
yet this lineage now contains 44% of world salamander species diversity. To date, phylogenetic
hypotheses for this group have been based primarily on mtDNA, and relationships among the twelve
genera were not well resolved. We sequenced over 5000 bp of mitochondrial DNA together with portions
of three nuclear exons (POMC, RAG1, SLC8A3) to generate a new phylogenetic hypothesis for the clade.
Our phylogeny includes all genera and over half of the species of the possibly paraphyletic genus
Pseudoeurycea and representatives of each subgenus of Bolitoglossa , the largest genus. We employed
maximum likelihood and Bayesian phylogenetic methods, including species tree estimation methods. The
large, morphologically diverse Pseudoeurycea is paraphyletic, and recognition of its relatives,
Parvimolge and Ixalotriton , is supported. Recognition of these genera requires that a large clade of
species currently assigned to Pseudoeurycea be recognized as a new taxon. This clade, composed of
the Pseudoeurycea bellii and P. cephalica groups, is only found north and west of the Isthmus of
Tehuantepec and reaches areas of northern Mexico not occupied by other Pseudoeurycea , while the
remainder of Pseudoeuryea occurs on both sides of the Isthmus. The new phylogeny identifies a
morphologically diverse clade of exclusively Central American genera; within this clade, the small,
arboreal ecomorph has evolved several times. Paraphyly of the former genus Lineatriton is supported, in
agreement with previous mtDNA results, confirming parallel origins of the fossorial ecomorph. These
results clarify the biogeographic context in which the largestradiation of salamanders evolved, and
highlight the deep history of the group within Central America.



Rowley, Jodi J. L. (Australian Museum); Ng, Connie Ka-yan (Agriculture, Fisheries and Conservation
Department, The Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Kowloon, Hong Kong);
Le, Duong Thi Thuy (University of Science-Ho Chi Minh City, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam); Kusrini, Mirza
D. (Bogor Agricultural University, Bogor, West Java, Indonesia); Chan, Simon Kin-fung (Agriculture,
Fisheries and Conservation Department, The Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region, Kowloon, Canada); Hoang, Huy Duc (University of Science-Ho Chi Minh City, Ho Chi Minh City,
Vietnam)

Stream amphibian population declines in Southeast Asia?

Southeast Asian amphibians are relatively poorly known, face the highest deforestation rate on the
planet, and are under pressure from over-harvesting. In addition, the pathogen responsible for the
potentially devastating amphibian disease chytridiomycosis has recently been detected in the region and
is known to infect amphibians at a relatively high prevalence and infection intensity at some sites. While
there is little evidence of enigmatic amphibian population declines having occurring in Southeast Asia,
declines may have gone undetected given the paucity of data on amphibian population trends in the
region. To assess evidence for both historical and current enigmatic population declines and extirpations
in Southeast Asian stream amphibians, we repeated surveys at historically surveyed sites and monitored
amphibian populations at sites in Hong Kong, Indonesia and Vietnam. While amphibian diversity has no
doubt been, and continues to be, irreversibly eroded due to habitat loss, we found little evidence of
enigmatic amphibian population declines at our survey sites. In particular, long-term data from territory-
wide stream amphibian surveys in Hong Kong reveal no obvious declines in amphibian abundance or
diversity. However, declines may have occurred or be ongoing at other sites, and there is an urgent need
for long-term amphibian population monitoring throughout Southeast Asia in order to detect and respond
to any population declines.



                                                                                                      613
Rowlison, Tricia (Mississippi State University); Kouba, Andrew (Memphis Zoo, Memphis, TN, United
States); Calatayud, Natalie (Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, United States); Langhorne,
Cecilia; Willard, Scott (Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS, United States)

The Effects of Arginine Vasotocin on Amplexus and Calling Behavior in the Boreal (Bufo boreas
boreas) and Fowler's (Bufo fowleri) toad.

Arginine vasotocin (AVT) is a neuropeptide that can induce reproduction in certain amphibian species.
The aim of this study was to compare the effects of AVT administration in the boreal toad (Bufo boreas
boreas) and Fowler‘s toad (Bufo fowleri). The boreal toad is a declining species from the southern Rocky
Mountain region and the Fowler‘s toad is a common species located in the eastern US region. Male
Fowler‘s toads produce a loud mating call during the breeding season while the boreal toads exhibit no
mating call. The objectives of this study were to determine if AVT could elicit: 1) calling, and 2) amplexus
behaviors in each of these toad species. Toads were paired into single male:female groups and
administered AVT at varying concentrations: 0.1, 1.0, 5.0, 10.0 and 25.0 µg/g. Administration of
phosphate buffered saline solution alone served as a control. AVT treatments were compared when
administered in different combinations including: 1) only the male was injected, 2) only the female was
injected, and 3) both male and female were injected. Reproductive behaviors including calling, amplexus,
phonotaxis, and egg deposition were recorded using motion-activated video. Urine samples were also
collected at various time points post hormone administration (30min, 1, 3, 5, 7 and 24hr) to examine the
effects of AVT on male spermiation response. AVT failed to stimulate any breeding behavior in the boreal
toad which may be due to the absence of calling behavior in the wild. Administering 10µg/g AVT to both
male and female B. fowleri elicited the greatest behavioral response with 100% of males calling and 60%
of pairs eliciting amplexus. Administering AVT to both genders significantly affected the length of
amplexus (p<0.0347). In addition, the concentration of AVT also significantly affected the length of
amplexus (p<0.0347) and call frequency (p<0.0294). AVT was unable to elicit spermiation in either
species. To the author‘s knowledge this is the first time AVT has been reported to induce amplexus in any
anuran species. It is also one of the first studies conducted that compared the behavioral effects of AVT
when administered to both male and female anurans and found that the stimulation of both genders was
necessary to elicit the most successful reproductive response. These results will be valuable for
amphibian breeding programs where animals are failing to show any natural reproductive behaviors.



Royer, Mark (Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology); Nosal, Andrew (Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
University of California - San Diego, Canada); Lankford, Thomas (Center for Marine Science, University
of North Carolina Wilmington, Canada); Cartamil, Daniel; Wegner, Nicholas; Graham, Jeffery (Scripps
Institution of Oceanography, University of California - San Diego, Canada)

Foraging Ecology of the Leopard Shark (Triakis semifasciata) in the La Jolla Ecological Reserve
using Non-Destructive Dietary Analysis

 Leopard sharks ( Triakis semifasciata ) are a common inshore benthic predator that is found along the
west coast of continental North America with a range extending from Oregon (USA) to the Gulf of
California (Mexico). While the feeding habits of northern populations in the bays and estuaries have been
examined, little is known about the southern populations that reside in coastal habitats. Every year
hundreds of mature female leopard sharks aggregate at the south end of the La Jolla Shores beachwithin
the San Diego-La Jolla Ecological Reserve (SDLJER). This marine protected area consists of a variety of
coastal habitats including sandflats, rocky surfgrass beds, kelp forests, and a submarine canyon.
Tracking studies have revealed fine-scale movement patterns of leopard sharks inside the reserve
between the different habitats. Insight on the foraging behavior of these sharks could explain their



                                                                                                        614
movement behavior and their functional role in these coastal habitats. Stomach contents were obtained
non-lethally using the gastric lavage technique from sharks sampled (n=87, 116-169 cm TL) in the
surfgrass bed and sandflat at the mouth of La Jolla Submarine Canyon inside the reserve from July 2010
to July 2011. Of the 87 sharks sampled, 46 (54.7%) contained prey items which were identified to the
lowest possible taxon. The percent index of relative importance (%IRI) was calculated for each food type
to facilitate comparisons between prey groups and other reported diets from northern populations. The
composition of major prey groups in T. semifasciata was heterogeneous, consisting mostly of decapod
crustaceans (%IRI =14%), teleost fish (%IRI=27%), squids (%IRI=20%), octopi (%IRI=19%), gastropods
(%IRI=4%) and mixed vegetation (%IRI=10%) with 8% as unidentified digested matter. When the %IRI
was examined on the species level, it was found that the market squid ( Loligo opalescens ) which uses
the submarine canyon as a spawning ground had the highest index of relative importance (18.8%). The
association of specific prey items to the habitat types they reside in indicates that leopard sharks utilize
each habitat type within the SDLJER as a foraging ground. The prey composition of leopard sharks
sampled in the San Diego-La Jolla Ecological Reserve was entirely different from the reported prey
compositions of north populations with Cancer gracilis being the only prey item overlap. This study helps
gain insight on the movement patterns of leopard sharks between habitats for foraging and the role they
have in trophic exchange between coastal habitats. Broader ecosystem based modeling for the southern
California coast and the designation of important locations for Marine Protected Areas can utilize this
information on the functional role of leopard sharks.



Ruane, Sara (College of Staten Island); Bryson, Robert (UNLV, Canada); Pyron, A. Robert (George
Washington University, Canada); Burbrink, Frank (CUNY, Canada)

Speciation in the Milksnake (Lampropeltis triangulum)

Studying organisms in a phylogeographic context yields a better estimation of diversity and, at the same
time, permits questions regarding processes and patterns of speciation to be addressed. Additionally,
hypotheses that test whether gene flow between lineages occurs during speciation at particular
geographic barriers and how populations change through time given fluctuating environmental conditions
are made possible by examining phylogeographic patterns and understanding modes of speciation (e.g.,
allopatric, parapatric, etc.). Here we examine the widest-ranging New World squamate species, the
milksnake ( Lampropeltis triangulum ) in a phylogeographic context. Using a dataset composed of 12
independent loci, we quantify the diversity within milksnakes in a Bayesian framework and use
coalescent-based methods to determine under what conditions speciation occurred (with or without gene
flow between lineages) and infer the historical demography of lineages. Due to their large range, which
covers both the Nearctic and Neotropical zoogeographic zones, milksnakes present us with a unique
opportunity to compare historical demographic responses between temperate and tropical taxa.
Furthermore, this large range permits us to examine whether the geographical barriers responsible for
diversification in other snakes also impact milksnake lineages. The results of this study contribute to the
understanding of diversity of a New World snake, as well as speciation/lineage formation and population
demography in both temperate and tropical organisms.v




                                                                                                        615
Rubio-Rocha, Laura C. (University of Tennessee); Bock, Brian; Páez, Vivian (Universidad de Antioquia,
Medellín, Columbia)

Continuous reproduction under a bimodal precipitation regime in a high elevation anole (Anolis
mariarum) from Antioquia, Colombia

Comparison of the reproductive ecologies of lizard species with small fixed clutch sizes, such as geckos
or anoles, offers an opportunity to examine hypotheses concerning the factors that contribute to the
evolution of seasonal vs. continuous reproduction. Total annual precipitation at a site has been found to
be significantly related to reproductive phenology in Neotropical lizards, and more important than duration
of dry season. Most of the studies in reproductive phenology of anoles have been conducted in places,
such as Central America, where a well defined primary dry season occurs and the second dry season
never approaches the intensity or duration of the primary dry season. However, as latitude decreases
towards the equator, genuinely bimodal patterns of precipitation occur and there is evidence of
continuous reproduction in this genus despite a comparable total annual precipitation as in Central
America, suggesting that selection acts differently on reproductive phenology in Anolis species from this
region. We described the reproductive phenology of two populations of Anolis mariarum (Polychrotidae)
located in Antioquia, Colombia, where there is a bimodal precipitation regime, to further examine the
effects of the amount and distribution of precipitation on the reproductive phenology of Anolis lizards.
Minimum size at maturity was comparable at the two sites for both males and females. At the population
level, reproduction was continuous, with the majority of adult males and females reproductively active
even during the dry season months. Juvenile size distributions also were uniform across seasons,
consistent with the conclusion that recruitment is not pulsed in these populations. However, there was
some evidence that certain females may lower their reproductive rates during the dry season, especially
at the site receiving the least total annual precipitation (1700 mm). These results further support
accumulating evidence that populations of Anolis species inhabiting the equatorial climatic region, where
the annual precipitation regime is bimodal, are capable of maintaining continuous reproduction even
when annual precipitation amounts are relatively low. In contrast, Anolis populations in areas receiving
comparable amounts of annual precipitation during a single rainy season tend to cease reproductive
activity during the longer dry season each year.



Rubio-Rocha, Laura C. (University of Tennessee); Alzate, Esteban (Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín,
Columbia); Echternacht, Arthur C. (University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, United States)

Geographic variation in the lower temperature tolerance in the invasive brown anole, Anolis sagrei
and the native green anole, Anolis carolinensis

Invasive species are considered to be the second greatest threat to native biodiversity and several factors
have been identified as contributing to the success of introduced species, including their initial genetic
variation and the ability of populations to adapt to a new environment. The brown anole Anolis sagrei is
remarkable for its colonizing ability. The species is thought to have evolved in Cuba and appears to have
arrived on the mainland of South Florida by 1940, as the result of introductions from both Cuba and the
Bahamas which subsequently interbred. It has exhibited an exponential range expansion since its
introduction and now occurs throughout the southeastern United States; A. sagrei is considered highly
invasive and negatively impacts populations of the native green anole, A. carolinensis. Temperature has
a significant impact on reptilian ecology and distribution since they ordinarily rely on external heat sources
for the maintenance of body temperatures suitable for normal activity. Body temperature affects
performance in these organisms given its importance for all aspects of behavior, locomotion, courtship
and rates of feeding and growth. Critical thermal tolerances therefore, can give an indication of the range



                                                                                                          616
of climatic conditions that can be tolerated and which may be the causal range limit in some cases. We
studied the cold tolerance (Critical thermal minimum) of female and male invasive A. sagrei and native
A. carolinensis in four populations along a latitudinal gradient from south Florida to northern Georgia, in
field conditions and after a period of acclimation, to identify whether there is variation in this characteristic
as latitude increases as a result of differential selection for lower temperature adaptation or as result of
phenotypic plasticity, and whether there is a difference in cold tolerance between the native and invasive
species. We found at all four sites sampled that A. carolinensis has a lower field cold tolerance (CTMin)
than A. sagrei , and for both species, male CTMin is lower than female CTMin. For males and females of
both species, the lowest CTMins were exhibited by those anoles from the northern-most population
(Savannah, GA). However, after controlling for thermal history, there were no significant differences in
CTMin among populations or between sexes of either species, suggesting a notable capacity for both
species to acclimate to local conditions.



Ruby, Douglas (UMES); Middendorf, George (Howard University, Canada)

Communication through Calisthenics: Displays in Yarrow's Spiny Lizard Sceloporus jarrovii
Communicating information about status is an important component of behavioral interaction between
organisms.      Stereotyped visual displays performed through rhythmic leg extensions, head nods and
expansion of throat dewlaps by many species conveys information useful in announcing territorial,
reproductive, and species status. Comparison variation in visual signaling among isolated populations
within a species distribution provides an opportunity for understanding the relationships among
populations but also about how display signals change over evolutionary time.            A montane lizard,
Sceloporus jarrovii jarrovii , occurs in the mountains of southeastern Arizona, southwestern New Mexico
and adjacent areas of Mexico.         Populations are currently isolated from one another by stretches of
inhospitable, lowland desert.      Displays of adult males in 10 isolated populations in Arizona and New
Mexico were filmed in the field using tethered encounters and then analyzed for pattern similarities and
differences.     We found limited variation in display patterns within a specific mountain range, but
distinctive, population-specific patterns between mountain ranges.          More significant differences in
display pattern were observed between groups of mountains in the eastern and western part of the
distribution.   Populations in the eastern regions of the range (N=8) showed relatively simple displays
with two peak units while western populations (N=2) showed more extended, multi-peaked displays with
longer plateau units.     In the east, the two display peaks differ in timing and relative height but not
consistent with a hypothesis of adjacent mountains have more similar displays. The division into eastern
and western regional displays is geographically delineated by the San Pedro River in Arizona.           We
hypothesize that this low elevation drainage served as a geographical barrier to dispersal from east to
west—even during the wettest pluvial periods.         Possible dispersal corridors between the mountain
ranges, predicted through elevational analysis, further support similarities between adjacent mountains
ranges with potential connections during more mesic, pluvial times.



Rucker, Matthew (UW-Stevens Point);

Are there two species of blue-spotted salamanders in Wisconsin?

Biodiversity is a vital element necessary to maintain a healthy ecosystem. However, even in well-studied
fauna, some unidentified biodiversity remains cryptic. This may be the case with Wisconsin salamanders.
A single ―blue-spotted‖ salamander species, Ambystoma laterale, is currently recognized. Historically,




                                                                                                             617
purported polyploid hybrids within the A. laterale-jeffersonianum (l-j) complex have been documented in
the state (Vogt 1981, Petranka 1998).           However, no Wisconsin record for non-hybridized A.
jeffersonianum currently exists. Recent studies have examined the phylogeography of a unisexual
kleptogen ambystomatid. This kleptogen is often sympatric with the sexual A. laterale, but these studies
have not included individuals collected from Wisconsin. It has been hypothesized that Wisconsin may be
suitable for either the kleptogen or A. jeffersonianum to maintain persisting populations. Our field work
has recently uncovered additional morphologically unusual A. laterale specimens that could represent
non-hybridized A. jeffersonianum, hybrids within the l-j complex, or kleptogens. Using nonlethal
molecular analyses (utilized by Ramsden, et. al.) of tissue samples taken from broad state transects, we
are attempting to further characterize blue-spotted salamander populations in Wisconsin. We are initially
examining mitochondrial control region DNA. Further examinations will use microsatellite loci or other
nuclear markers. Our long-term goals are to identify the actual species present, evaluate any patterns of
hybridization among species, and assess any potential evidence of kleptogenesis. As more samples are
analyzed, and a more fully resolved picture emerges regarding the diversity of blue-spotted salamander
forms in Wisconsin, future questions concerning the conservation status of these species in the state may
need to be addressed.



Rumschlag, Samantha (Miami University); Boone, Michelle (Miami University, Oxford, OH, United
States); Fellers, Gary (U.S. Geological Survey, Point Reyes, CA, United States)

The Effects of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis, Insecticides, and Temperature on Pacific Treefrog
(Pseudacris regilla) and Grey Treefrog (Hyla chrysoscelis) Metamorphosis and Survival

 Chytridiomycosis, caused by the fungal pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), has been
implicated as a leading cause of amphibian declines. Diseases outbreaks can be influenced by
alterations to the environment including climate change and ecological contamination through increases
in susceptibility. The interactions of temperature, pesticides, and Bd may be important for understanding
patterns of population declines in amphibians. We looked at the long-term effects of Bd, insecticides
(carbaryl or malathion), and static and variable temperature (15 C, 20 C, 25 C, or 15 to 25 C 72:72 hour
cycle) on metamorphosis and survival of Pacific tree frog ( Pseudacris regilla ). In addition, we studied
the short-term effects of Bd and temperature (15 C, 20 C, or 25 C) on grey treefrogs ( Hyla chrysoscelis ).
Our results showed that temperature can interact with Bd to have greater than expected negative effects
on larval survival and development and that insecticides appear to have a positive effect on Bd exposed
amphibians‘ late metamorphic development. For Pacific treefrogs, survival to metamorphosis decreased
at high and variable temperatures when tadpoles were exposed to Bd, and time to tail absorption
decreased when tadpoles were exposed to carbaryl or malathion and Bd. For grey treefrogs, survival
decreased when tadpoles were exposed to Bd at 25 C. Our study suggests that high and variable
temperature may contribute to increased susceptibility to Bd and could put amphibians at greater risk in
nature and that environmentally relevant levels of pesticides might inhibit the infectivity of Bd.



Russell, Anthony (University of Calgary); Hynes, Sabrina (University of Calgary, Canada)

Resource partitioning in caudal regeneration : assessing the impact of dietary intake on tail and
body growth in the leopard gecko (Eublepharis macularius).

The ability to cast off the tail to avoid predation is well-known among lizards. The locomotor
consequences of the absence of a tail , and the potential impact of tailessness on fecundity, have also



                                                                                                       618
been quite extensively considered. When the tail is dropped, however,the lizard is also faced with the
energetic demands of regeneration, which may have long-term consequences. Relatively few studies
have explored the effects of the demands of tail regeneration on body growth, and even fewer have
contemplated the trade-offs that may occur when dietary resources are limiting. Potential implications
may differ depending upon : whether the tail serves as a major site of lipid storage; the life history stage
at which tail loss occurs; and the availability of food. To investigate the relative impact of these effects we
raised and maintained juvenile leopard geckos under controlled conditions to dissect out the additive
influences of the demands of growth, food availability, and metabolic responses. Firstly we investigated
how growth is impacted by differential caloric availability and intake. We then investigated the impact of
tail loss on growth (of the body and tail) under ad libitum dietary conditions. We employed these
baseline data to further explore the additive effects of reduction of dietary resources and the demands of
somatic growth on caudal regeneration. Our results reveal that the regenerating tail receives priority over
somatic growth when resources are limiting. Furthermore, animals undergoing caudal regeneration
suppress their metabolic rate at the point in caudal regeneration when volumetric increase is greatest,
diverting resource allocation to the tail while maintaining linear growth of the tail.



Russell, Ron (Saint Mary's University); Gilhen, John (Nova Scotia Museum of Natural History, Canada)

Stable Isotopic Relationships Among Forest Salamanders

Natural communities are structured by a number of biotic and abiotic mechanisms. Analysis of stable
isotope ratios of carbon and nitrogen can be used to describe diets and thus ecological relationships
among organisms. In this work, we use stable isotope ratios of 13 C and 15 N to describe the ―isotopic
niche‖ in a guild of five caudate amphibian species native to Nova Scotia, Canada. We analyzed
terrestrial and aquatic forms of Ambystoma maculatum and Notophthalmus viridescens , and terrestrial
forms of Hemidactylium scutatum , Ambystoma laterale , and Plethodon cinereus . Of the terrestrial
caudates, A. maculatum, P. cinereus, and N. viridescens (red eft) exhibited strongly overlapping δ 13 C
and δ 15 N values indicating similar dietary and habitat preferences. H. scutatum showed similar 15 N
signatures as the above group but depleted 13 C signatures, possibly due to the complex habitat
requirements of this amphibian. There were significant differences in both δ 13 C and δ 15 N values
between A. laterale and A. maculatum , consistent with differences in diet and habitat. Movements from
the aquatic to terrestrial environment, and converse were accompanied by dramatic shifts in δ 13 C and δ
15 N isotopic ratios. Extreme disturbance of the forest canopy resulted in changes in ground cover and
soil conditions ultimately affecting the isotopic signatures of salamanders.



Russello, Michael (UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA); Jensen, Evelyn; Madsen, Jeanette (The
University of British Columbia, Kelowna, BC, Canada); Govindarajulu, Purnima (BC Ministry of
Environment, Victoria, BC, Canada)

Extirpation by Introgression?: Investigating the genetic consequences of released painted turtle
pets on endangered Chrysemys picta bellii in British Columbia

Introduction of non-native species has long been recognized as a threat to biological diversity. When
native and non-native species retain the ability to interbreed, introgressive hybridization can lead to
genetic pollution of the local gene pool. One such case may be the western painted turtles ( Chrysemys
picta bellii ) of Burnaby Lake, British Columbia. In 2010, a monitoring study at Burnaby Lake found five
individuals displaying     morphological characteristics intermediate between C. p. bellii and C. p.



                                                                                                           619
marginata or C. p. picta. These subspecies are known to hybridize naturally wherever their ranges
overlap, but the presence of the other subspecies in British Columbia is likely due to human release of
pets. As part of a larger study investigating phylogeography and population history of Western painted
turtles , here we used mitochondrial control region and nuclear oncogene sequence, as well as
microsatellite data to investigate the presence of hybridization and extent of introgression that may have
occurred in Burnaby Lake between native and putatively introduced individuals. From a management
perspective, Western painted turtles in the coastal region of British Columbia are listed by Committee on
the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada as endangered, despite, in many cases, having an uncertain
origin. Our work will help quantify the degree to which genetic pollution from the introduced turtles may
compromise the conservation value of the Burnaby Lake population, highlighting the importance of
educating the public on the evolutionary consequences of intentional releases of unwanted pets.



Russello, Michael (UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA); Poulakakis, Nikos (University of Crete,
Iraklion, Greece); Garrick, Ryan (University of Mississippi, University, MS, United States); Benavides,
Edgar (Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States);
Caccone, Adalgisa (Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States)

Unraveling the Peculiarities of Island Life: Vicariance, Dispersal and the Diversification of Giant
Galápagos Tortoises

In isolated oceanic islands, colonization patterns are often interpreted as resulting from dispersal rather
than vicariant events. Such inferences may not be appropriate when island associations change over time
and new islands do not form in a simple linear trend. Further complexity in the phylogeography of oceanic
islands arises when dealing with endangered taxa as extinctions, uncertainty on the number of
evolutionary ‗units‘, and human activities can obscure the progression of colonization events. We have
conducted a series of studies to address these issues through a reconstruction of the evolutionary history
of giant Galapagos tortoises, integrating DNA data from extinct and extant species with information on
recent human activities and newly available geological data. Our results show that only three of the five
extinct or nearly extinct species should be considered independent evolutionary units. Dispersal from
mainland South America started at approximately 3.2 Mya after the emergence of the two oldest islands
of San Cristobal and Espanola. Dispersal from older to younger islands began approximately 1.74 Mya
and was followed by multiple colonizations from different sources within the archipelago. Vicariant events,
spurred by island formation, coalescence, and separation contributed to lineage diversifications on Pinzon
and Floreana dating from 1.26 and 0.85 Mya. In addition, human-mediated movement of tortoises may
have inadvertently preserved the genetic legacy of presumed extinct ( Chelonoidis elephantopus
endemic to Floreana) and nearly extinct ( C. abingdoni endemic to Pinta) species, genetic signatures of
which were detected within living hybrid descendents on the northern island of Isabela. This work
provides an example of how to reconstruct the history of endangered taxa in spite of extinctions and
human-mediated dispersal events, and highlights the need to take into account both vicariance and
dispersal when dealing with organisms from islands whose associations are not simply explained by a
linear emergence model.




                                                                                                       620
Ruyle, Leslie (University of GA/ TAMU ABS); Todd, Brian (University of CA- Davis, Canada); Maerz,
John (University of GA, Canada)

Life history traits, behavior, parasite load, and density reveal the effects of anthropogenic impacts
on a critically endangered micro-endemic species

Threatened and endangered species living in protected areas with human populations pose a different set
of conservation challenges than protected species in exclusionary zones. Demographic and life history
characteristics of these populations may be influenced directly and indirectly by human activities. Direct
effects can result in non-lethal injuries such as tail loss Indirect effects may include resource subsides,
altered habitats, and perturbations in behaviors affecting foraging time and social interactions. The Black-
chested Spiny-tailed iguana ( Ctenosaura melanosterna ) is a critically endangered lizard species living
on a protected archipelago off the northern coast of Honduras. We used a three-year study, consisting of
585 captures of C. melanosterna among four sites (two with high levels of human activity and two with
low levels of human activity) to describe the relationship between human activity and variation in
ctenosaur body size, sexual size dimorphism, sex ratio, parasite load, body condition, tail loss, behavior,
and density. Ctenosaurs showed a negative response to high human density and domestic animal
presence, which was manifested as a decline in body size, changes in sexual size dimorphism, and
higher tail loss frequency. Sex ratios were relatively stable, except for at one site, where we believe
females may be drawn to nesting habitat. Parasite loads varied from being absent at the highest human
density site to heaviest at the highest ctenosaur density site. Wariness varied among sites and age
classes providing evidence that much of the behavior is learned. Ctenosaur density was highest at the
site with high human density and without domestic animals. Ctenosaur density was lowest where there
was high human activity and presence of domestic animals. Our results show that human activities within
protected areas affect ctenosaur populations, but the effect of human presence depends on the type of
human activity. Management plans for C. melanosterna should account for patterns of human habitation
and activity on the archipelago.



Ruyle, Leslie (University of Georgia); Miles, Donald (Ohio University, Athens, United States)

Parasite load covaries with sex, body condition and anthropogenic perturbation

As a consequence of higher titres of testosterone, males are hypothesized to have higher parasite loads
as a consequence of immune suppression. However, species whose distributions overlap human
settlements may also have higher stress levels as a consequence of habitat alteration and anthropogenic
perturbation, which results in immunosuppression. The Black-chested Spiny-tailed iguana ( Ctenosaura
melanosterna ) is a critically endangered lizard species living on a protected archipelago off the northern
coast of Honduras. We used a three-year study, consisting of 585 captures of C. melanosterna among
four sites (two with high levels of human activity and two with low levels of human activity) to test the
hypothesis that parasite loads are high not only among males, but also lizards that inhabit environments
adjacent to human settlements. For all captured lizards, we recorded body size (snout-vent length, SVL)
to the nearest millimetre and weighed to the nearest gram. We counted all ectoparasites (ticks). We also
measured the dewlap length and width in millimetres. We derived a measure of body condition by
retaining the residuals from the regression of body mass against snout-vent length. We used a poisson
regression to model count variables. We ran three analyses.        First, we ran a poisson regression that
compared tick loads among sites and between sexes.               Second, we tested the hypothesis that
differences in tick load among sites and between sexes was a consequence of body condition. Finally,
because males have larger dewlaps than females we tested the hypothesis that parasite load increased




                                                                                                        621
with dewlap area. A significant three-way interaction revealed that tick load varied across sites and
between sexes, but was conditional on sex. Parasite loads did not differ between the sexes at body
sizes less than 200 mm SVL. However, males above 200 mm had tick counts exceeding females. Tick
loads were highest on Isla Menor. Males in poorer condition had higher tick loads. Females and males
with high condition scores had lower tick counts. Tick counts were positively correlated with dewlap
length, but negatively correlated with dewlap width.     Our results suggest that males have a higher
parasite load than females, but the pattern depends on the density of lizards. Highest tick counts were
obtained at sites with the highest relative density of ctenosaurs (Ruyle unpublished). However, high
ctenosaur densities are also a consequence of resource subsidies from human sources. Thus, elevated
tick loads may be an indirect consequence of human activities.



Ryan, Maureen (University of Washington); Hamlet, Alan; Lee, Se-Yeun (University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, United States); Palen, Wendy (Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada); Adams,
Michael (US Geological Survey, Corvallis, OR, United States)

Amphibian Squeeze: synergistic impacts of climate change and introduced fish on amphibians in
the US Pacific Northwest mountains

Amphibians in the mountains of western North America are ―squeezed‖ between two synergistic
anthropogenic threats: rapidly changing climate and introduced fish. Exotic fish (primarily trout) exclude
amphibians from many deep, perennial lakes and ponds. However, the shallow fishless ponds and
wetlands on which many populations now rely may be disproportionately vulnerable to climate-induced
drying. This situation presents both opportunities and challenges. Fish removals from mountain lakes
have been successful in restoring aquatic habitat for amphibians, thus may represent a viable option for
building resilience to climate change. However, the intensity of synergistic effects, and hence the
effectiveness of fish removals for preventing declines, will vary among landscapes and species based on
the amount and quality of fishless habitat and the proportion of habitats that are likely to become
unsuitable for amphibians in future climates. Evaluating vulnerability to these factors across broad
landscapes requires a new generation of hydrologic modeling approaches specific to wetlands, an
understanding of geographic variation in the distribution of existing wetland habitats, and an assessment
of life history sensitivity for a range of species. The intention of our talk is to synthesize the magnitude of
this problem, and to support this overview with preliminary results from an ongoing interdisciplinary
collaborative effort, which suggest that variable infiltration capacity (VIC) climate-hydrologic models can
be successfully adapted to link climate models and landscape-specific amphibian species occurrence
data, enabling informed vulnerability assessment and climate adaptation planning.



Ryan, Travis (Butler University);

Effects of size, distance, age, and upland habitat on turtle occupancy of created urban wetlands

One of the major impacts of urbanization is the loss of wetlands and other habitats used by amphibians
and reptiles. More recent patterns of urbanization, however, have resulted in the creation of a significant
number of urban wetlands in the form of storm water detention ponds. These ponds may be inhabited
by urban wildlife populations, but occupancy may be significantly affected by the attributes of any
particular pond. This study focuses on factors influencing whether created urban wetlands are occupied
by aquatic turtles in Indianapolis, Indiana, the 14 th largest city in the United States. During the summer
of 2009, I sampled for the presence or absence of turtles in 65 haphazardly-selected urban ponds in



                                                                                                           622
Washington Township, a region of Indianapolis that has undergone significant urbanization over the last
60 years. In 2010, I used a randomized selection protocol to evaluate an additional 65 urban ponds in
Washington Township. I used GIS to determine (1) the size (surface area and perimeter) of each pond,
(2) the ages of ponds using historical aerial photography, and (3) the straight line distances between each
pond and potential sources of colonists (e.g., White River and its tributaries), the nearest body

of water, the nearest road, and the nearest major road. I compared the characteristics of occupied and
unoccupied wetlands using multivariate analysis of variation (MANOVA) and component single factor
ANOVAs, and found that size and ages of ponds were more significant than distance elements; turtles
were found in ponds that were significantly older and larger than unoccupied ponds.         The majority of
previous studies on urban wildlife, and for turtles in particular, tends to focus on individual species, a
particular site, or the effect of a particular disturbance. Only recently have ecologists begun adopting a
broader landscape view of the urban habitat; this research represents one of the first such study for
turtles.



Ryberg, Wade (Texas A&M University); Fitzgerald, Lee (Texas A&M University, College Station, TX,
United States)

Applying a landscape community concept to lizards of the Mescalero Sands

Local community diversity is a function of both regional-scale processes (speciation, extinction) that
determine the size of colonizing species pools and local-scale processes (competition, predation) that
limit community membership. Recently, research has focused on spatial population processes occurring
at the mesoscale, including mass effects, source-sink, and colonization-extinction dynamics of
metapopulations, that link such local- and regional-scale processes. The population processes of these
metacommunities jointly influence the diversity of local communities and are sensitive to the composition
and spatial geometry of different habitat types across landscape mosaics. Indeed, the surrounding
landscape can influence the diversity of local communities in ways that may not be predicted by local-
and regional-scale factors alone. As such, the spatial relationships of different landscape features at the
mesoscale represent essential determinants of local community diversity, and provide the context
necessary for a more thorough understanding of community organization. One complication, however, is
that there are many landscape features found within the vast spatial and temporal extent of the
mesoscale, and community organization may need to be examined through many different spatial
contexts. We used a hierarchical approach to describe how spatial relationships of landscape features
calculated at different spatial extents determine the composition of 59 local communities of lizards
occupying Shinnery Oak sand-dune habitats within the Mescalero Sands ecosystem of New Mexico. We
evaluated characteristics of lizard species‘ distributions, including coherence, species turnover and range
boundary clumping, to distinguish among idealized patterns of metacommunity structure. We observed a
nested subsets pattern of diversity with clumped species loss, which indicates these lizard species co-
occur in discrete communities with groups of species replacing each other along a latent environmental
gradient. We then used regression tree analyses to quantify associations between site scores from the
primary ordination axis (reciprocal averaging) and the spatial geometry of different landscape features
calculated at 20, 100, and 1000 hectare spatial extents. Ordination scores for sites and therefore
metacommunity structure were primarily dependent on the number and geographic arrangement of
different landcover types. We observed scale-dependence, however, in the specific landcover types and
spatial relationships among them that best explained variation in ordination scores across sites. From
these observations, we therefore conclude that multiple spatial contexts are needed to comprehensively
understand community structure in this lizard assemblage.



                                                                                                       623
Sabaj Pérez, Mark (Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia); Watkins-Colwell, Gregory (Yale
Peabody Museum of Natural History, Canada)

Can the Americas' oldest continuously operating natural history museum survive another 200
years?

In 1812, The Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia was founded ―for the encouragement and
cultivation of the sciences, and the advancement of useful learning‖. The not-for-profit Academy has been
the architect of its own fortune (and misfortune) for nearly two centuries as the oldest standing natural
history museum in the Western hemisphere. Despite a constant flow of biological specimens (now est. at
17 million), recent decades mark the ebb of annual budgets (deficits of 0.5–1 million for over a decade)
and curatorial staff (down 50% from 14 in the 1990s). On the eve of its Bicentennial, the Academy
                                                                          th
affiliated with Drexel University, founded in 1891 and now the nation‘s 14 largest private university. The
partnership is intended to enable the Academy ―to grow and prosper into our 3 rd century, enhancing our
programs of scientific research and education with our combined resources‖. The affiliation also joins
Academy researchers with Drexel faculty into a new university department (Biodiversity, Earth &amp;
Environmental Sciences) that will accept its first students in Fall 2012. Many are optimistic that this
alliance will expand successful Academy research programs and resuscitate those dormant, as well as
promote the importance of natural history collections to a new populace of students and stakeholders.
Long and passionately heralded by insiders, the irreplaceable nature of collections and their necessity to
taxonomic and systematic research are in some ways gaining recognition beyond the museum
community. In 2010, the US National Research Council identified ―understanding biological diversity‖
among five ―Grand Challenges‖ at the intersection of the biological and physical sciences. In response,
NSF‘s Directorate for Biological Sciences will focus investments on research to address these challenges.
Despite such prudence, anxious straits persist for many museums, and the FY 2013 budget request for
NSF may add rocks to the waters (e.g., funding for Collections in Support of Biological Research may be
effectively halved). The next century will be one of adaptation for The Academy and other museums,
marked by many tests of putatively anodyne solutions to decidedly unsustainable futures. In addition to
concluding remarks, this talk will identify models of university-museum alliances, explore the ―Grand
Challenges‖ facing natural history museums, and celebrate A Glorious Enterprise (1st complete history
of the Academy by Peck &amp; Stroud, 2012).



Sacerdote, Allison (Lincoln Park Zoo);

Smooth Green Snake (Opheodrys vernalis) recovery in northern Illinois

Lincoln Park Zoo partnered with Lake County Forest Preserve District in Illinois to develop a recovery
plan for smooth green snakes. Despite habitat restoration, remnant populations are isolated, limiting
colonization. We monitored populations and collected founders for zoo breeding and headstarting. From
2010-2011, we hatched 124 neonates. We evaluated headstarting and release techniques comparing in
situ and ex situ headstarting, brumating versus skipping brumation, and use of soft versus hard
releases. We compared survival, growth, and reproductive potential across treatments. Survival from
hatching to winter 2010 was 89% for ex situ headstarts and 63% for in situ headstarts. All ex situ
snakes survived the winter. Spring recaptures of in situ headstarts were low with survival estimated at
7%. Mean growth rate from hatching to one year of age did not differ between brumated and active
snakes. Brumated snakes compensated for lost mass with accelerated growth rates following warm-up.
We compared reproductive potential via fecal hormone analysis, production of spermatozoa, and egg
production. Testosterone and estrogen concentrations did not differ, but corticosterone concentration in




                                                                                                      624
active snakes was greater than in brumated snakes. Cloacal smears allowed detection of spermatozoa
from wild-caught adult males and brumated one-year olds, but not from active one-year olds. Five
brumated females produced unfertilized eggs in 2011 while active females did not produce eggs. We
supplemented a founder site with 18 headstarts; 12 were brumated and six were kept active. Nine
headstarts were soft released and nine were hard released. Fifteen headstarts and five wild adults were
externally radio-transmittered to monitor survival and movements following release. Estimated survival
was 78% with no effect of brumation, release type, or sex. Headstarts and wild snakes had mean daily
movements of 1.9 m (+ 1.1) and 4.9 m (+3.6), respectively. Population and habitat viability models were
produced to guide reintroduction planning.



Sadek, Riyad (Biology Department, American University of Beirut); Hraoui-Bloquet, Souad (Faculty of
Science, Lebanese University,, Canada)

Structure of the habitats of three sympatric populations of the lizards Trachylepis vittata,
Phoenicolacerta kulzeri and Parvilacerta fraasii in Lebanese mountains.

Phoenicolacerta kulzeri (Müller &amp; Wettstein, 1932) and Parvilacerta. fraasii are small lacertid
lizards endemic to the Lebanese mountains at high altitudes. Phoenicolacerta kulzeri is found between
1400m and 2100m while Parvilacerta fraasii (Lehrs 1910) , is observed at altitudes between 1900-
2400m. The skink Trachylepis vittata (Olivier, 1804) is sympatric with both lizards but its range extends
from sea level to altitudes higher than that for both lacertid species. These lizards are active mainly during
the warmer months, depending on weather conditions and snow cover. Field studies were conducted on
these lizards regarding their habitat use, microhabitat preferences and predator avoidance. Pa. fraasii
and T. vittata are ground-dwelling, seeking refuge inside vegetation, under stones and in some ground
level rock crevices. Ph . kulzeri is scansorial and seeks refuge in rock crevices at various heights. Ph.
kulzeri ‘s habitat comprises rocky slopes with sparse vegetation and cedar trees in a few locations. Due to
the scarcity of its habitat, Ph. kulzeri is found in widely-spaced patches over its distribution range while
the habitats of P. fraasi and T. vittata are more continuous and connected. Principal component
analysis was conducted on several habitat variables for the three lizards and for the available habitats.
There was clearer separation between the two lacertids but with some habitat overlap of both with T.
vittata. Populations of the three species are associated with heavy livestock grazing activity in some
locations.



Saenz, Daniel (Southern Research Station); Fucik, Erin; Kwiatkowski, Matthew (Stephen F. Austin State
University, Canada)

Synergistic effects of climate and the invasive Chinese tallow on larval amphibians

Chinese tallow, Triadica sebifera , is an exotic deciduous tree that has invaded the southeastern United
States. Larval amphibian occurring in environments invaded by Chinese tallow may be negatively
impacted as autumn leaf litter decomposes in natal areas. In a previous controlled experiment, tallow
leaf litter was found to negatively impact two anuran species that breed in winter, but not two species that
breed later in the year. These results suggested that the impact of invasive Chinese tallow on anuran
larvae may be dependent on when leaf litter enters aquatic habitats and when amphibians are present in
the water which, in turn, may be influenced by local weather and climate change. The objectives of this
study were to determine whether the timing of leaf fall from Chinese tallow and the timing of anuran
breeding influence survival of frog larvae. Tadpoles were raised in five mesocosm treatments, each



                                                                                                          625
treatment with Chinese tallow leaf litter at different stages of decomposition. Tadpoles in treatments with
shorter decomposition times had significantly lower survival.        Dissolved oxygen levels and pH were
significantly lower in the treatments where larvae survival was low. Our results suggest that when larvae
and Chinese tallow leaf litter enter aquatic habitats at similar times, anuran mortality may be high.     If
tallow leaf litter enters the water considerably earlier than anuran larvae, dissolved oxygen levels and pH
may have time to return to levels that allow larvae to survive. These results demonstrate the importance
of understanding how invasive plant species affect anuran larvae in the context of local weather and
climate change.



Salerno, Patricia (University of Texas at Austin); Cannatella, David (University of Texas at Austin,
Canada); Senaris, J. Celsa (Fundacion La Salle, Venezuela, Canada)

Ancient tepui summits harbor young rather than old lineages of endemic frogs

The flattop mountains (tepuis) of South America are ancient remnants of the Precambrian Guiana Shield
plateau. The tepui summits, isolated by their surrounding cliffs that can be up to 1000m tall, are thought of
as 'islands in the sky,' harboring relict flora and fauna that underwent vicariant speciation due to plateau
fragmentation. High endemicity atop tepui summits supports the idea of an ancient 'Lost World' biota.
However, recent work suggests that dispersal between lowlands and summits has occurred long after
tepui formation indicating that tepui summits may not be as isolated from the lowlands as researchers
have long suggested. Neither view of the origin of the tepui biota (i.e., ancient vicariance vs. recent
dispersal) has strong empirical support owing to a lack of studies. We test diversification hypotheses of
the Guiana Shield highlands by estimating divergence times of an endemic group of treefrogs, Tepuihyla.
We find that diversification of this group does not support an ancient origin for this taxon; instead,
divergence times among the highland species are 2–5 Ma. Furthermore, the species Tepuihyla edelcae ,
proposed to be the only species in the genus to have a disjunct distribution between two tepuis highlands
(Chimanta and Auyan) is known only at altitudes above 1800m (with no occurrence reported in the 60km
of lowlands or foothills that separate them). Preliminary results from our expanded molecular dataset
suggests not only that each tepui holds a different species, but also that this recently diverged group has
a complex genetic and evolutionary history.



Salo, Pälvi (University of Turku);

Detrimental impacts of alien American mink on two native snake species in the archipelago of the
Baltic Sea, SW Finland.

Introduced predators have negative impacts on native prey populations all around the world, but evidence
of alien predator impacts on terrestrial ectothermic vertebrates, especially snakes, is still scarce. In
Europe one of the most widespread invasive predators is the American mink ( Mustela vison ; hereafter
mink), a North American mustelid introduced as a fur animal. Across its novel range mink has been
accused of the decline of many native species, e.g. water voles ( Arvicola terrestris ) and several colonial
seabirds in the UK and the native European mink ( Mustela lutreola ) in Estonia. One of the best-studied
ecosystems affected by mink is the outer archipelago of the Baltic Sea, SW Finland, where alien mink is
the only resident terrestrial mammalian predator. Mink have been shown to reduce population densities of
all its terrestrial prey groups on the islands, including voles, amphibians and several species of breeding
birds. Mink share these prey with two native snake species, European adders ( Vipera berus ) and Grass
snakes ( Natrix natrix ). Snakes in the outer archipelago may suffer from resource competition with mink



                                                                                                         626
and mink are also occasionally known to prey on snakes. I used an experimental setup to evaluate the
impact of alien mink on native snake populations, whereby snakes and prey populations were surveyed
on five islands in four different study areas. Two of the study areas are a part of a large-scale mink
eradication effort while the two other areas serve as controls, where mink are still present. Preliminary
results from years 2011 and 2012 indicate that both European adder and Grass snake population
densities are higher in mink removal areas compared to control areas. Densities of amphibians and
breeding passerines were also higher in the mink removal areas while, contrary to expectations, vole
populations were higher when mink were present. These results suggest that mink presence has a
negative impact on snake populations but the exact mechanism (predation or resource competition) is still
unknown.



San Mauro, Diego (University of Barcelona); Gower, David (The Natural History Museum, London,
United Kingdom); Zardoya, Rafael (Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales, Madrid, Spain); Wilkinson,
Mark (The Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom)

The Tree of Life of caecilian amphibians: from mitogenomics to multilocus

Caecilians (Gymnophiona), along with frogs and salamanders, are one of the three orders or extant
amphibians. They are a highly specialized group with elongate, annulated and limbless bodies, and
sensory tentacles in the head. Most of the nearly 200 currently recognized species have a secretive
fossorial lifestyle, but members of one family are secondarily adapted to aquatic habitats. Although they
are a relative small group, they have a remarkable morphological, ecological, and reproductive diversity.
There are 10 currently recognized families of caecilians (35 genera) distributed in tropical regions of
Africa, Central and South America, India, and South East Asia. During the past 10 years, we have used
complete mitochondrial genomes to unravel the phylogenetic relationships and systematics of the major
lineages of caecilians. This mitogenomic approach has eventually yielded a robust phylogenetic
framework for 45 caecilian taxa representing most described genera (over 80%), including some for
which molecular data had never been collected before. More recently, we have moved on a multilocus
approach in order to reconstruct the caecilian tree of life at a finer level. We have sequenced six nuclear
(four protein-coding, one ribosomal, and one intron) and six mitochondrial (four protein-coding and two
ribosomal) markers for an expanded taxon sampling of 70 caecilians representing virtually all the diversity
in Gymnophiona. Preliminary phylogenetic results of this multilocus dataset are robust and definitively
promising. We are now using both the mitogenomic and the multilocus phylogenetic frameworks to study
morphological and reproductive evolution, as well as historical biogeography and diversification patterns
in caecilians.



Sánchez Solís, Jorge Fernando (Instituto de Biología); Gabriela, Parra-Olea (Instituto de Biologia,
Mexico, Mexico)

Molecular Systematics of the complex of Pseudoeurycea cephalica (Caudata: Plethodontidae)
Cope, 1865.

In recent years, molecular tools have helped clarify the phylogenetic relationships and resolve those
species complexes that present taxonomic uncertainties. In Mexico, many cryptic species have been
found lately, showing that mexican amphibian but especially salamander biodiversity is underestimated.
Pseudoeurycea is almost endemic of Mexico (having only four species reported outside the country).
Species of Pseudoeurycea have restricted distributions except for three species complexes: P. bellii ,



                                                                                                       627
P. leprosa and P. cephalica , the latter, consisting of four species ( P. cephalica, P. galenae, P.
scandens and P. quetzalanensis). P. cephalica is widely distributed throughout the Tranversal Volcanic
Belt and southern Sierra Madre Oriental, with two subspecies, P. c. manni and P. c. rubrimembris , from
Hidalgo. The taxonomic problem is based on the fact that paratypes of P. c. manni and P. c.
rubrimembris were collected from the same locality, and apparently the morphological differences don‘t
justify their separation from P. cephalica . For this study, we collected a total of 81 individuals which were
sequenced for mitochondrial fragment, (L2) and nuclear genes (POMC and RAG1). In a preliminary
phylogenetic analysis we found that P. c. manni and P. c. rubrimembris are not subspecies, and
actually they are well genetically caracterized species. However several new species within the complex
are yet to be described.



Sanchez, Barbara (California State University, Northridge);

A comparison of growth and fecundity of Paralabrax nebulifer (barred sand bass) from polluted
and unpolluted sites in Southern California

Organic pollutants and trace metals are environmentally persistent in the marine realm, they have
carcinogenic and mutagenic properties, and they can accumulate in tissues of marine organisms and in
sediments. These environmental stressors can have detrimental effects on fish populations by limiting the
abilities of individuals to acquire resources for growth, reproduction, and survival. Pollutants such as
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and heavy metals can cause
physiological stress in fishes, especially in areas of high pollutant concentrations, like harbors. This study
evaluated the impacts of pollutants on growth and fecundity of a common coastal marine fish in Southern
California. This study was conducted at four sites: two polluted sites within harbors and two relatively
unpolluted sites located outside of harbors. Measures of growth and condition (weight-at-age, weight-at-
length, and hepatosomatic index (HSI)) were compared between the polluted and unpolluted sites.
Reproductive potential was measured by three different methods: gonadosomatic index (GSI), batch
fecundity in hydrated eggs and size range ratio in mature eggs between polluted and unpolluted sites.
Concentrations of pollutants such as PAHs, PCBs, and chlorinated pesticide were compared between the
polluted and unpolluted sites. Measures of growth and physiological condition did not differ between the
polluted and unpolluted sites, implying that concentrations of pollutants in the harbors studied were not
high enough to affect growth rates. Reproductive potential did not differ between the polluted and
unpolluted sites, confirming that these pollutants have little affects on this multiple batch spawning
species.



Sandkam, Benjamin (Simon Fraser University); Watson, Corey; Joy, Jeffrey; Breden, Felix (Simon
Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada)

Color vision is influenced by genomic and lighting environments in guppies

Guppies are small freshwater fish native to South America and are considered one of the best known
examples of sexual selection in that females prefer to mate with more colorful males. This raises
questions of how do guppies see color and why is color so important to them. Color vision is mediated by
transmembrane proteins in the retina called opsins. The peak spectral sensitivity of an opsin is a function
of its genetic sequence. Understanding how guppies see and perceive color requires knowing the genetic
sequence of the opsins that make up their opsin repertoire in addition to how they use that repertoire.
Aquatic systems further complicate color vision as water can differentially transmit wavelengths of light,



                                                                                                          628
shifting the distribution of light available to the visual system. The opsin loci of guppies and 15 other
species in the Poeciliidae family were sequenced to determine the evolutionary history of guppy color
vision. High gene conversion activity was found to occur between two long-wavelength sensitive loci
throughout the Poeciliidae family. This is most likely due to the genomic environment of these genes,
which occur in an inverted orientation within a tandem array of multiple homologous genes. The extent to
which the lighting environment influences color vision was determined by measuring the lighting
environment (abundance and distribution of different wavelengths of light) of natural populations in
Trinidad. Guppy tissue samples were collected simultaneously with light readings and color vision was
assessed using quantitative PCR to determine opsin expression profiles. Understanding the visual
system of guppies will allow future work to investigate the mechanisms of mate choice that result in
sexual selection.



Sandmeier, Fran (University of Nevada, Reno); Tracy, C. Richard; Weitzman, Chava; DuPre, Sally;
Hunter, Kenneth (University of NV, Reno, Canada)

Ecological immunology, climate, and pathogen loads in Mojave desert tortoise populations

Historically, health and the prevalence of pathogenic disease in populations of the threatened Mojave
desert tortoise ( Gopherus agassizii ) has focused on the seroprevalence of Mycoplasma agassizii ,
known to cause a chronic respiratory disease. Here, we quantified the prevalence and average loads of
M. agassizii in more than 20 populations, and simultaneously quantified innate immunocompetence via
bacteriocidal assays (a measure of natural antibody and complement activity) and differential white blood
cell counts (a measure of long-term fluctuations in levels of physiological stress). Multiple regression
models (assessed via Akaike Information Criterion) were used to assess the importance of these
measurements of disease and immunocompetence, as well as the importance of climatic variables, in
predicting known differences in disease-prevalence in these populations. In our models, colder thermal
regimes proved to be correlated with decreased immunocompetence. Previously, colder thermal regimes
have also been associated with increased disease prevalence in this host-pathogen system. This and
other patterns emerging from these models led us to develop new hypotheses describing the ecology of
chronic respiratory diseases in these populations of desert tortoises.



Santos, Eduardo Jose dos (Universidade Federal do Paraná); Conte, Carlos Eduardo (Universidade
Federal do Paraná, Canada)

Diversity of anuran amphibians in dry forest fragments from Brazil

Habitat loss and fragmentation currently correspond to the biggest threat to the survival of all living
species. Beyond that, sensitive organisms like amphibians have to cope with other barriers, such as
climate variation. The patterns and processes involved in areas with these characteristics, such as dry
forest (Mesophytic Semideciduous Forest) fragments, still need more focus. Herein, we describe the
richness and abundance of anuran amphibian species occurring in 22 sites, distributed in four dry forest
fragments from the northern state of Parana, Southern Brazil. Data was obtained in ten campaigns from
September 2011 to February 2012, through the method of sampling at breeding sites. The obtained data
was then evaluated and compared in the alfa, beta and gamma diversity levels. A total of 4.962
individuals, distributed in 18 species, belonging to seven families, were recorded. They are: Bufonidae (2
spp); Centrolenidae (1 sp); Cycloramphidae (1 sp); Hylidae (9 spp); Leiuperidae (1 sp); Leptodactylidae
(3 spp); Microhylidae (1 sp). Two more species (Proceratophrys avelinoi and Scinax berthae) had been



                                                                                                      629
recorded in a previous campaign, totaling 20 species in the region. The most abundant species was D.
nanus, with 3.060 individuals registered (61% of the total). Temporary ponds at the forest edge were the
sites with highest diversity (13 spp), while forest transects were the poorest (1 sp). The number of
habitats used by species ranged from one to 14. The fragments were fairly similar in their composition but
the richest one was also the largest in area and had a greater variety of habitats. A clustering analysis of
similarity (Coefficient of Sorensen) was performed to compare the composition in the four fragments
studies with 12 other sites, being 10 within dry forest domains, one within Araucaria forest domains and
one within rainforest domains. The analysis showed a pattern expected, both in a gradient of similarity
and in the division of forest domain. Difference in vegetation physiognomy seems to be the main
separator of composition, followed by distance between fragments. However, one of the fragments
sampled did not show high similarity with the others, possibly because it was the only one without a
temporary pond associated in the region. Further analyses and comparisons may clarify the patterns of
diversity shown in the area and in dry forest fragments.



Santos, Eduardo Jose dos (Universidade Federal do Paraná); Oliveira, Adriele Karlokoski Cunha de
(Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, PR, Brazil); Foerster, Nathalie Edina (Universidade Federal
do Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil); Conte, Carlos Eduardo (Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, PR,
Brazil)

Key of identification for the families of anuran amphibians occurring in Brazil: An attempt to
integrate molecular and morphological datasets

Anura has been the aim of several taxonomic studies throughout the past decades, and many
classifications have been proposed, based either on morphological or molecular characteristics. However,
attempts to unify these two approaches are scarce, and the most recent studies are based mainly on
molecular data. Genetic classification may cause problems when identifying taxa in field or museum
studies, because DNA approaches are not very accessible and identification is generally done through
morphological analysis beforehand. For Brazilian species, the problem becomes even bigger due to the
high richness and morphological diversity entailed to the impossibility of studying all species genetically.
The most recent phylogenetic classification for Amphibia was published by Pyron and Wiens (2011),
leading to drastic changes in taxonomy, decreasing the number of occurring families in Brazil from 19 to
17, and relocating several genera in different families. We developed a dichotomic key based on a
previous one created by Vizotto (unpublished data), the current classification of families and
morphological characters. The aim was to facilitate practical activities and evaluate whether the new
phylogeny can be applied or not. The key has 17 steps and comprises all the occurring families of Anura
in Brazil. The most general, observable and diagnostic characteristics were used, such as
presence/absence and type of tongue; shape and structures present in and between the phalanges; type
and thickness of skin; size of body, head and mouth; shape of pupils. When external traits could not be
verified or distinguished between groups, we used osteology and color as differentiators. Overall, the new
classification allowed a satisfactory grouping of taxa, because even though several of them were
relocated and altered, the procedure remained similar. The main difficulties were met with families
Cycloramphidae, Hemiphractidae and Hylidae, which contain quite morphologically distinct genera,
hardening the generalization of family traits. Regardless of classification used, anurans still hold relations
too problematic to be solved through just one approach, which makes attempts of integration urgent and
necessary.




                                                                                                          630
Santos, Eduardo Jose dos (Universidade Federal do Paraná); Crivellari, Lucas Batista; Oliveira, Adriele
Karlokoski Cunha de; Oliveira, Igor Soares de; Conte, Carlos Eduardo (Universidade Federal do Paraná,
Canada)

The influence of environmental heterogeneity on the composition and distribution of anuran
amphibians in dry forest fragments

The main objective when studying the ecology of communities is to predict how living organisms interact
with each other through complex associations. For anuran amphibians, habitat heterogeneity may have
huge force in structuring their communities both in local and landscape scales. Hypothetically, more
diverse and heterogeneous sites will enable the occupation of more species and more individuals. We
tested this by surveying 12 ponds associated with four dry forest fragments in Southern Brazil, and then
measuring 14 environmental variables to analyse the contribution of each in different levels. Samples
were carried from September 2011 to February 2012 through the method of sampling at breeding sites. In
order to evaluate the data obtained, the analyses used were the

variance inflation factors (VIF), to choose the best variables, the generalized linear models (GLM), to
evaluate the influence of local and landscape factors on richness, the model selection of Quasi-Akaike
(AICc), to choose the best model, the hierarchical partitioning analysis, to elucidate which environmental
variables best explained distribution and abundance, and the null model analysis, to check potential
degrees of niche overlapping and competition. A total of 4.866 individuals, distributed in 17 species,
belonging to six families were recorded. Through the application of VIF, five variables were chosen. The
GLM and AICc methods showed that the heterogeneity of vegetation in the interior of the pond, and minor
distances from the nearest pond, enhance richness in the area. These variables explained 71% of
variation on the richness in ponds. The hierarchical partitioning explained from 27 to 58% of abundance
variance of eight species. Species from the families Bufonidae, Hylidae and Leptodactylidae were more
influenced by the percentage of vegetation inside and outside the ponds, the types of vegetation inside
the ponds, and minor distances from the nearest fragment. The family Leiuperidae was more influenced
by the distance from the nearest pond. The null model tests run showed great niche overlapping and no
significant evidence of competition, illustrating that species occur mainly because of variation in
heterogeneity. The data obtained showed that higher complexity of vegetation associated with the pond
and minor distances between them enhance richness in dry forest fragments, which is an additional
motivator to conserve and manage the ponds and the forests around them.



Santos, Juan (NESCent (National Evolutionary Synthesis Center));

Molecular evolution and metabolic rates in poison frogs

Molecular evolution is simultaneously paced by mutation rate, genetic drift, and natural selection. Life
history traits also affect the speed of accumulation of nucleotide changes. For instance, small body size,
rapid generation time, production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and high resting metabolic rate
(RMR) are suggested to be associated with faster rates of molecular evolution. However, phylogenetic
correlation analyses failed to support a relationship between RMR and molecular evolution in ectotherms.
In addition, resting metabolic rate might underestimate the metabolic budget (e.g., digestion, reproduction
or escaping predation). An alternative is to test other metabolic rates, such as active metabolic rate
(AMR), and their association with molecular evolution. Here, I present comparative analyses of the
associations between life history traits (i.e., AMR, RMR, body mass, and fecundity) with rates of
molecular evolution of nuclear and mitochondrial loci in the poison frogs (Dendrobatidae). My results
support a strong positive association between mass-specific AMR and rates of molecular evolution for



                                                                                                       631
both mitochondrial and nuclear loci. In addition, I found weaker and genome-specific covariates such as
body mass and fecundity for mitochondrial and nuclear loci, respectively. No direct association was found
between mass-specific RMR and rates of molecular evolution.



Santos, Marcella (Universidade de Brasília); Giugliano, Lilian; Colli, Guarino (Universidade de Brasília,
Brasília, Brazil)

Phylogeography of Micrablepharus atticolus in the Brazilian Cerrado

We conducted a phylogeographic analysis of Micrablepharus atticolus, an endemic lizard from the
Cerrado of Brazil. We investigated a possible genetic structuring within the species, and confronted it with
hypotheses related to differentiation on plateaus/depressions, historical stability/instability areas derived
from potential distribution models from the Pleistocene and Holocene, and centre/periphery regions of the
Cerrado distribution. Occurrence records for M. atticolus were compiled and georeferenced. We
compared the species elevational occurrence with its sister species M. maximiliani to investigate a
possible segregation on elevational gradient. Current and past distributional models (6, 21, and 130 kyr
BP) were constructed. We conducted a logistic regression analysis to investigate past and current
variables associated with M. atticolus distribution. A cytochrome b fragment was sequenced for 116
samples from 30 localities. We obtained population genetics indexes, haplotype networks, a Bayesian
phylogenetic analysis, and molecular dating for haplotypes observed. Spatial genetic structure was
investigated, and we verified the existence of association between genetic and geographical distances.
We traced elevational records on the phylogeny and calculated genetic diversity indexes for well sampled
localities to investigate plateaus/depressions, stability/instability, and centre/periphery hypotheses. There
was no segregation between Micrablepharus species on elevational gradient. The strong association of
M. atticolus with Cerrado was confirmed by distribution modelling and logistic regression. Past climatic
models revealed noticeable changes on suitable areas for the occurrence of the species through the last
130 kyr BP. There was high genetic diversity and structuring, with a main differentiation among northeast
and southwest localities. We suggest three geographical groups, that diverged around 3.5 to 1.5 Ma.
There was association between geographical and genetic distances. Tree topology revealed a complex
history of occupation of high and lowlands and genetic diversity indexes were in general against
hypotheses predictions. It is clear that there is strong structuring and high diversity among sequences
sampled. Yet, there was no evidence for the hypotheses investigated. Our results suggest the existence
of a mechanism still unexplored acting on diversification the Cerrado‘s biota, nevertheless supporting the
high diversity on the region.



Santoyo-Brito, Enrique (Oklahoma State University); Anderson, Matt; Fox, Stanley (Oklahoma State
University, Stillwater, OK, United States)

Sex ratio and morphological development according to incubation temperature in the collared
lizard, crotaphytus collaris

Two modes of sex determination occur in squamates: genotypic sex determination (GSD) and
environmental sex determination (ESD). An example of ESD is temperature sex determination (TSD).
Temperature sex determination is well known in many reptiles and has evolved multiple times within a
given taxon, for example, in iguanidae. Collared lizards, Crotaphytus collaris, are oviparous diurnal
crotaphytids distributed in the southwestern United States and northern Mexico. It is not known with
certainty if this species has GSD or TSD. Although no sex chromosomes have been identified, the



                                                                                                         632
species is generally regarded as having GSD. In a previous preliminary study in which sex was
determined after incubation of eggs at different temperatures in the laboratory, the authors considered
their results inconclusive. Thus, the exact sex determination mechanism in C. collaris is unknown.
Incubation temperature may also affect an embryo´s development, survival, and phenotype. Incubation
temperature can also influence an individual´s post-hatch growth. The objective of this study was to
measure the effect of incubation temperature on sex and morphology of Crotaphytus collaris hatchlings,
as well as its effect on subsequent morphological development. We incubated eggs at six constant
temperatures: 20°, 21°, 26°, 30°, 32°, and 35°C. We obtained 103 eggs from 17 females from a
population located at the Glass Mountains, Oklahoma. Forty-three eggs hatched. To increase sample
size, we also included the results of treatments (27°, 28°, 30°, and 32°C) reported in Viets et al. (1994) for
the same species. Statistical analysis suggested a difference in the sex ratio among treatments, and the
number of males was significantly lower in the 32°C treatment. No subject hatched at the lowest
temperature, 20°C. The eggs in this treatment were kept inside the incubator for a mean of 130 days. By
contrast, all subjects hatched at the highest temperature, 35°C, and the mean number of days of
incubation was 37.1. We assessed overall differences in 8 morphological traits (snout-vent length, tail
length, mass, head width, head length, head height, forelimb and hindlimb length using Discriminant
Function Analysis of individuals hatched at 21°, 26°, 30°, 32°, and 35°C. There was no statistically
significant difference in morphology on the day of hatching between the sexes, but there was a significant
difference among treatments. There also was no significant difference in morphological development
during the first 60 days of life between the sexes, but there was a significant difference among
treatments. Incubation period was different by treatment, with a significant inverse relationship between
temperature and duration of incubation. We tentatively suggest that fewer males are produced at
intermediate incubation temperatures, but more data are needed to be certain.



Saporito, Ralph (John Carroll University); Jennifer, Stynoski (University of Miami, Coral Gables, United
States); Yaritbel, Torres-Mendoza (John Carroll University, University Heights, United States); Sasa-
Marin, Mahmood (Instituto Clodomiro Picado, San Jose, Costa Rica)

Ontogeny of alkaloid-based chemical defenses in the strawberry poison frog (<I>Oophaga
pumilio</I>)

Many organisms use chemical defenses in various life stages to reduce predation risk. Chemical
defenses can be manufactured or sequestered, such as in some dendrobatid frogs that obtain alkaloid-
based chemical defenses from an arthropod diet. A wealth of studies on alkaloids in dendrobatids is thus
far largely limited to adults. Herein, we identified and quantified the alkaloids in all life stages of a
dendrobatid frog, Oophaga pumilio , that displays complex parental care; at hatching, O. pumilio
tadpoles are transported to water pools called phytotelmata, and then for at least 6 weeks, mother frogs
return to supply tadpoles with an obligate diet of unfertilized nutritive eggs. We collected adults, juveniles,
tadpoles, and nutritive and ovarian eggs, as well as early-stage tadpoles hand-reared with eggs of an
alkaloid-free heterospecific frog. We detected alkaloids in mid- and late-stage tadpoles, juveniles, and
adults, and found that the quantity and diversity of alkaloids increase with size. No alkaloids were
detected in early-stage tadpoles or tadpoles fed with heterospecific eggs, perhaps because these
tadpoles do not yet possess any form of granular glands. We also did not detect alkaloids in nutritive
eggs, although alkaloids were variably detected in ovarian eggs in this and other studies. In frogs, alkaloid
quantity increased dramatically at sexual maturity, which is ontogenetically timed with a similar increase in
granular gland size. Because the same alkaloids derived from terrestrial arthropods were detected in
adults and phytotelm-dwelling tadpoles, this frog may be the first known to actively provision its posthatch
offspring with chemical defenses.



                                                                                                           633
Sapsford, Sarah (James Cook University); Alford, Ross; Schwarzkopf, Lin (James Cook University,
Townsville, Australia)

Transmission, demography, and environment all affect the prevalence of infection by
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in Australian rainforest stream tadpoles

Tadpoles may serve as intraspecific reservoir hosts for the amphibian chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium
dendrobatidis ( Bd ), transmitting the infection to terrestrial frogs when they contact water. Understanding
the dynamics of Bd infections in tadpoles may therefore be crucial to understanding and ultimately
managing the impact of the disease. The prevalence of infection by Bd in adult and juvenile frogs is
usually higher in winter in species associated with Australian tropical rainforest streams. In these
systems, many species have prolonged breeding periods centered on summer, and tadpoles are present
throughout the year. Prevalence could thus increase over winter due to increasing cumulative risk in
tadpoles, then decrease as infected tadpoles either metamorphose or die and uninfected hatchlings enter
the system. Tadpole demography could thus play a key role in driving prevalence of Bd throughout the
year. Our aim was to determine the importance of transmission, demography, and thermal environment
and its seasonal changes in determining prevalence of Bd throughout the year in Australian tropical
rainforest streams. We sampled tadpoles at six different streams at three different types of sites: high and
low elevation sites in contiguous blocks of rainforest, where the low elevation sites are likely to receive
Bd zoospores from higher elevation sites, and low elevation sites in isolated blocks of rainforest.
Tadpoles were swabbed for Bd throughout the year. Prevalence fluctuated seasonally and was usually
highest in winter. We used our data to model how prevalence should change if only demography affected
it, and if it was affected both by tadpole demography and seasonal environmental effects. We compared
the predictions of both model types with observed data, and found that demography alone can account
for a substantial proportion of seasonal fluctuations, and that seasonal environmental effects account for
a substantial additional fraction. There were also effects of site elevation and degree of site isolation
Prevalence was higher in contiguous low elevation sites than in isolated low elevation sites, indicating
that transmission may also affect prevalence. Finally, prevalence was also clearly influenced by historical
effects specific to each individual site. Our detailed understanding of what drives prevalence in tadpoles
in these systems will be incorporated in plans to manage the impacts of possible future outbreaks of
chytridiomycosis.



Sarre, Stephen (University of Canberra); Ezaz, Tariq; Georges, Arthur (University of Canberra, Canada)

How many transitional pathways between sex-determining systems in reptiles and amphibians?

 Important technological advances in genomics are driving a new understanding of the evolution of sex
determination in vertebrates. When this new understanding is combined with the widespread distribution
of genetic and temperature-dependent sex-determination mechanisms among reptiles, it is apparent that
transitions between modes have occurred many times, as they have for amphibians. It is also likely that
thermosensitivity in sex determination is a key factor in those transitions in reptiles, and possibly in
amphibians. A number of recent models have addressed the idea that movement in thresholds provides a
potent force in transitions among sex-determining modes where transitions in sex determination are
facilitated by the interaction between genes and the environment. The central question arising from these
models and from the sparse data currently available is whether transitions in reptiles and amphibians
between the modes of sex determination have been affected by the evolution of independent and
fundamentally unique genetic mechanisms or by more subtle and possibly reversible modifications of
some conserved underlying mechanism. They suggest that it is likely that homologous or nonhomologous




                                                                                                        634
states for sex chromosomes among sister and more distantly related taxa may be arrived at by a number
of different pathways. We identify seven such routes with the best understood being the ancestrally
homologous sex chromosomes, such as the XY system seen in most mammals. Although the potential for
temperature influences on sex determination in reptiles and amphibians has been known for some time,
investigation of sex-determination transitions has really become possible only since the arrival of modern
genomics. The key to those investigations lies in the identification of homology among sex chromosomes,
and in the identification and characterization of sex-determining genes in multiple taxa. Only with such a
mechanistic approach can we hope to tease apart the different possibilities for the types of sex-
determining mechanisms in reptiles and amphibians.



Savage, Anna (Smithsonian Institution); Zamudio, Kelly (Cornell University, Canada); Fleischer, Robert
(Smithsonian Institution, Canada)

Comparative transcriptomics of of frogs with divergent responses to a pathogenic fungus

Amphibians are declining worldwide at an unprecedented rate due to the emerging fungal disease
chytridiomycosis. To date, immunological and genetic correlates of chytridiomycosis susceptibility are
poorly understood. We used 454 pyrosequencing to characterize whole transcriptomes of immune
tissues from a declining amphibian species, Lithobates yavapaiensis , that shows natural variation in
chytridiomycosis susceptibility. Comparison with the model frog Silurana and with the NCBI Gene
Ontology database reveals a high proportion of immune-related genes are expressed in all sampled L.
yavapaiensis individuals. The complement of genes expressed in spleen and skin from uninfected,
susceptible and resistant frogs sampled in the wild varies across tissues, individuals, and disease status.
This preliminary study will enable us to identify the transcriptomic hallmarks of frog immune responses to
chytridiomycosis , with the ultimate goal of identifying resistance genes and improving amphibian
conservation strategies.



Sawaya, Ricardo (Universidade Federal de São Paulo - UNIFESP); Martins, Marcio (Universidade de
São Paulo - USP, Canada); Fausto, Barbo; Felipe, Grazziotin (Museu de Zoologia da Universidade de
São Paulo - MZUSP, Canada); Otavio, Marques (Instituto Butantan, Canada)

Repeated and parallel evolution of dwarf lanceheads of the Bothrops jararaca complex in
continental islands along the Brazilian coast

Continental islands of the Brazilian coast have a complex history of connections with the adjacent
mainland during the Pleistocene. These islands house subsets of the Atlantic forest biota and can be
considered as natural experiments for the study of the evolution of isolated populations. The common
lancehead B. jararaca is a medium sized pitviper, with a geographic distribution congruent with the
Atlantic forest. Juveniles of B. jararaca feed upon centipedes, amphibians, and lizards, whereas adults
are diet generalists, consuming mostly mammals. At least two insular forms of the B. jararaca complex
have been recognized as full species ( B. alcatraz and B. insularis ), but additional forms of this complex
are waiting to be described. Gigantism and dwarfism are relatively well known phenomena in island
vertebrates. One possible explanation for the body size change in island snakes is the diet alteration
hypothesis, in which snake body size is a consequence of prey availability. Here we use five insular
populations of the B. jararaca complex to explore this hypothesis related to body size changes in island
snakes. None of the islands inhabited by these species has natural populations of small mammals.
Juveniles of two island species, B. insularis and Bothrops sp. 1, feed upon ectothermic prey, like the



                                                                                                       635
mainland form, but are bird specialists when adults. Both species are slightly smaller than the mainland
B. jararaca and show some changes in body form apparently related to the more arboreal habits. The
other three island species, B. alcatraz , Bothrops sp. 2, and Bothrops sp . 3 are dwarf forms within
the B. jararaca complex. Bothrops alcatraz feeds mainly on centipedes, but also on lizards, Bothrops
sp. 2 feeds mainly on lizards, but also on centipedes and conspecific snakes, and Bothrops sp. 3 feeds
on frogs. The three dwarf forms are terrestrial and show a body form similar to that of young B. jararaca
from the mainland. Our data corroborate the diet alteration hypothesis and suggest an adaptive plasticity
of B. jararaca regarding body morphology and diet. Indeed, unpublished data on altitudinal variation in
the biology of mainland B. jararaca indicate that variation in prey availability is associated to variation in
size and morphology. This plasticity may have played an important role in body form and size shifts in this
snake complex, perhaps facilitating the persistence of insular forms in depauperate habitats.



Schalk, Christopher (Texas A&M University);

Community structure of tadpoles along environmental gradients in the Bolivian Gran Chaco

Communities of tadpole species are assembled in association with multiple environmental gradients, in
particular pond hydroperiod and canopy cover, resulting in non-random distribution of species in
breeding ponds and across entire landscapes. The relative strengths of these abiotic and biotic factors
that constrain species‘ distributions often change along environmental gradients. Species distibutions
often reflect their ability to cope with these abiotic and biotic constraints. I studied the role of
environmental gradients contributing to assembly of tadpole communities in the Bolivian Gran Chaco, a
semiarid thorn forest that receives approximately 450 mm of rainfall annually. Rainfall is sporadic and
results in a highly dynamic pond presence across the landscape. Ponds in this region not only contain
invertebrate and fish predators, but the carnivorous tadpoles of Ceratophrys cranwelli . I sampled 35
ponds to determine community composition and species abundance of tadpole species associated with
these environmental gradients across the landscape. At each pond, I quantified abiotic variables (pond
dimensions, physiochemical factors, and canopy cover) and predator abundance and diversity. A
Canonical Correspondence Analysis and Cluster Analysis showed that community structure was primarily
associated with abiotic factors, specifically forest canopy cover, pond depth, and pond area. Both
tadpole richness and abundance increased with increasing pond area and pond depth, but decreased
with increasing canopy cover. These results suggest greater species diversity and abundance in these
ponds is dependent on large, open canopy ponds. These species may be unable to cope with increasing
canopy cover due to the low productivity within these pond types. Tadpole richness and abundance had
weak associations with predator abundance and diversity. Tropical dry forests, such as the Bolivian Gran
Chaco, are currently threatened with habitat loss and among the most endangered ecosystems in the
world. The implications for conservation of this study are that both species diversity and variation in
community structure depends on pond structure. Conservation strategies may be developed that take
into account the environmental factors associated with community assembly as well as maintenance of
species diversity.



Schiller, Nicole (Thompson Rivers University); Larsen, Karl (Thompson Rivers University, Canada)

Life in fluctuation: the ecology of western painted turtles in a northern reservoir

Hydroelectric operations have increased in response to growing energy demands, and are often
considered a ‗green‘ energy source. However, the catchment of hydroelectric reservoirs and fluctuations



                                                                                                          636
in water levels (drawdown zone) can have significant impacts on aquatic ecosystems. For herpetofauna
that live in cold climates these human-induced alterations may affect their ability to manage and tolerate
their environment. Our objective was to investigate the ecology of an extreme northern population
(Revelstoke, British Columbia) of western painted turtles ( Chrysemys picta bellii ) that inhabits an
environment constantly fluctuating due to hydroelectric operations. Our data suggest that all age and sex
classes utilize the drawdown zone. Telemetry and early spring surveys revealed that adult and juvenile
turtles overwinter within the drawdown zone and it appears that there is a communal hibernating site
within a floating mass of vegetation (island). Nest inundation as a result of reservoir operations was not a
significant threat to the animals, simply because all nesting sites detected, thus far, lay above the high-
water mark. Similarly, no incidents of mortality to turtles could be attributed to the reservoir operation.
However, changes in water levels affect habitat availability. Areas of use and basking sites during early
spring are lost as water levels rise, while as other areas flood, more ‗usable‘ habitat becomes available
for turtles than would normally be accessible. Comparisons between turtle movements and water levels
(elevation in meters) may suggesthat variations in movements increase, and that larger movements are
made when water levels rise. Differences in movements may be related to changes in available habitat
(including temperatureranges) and/or other resources (e.g. food availability, cover from predation, nesting
and overwintering locations, shelter) or they may be affected by changes in water levels. This potentially
could lead to higher energetic costs or predation risks for those turtles that are moving greater distances.
Perhaps most interesting is that the size-frequency distribution of the turtles appears consistent with that
reported for other northern turtle populations, yet there is a very strong female bias (1♂ : 6 ♀). Possible
reasons for this bias will be discussed. Overall, this project provides the foundation for a long-term
monitoring program for these animals, and suggests that the population seems stable in this extreme
environment. However, some life-history attributes (e.g. movements) may in part be explained by
differences in exposure to reservoir levels, changes in water temperature, and habitat availability.



Schloegel, Lisa (EcoHealth Alliance);

Wildlife trade: species introductions and disease vectors

The transport of live wildlife across geographic boundaries has allowed for the co-mingling of disease
vectors and potential hosts contributing to the emergence and global spread of emerging pathogens (e.g.
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Ebola Reston virus, and HIV-2). A series of data analyses, field
sampling, laboratory experimentation and molecular techniques have shown a clear link between the
transport of anurans for the food and pet trades with the spread of two lethal amphibian pathogens (
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis and ranaviral disease). Data indicate the international transport of
vectors could not only introduce pathogens into new regions, but could also facilitate the mixing of
pathogen genotypes and the inadvertent spread of strains of unknown virulence that could negatively
impact animal health. In 2008, data collected were instrumental in the decision to list the first and only
amphibian diseases to the World Organization for Animal Health‘s Aquatic Animal Health Code,
providing guidelines to limit the spread of these pathogens through the trade (e.g. quarantine
procedures). The evidence that will be presented reinforces the need for urgent action to minimize the
potential spread of diseases through international trade routes, for the benefit of wildlife health and
sustainability.




                                                                                                        637
Schmidt, Benedikt (University of Zurich);

Use of state-space models to analyse amphibian time series collected by volunteers

During spring, many amphibians migrate to the breeding sites. On the way to the breeding sites, the
amphibians often must cross roads where they may get killed by cars. At many sites, volunteers have
used drift fences for years or decades to capture amphibians and to reduce road mortality. Such
conservation activity thus yields long-term time series of amphibian populations from many sites that
could be used to estimate large-scale population trends. However, the methods used by volunteers differ
among sites and there is observation error. State-space models are a relatively new statistical tool to
analyse data collected by volunteers because they take observation error into account. Here, I will
present the results of an analysis of the amphibian time series data in the Swiss national amphibian data
base. The aim is to assess the reliability of the data (i.e., observation error) and to test whether there are
population declines.



Schneider, Christopher (Boston University); Crawford, Nicholas; McGreevy, TJ; Messana, Nick (Boston
University, Canada)

The genetic basis of phenotypic variation and divergence in Anolis marmoratus

Understanding the process of population divergence and speciation is a central goal of evolutionary
biology. Ultimately, understanding this process requires that we link phenotypic variation to underlying
genetic variation. Traditionally, such analyses were restricted to model organisms. However, advances in
genomic technology, and complete genome sequences of phylogenetically diverse vertebrates, have
opened the opportunity to link phenotype to genotype in non-model organisms. Here we examine the
genetic basis of phenotypic variation in Anolismarmoratus, a polytypic species complex from the
Caribbean islands of Guadeloupe. We examine genetic variation on a genome-wide scale with RAD-tag
and bulk-segregant analyses and identify loci that show signatures of divergent natural selection. We are
able to relate variation at many of those loci to patterns of phenotypic variation among populations,
providing candidate loci for studies of adaptive divergence. Interestingly, on a genome-wide scale, there
is little evidence for restricted gene flow among populations and, while portions of the genome show
signatures of adaptive divergence, most of the genome remains homogeneous. This suggests that the
genome is porous, with segments of the genome (adaptive islands) maintained at alternate states by
divergent selection while the rest of the genome is homogenized by gene flow and recombination. We
discuss the implications of these results for understanding the genetics of adaptation and speciation in
Anolis .



Schock, Danna M (Keyano College); Soos, Catherine (Environment Canada, Canada); Machin, Karen
(University of Saskatchewan, Canada); Pauli, Bruce (Environment Canada, Canada)

Health of amphibian populations as indicators of ecosystem health in the Oil Sands region of
northeast Alberta.

 Several economically important projects related to oil sands mining and upgrading are taking place in the
boreal forest ecosystem in northern Alberta. Although substantial economic benefits are derived from this
natural resource, the poorly understood ecological costs of these operations have drawn scrutiny. Our
research is evaluating the health of wild amphibian populations in north-eastern Alberta. Amphibian
populations are integral components of boreal ecosystems, linking terrestrial and aquatic food webs by



                                                                                                          638
virtue of their lifecycles, and may also serve as valuable indicators of ecosystem health in general.
Amphibians may be especially vulnerable to organics and heavy metals from mining processes because
their breeding ponds are primarily filled by snowmelt in the spring. Previous studies have shown that
snowmelt contains particularly high levels of toxic organic compounds such as polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAH). Thus, amphibians in the boreal forest may be receiving high doses of oil sands
related substances when their breeding ponds fill in the spring. Specifically, we are using wood frog (
Lithobates sylvaticus = Rana sylvatica ) populations in northeast Alberta to test for correlations between
proximity to oil sands operations and: prevalence of infectious diseases (ranavirus, chytrid fungus),
malformation rates, biomarkers of chronic stress (metabolomics), and concentrations of priority
substances (heavy metals, PAH, naphthenic acids) in amphibian tissues and breeding pond water. The
suite of parameters we are investigating will shed light on effects of oil sands mining on amphibian
populations in particular, and the boreal forest ecosystem in general. The new knowledge being
generated by our research is providing tractable parameters that can be measured and interpreted by
regulatory agencies, industry, and other groups responsible for monitoring and managing land in the
boreal forest of Alberta.



Schock, Danna M (Keyano College);

Infectious diseases as a threat to Canadian amphibian populations.

Infectious diseases are a normal component of all ecosystems. However, they can threaten the long-term
persistence of host populations under several circumstances. For example, situations that compromise
host immune defences can be expected to intensify or prolong the impacts of pathogens. Consequently,
environmental stressors such as contamination and altered environmental conditions can interact with
pathogens in ways that tip disease dynamics in directions that promote the collapse of host populations.
The spread/translocation of novel pathogens (or novel strains of pathogens) into new geographic areas
can also threaten host populations (or species) with no innate immune defences to the pathogen.
Sublethal effects of infectious diseases can also present serious threats to host populations. Although
mass mortality events of hosts are often recognized for the potential effects that they may have on host
population ecology, sublethal effects are often overlooked. Growth rates, predator avoidance, and
fecundity rates can all be affected by infectious diseases, and the effects are much more difficult to
detect, particularly in the absence of long-term monitoring. A key characteristic of most pathogens,
including amphibian pathogens, is the fact they are capable of infecting and completing their lifecycles in
multiple species. Another characteristic of many amphibian pathogens is that there can be marked
differences among amphibian species in the levels of disease that results from infection. As a result,
some amphibian species may serve as reservoirs of infection for other species. This can become a critical
challenge for conservation measures when a widespread, resistant host species can harbour pathogens
that cause lethal infections in rare host species. Amphibian pathogens documented in Canada include
ranaviruses, chytrid fungus, Saprolegnia , opportunistic bacteria such as Aeromonas , and a variety of
relatively poorly understood parasites such as ―protists‖ like trypanosomatids, and helminths such as
tapeworms and lungworms. Each of these groups of infectious agents will be discussed as case studies
that highlight the scenarios described above where infectious diseases can become threats to amphibian
populations.




                                                                                                       639
Schoen, Alan (Redpath Museum, McGill University); Boenke, Morgan; Laroche, Philippe; Green, David
M. (Redpath Museum, McGill University, Canada)

Tagging fowler's toads with digital fingerprints

Fowler‘s toads have spot patterns which identify individuals like fingerprints. We automated visual
identification to develop an alternative to physical tagging. A small, endangered, population of fowler‘s
toads lives on the north shore of Lake Eerie. The Canadian government has severely restricted the use
to toe clipping on these animals because data that suggests the method is harmful to animals. In order to
continue conducting mark-recapture studies, we required a different method for marking individuals.
Identifying the toads by eye would allow us to study the toads without harming them, but would require an
unreasonable amount of labor for large samples. We developed software to automate most of the
recognition process, so only about a minute of work was required per picture. The software compensates
for a variety of differences in picture condition so it can be used with pictures taken in the field. We tested
the software with 1593 pictures taken in 7 years of field research. The pictures were collected as part of
the standard field protocol, without the knowledge that they would be used by software. We found that
the software correctly identifies 87% of the known matches from the toe clipping protocol, which is
comparable to the success rate for toe-clipping. We conclude that digital fingerprinting is a viable method
for large-scale population surveys. It also opens new ways to conduct population surveys, since
interested amateurs can contribute pictures of toads with GPS coordinates.



Schriever, Tiffany (University of Toronto); Williams, Dudley (University of Toronto Scarborough, Toronto,
ON, Canada)

Ontogenetic diet shifts within and among amphibian species using stable isotopes and gut
content analyses

Community assembly, composition, and trophic dynamics are the underlying mechanisms responsible for
variation in food web structure. Niche variation can occur among individuals of a population, between
species, and change throughout development. Typically, the trophic niche is measured by quantifying gut
contents, but the use of stable isotopes to define niche width is becoming a popular and powerful
accompaniment. The goals of this project were to quantify amphibian diet throughout development and
test for inter- and intra-specific niche divergence among larval amphibians. Stable isotopes and mixing
models were used to quantify the diets of Pseudacris crucifer (spring peeper), Lithobates sylvaticus
(wood frog), Lithobates clamitans (green frog), and Hyla versicolor (grey treefrog) throughout their
larval development to illustrate community dynamics. Isotopic niches overlapped considerably among the
anuran species, however trophic partitioning was clear when assessed across ontogeny because species
that co-occurred showed opposing δ 13 C trajectories across development. We also found substantial
individual variation within species suggesting specialization within generalist populations. In all species,
greater than 50% of assimilated resources were derived from detritus (allochthonous source). This study
shows that aquatic larval amphibians are tightly linked to the terrestrial ecosystem, and highlights how
stable isotopes and gut content data can illuminate details of complex pond food webs. Stable isotopes
provide a high resolution of individual and population level niches, and across development however, this
requires many individuals and repeated sampling to collect all stages to improve our understanding of
amphibian ecology.




                                                                                                           640
Schulte, Lisa Maria (University of Trier);

The smell of danger: The use of chemical cues in the breeding behavior of poison frogs

Chemical signaling and communication in amphibians is especially well documented in salamanders and
newts, but several studies have also identified chemical communication in anurans. In adult frogs for
example, pheromones are used for sex recognition or aggressive male-male behavior. Anuran larvae are
able to use intraspecific chemical cues for kin recognition and recognition of con- and heterospecific
tadpoles. We investigated chemical communication between adult frogs and their tadpoles in the poison
dart frog species Ranitomeya variabilis . As known for many poison dart frog species, the males of this
species deposit tadpoles singly into different phytotelmata. The exploitation of these small pools is
advantageous as it lowers the risk of predation, but it is more costly because of limited resource
availability. Additionally, poison frog larvae are often cannibalistic, so the identification and avoidance of
conspecifics represents an adaptive behaviour for these amphibians. Here we report that parental R.
variabilis are able to recognise the presence of tadpoles in phytotelmata without invoking visual or
physical stimuli, but are able to accurately determine the presence of tadpoles via chemical cues.
Furthermore, it appears that these frogs can distinguish between different kinds of cues, produced by
tadpoles of different species. Moreover, we found that visual cues may not play a major role in tadpole
deposition, as we found that artificial tadpoles did not elicit a response in adult frogs. Current research is
focused on the identification of the specific chemical cue(s) produced by the tadpoles that elicit responses
in adults. Therefore we extract and fractionate the cues and test those different fractions by presenting
them to the frogs in the field. That way we try to get closer to the special cue(s) avoided by the frogs.



Schulte, Ulrich (Trier University); Beninde, Joscha (Trier University, Trier, Germany); Veith, Michael
(Trier University, Biogeography Department, Trier, Germany, Trier, Germany); Hochkirch, Axel (Trier
University, Trier, Germany)

Rapid genetic assimilation of native wall lizard populations (Podarcis muralis) through extensive
hybridization with introduced lineages

The Common Wall Lizard ( Podarcis muralis ) has established more than 150 non-native populations in
Central Europe , stemming from eight geographically distinct evolutionary lineages. While the majority of
these introduced populations are found outside the native range, some of these populations also exist at
the northern range margin in south-western Germany . In order to a) infer the level of hybridization in
contact zones of alien and native lineages and b) compare the genetic diversity among purebred
introduced, native and hybrid populations we used a combination of maternally inherited markers
(mtDNA: cyt b ) and Mendelian markers (microsatellites). O ur results suggest a rapid genetic assimilation
of native populations by strong introgression from introduced lineages. Discordant patterns of mtDNA and
nDNA variation within hybrid populations may be explained by directed mate choice of females towards
males of alien lineages. In contrast to previous studies we found a non-linear relationship between
genetic diversity and admixture level. The genetic diversity of hybrid populations was substantially higher
than in introduced and native populations belonging to a single lineage, but reaching rapidly a plateau of
high genetic diversity at an admixture level of two. However, even introduced populations with low
founder sizes and from one source population retained moderate levels of genetic diversity and no
evidence for a genetic bottleneck was found. The extent of introgression and the dominance of alien
haplotypes in mixed populations indicate that introductions of non-native lineages represent a serious
threat to the genetic integrity of native populations due to the rapid creation of hybrid swarms.




                                                                                                          641
Schulze, Arne (Senckenberg Forschungsinstitut und Naturmuseum);

Tadpole diversity and reproductive modes of Bolivia´s lowland anuran communities

Tadpole diversity and reproductive modes of Bolivia´s lowland anuran communities Arne Schulze1,2,3
1. Biodiversity and Climate Research Centre (BiK-F), Senckenberganlage 25, 60325 Frankfurt am Main,
Germany; 2.         Senckenberg Forschungsinstitut und Naturmuseum, Senckenberganlage 25, 60325
Frankfurt am Main, Germany; 3. Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University, Institute for Ecology, Evolution
&amp; Diversity, BioCampus – Niederursel, Max-von-Laue-Straße 9, 60438 Frankfurt am Main
arne.schulze@senckenberg.de The eastern lowlands of Bolivia can be valued as a region of distinct
regional faunal diversity and seen as a climatic and biogeographic transition zone. In the last decades
studies on amphibian diversity increased and many new species were discovered. Only recently, an
integrative anuran inventory has revealed hidden diversity and suggested several divergent lineages and
cryptic species complexes. In contrast, information on anuran larval stages and reproductive strategies
are still scarce. However, tadpoles can be a good tool for assessing local biodiversity and are often found
more easily and in greater amounts than adults. The aim of this study was to differentiate all tadpoles
within the studied anuran communities and assign them to their respective adult stage. Therefore, a
combined approach composed of morphology, DNA barcoding, and tadpoles raised in captivity from
identified adults was conducted to assure correct tadpole identifications. The preceding integrative
species inventory of adult amphibians formed the basis for confirmed tadpole identifications. The selected
study areas consisted of open Cerrado savannahs and endemic Chiquitano Dry Forest, and provided a
variety of habitats for amphibian reproduction. In detail, savannah puddles, rock pools, flooded wetlands,
ponds, small streams, and flooded forest floor were sampled for eggs, larvae, and amplectant pairs. The
tadpoles of more than 50 different species of Bufonidae, Dendrobatidae, Hylidae, Leiuperidae,
Leptodactylidae, and Microhylidae could be distinguished and described for the Bolivian lowlands. All
tadpoles were classified into the established ecomorphological guilds, containing different lotion and lentic
forms like benthic, nektonic, carnivorous, and suspension feeder, among others. Some of the identified
tadpoles are described for the first time or clearly show deviations compared with associated tadpole
descriptions from neighbouring countries. Additionally, different oviposition strategies were recorded and
assigned to the known classifications of reproductive modes. The range of observed reproductive
strategies included for example generalized oviposition and development of eggs and larvae in lentic
water bodies, semi-aquatic oviposition with terrestrial foam nests or clutches on leaves with tadpoles
completing their development in water, up to strictly terrestrial oviposition and development. The results of
my study on reproduction biology and developmental stages of lowland amphibians emphasise the
capacity of the Bolivian lowlands for conservation efforts and further studies on the still underestimated
amphibian diversity.



Schwarzkopf, Lin (James Cook University);

Fragmentation Processes: Why do reptiles avoid some habitats?

Fragmentation breaks up large continuous tracts of preferred habitats, and surrounds them with non-
preferred matrix habitat. Research into effects of fragmentation often focuses on features of habitat
fragments, evaluating factors such as size, and shape of fragments or mortality rates in fragments:
aspects of fragments that influence population viability. Knowledge of processes driving habitat
preference in fragments, and avoidance of matrix habitats can also be useful, because one strategy for
mitigating effects of fragmentation would be to make matrix habitat more attractive to target species, i.e.,
increasing preference or reducing avoidance. I have examined habitat use by reptiles inside matrix and




                                                                                                         642
preferred habitat areas, in several different habitat types in Australian tropical ecosystems. There are 3
main, non-independent factors that could cause avoidance of matrix habitat: reduced food availability,
increased predation risk, and inappropriate structure. In mammals and birds, absence of food and
increased predation strongly influence habitat use. Interestingly, for small, insectivorous reptiles, matrix
habitat can have similar or increased food availability and reduced predation rates compared to preferred
habitat, but reptiles will still avoid areas that fail to provide adequate structure. Thermoregulatory
opportunities, retreat sites, and, surprisingly, composition, size, and shape of leaf litter can strongly
influence habitat use by reptiles. Because reptiles respond strongly to certain habitat features, corridors
between highly suitable habitat fragments may require only some of these features to remain useful to
reptiles.



Schweiger, Susan (Institut für Spezielle Zoologie und Evolutionsbiologie, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität
Jena); Müller, Hendrik (Jena University, Department of Comparative Zoology and Evolutionary Biology,
Jena, Germany)

Skeletal and muscular ontogeny of the direct developing frog Arthroleptis xenodactyloides
(Anura: Arthroleptidae)

Direct development is widespread throughout the animal kingdom and raises interesting questions in
evolutionary and developmental biology. The development of direct developing taxa is characterized by
the loss of the aquatic, larval stage and usually differs considerably from taxa with the plesiomorphic,
metamorphosing life-cycle. In frogs direct development is widespread, both phylogenetically and in terms
of species numbers, but surprisingly little information is available on the development of direct developing
species. In this study, we examined the skeletal and muscular development of the direct developing, East
African squeaker frog        Arthroleptis        xenodactyloides      (Arthroleptidae) using whole mount
immunohistochemistry. The focus of investigation lies on characters involved in larval feeding, which have
often been altered in comparison to biphasic frogs. Embryonic development in A. xenodactyloides is
altered in comparison to taxa with a free-living aquatic larva shows similarities to other direct developing
anurans, such as Eleutherodactylus coqui and Philautus silus . In A. xenodactyloides , the absence of
nearly all larval cartilages typical for the ancestral life-history is an obvious feature of embryonic
development. In metamorphosing frogs, bone formation occurs post-hatching, whereas cranial
ossification in A. xenodactyloides has been advanced into the embryonic period. Furthermore, the
plesiomorphic cranial muscle ontogeny in metamorphosing anurans differs considerably from that seen in
the direct developing A. xenodactyloides embryos. Comparing the limited, available data on direct
developing anurans, the degree to which direct development deviates from the ancestral life-history
appears to vary substantially between species that evolved direct development independently.



Scott-Prendini, Elizabeth (American Museum of Natural History); Oliver, Lauren (Louisiana State
University, Canada); Visser, John (National Museum of Namibia, Canada); Lewis, Amanda (Louisiana
State University, Canada)

Morphological variation in African Bullfrogs (Pyxicephalidae: Pyxicephalus), assessed from CT
scan data and morphometrics.

 African bullfrogs ( Pyxicephalus ) are large, impressive anurans which display reversed sexual
dimorphism, male-male combat and male parental care. Three species are currently recognized from
throughout the arid savannas of Africa. Morphometric data have traditionally underpinned the diagnoses




                                                                                                        643
of species within Pyxicephalus . However, the two most commonly encountered species ( P. adspersus
and P. edulis ) are problematic to diagnose: none of the four traditionally used characters separate all
individuals from all regions. This study aimed to examine the morphology of all previously named taxa
(valid or synonymized), assess the extent of geographical variation across Africa, and identify consistent
diagnostic characters for each species. The rarity of some material, and general poor results obtained
through double staining and clearing large vertebrates preclude this method for Pyxicephalus .
Computed Tomography (CT) scanning was used to create non-destructive 3D images of the skeletons. A
dataset from external morphology and osteology from discrete characters was compiled. Various notable
skeletal characteristics specific to Pyxicephalus were discovered, some of which appear to be correlated
with its fossorial lifestyle, whilst others may be the result of structural constraints caused by large body
size, or even ecology. We found that many of the traditional morphometric characters are not reliable for
species diagnosis, and examined the osteological basis for this. Further work on genetics and
vocalizations of Pyxicephalus is underway, and may reveal further cryptic taxa.



Searcy, Christopher (University of California - Davis); Gray, Levi (University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM, United States); Trenham, Peter (Western Washington University, Bellingham, WA,
United States); Shaffer, H. Bradley (University of California - Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United
States)

Delayed life history effects, multilevel selection, and evolutionary tradeoffs: Mass and date of
metamorphosis in the California tiger salamander

Delayed life history effects (DLHEs) occur when fitness in one life stage affects fitness in subsequent life
stages. Given their biphasic lifecycle, pond-breeding amphibians provide a natural system for studying
DLHEs. In this study, we use numerous mark-recapture techniques (visual implant alphanumeric tags,
visual implant elastomer, and photographic pattern recognition) and a large drift fence array (221 fences
monitored over a six-year period) to document selection in a population of the endangered California tiger
salamander (Ambystoma californiense). We find that DLHEs are prominent across all life stage transitions
and that there is variation in whether selection acts at the individual or cohort level. We also demonstrate
that there is large variation in average cohort fitness (> one order of magnitude), which is the variation
that DLHEs act upon. A literature review reveals that this high level of intercohort variation is not
restricted to A. californiense, but also occurs in numerous other pond-breeding amphibians, and that
appropriately documenting the magnitude of intercohort variation requires long-term studies (~two
population turnovers). Given the profound effect that DLHEs can have on population dynamics,
understanding intercohort variation in average metamorph quality and the action of selection at the
individual or cohort level is critical for developing realistic models of population dynamics. When
developing models of population dynamics, greater attention should be paid to variation in average fitness
rather than focusing exclusively on variation in total numbers. Finally, we empirically document an
evolutionary tradeoff between mass at metamorphosis and date of emergence. This tradeoff may play a
role in maintaining the variation in mass (fitness) at metamorphosis.




                                                                                                        644
Sears, Brittany (University of South Florida); Snyder, Paul (University of Georgia, Canada); Rohr, Jason
(University of South Florida, Canada)

Can tadpoles turn the tide on their parasites?

Anuran tadpoles can exhibit behavioral resistance against parasitic trematode cercariae by dislodging
attempted infections. Although this behavior does not prevent all infections, it might serve to deflect
parasites away from crucial body areas (i.e., craniofacial) and towards areas less compromised by
infection (i.e., tail). To investigate intraspecific variation in anti-parasite behavior and subsequent
encystment location, tadpoles from seven anuran species were exposed to trematode cercariae while
anesthetized, to remove behavioral resistance, or without anesthesia. Species differed significantly in
their use of anti-parasite behavior and, in the pinewoods tree frog (Hyla femoralis) , behavioral resistance
resulted in tail infections, whereas infections in anesthetized tadpoles occurred significantly more
frequently in the craniofacial region. Because tadpoles reabsorb their tails at metamorphosis, they might
also reabsorb parasite cysts, resulting in little or no net loss of fitness. Given that H. femoralis was the
most susceptible species in our study, the shunting of parasites to less vulnerable regions may be a
heretofore undescribed mechanism by which hosts cope with parasitic infections.



Sears, Jennifer (Institute of Zoology);

Presence of an Introduced Amphibian Predicts the Presence of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis

The multi-host amphibian fungal pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) was first identified in the
UK in 2004. While it has now been found in widely geographically distributed sites across the country, its
effects on native amphibians and the speed and route of its spread is not well understood. During a three
year study at a pond system in South East England I aimed to investigate the occurrence and spread of
Bd in the UK on a fine scale. Nineteen amphibian breeding ponds within a 4km radius of a known Bd-
infected site were were sampled twice per year during the spring breeding season (March-June). Over
2000 samples were collected during the course of the study, comprising of five native and one introduced
species. The presence of infection at a site appeared strongly associated with the presence of a non-
native amphibian, the European alpine newt, Mesotriton alpestris. This species was introduced to the
area in the early 1990s and in recent years has begun to successfully disperse through the pond system.
No cases of Bd were detected at sites where the alpine newt was not found, despite extensive sampling
of native species, including the Bd -susceptible Bufo bufo. It appears that presence of M. alpestris
predicts the occurrence of Bd in this system, with potential implications for the understanding of Bd in the
UK.



Secondi, Jean (GECCO, University of Angers); Sourice, Stéphane (GECCO, University of Angers,
Canada); Théry, Marc (CNRS/MNHN, Canada)

Why habitat quality matters? Insights from a sensory ecology perspective on the effect of nitrate,
turbidity and UV transmission on mate assessment in aquatic breeding amphibians

Habitat selection is the response of a species to a combination of factors affecting its probability of
presence. Such a general definition does not say much about the proximal factors affecting local selection
processes and particularly the selection of sexual partners. Mate choice depends on the reliable
assessment of individual quality which itself depends on the expression of sexual signals and the
transmission of signals across the medium. From a sensory ecology point of view, mate assessment is



                                                                                                        645
increasingly difficult as niche breadth widens. It may become critical for ubiquitous species as contrasting
habitat conditions may be encountered over a small spatial scale so that gene flow may strongly
counteract local adaptation and hinder the optimization of communication. We investigated in a series of
experiments how properties of breeding habitats that vary in space and time (nitrate concentration,
turbidity, UV transmission) affected sexual communication in Lissotriton newts. These water breeding
species display large sexual ornaments and a complex courtship involving both chemical and visual
communication. Nitrate has indirect toxicological effects on oxygen transfer and is considered as an
endocrine disruptor. Water turbidity reduces light transmission and the efficiency of visual signaling.
Dissolved organic carbon is generated by decaying vegetation and absorbs ultraviolet light so that the
use these wavelengths for communication may be impaired in forested environments. Thus, mate
selection is likely to be influenced by habitat characteristics in newts. We found that (i) realistic nitrate
concentration reduced the expression of male sexual ornaments and olfactory attractiveness to females,
(ii) the size of male ornaments was negatively related to turbidity level, and (iii) the availability of UV
wavelengths affected male attractiveness and species recognition, which is the first demonstration of
functional UV signaling in Amphibians. Results highlight the importance of considering environmental
constraints bearing on sexual communication and mate assessment in Amphibians. They question how
optimal mate choice and more largely local adaptation are achieved in species with large breeding habitat
niches. Beyond the evolutionary issue, identifying proximal habitat factors affecting mate choice is also
relevant to optimize conservation strategies.



Semba, Yasuko (National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries); Shono, Hiroshi (Kagoshima
University, Kagoshima, Canada); Yokawa, Kotaro (National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries,
Shizuoka, Japan)

Distributional pattern of shortfin mako, Isurus oxyrinchus, by ontogenetic stage and sex in the
western and central North Pacific

Shortfin mako, Isurus oxyrinchus , is a large pelagic shark with wide distribution from the tropical to
temperate oceans. This species are suggested to have long life span and be sexually dimorphic in
various aspects such as maximum size and life history traits. Recent studies on life history traits suggest
that females grow larger and live longer than males with much longer time to attain sexual maturity.
These aspects are suggested to be closely linked to their behavioural aspects, which was supported by
the report on the sexual segregation of this species. Considering the long life span and difference of life
history schedule between the sexes, ontogenetic stage is also important factor to affect the distributional
pattern of this species.

 This study focused on the ontogenetic aspects of the distributional pattern of this species and described
the temporal and spatial pattern by ontogenetic stage (i.e. juveniles and adults) and also by sex, based
on the fishery and research data in the western and central North Pacific Ocean. In the juvenile stage,
both males and females frequently occurred in the northwestern part ( higher than 30°N and west of the
dateline ), while the distribution of females in the subadult stage tended to shift to the south and the east.
In adult stage, males exclusively occurred in the southeastern part ( lower than 30°N and east of the
dateline ) with some seasonal fluctuation, while females, both pregnant and non-pregnant, were caught
widely across the North Pacific from subtropical and temperate areas. The results in this study suggest
the clear ontogenetic difference in the distributional pattern and possible sexual difference in each
ontogenetic stage.




                                                                                                          646
Further research and effort to collect the size data by sex are necessary to understand the complex
distributional pattern of    I. oxyrinchus  by sex and ontogenetic stage. Combination of fishery and
research data would provide important information on the ecology of sharks, especially for species with
wide distribution in the pelagic ocean.



Semlitsch, Ray (University of Missouri);

Initial dispersal and habitat resistance of metamorphosing salamanders in fragmented landscapes

The movement of individuals is a critical ecological process that maintains populations through dispersal
and connectivity. However, the ability of an individual to cross a landscape depends on the interaction
between landscape structure and species-specific behavior. Habitat loss and alteration disrupts functional
connectivity and can lead to reduced dispersal and subsequent population declines. Although there has
been a sharp increase in studies of landscape structure, especially fragmentation, links with individual
behavior are stilling missing. The real challenge for research is to understand species movement
behavior such as rate of movement, distance, mortality risk, and habitat resistance. Research on the
juvenile dispersal stage of amphibians in my lab has begun to address these questions using mark-
recapture studies, fluorescent powder tracking, and habitat enclosures. We found that initial orientation of
newly metamorphosed salamanders was predominantly nonrandom. Emerging metamorphs initially
traveled short distances using a correlated random-walk pattern. Distance traveled by metamorphs was
greater in forested habitat than non-forested habitat. Juveniles initially traveling through open-canopy
habitats switched at a higher rate to forested habitat than juvenile moving through forested habitat.
Perception distance to forested habitat by metamorphs released into open grasslands was found to be no
more than 5-10 meters. Substrates such as gravel and asphalt used for roads caused salamanders to
move faster and straighter whereas mowed grass caused individuals to move very slowly in a sinuous
path and stop for long periods of time. Together, our results indicate that habitat structure and substrate
features can significant influence both movement and settling behavior of salamanders, and could
strongly affect functional connectivity.



Serena, Alyssa (Simon Fraser University); Palen, Wendy; O'Regan, Sacha (Simon Fraser University,
Canada); Combes, Stacey (Harvard University, Canada)

Using thermal performance assays to predict climate change impacts for pool breeding
amphibians

Global climate change may affect amphibian species through many pathways, including changing habitat
suitability, altered species distributions, vulnerability to disease, and increasing metabolic demands.
However, empirical studies thus far have primarily focused on large-scale changes in species distributions
and interactions between climate and disease. Thermal changes in amphibian habitats may also affect
locomotion performance, and locomotion influences predator evasion, foraging success, and territory
defense. This has the potential to shift species closer to or beyond their thermal performance optima, and
for species with overlapping distributions creates potential repercussions for ecological interactions and
habitat suitability in the future. We conducted a physiological experiment of the potential thermal
performance differences between three amphibian species, Spea intermontana , Rana aurora ,
Pseudacris regilla , encompassing a wide range of life history characteristics and thermal environments.
We incubated tadpoles of each species at equal densities from 5 – 35°C over a 96 hour period. Tadpole
startle responses to a mild electrical stimulus were then recorded with high-speed video. We calculated



                                                                                                        647
average swimming performance, maximum velocity (V max ) and maximum acceleration (U max ), after
digitizing video footage and applying a Butterworth smoothing function to reduce high frequency
fluctuations associated with tail-beats. We found that swimming performance differed substantially among
the three species, with S. intermontana achieving the highest swimming speeds, approaching 40cm · s -
1 . Species also differed in peak performance temperatures, where estimated thermal optima were 22ºC,
28ºC, and 35ºC for R. aurora, P. regilla , and S. intermontana respectively. These results suggest that
all three species have the physiological scope to benefit from a warmed climate, as all three are often
found well below our estimates of thermal performance optima. We propose that thermal performance
assays are a useful tool for setting ecological expectations for how changing climates may influence the
relative performance and persistence of species in novel environments.



Seret, Bernard (Institut de Recherche pour le Développement);

Deep-sea sharks from La Reunion (SW Indian Ocean)

Two research programs are currently carried out at La Reunion island (south-western Indian Ocean). One
concerns the evaluation of the deep-sea resources and the other program, BIOLAVE, deals with the
impact of the recent volcanic eruptions on the marine life. In the frame of these programs, deep-sea
elasmobranchs have been collected. Preliminary results are presented, with a focus on the taxonomic
status of Squalus species, commonly caught in the deep-sea around this volcanic island.



Servidio, Katharine (Warnell School of Forestry and Natural Resources, University of Georgia); Maerz,
John (Warnell School of Forestry and Natural Resources, University of Georgia, Canada); Warren, Robert
(School of Forestry and Environmental Studies, Yale University, Canada)

Effects of Plethodon Foraging Behavior in the Southern Appalachians on Woodland Biodiversity

The diet composition of two species of Plethodon in the Southern Appalachians reveals the key role
played by salamanders in their ecosystem and their potential effects on woodland biodiversity. Recent
research shows Plethodon shermani and Plethodon teyahalee within the hybrid zone at the Coweeta
LTER in Otto, North Carolina forage heavily on ants (&gt;50% of all prey items consumed; found in 94%
of samples). As most vascular plants in the Southern Appalachians rely on ants for seed dispersal, this
significant predation on ants, especially Aphaenogaster , reveals an intriguing and important relationship
between these salamanders and the vascular plant abundance and distribution within their ecosystem. As
consumption of ants increases with high temperatures and low relative humidity indicating that, with
climate change, the effects of Plethodon foraging behavior on woodland biodiversity will be amplified.
With increased predation on ants, we expect a further reduction in ant populations, limiting the dispersal
of local vascular plants. Additionally, Aphaenogaster populations are predicted to decline under climate
change due to their habitat requirements. The additional stress of increased predation on the population
may precipitate dramatic changes in the vascular plant distribution within the Southern Appalachians.
Using a paired design, we are placing removal plots along an elevational gradient within the hybrid zone
at the Coweeta LTER, to observe and quantify the effect of Plethodon foraging on ant communities,
seed dispersal, and vascular plant distribution. Both occupancy and foraging rates of ants, with a focus on
Aphaenogaster , will be monitored using artificial nest boxes and direct observation/counts of foraging
ants. Data analysis will consist primarily of information theoretic approaches to reveal the relationship
between salamander population density and ant populations and foraging within the greater context of
climate change in the Southern Appalachians.



                                                                                                       648
Setlalekgomo, Mpho (Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University); Winter, Deo (Nelson Mandela
Metropolitan University, Port Elizabeth, South Africa)

The effects of gender, body mass, temperature and seasonal acclimation to the resting oxygen
consumption of adult angulate tortoises (Chersina angulata)

Metabolic rate in animals is commonly known to be influenced by several factors. These include gender,
body mass, temperature and photoperiod. We investigated the combined effects of the above mentioned
factors on the resting oxygen consumption in adult Chersina angulata. Eight female tortoises of mass
range 358.00 to 765.55 g and 9 male tortoises of mass range 360.02 to 867.81 g were used in the study.
The resting oxygen consumption (RVO2) rates were determined at varying experimental temperatures in
tortoises acclimated at either summer or winter temperatures and photoperiods. The RVO2 for males and
females at different experimental temperatures during different seasons were not statistically different
from each other (P>0.05). The RVO2 of C. angulata increased with body mass and experimental
temperature at all temperatures tested at both summer and winter acclimations. An inverse relationship
was observed between mass-specific resting oxygen consumption and body mass. The mass scaling
exponents obtained for C. angulata at different temperatures and seasons have a broad range (0.48 -
1.67) and are within the range reported for other chelonians but were higher than the theoretical values
for turtles. The exponents are not significantly influenced by season, but show three distinct ranges
within the temperature range of 14 - 40°C in summer-acclimated tortoises. The variation between the
intraspecific mass exponents among chelonians, as well as the deviation of most intraspecific mass
exponents from the theoretical value for turtles, show the danger of using generic values and the
importance of determining a species-specific relationship to be able to reasonably estimate the energy
demands of any given species of tortoise.



Sever, David (Southeastern Louisiana University); Rheubert, Justin (Saint Louis University, Saint Louis,
MO, United States); Trauth, Stanley (Arkansas State University, State University, United States); Siegel,
Dustin (Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau, MO, United States)

Recent Advances in Our Knowledge of Comparative Cytology of Sex Accessory Organs in Male
Squamates

Sex accessory organs are the genital ducts and derivatives of these structures. In lizards and snakes,
these include the rete testis, ductuli efferentes, ductus epididymis, ductus deferens, ampulla ductus
deferentis, the ampulla ureter (AUR) or ampulla urogenital papilla (AUP), and the sexual segment of the
kidney (SSK). Our recent work has provided new comparative ultrastructural data for the lizards
Hemidactylus turcicus and Scincella lateralis and the snakes Pantherophis obsoletus, Seminatrix
pygaea, Tantilla gracilis, Pelamis platurus, Agkistrodon contortrix, and A. piscivorus. These
observations are compared to findings on other amniotes including the few published cytological studies
on additional squamate taxa. The ultrastructure of the rete testis and ductuli efferentes is highly
conserved among all amniotes heretofore examined, but the ductus epididymis is highly variable. A
comprehensive study on the ductus deferens at the cellular level does not exist for squamates, but the
distal end of the ductus deferens, the ampulla ductus deferentis, is variable among the four taxa of
squamates that have been studied. An AUR (ureter distally enlarged) is the ancestral condition in
squamates and the AUP (chamber at junction of ureter and ductus deferens) is derived in some elapids
and colubroids. Only cursory cytological observations occur on the AUR/AUP for three snake taxa. The
ancestral condition of the SSK in squamates is the presence of simple columnar epithelium specialized
for secretion of a protein + carbohydrate product that matures and is released seasonally. Thus, the




                                                                                                      649
general cyctology of the SSK is conserved, but ultrastructural studies on 10 disparate squamate taxa
reveal much variation in cellular details.



Shaffer, H. Bradley (University of California Los Angeles);

A genomic perspective on hybridization between invasive and native tiger salamanders

Invasive species can be conservation nightmares as well as amazing opportunities to study real-time
evolutionary ecology unfold on natural landscapes. For two decades our lab has studied the invasion
dynamics of non-native tiger salamanders as they hybridize with, and genetically invade the endangered
California tiger salamander (CTS) in California. Based on studies ranging from physiological analyses of
locomotor performance to natural selection on genotypic composition, our work indicates that hybrids and
pure non-native salamanders consistently outperform pure native CTS, even on California landscapes
where natives should have an advantage. This non-native advantage often takes the form of more rapid
larval growth rates, leading to larger larvae, the emergence of paedomorphosis as a novel life history, and
shorter times to sexual maturity in metamorphosing populations. In addition, a small fraction of the non-
native genome is superinvasive, and those genomic regions are sweeping to fixation across the CTS.
Laboratory genetic analyses indicate that these superinvasive genes act synergistically to produce
metamorphs that are exceptionally large and rapidly-growing, and that hybrids are most strongly favored
in human-modified ecosystems. Our analyses suggest that many of these same phenomena occur in
natural hybrid zones, but their transient nature may render them very difficult to observe under most
conditions. In the future, we hope to use our extensive tissue samples extending back 25 years to track
the movements of this genetic invasion in real time, with thousands of mapped genetic markers, as it has
moved across the California landscape.



Shaffer, H. Bradley (University of California Los Angeles);

Invasive genomics of western Tiger salamanders

In the 1950s, tens of thousands of non-native tiger salamanders were introduced into central California,
where they hybridized extensively with native California tiger salamanders (CTS). Fifty years later, the
CTS was listed under the US Endangered Species Act. Comprehensive population genetic data from our
lab indicates that about a quarter of the range of the endangered CTS is now an admixture of native and
non-native genes, and that two classes of non-native genes exist on the landscape. In Central coast
regions near the sites of original introduction, hybrid swarm populations have replaced pure native CTS;
these populations are often greater than 70% non-native alleles, and have life history features associated
with the non-native species. In addition, about 5% of the genome is superinvasive, consisting of highly
favored non-native genes that have spread another 100 km beyond the hybrid invasion front. A key
question is how to manage this invasion in the context of an endangered species. Should hybrids be
protected, particularly those with only superinvasive alleles? Should we manage for genetic purity, for
ecological authenticity, or simply for the greatest fraction of native genes that we can? Given that it
appears virtually impossible to remove the non-native genes, what is the most appropriate conservation
target for this system? And at a larger scale, how should we manage genetic invasions that threaten the
ecological and evolutionary integrity of endangered native taxa and communities?




                                                                                                       650
Shaney, Kyle (Weber State University); Marshall, Jonathon (Weber State University, Ogden, UT, United
States); Leavitt, Dean (San Diego State University, San Diego, United States); Grover, Mark (Utah
Division of Wildlife Resources, Springville, UT, United States)

Investigating a Potential Hybrid Zone in Eastern and Western Fence Lizards (genus Sceloporus)

The state of Utah in the USA is home to four different species of Spiny lizards (genus Sceloporus). In
southwestern Utah (Washington County) four species of Sceloporus come into close proximity of each
other. The distribution of two of these species the Eastern Fence lizard (Sceloporus undulatus) and the
Western Fence lizard (Sceloporus occidentalis) overlap in several localities in the Pine Valley Mountain
area of Washington County. This is the only region in the world that these two species meet. Based on
morphological observations several employees of the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources believe these
two species of lizards are occasionally breeding and forming hybrid offspring. During the summers of
2010 and 2011, lizard tail samples were collected from 60 lizards morphologically identified as S.
occidentalis, S. undulatus, or potential hybrids. These tissue samples were taken from four different
potential hybrid zone localities in the Pine Valley mountain area. In this preliminary hybrid zone one
study, we use sequenced mitochondrial ND1 genes to assess evidence of hybridization resulting in gene
flow between species.



Shaw, Ashley (College of Charleston); Sancho, Gorka (College of Charleston, Canada); Frazier, Bryan
(South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Canada)

Trophic ecology of an estuarine predatory fish community in South Carolina assessed by stable
isotope analysis

Estuaries serve as habitats and nurseries for many recreationally and commercially important fish,
contributing recruits into adult populations that remain in close proximity to estuarine environments.
Understanding the diet and trophic relationship dynamics of the fish populations within the estuarine
community is essential to effectively managing these species. Upper-level predatory fish are among the
most sought-after fisheries species, and studying the trophic ecology of this community can infer the
probability of competition and niche partitioning within this highly productive ecosystem. To establish
these trophic relationships, relative trophic levels and dietary niche overlap of the predator community in
the Cape Romain National Wildlife Refuge (specifically Bulls Bay and its surrounding tidal creeks) were
assessed using stable isotope analysis. The main predators examined in this study include teleosts such
as red drum, spotted seatrout, and southern flounder, in addition to elasmobranchs, which include
bonnethead, scalloped hammerhead, Atlantic sharpnose, sandbar and finetooth sharks. Fish, collected
with cooperation of South Carolina Department of Natural Resources via trammel nets, gillnets and
longlines in the channels and along the banks of the estuary, were measured, muscle biopsied, and then
released. Tissue samples were taken from the dorsal musculature with a 4 mm biopsy punch and frozen
until analysis. Samples were examined for carbon (C 13 ) and nitrogen (N 15 ) isotope ratios. Isotopic
signatures of potential prey were collected and used to elucidate the predators‘ diets. In addition,
stomach content of predators was collected during sampling when a live release was not possible.
Results may have implications for ecosystem-based management of the Cape Romain estuarine system
that can be applicable to other estuaries.




                                                                                                       651
Sheil, Christopher (John Carroll University); Harrington, Sean (John Carroll University, Canada)

Intraspecific Variation in Timing of Ossification Affects Inferred Sequence Heterochrony

Numerous studies have addressed heterochrony in the relative timing of ossification in the skeleton of
amphibians and reptiles.       These studies synthesize information from an impressive body of literature
that describes the developmental origins of skeletal elements. Recent methods have been developed to
automate the process of inferring ancestral sequences of ossification (e.g., Event-Pair Cracking;
Continuous Analysis, and PGi), and that allow one to identify shifts in the relative timing of appearance of
bones across phylogeny.        Other major contributions to these studies have come through advances in
phylogenetic techniques that yield impressive and robust evolutionary hypotheses for an incredible
number of taxa (e.g., hundreds of species of amphibians spanning global diversity in this clade).
Though these methods facilitate faster studies of sequence heterochrony across increasingly larger
datasets, the problem of intraspecific variation in timing of ossification remains.        The few studies of
variation in developmental timing of ossification that exist suggest that it can be quite large, and it remains
to be determined whether this variation can affect inferred sequence heterochrony.              To explore the
influence of intraspecific variation on sequence heterochrony, we used PGi to analyze pairs of datasets
collected from lab-raised and field-caught amphibians, and analyzed them with identical methods,
parameters, taxa, and phylogenetic topologies. Each taxon represented a species for which ossification
sequences had been collected from lab-reared or wild-caught specimens, and for which these data had
been collected with comparable methods. Results from these paired analyses yielded radically different
scenarios of sequence heterochrony, and few instances of congruence were identified.                Sequence
heterochrony differed for specified taxa when data were collected from the lab or field. These results
suggest that caution should be taken when data are combined from specimens collected and raised in the
lab and wild.



Sherratt, Emma (Harvard University); Gower, David J.; Wilkinson, Mark (The Natural History Museum,
London, United Kingdom); Klingenberg, Christian P. (The University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom)

Modularity influenced evolution of the caecilian skull

Morphological integration is the internal coordination among morphological subunits. The related concept
of modularity, the degree of integration within and between these subunits, can be inferred from patterns
of covariation among measured traits. We used geometric morphometrics to investigate modularity in the
cranium across the order of Gymnophiona (caecilians - limbless and mostly burrowing amphibians that
use their head as a tool for locomotion). Taking a developmental and evolutionary perspective, we
examined covariation at three levels of variation: within individuals (fluctuating asymmetry), within species
and among species. We evaluated two a priori hypotheses of modularity that defined functionally distinct
regions of the cranium as modules, and found support for one, where the cranium is modular with respect
to the snout and the braincase with cheek region. This hypothesis was supported at all levels, indicatin g
there is a developmental basis for the modularity, which is shared among all species of caecilians. We
examined patterns of evolutionary shape variation for each module and found that they substantially
differ, where the snout has undergone greater morphological diversification during history of caecilians
than the braincase with cheek region module. We interpret this pattern as support to the theory that
modularity may facilitate adaptive evolution by allowing independent changes to underlying
developmental interactions within a module without disrupting the function of the entire organism.




                                                                                                           652
Sherratt, Emma (Harvard University); Losos, Jonathan B. (Harvard University, Canada)

The deep history of Anolis habitat specialists.

Anolis lizards are an upcoming model system for studies of evolutionary diversification; they represent an
excellent example of a rapidly multiplying lineage, in which the members display great diversity in their
ecology, behavior and observed characteristics. Our inferences about the evolutionary history of these
lizards are based solely on comparisons of modern species‘ DNA and statistical inferences about the
likely characteristics of ancestors. Now we have the opportunity to test hypotheses laid down by these
comparative methods using evidence from the fossil record, specifically from amber inclusions.
Dominican amber - fossilized tree resin from the Caribbean island Hispaniola - is highly sought after by
antiquity collectors and scientists alike because of its well-preserved animal and plant inclusions.
Vertebrate inclusions, such as lizards, are considered quite rare, and to date just three anoles have been
described from Dominican amber. We present a large sample of previously unpublished amber anole
fossils from private collections and museum collections world wide. These fossils were imaged using
high-resolution x-ray computed tomography in order to examine the internal structure of the specimens
and the morphology of the fossil inclusions. We reconstructed models of the skeletons, and where
possible soft tissue, and used morphometrics to compare the body and head shape of these fossils to
modern Dominican species. From these data, we reveal new insights on the evolution of this fascinating
system.



Shiffman, David (University of Miami); Gallagher, Austin; Wester, Julia; Hammerschlag, Neil (University
of Miami, Canada)

Catch and release recreational shark fishing in Florida: economic, social, and policy implications

Catch-and-release fishing represents a non-extractive use of sharks that furthers the frequently-used
conservation principle that sharks may be worth more alive (to ecotourism businesses) than dead (to
extractive fishermen). Recreational fishing is economically and socially important in the state of Florida,
and sharks are a popular sportfish. 137 charter fishing businesses throughout the state of Florida that
advertise shark fishing trips were identified. Using content analysis of charter fishing business websites
and trade publications, as well as surveys of charter fishing captains, the extent of the catch and release
shark fishery was estimated. Catch and release practices are commonly utilized by charterboat fishing
captains, with only two businesses explicitly advertising "catch and kill" practices. The most commonly
targeted species of sharks are mostly locally abundant, with the exception of great and scalloped
hammerheads, which are declining in population and are the least likely to survive catch and release
fishing. The wording used by charterboat businesses on company websites and trade publications was
analyzed to show attitudes towards catch and release fishing. For many businesses, shark fishing trips
are the most expensive service offered, suggesting that sharks are economically valuable to these
charterboat captains. Survey results are also discussed. Applicable fisheries management policies are
reviewed.




                                                                                                       653
Shin, Jaehyub (Seoul National University);

Effects of amphibian chytrid fungus (Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis) on reproduction of fire-
bellied toads (Bombina orientalis)

Emerging infectious disease, especially the amphibian chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis
(Bd), may be responsible for population declines and extinctions of many amphibian species. Recently Bd
has been discovered in Korea, but no reports have surfaced of mortality or morbidity associated with
infection. Furthermore, no animals showing clinical signs of chytridiomycosis have been found. However,
Bd may cause more subtle effects that require examination. I investigated the clutch size and hatching
rate of Bombina orientalis collected from wild populations in Korea as a function of the Bd-infection
status and load of the female parent. I observed amplexed pairs in the field and brought them back to the
laboratory where they oviposited. I tested each parent for Bd infection and Bd load by nested PCR and
quantitative PCR, respectively. I estimated clutch size by counting samples of egg masses and I
measured hatching rate of these samples in laboratory conditions. I expected to find that infected animals
may suffer reduced clutch size or hatching rate. Analyses of results to test this hypothesis are still
underway. I also am examining interactions between Bd and life-history traits by comparing fecundity and
hatching-success measures among individuals based on their major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
genotypes. This research should contribute to the development of a better understanding of the
population dynamics of Korean amphibians and how they are influenced by Bd infection.



Shine, Rick (University of Sydney);

Invasive cane toads in Australia: the ecological and evolutionary effects of a big frog in a strange
land

Cane toads are the animals that Australians love to hate. Introduced to Queensland in 1935, toads have
now spread across much of northern Australia. In this talk, I will review recent scientific advances in our
understanding of toad biology and impact. Large predators have been decimated by toad arrival, whereas
many other native species have benefited. Remarkably, the toad invasion has induced rapid evolutionary
changes both in native predators (that have evolved to deal with the toads‘ presence) and in the toads
themselves (that have evolved to become more effective invaders).



Shirk, Philip (Virginia Commonwealth University); Patrick, David (Paul Smith's College, Canada); Howell,
Kim (University of Dar es Salaam, Canada); Harper, Elizabeth (Paul Smith's College, Canada); Vonesh,
James (Virginia Commonwealth University, Canada)

Community and population-level responses of an Afromontane chameleon assemblage to forest
fragmentation

Habitat modification in the form of fragmentation and loss is a leading cause of biodiversity decline. The
basic predictions from island biogeography theory that species richness and population size decrease
with declining area and increased isolation have received considerable support. However much of this
research has focused on birds and mammals in temperate regions or the Neotropics, limiting our ability to
generalize to other taxa and regions. Reptiles in particular are understudied and have not shown a clear
response. Here we examine          the community and population-level responses of an Afromontane
chameleon assemblage to forest fragmentation. The East Usambara Mountains of Tanzania have high
rates of endemicity within a highly fragmented forested landscape. Within this fragmented habitat are



                                                                                                        654
eight species of chameleon, many of which are of conservation concern. We used repeated distance-
based sampling in a large forest block and 11 forest fragments in order to estimate species‘ densities and
overall richness. This allowed us to quantify the population and community-level responses to habitat
fragmentation while accounting for differences in detectability. Chameleon richness decreased with both
decreasing fragment size and with increasing isolation. The chameleon communities of 10 of the 11
forest fragments were subsets of the community of the largest block sampled, suggesting that smaller
fragments contribute little to landscape-level biodiversity. Chameleon densities are better predicted by
fragment area alone than by any model including isolation, but species‘ responses differ. Rhampholeon
temporalis shows a strong decrease in density with decreasing fragment area, while Trioceros
deremensis ‘ density decreases only slightly with decreasing fragment area. Neither species was found in
the two smallest forest fragments (&lt;3.5 ha), suggesting that each has a similar fragment area threshold.
The combination of Kinyongia matschiei and K. vosseleri show an increase in density as fragment area
decreases. Due to the alteration of chameleon communities in smaller fragments, with declines in species
richness and species-dependent changes in density, several small blocks are not equivalent to a single
large block. A possible functional cause for this non-equivalency is altered vegetation characteristics in
smaller fragments. In some cases the vegetation variables are more strongly correlated with species‘
density than is fragment area.



Shirley, Matthew (University of Florida);

Phylogeographic perspective on the population histories of sympatric Central African crocodiles

Recent molecular phylogenetic studies have shown that the three traditionally recognized extant African
crocodilian taxa ( Crocodylus niloticus , Mecistops cataphractus , and Osteolaemus tetraspis ) are each
comprised of highly divergent, cryptic lineages. Interpreting these results in light of continent-scale
biogeographic events indicated several common, putatively vicariant, patterns. Our study represents the
first comparative study across Africa crocodilian taxa. Cryptic African crocodile complexes provide a
unique opportunity for comparison because they are of different evolutionary age yet display similar levels
of distributional stability. Despite being broadly sympatric throughout western Africa, they each exhibit
significant niche partitioning and life history differences, as well as different capacity for dispersal.
Comparative phylogeographic analyses provide a framework under which genealogical concordance
between sympatric species is used to test the strength of geographic features in structuring regional
biotas. Comparing phylogeographic structure between these crocodile species complexes will produce
significant insights into the relative role of vicariance, notably basin entrapment, and the effects of
paleoclimatic change on forest distribution and desertification.

Individuals of all three crocodile species were sampled from throughout their known distributions from
both wild populations and museum collections and sequenced at up to five homologous gene regions
including both mitochondrial and nuclear markers. Individuals of Mecistops and Osteolaemus were
additionally genotyped for 10 homologous microsatellite loci. Sequence data for all three species was
analyzed under a comparative, statistical phylogeographic framework to test congruent vicariance and
divergence timing between the Congo and Ogooué Basins, as well as across the Cameroon Volcanic
Line. Both sequence and microsatellite data were used to test for patterns of comparative structure
between Mecistops and Osteolaemus within the Ogooué Basin. Preliminary results show congruent
patterns of high interbasin differentiation, though not for all species complex pairs, with low intrabasin
structure. These results support the importance of both species specific and landscape-level factors in
driving the evolution of faunas across regions over time.




                                                                                                       655
Shirley, Matthew (University of Florida);

Range-wide Hierarchical Processes Structuring Slender-snouted Crocodile Populations

The factors shaping landscape-level population genetic structure are dynamic and dependent on both fine
and coarse spatial and temporal scale processes. Therefore, a comprehensive understanding of regional
evolutionary processes can best be gained by integrating data that are affected by factors operating at a
broad spatiotemporal scale. The slender-snouted crocodile ( Mecistops cataphractus ) is an old (min. 10-
12 mya), widely distributed habitat specialist (forest-restricted) that has undergone large-scale
anthropogenic population reductions. We assessed the phylogenetic, phylogeographic and landscape
genetic structure of this species with the objectives of elucidating regional biogeographic process and
better managing wild populations of this increasingly threatened crocodile. Samples from wild individuals
from throughout the range were collected and sequenced for four mitochondrial genes and unlinked
nuclear loci, as well as genotyped for 14 unlinked microsatellites. Phylogenetic and coalescent-based
methods were used to test for cryptic, species level diversity between the three major biogeographic
zones of western Africa following expectations from sympatric crocodile species, and to test the relative
importance of historic versus contemporary events on population structure. Phylogenetic analysis
provided support for two highly divergent, monophyletic clades with no support for finer-scale structure
within each independent biogeographic zone; though the observed phylogeographic pattern is
incongruent with expectations from closely related crocodile species suggesting that M. cataphractus
may be older than evidenced by the fossil record. Within the Ogooué Basin, preliminary results support
drainage structured populations with higher isolation between more distantly distributed populations likely
exacerbated by anthropogenically-mediated population declines. In the face of rapid environmental
change, studies aiming to impact the conservation of biodiversity can no longer afford to be narrow in
scope. This project utilized a novel, multi-level approach to species conservation that integrated field and
molecular techniques to improve our understanding of the ecological and evolutionary processes driving
population structure and persistence in the slender-snouted crocodiles across western Africa.



Shivji, Mahmood (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA and Guy Harvey Research Institute, Nova
Southeastern University); Horn, Rebekah (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA and Guy Harvey Research
Institute, Nova Southeastern University, Canada)

A meta-analysis of matrilineal population genetic structure in fishery exploited sharks

Assessment, management and conservation of resources by their individual populations/stocks is a
central goal of fishery managers. This goal also applies to shark fisheries, but management of sharks on
a population basis is still infrequent partly because information on their population delineation is limited
(although growing). This limitation is particularly acute for species that have widespread distributions and
constitute major components of the global fishery catch. Contrary to expectations given the apparent
potential for long-distance movement by many large shark species, studies that have examined their
population structure are revealing notable levels of genetic differentiation at various spatial scales. We
present a ―first-look‖ meta-analysis of maternal lineage (mitochondrial DNA-based) population genetic
structure in sharks based on published and unpublished data. At the minimum, inter-ocean basin or inter-
hemispheric population differentiation based on mitochondrial markers is present in nearly all species with
global distributions. For some species, statistically significant, matrilineal population structure has been
detected within ocean basins, and in some cases this structure is present over relatively small geographic
scales (1000-2500 km) and even continuous coastlines. Although more detailed information on shark
population structure is still required (i.e., studies with many more sampling locations and more statistical
power using more markers and/or larger sample sizes), the growing evidence that sharks consist of



                                                                                                        656
genetically differentiated populations bodes well for assessment and management of sharks on a
population-specific basis, the ability to track the population origin of shark products in fisheries and trade
for fishery law enforcement efforts, and monitoring landings and markets to detect if certain populations in
less-regulated fisheries are being inadvertently overexploited.



Shuker, Jon (Griffith University); Simpkins, Clay; Hero, Jean-Marc (Griffith University, Canada)

Abiotic and biotic factors associated with the distribution and abundance of the threatened
wallum sedge frog (Litoria olongburensis) in mainland eastern Australia

Natural resource managers responsible for conservation of a threatened species require knowledge of
important environmental influences on survival and reproduction of the species. In an environment that is
subject to changing conditions, managers need to know the environmental limits, or ecological niche,
within which the threatened species can thrive. Various methods have been devised to model a species‘
niche. However, few studies have successfully described the ecological niche of terrestrial vertebrate
species. Ecologists often assume that environmental relationships are straight-lined, or at least
monotonic, even though unimodal responses can occur due to, for example, physiological tolerance
limits or niche overlap with predators or competitors. Herein we describe relationships between
environmental      factors and the relative density of the threatened wallum sedge frog (Litoria
olongburensis) throughout its mainland distribution during the breeding season. The relative importance
of the relationships have been determined by a multi- factorial analysis that considers unimodal forms of
response. Abiotic factors examined were acidity, water depth, turbidity and salinity, while biotic factors
examined were plant species abundance, potential competitor frogs and potential predators of the frog‘s
aquatic larvae. The two factors most strongly related to frog density were acidity and water depth.
Models of the species‘ ecological niche derived from Liebig‘s Law of the Minimum were used to obtain
estimates of optimal conditions, and unsuitable conditions, for each factor. This data is critical for the
long-term management of the species.



Siddons, Spencer (University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point);

The Occurrence of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis among Populations of Lithobates pipiens and
L. clamitans in Wisconsin, USA

Despite the global concern regarding the spread of the Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis , the fungus that
causes amphibian chydtridiomycosis, and the increasing number of studies documenting its presence
and distribution, very little has been reported from the state of Wisconsin. Herein we report the results of
a survey for B . dendrobatidis performed throughout Wisconsin during September 2009 and June and
July 2010. Swab sampling of Lithobates clamitans and L. pipiens , two species known to be susceptible
to infection by B. dendrobatidis , occurred at 50 sites representing all 24 of Wisconsin‘s water
management units. PCR analysis of swab samples revealed B. dendrobatidis to be widely distributed in
Wisconsin, infecting both Lithobates clamitans and Lithobates pipiens .                Proportions of water
management units, individual sites, and individual species testing positive for B. dendrobatidis will be
discussed. Whereas B. dendrobatidis is apparently widespread and common in Wisconsin, none of the
frogs sampled exhibited visible evidence of chytridiomycosis, nor could any such reports be found in the
literature. The potential significance of these findings, suggestions for future research, and conservation
implications will be discussed.




                                                                                                          657
Sidlauskas, Brian (Oregon State University); Hoekzema, Kendra (Oregon State University, Corvallis,
OR, United States); Sabaj Pérez, Mark (Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA,
United States)

Macroevolutionary Implications of an In-Progress Molecular Phylogeny for Anostomoid Fishes

The anostomoid fishes of South America (Order Characiformes) include more than 300 omnivorous,
herbivorous, invertivorous and detrivorous species with a spectacular range of jaw and head
morphologies. A phylogeny based on nearly 500 anatomical characters supports their current taxonomy
and formed the framework for recent cladewide studies of the group‘s ecomorphological diversification.
However, little molecular data has been available to contrast with the wealth of morphological information.
Herein, we present an in-progress phylogeny for anostomoid fishes based on likelihood and Bayesian
analysis of mitochondrial (COXI, 16S, CytB) and nuclear (Myh6) loci that includes representatives from
most major lineages in the morphological phylogeny. Support values using this set of loci vary across
the tree and some relationships are in flux, but much of the molecular tree agrees well with the
morphological hypothesis. Perhaps the most interesting difference lies in the relationships of two groups
of anostomid fishes with upturned jaws, Laemolyta on the one hand, and a diverse assemblage
including Anostomus and Pseudanos on the other. Morphological analysis places these groups as
sisters and nests them deeply within family Anostomidae. The molecular tree indicates a similar
placement for Laemolyta , but suggests that the clade including Anostomus and Pseudanos branched
off from the rest of Anostomidae early in evolutionary history.        This molecular hypothesis implies
substantial morphological convergence, including multiple evolutionary origins of the greatly elongated
quadrate that results in one of the most extreme head morphologies seen in the group. Analysis of head
morphometrics in the context of the molecular hypothesis using Brownie 2.0 suggests that anostomid
fishes experienced a faster rate of evolution along the axis in morphospace corresponding to that
convergence. These results are provocative and may imply a different macroevolutionary scenario than
previously proposed for this group, but they are also preliminary. Substantially more taxa and loci will
need to be added before the depth of the molecular dataset approaches that of the morphological.



Sidlauskas, Brian (Oregon State University);

The Collection in the Classroom and Beyond

In addition to their well-documented role in catalyzing scientific discoveries, natural history collections
provide exceptional resources with which to engage students in hands-on learning about biodiversity,
evolution, ecology, morphology and geography. For example, it is one thing to tell a student about how
fishes modify their fins for a variety of purposes (swimming, gliding, sucking, fishing!) and another to
confront them with specimens showing those diverse adaptations, ask them to compare and contrast the
fins that they see, and hypothesize how they might be used. University collections are well suited for
collections-based education because they bring the specimens into close proximity with students ranging
from grade school through the doctorate. During this talk, I‘ll highlight two programs at Oregon State
University that draw on the diversity of students in order to teach the diversity of fishes. In the Discovery
Units, undergraduate and graduate students design and lead hands-on sessions for groups of precollege
students using the teaching collection.      In the Systematics of Fishes course, undergraduates work in
teams to compare and contrast specimens, discover diagnostic characteristics and learn how to identify
fishes. We are in the early stages of developing an online version of this course based on a virtual
teaching collection that will preserve the observational, group-learning environment as much as possible.
Both programs are founded on the complementary ideas that active, hands-on engagement with
collection objects strengthens learning by allowing students to make discoveries themselves, and that



                                                                                                         658
mastery of a subject is best achieved by helping others grasp the material in turn. While my examples are
ichthyological in nature, these techniques translate easily to other taxa and represent some of the many
ways that collections can impact education broadly.



Sidor, Christian (University of Washington);

Tetrapods from the Permian and Triassic of Africa: New data on biogeographic provincialism.

The Middle Permian to Middle Triassic rocks of South Africa‘s Karoo Basin record detailed baseline data
on the composition of end-Paleozoic and early Mesozoic terrestrial ecosystems at moderate southern
paleo-latitudes.    The broad geographic distribution of several Karoo genera (e.g., Diictodon,
Lystrosaurus) has been considered compelling evidence for the unrestricted dispersal of tetrapods across
a coalesced Pangaean landscape as well as for interpreting Karoo data as a model for global patterns,
especially regarding the effects of the end-Permian extinction. Recent expeditions have targeted
equivalent strata in Niger, Tanzania, and Zambia to gauge the degree to which patterns observed in
Karoo data are basinal, regional, or continental in scale.

The Moradi Formation of northern Niger has yielded an Upper Permian fauna that is strikingly different
from those known elsewhere. All Moradi tetrapods are endemic and the taxonomic composition of the
fauna is unlike that of any coeval fauna, being dominated by large reptile (captorhinid and pareiasaurian)
herbivores. Most surprisingly, dicynodonts have yet to be discovered in the Moradi Formation, and
therapsids are represented by only two gorgonopsian fossils.

The Ruhuhu Basin of Tanzania and the Luangwa Basin of Zambia both host Upper Permian tetrapod
assemblages that are very similar to each other, as well as to the Karoo. Each area records some
endemic genera (e.g., Peltobatrachus in Tanzania; a new tusked cistecephalid in Zambia), but the bulk of
tetrapod genera are found in all three basins. Both the Usili Formation (Tanzania) and upper
Madumabisa Mudstone Formation (Zambia) contain a single fauna that correlates most closely with that
of the Cistecephalus Assemblage Zone of South Africa.

Middle Triassic (Anisian) rocks are present in South Africa, Tanzania, and Zambia and record faunal
assemblages postdating the Permo-Triassic mass extinction by approximately five million years. In
contrast to the single, broadly distributed faunal structure featured in the Upper Permian, the Anisian was
characterized multiple faunal provinces, the more equatorial of which contained dinosaur predecessors
unknown elsewhere. The results of newly developed network methods suggest that the end-Permian
mass extinction was responsible for the regionalization of tetrapod faunas within a geographically limited
area of southern Pangaea.



Siegel, Dustin (Southeast Missouri State University); Aldridge, Robert; Rheubert, Justin (Saint Louis
University, St. Louis, MO, United States); Gribbins, Kevin (Wittenberg University, Springfield, OH, United
States); Sever, David (Southeastern Louisiana University, Hammond, LA, United States); Trauth, Stanley
(Arkansas State University, State University, AR, United States)

The genital kidney of male Ambystoma maculatum (Amphibia, Urodela, Ambystomatidae)

In male salamanders sperm from the testes travel to the Wolffian duct via the vasa efferentia, afferent
epididymal ducts, epididymal renal corpuscles, epididymal nephrons, and efferent epididymal ducts. The
longitudinal collecting duct that often is found adjoining the vasa efferentia and afferent epididymal ducts



                                                                                                        659
longitudinally is ultrastructrually identical to that of the vasa efferentia. A complete ontology of the
―epididymal complex‖ in male salamanders is presented. We hypothesize that the vasa efferentia,
longitudinal collecting duct, and afferent epididymal ducts are derived from testicular tissue and are thus
homologous to the retia testium of amniotes. We tested the hypothesis that the genital kidney nephrons
are modified for sperm transport and no longer function in urine concentration/dilution by examining the
genital kidney with transmission electron microscopy. This novel approach resulted in support of our
hypothesis by the finding of an extended proximal segment of the proximal convoluted tubule that is
heavily ciliated, the absence of a basal labyrinth in the proximal convoluted tubule, and an apparent
decrease in absorptive function of the apical plasma membrane in the proximal convoluted tubule.



Sieggreen, Marcy (Detroit Zoological Society); Pratt, Kevin; Johnson, Becky (Detroit Zoological Society,
Royal Oak, United States)

Mudpuppy Population Size and Status Throughout the Great Lakes in Canada and the USA

The mudpuppy (Necturus maculosus), sometimes called ―slime-dog‖ or ―snot-otter,‖ is the largest
amphibian found throughout the Great Lakes ranging between 8 and 15 inches in length. Little is known
about their behavior, migration and population status in the wild. Over the last ten years, several hundred
have washed on shore. However, because so little is known about these animals, the causes of these
events or their impacts on the population cannot be determined. The Detroit Zoological Society began
informal surveys in 2005 to determine the health and population size of animals within the Detroit River.
In 2009, a more formal and scientific approach was developed, including water quality and atmospheric
recordings. Since then, consistent data has been collected and surveys conducted on a monthly basis.
Additionally, increasing interest from other zoos has resulted in a collaborative effort of monitoring and
surveying these animals throughout the Great Lakes. These data are being compiled along with most of
the historical and anecdotal data. This will allow us to determine the status of the population, monitor it for
changes, and intervene if necessary.



Simmons, John (Museologica);

Looking back at moving forward-an historic view of how new technologies and discoveries
changed collections

The first natural history collections contained only specimens that could be preserved dry.       Individual
specimens were rarely marked or labeled, and collections care was limited.            Post-1600 advances in
preservation technology included the introduction of glass and other stable containers; the use of
embalming chemicals to dehydrate tissues; specimen preparation using wax injections; the application of
arsenic and other pesticides; and the discovery of several fluid preservatives, most significantly ethyl
alcohol. During the 1800s, improvements were made in containers and seals; cataloging and labeling of
individual specimens became common; the concept of the study skin was developed; and formaldehyde
fixation was introduced. Post-1975 collections grew increasingly larger and more complex, and the use
of specimens and collection data extended beyond taxonomic uses. These larger, more heavily used
collections required more care, resulting in the advent of the profession of collections management. The
use of electronic databases greatly improved the management of collection records after 1980, but
diverted significant time away from collection care.    In 1985 the Society for the Preservation of Natural
History Collections began promoting preventive conservation based collections management
emphasizing collections storage environments and measures to prolong the useful life of specimens and



                                                                                                           660
associated data. With the widespread application of electronic database systems and digital imaging,
collections and specimen data have become an international resource. To meet future research needs
while properly managing collections, specimen preservation techniques should be diversified; more
reliable means of DNA preservation must be developed; methods for cost-effective archival storage of
collection information in electronic formats developed; and collection database systems must become
comprehensive collections management tools that track specimen interactions with storage environments
and individual specimen use histories.



Simpfendorfer, Colin (Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries and Aquaculture); Rigby, Cassandra
(James Cook University, Cairns, Q, Australia)

How low is too low? Depletion reference points for deepwater chondrichthyans

Deepwater chondrichthyans are among the most vulnerable to human impacts because of their late ages
of maturity and low reproductive rates. While this vulnerability is being increasingly recognized,
understanding how to best manage these populations is still limited. Here we use life history data to
calculate levels of population productivity and estimate the levels of depletion at which Maximum
Sustainable Yield (MSY) occur. These estimates of the population levels at which MSY are achieved
provide target reference points for conservation and management of deepwater chondrichthyans. The
patterns in these reference points with factors such as depth, taxonomy and reproductive mode are
examined. Gaps in our knowledge that will help improve the conservation and management of deepwater
species are also identified.



Simpkins, Clay (Griffith University); Hero, Jean-Marc (Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia)

Use of anthropogenic habitats by 'acid' frogs associated with wallum heathland along the eastern
Australian coastline

Anthropogenic waterbodies may play a pivotal role in amphibian conservation, especially when
amphibians are under threat from climate change or when attempting to compensate for habitat loss.
However, no studies have examined the suitability of anthropogenic waterbodies for ‗acid‘ frog species
restricted to wallum healthland vegetation along the eastern Australian coastline. We surveyed amphibian
assemblages within 12 natural and 25 anthropogenic waterbodies in wallum heathland over the summer
period of 2011/2012. Anthropogenic habitat usage was dependant on the amphibian species, with a
majority of generalist/non-threatened amphibian species favouring anthropogenic over natural
waterbodies. Threatened amphibian species were recorded from both anthropogenic and natural
waterbodies, with density being highest in natural waterbodies. The total number of species present
within natural waterbodies was lower then anthropogenic waterbodies. Quantitative analysis was
conducted for two amphibian species, which were recorded from more than ten waterbodies, to determine
what variables were influencing their distribution within the waterbodies surveyed. We found that the
threatened acid frog species, Litoria olongburensis (Wallum Sedge Frog), was detected in both natural
and anthropogenic waterbodies. However, the highest densities of L. olongburensis were associated with
natural waterbodies where aquatic sedge cover was the highest. Additionally, a majority of waterbodies
where L. olongburensis occurred were below pH 4.5. The non-specialist frog, Litoria fallax, a potential
competitor of L. olongburensis, was strongly associated within anthropogenic waterbodies. Additionally, L.
fallax abundance was associated with pH, salinity and turbidity. The presence of adult frogs does not
reflect breeding success; with tadpoles of L. olongburensis found in a majority of natural waterbodies and



                                                                                                       661
present in only 2 of the 25 anthropogenic waterbodies. Our findings demonstrate that the Wallum Sedge
Frogs of eastern Australia have specific habitat requirements that must be maintained in natural systems,
and adjacent anthropogenic wetlands, to ensure the long-term conservation of acid frogs in wallum
heathland.



Sinervo, Barry (University of California); Miles, Donald B. (Ohio University, Athens, OH, United States);
Mendez de la Cruz, Fausto (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México, D.F., Mexico);
Ibargoyaguentia, Nora (INIBIOMA-CONICET, San Carlos de Bariloche, Río Negro, Argentina); Corl,
Ammon (University of Lund, Uppsala, Sweden); Bastiaans, Beth (University of California, Santa Cruz, CA,
United States); Sites, Jr., Jack W. (Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, United States)

The rock-paper-scissors social system and the origin of viviparity and high rates of speciation

We present a brief overview of the rock-paper-scissors mating system (Sinervo &amp; Lively 1996,
Nature) in the side-blotched lizard and the genetic control for color, life history traits (Sinervo et al. 2000,
Nature), and social behaviors (Sinervo et al. 2006 PNAS). We then present patterns of phylogenetic
changes in number of color morphs in side-blotched lizards (Corl et al. 2010, PNAS) and new data on
morphs across all the phrynosomatid lizards of the US and Mexico. The phylogeny for Phrynosomatidae
shows 13 origins of the RPS game, and that the speciation rate more than doubles when the RPS
originates, largely because lineages that are RPS give birth to many daughter lineages in which morphs
are lost, thus producing dimorphic and monomorphic lineages at a high rate. Furthermore, the origin of
viviparity appears to be related to the origins of trimorphic RPS systems in phrynosomatid lizards, in
lacertids of Europe and in liolaemids of South America. We also show that speciation rate among lizard
families of the world is related to the origin of color polymorphism, and that viviparity is also related to
origins of morphs. Therefore the rock-paper-scissors mating system has been responsible for the
evolution of considerable diversity in color, social systems and life history traits, including the origins of
viviparity. Rock-paper-scissors social systems generate conditions for the origin of more complex social
systems, including kin cooperation and other forms of genic cooperation, and perhaps even more
complex social systems in the context of viviparity. When morphs are lost, genes for life history and social
system present in dimorphic and monomorphic descendant species evolve rapidly from the ancestral
trimorphic RPS species, promoting reproductive isolation, divergence in social traits, and thus,
contributing to a rapid speciation process.



Singer, Randy (Florida Museum of Natural History);

Are Dehydrated Specimens A Lost Cause? A Case Study To Reclaim Dehydrated Fluid-Preserved
Specimens

Fluid-preserved specimens in collections persist only as long as their preservative is maintained. When
preservatives evaporate due to neglect or container malfunction, collection managers are often forced to
discard the specimens. Subjecting specimens to a rehydration process can be both time consuming and
hazardous. A recent development in vertebrate specimen rehydration that mitigates these hazards and is
relatively simple to conduct is discussed. Through the use of concentrated water vapor, and gradual
staging in various concentrations of preservative, dehydrated museum specimens can be rehydrated.
Similar techniques have been applied to invertebrates for decades, and more recently to herpetofauna.
Herein a new technique is applied to both fishes and mammals and its efficacy for most other groups is
indicated.




                                                                                                            662
Sinsch, Ulrich (University of Koblenz-Landau, Department of Biology. Koblenz, Germany); Dehling, J.
Maximilian (University of Koblenz-Landau, Dep. Biology, Koblenz, Germany)

Acoustic niche partitioning in an anuran community inhabiting an afromontane wetland (Butare,
Rwanda)

The species richness and calling activity of an anuran community inhabiting an agricultural wetland area
at 1 645 m asl near Butare, Rwanda, was assessed with visual and acoustic transects. The community
included 15 species which were readily distinguishable using morphological, bioacoustic and molecular
features. Eight species (Xenopus victorianus, Amietophrynus regularis, Ptychadena anchietae, P.
porosissima, Kassina senegalensis, Afrixalus quadrivittatus, Hyperolius kivuensis, H. lateralis) were
taxonomically identified. The remaining seven species (3 species of Hyperolius , 2 Phrynobatrachus , 1
Amietia , 1 Ptychadena ) represent undescribed or currently unrecognized taxa suggesting a significant
magnitude of overlooked a mphibian diversity in afromontane communities. Acoustic niche analysis of
the 14 species producing airborne advertisement calls integrated the spatial dimension, i.e. the
microhabitat used for calling, the temporal dimension, i.e. the daytime at which calling takes place, and
the call structure dimension, i.e. the physical features of the advertisement call . Average standardized
acoustic niche breadth was narrow (measured: 0.08, predicted: 0.07) and showed low variability (0.04 -
0.16) among species, which means that empiric data are in full agreement with the predictions of
stochastic niche theory for species-saturated communities. Niche segregation was mainly based on
advertisement call features, whereas spatial and temporal niche dimension contributed less. Measured
average niche overlap (0.30) was intermediate between random overlap (0.51) and minimum possible
overlap (0.11) indicating significant acoustic resource partitioning. The only taxon group with widely
overlapping acoustic niches were Ptychadena spp. which might indicate a recent invasion of the
community by one or two of the three species.



Sinsch, Ulrich (University of Koblenz-Landau, Department of Biology. Koblenz, Germany); Neukirch,
Sarah (University of Koblenz-Landau, Koblenz, Germany)

Diel vocalization activity of the afromontane umbrella species Hyperolius castaneus under
controlled conditions

The highland anuran communities (2000 – 2800 m) of the Albertine Rift in Rwanda and DR Congo
include Ahl´s reed frog ( Hyperolius castaneus ) which represents a suitable umbrella species for
threatened highland Albertine Rift endemics. H. castaneus is easily detected in field based on the
characteristic advertisement and aggression calls which were emitted during the day and at night. In
captivity (LD 12:12, temperature range 20-27°C), we recorded continuously calling activity of nine males
collected in the Nyungwe National Park at 2370m, using a Song Meter SM2 (Wildlife Acoustics, Inc .).
Responses to acoustic stimulation by playback-advertisement calls and of simulated rainfall were tested.
During trials frogs gave predominantly advertisement calls and rarely aggression calls. Independent of
ambient humidity, call activity was significantly greater during darkness, but never ceased. Acoustic
stimulation increased daytime activity to night levels, but direct vocal response to playback-advertisement
calls were rare. Calling activity decreased with rising temperature. Our study supports that advertisement
of H. castaneus occurs throughout the whole year day and night, making this species an ideal umbrella
species for the rapid assessment of threatened anurans in montane Rift communities.




                                                                                                       663
Sion, Guy (Hebrew University);

Can minor directional asymmetry of the eye reflect brain laterality? The gecko Ptyodactylus
guttatus as a model

Fear and fear processing are known in primates and other mammals to be correlated with the intensity of
brain laterality, and this association was confirmed using fMRI and EEG particularly in humans. The
presented study aims to demonstrate such an association in a gecko, Ptyodactylus guttatus.

1) Minor directional asymmetry (DA) in eye diameter of the gecko is correlated with levels of fear: We
found that geckos which have a right eye larger than the left (right-biased), have higher levels of
corticosterone and also tend to forage closer to cover, presumably indicating a higher level of fear.

2) In a different set of experiments, geckos that tend to bypass an obstacle from the left (i.e., are also
right-biased) have had a significantly higher testosterone level and higher breathing rates.

3) Assuming that eye DA and the detour DA are associated with brain laterality, we can conclude that fear
is correlated with brain laterality also in the gecko Ptyodactylus guttatus. Further study on the lizard brain
might unravel whether this similarity between the gecko and the primates is more than a coincidence or is
derived from a common evolutionary process.



Sipiorski, Justin (Department of Biology and Museum of Natural History, University of Wisconsin
Stevens Point); Howard, Michael (University of Wisconsin - Stevens Point, Appleton, United States);
Enright, Caitlin; Nickel, Adam (University of Wisconsin - Stevens Point, Canada)

An efficient method for georeferencing frequently collected localities for historical, non-
referenced ichthyological collections.

A wealth of ecological data exists within the ichthyological specimen collections of universities and natural
history museums. A great deal of data mining within existing collections begins with georeferencing. In
order to obtain meaningful data quickly, we constructed a geographic information system (GIS) basemap
of all public access localities for the Plover River system, which encompassed Portage, Marathon, and
Langlade counties in Wisconsin. Public access sites were referenced using the North American Datum
1983 (NAD83) coordinate system via web resources. Public Land Survey System (PLSS) coordinates
assigned to specimen lots collected in the Plover River system were converted to the NAD83 system as
well using a number of online resources and government publications. By referencing all possible
collection localities in an often-collected region, historically collected lots may be referenced in batches
rather than iteratively. All lots collected through time from one location (matched by common locality) can
be georeferenced simultaneously. The specific attributes of each collection lot associated with the Plover
River were translated into map layers as well. To test our georeferenced lots, we created a map layer
identifying black spot parasite spread and persistence throughout the Plover River system.




                                                                                                          664
Skerratt, Lee (James Cook University); Berger, Lee (James Cook University, Canada); Murray, Kris
(James Cook University and Ecohealth Alliance, Canada)

Determining how disease can cause mass global decline and extinction of species: the example of
the epidemiological investigation of chytridiomycosis

A vital step towards mitigating the enigmatic decline of several hundred species of amphibians was
determining its cause. The outbreak investigation progressed significantly when a ―One Health‖ approach
was adopted approximately 14 years after initial amphibian declines by herpetologist Keith McDonald.
This then led to analysis of outbreak data by an epidemiologist and a tentative diagnosis of a novel
pathogen spreading into naïve amphibian populations (Laurance et al 1996). A key factor in progress was
incorporating prior knowledge of disease gained from studies of disease in animals including humans by
epidemiologist Rick Speare. Recruiting a veterinary PhD student, Lee Berger, to conduct a pathological
investigation of the outbreak at Big Tableland, Queensland, Australia led to the discovery of
chytridiomycosis and its impact on amphibians (Berger et al 1998). Additional epidemiological
investigations revealed that the spread of chytridiomycosis is the worst disease affecting vertebrate
biodiversity in recorded history and had caused the severe decline of up to 200 species of amphibians
globally with many of these now believed to be extinct (Skerratt et al 2007). Additional epidemiological
investigations have shown the key determinants of the disease‘s impact such as environmental
preferences (Murray et al 2009, 2011). These findings are now being used to estimate risk and guide
management in terms of surveillance, biosecurity and emergency response and as a framework for
investigation of other wildlife diseases and declines (Skerratt et al 2009).



Skipwith, Phillip (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, UC Berkeley); Bauer, Aaron; Jackman, Todd
(Villanova University, Canada)

Phylogeography and Population Structure of the New Caledonian Gargoyle Gecko (Rhacodactylus
auriculatus)

Rhacodactylus auriculatus is a representative of a species-rich and morphologically diverse diplodactylid
gecko radiation endemic to the South Pacific island of New Caledonia.            This species is unique in a
number of behavioral, morphological, and ecological aspects. The recent discovery of R. auriculatus in
the northern province of the Grande Terre has increased the known range of this taxon, making it the
most widespread of the giant geckos currently assigned to the paraphyletic genus Rhacodactylus .
Phylogenetic analysis using concatenated mtDNA (ND2 + WANCY) and nucDNA (RAG1, MXRA5,
KIAA1549, KIF24, PDC) recovered two reciprocally monophyletic groups, a northern one comprising
individuals restricted to the northern ultramafic peaks and a southern assemblage containing all other
localities. Bayesian clustering analyses with S tructure support the presence of two populations with little
or no admixture. Dating analyses suggest that the two populations began diverging around 2.8 mya. The
relative isolation of the northern ultramafic peaks results in a high degree of structuring between sites in
the combined analysis and dating analyses support that this isolation occurred relatively early. The lack of
geographic structure within the southern population seen in the haplotype networks suggests that a
combination of widespread gene flow and incomplete lineage sorting may have played a role. This lack of
structuring may have been facilitated by historically continuous habitat in the southern province. The
divergence between the northern and southern clades as well as the structure seen within the northern
population may be linked to the fragmentation of suitable habitat during the Pliocene due to climate
change.




                                                                                                        665
Skutschas, Pavel (Saint Petersburg State University);

Mesozoic lissamphibians from Middle Asia and Siberia

Mesozoic terrestrial deposits are widely distributed in Siberia (central and Eastern part of Russia) and in
Middle Asia     (Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and South Kazakhstan) and have
yielded diverse vertebrate faunas. Three groups of lissamphibians are known from the Mesozoic of
Middle Asia (albanerpetontids, frogs, and salamanders) and only two (frogs and salamanders) from
Siberia. Albanerpetontids are extremely rare in Mesozoic of Asia and their fossil record is limited to the
Cenomanian Khodzhakul and the Turonian Bissekty formations (Uzbekistan). Albanerpetontid from the
Khodzhakul Fm. Represents the first record of the genus Albanerpeton in Asia. In Siberia record of
Mesozoic frogs is limited to one taxon with possible discoglossid affinities from the Barremian?-Aptian
Khilok Fm. in Transbaikalia. In Mesozoic of            Middle Asia frogs are diverse and        are known
predominantly from the Khodzhakul Fm. (four taxa with uncertain affinities), Bissekty Fm. (numerous
names gobiatids and ―discoglossid‖ taxa some of which are obvious synonymous). Except these
geological units, rare and poorly definable remains of frogs are also known from the Cenomanian
Dzharakuduk Fm. and Turonian-Coniacian Aitym Fm. in Uzbekistan and Santonian Yalovach Fm. in
Tajikistan. Salamanders in Siberia are known from the Bathonian Itat Fm. in Krasnoyarsk Region (stem
salamander Urupia monstrosa and two undescribed taxa) and the Aptian-Albian Ilek Fm. in Kemerovo
Province (crown-group salamander Kiyatriton leshchinskiyi ). In the Jurassic of Middle Asia salamanders
are represented by Kokartus honorarius (Bathonian Balabansai Fm. in Kyrgyzstan) . The younger
record of salamanders from Middle Asia is restricted to only two Late Cretaceous salamander genera: b
asal crown group salamander with possible cryptobranchoid affinities Nesovtriton ( Turonian Bissekty
Fm. ) and cryptobranchid Eoscapherpeton (Cenomanian-Campanian, Khodzhakul, Dzharakuduk,
Bissekty and Aitym formations in Uzbekistan and Yalovach Fm. in Tajikistan). The composition of the
Late Cretaceous      lissamphibian    assemblages is different between Middle Asia and Euramerica:
albanerpetontids are rare in Middle Asia (in contrast to North America) and there is no evidence of any
salamander families that were common for Middle Asia (and whole Asia) and Euramerica.



Slimani, Tahar (cadi Ayyad University); Abderazzak, FATTAH (Cadi Ayyad University, Faculty of
Sciences, Laboratory of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, PO Box 3290, Marrakech 40 000,
Morocco, Canada); El Hassan, EL MOUDEN; Mohamed, RADI (Cadi Ayyad University, Faculty of
Sciences, Laboratory of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, PO Box 3290, Marrakech 40 000,
Morocco., Canada); Stefano, DOGLIO (Società Romana di Scienze Naturali, Ente di Ricerca Pura, via
Fratelli Maristi 43, ¿Villa Esmeralda¿, 00137 Roma (Italy), Canada)

Ecology and population parameters of Pseudepidalea brongersmai (Hoogmoed, 1972) living in
small temporary ponds in the arid area of Jbilets (Western Morocco)

Climate Change including more or less extended drought periods in arid environments may be one of the
major causes of animal populations decline. The object of this work is to study the population
demography and ecology of        Pseudepidalea brongersmai, a Moroccan endemic amphibian living in an
arid environment. The study was conducted in the central Jbilets (Western Morocco) during 4 years
(2008-2011). The relative abundance of the species in two nearby located temporary ponds (maximal
diameter of 4 and 6 meters, respectively) was 86 individuals. The adult sex ratio was close to 5.4 for
males. The average size of individuals was 43.8 mm (min: 35.5 mm to max: 48.1 mm), with an average
weight of 5.8g (min: 5g to max: 6.4g). The specimens with size between 40 and 45 mm represented over
53% of the sample. The study of the reproduction and behaviour activity provided us extensive
knowledge about the adaptation of this toad to an arid and unpredictable environment. In fact, there is a



                                                                                                       666
strong connection between this species phenology and the rainfalls: an early activity and reproduction
occurred immediately after the rains, apparently as an adaptation of this species to its constraining
environment (to optimize the chances of tadpoles survival). The diets of adults analyzed from faecal
contents and based on the occurrence frequency and          the relative number of prey showed that
Coleopteran and Formicidae constitute the dominant dietary items. This study has been supported by
the Hassan II Academy for Science and Technique – Project " ICGVSA".



Sloan, Leah (Humboldt State University); Marks, Sharyn (Humboldt State University, Canada)

Where Have All the Young Turtles Gone? Western Pond Turtle (Actinemys marmorata) Population
Health in Lentic Habitats along the Trinity River, California

As populations of a species decline, an understanding of the regional variation in population health can
aid in focusing conservation efforts. Over the past century Western Pond Turtle ( Actinemys marmorata
) populations have declined throughout much of their range (Baja California through Washington) as a
result of habitat loss, verexploitation, introduced species, and water course alterations.            The Trinity
River, in northwestern California, has been modified from its natural state by damming and flow
regulations; these alterations have decreased river quality for turtles.         We investigated the health of
Western Pond Turtle populations in alternative, lentic habitats adjacent to the Trinity River and its
tributaries using four indicators of population health: 1) age structure, 2) size structure, 3) adult size, and
4) growth rate of young turtles.       Of six lentic habitats sampled, four were biased towards large, old
turtles.    These habitats had prolific Bullfrog populations, while the other two sites lacked Bullfrogs.
Given that Bullfrogs will eat hatchling turtles, it appears that Bullfrogs are inhibiting turtle recruitment. The
same four lentic habitats also had turtles with faster growth rates and larger adult sizes, likely a result of
warmer water temperatures.           Overall, conservation efforts should focus on creating or preserving
ephemeral lentic habitats that dry in late summer; turtles and native anurans do not require permanent
water, but Bullfrog larvae usually take two years to metamorphose.



Smid, Jiri (National Museum); Carranza, Salvador (Institute of Evollutionary Biology, Barcelona, Spain);
Gvozdik, Vaclav (Nationa Museum, Prague, Czech Republic); Kratochvil, Lukas (Charles University,
Prague, Czech Republic); Moravec, Jiri (National Museum, Prague, Czech Republic)

Cryptic diversity of Arabian geckos of the genus Hemidactylus

The genus Hemidactylus includes over one hundred species, majority of which occurs in tropical Africa
and Indian subcontinent. The Arabian Peninsula is known to host 13 species, some of them described
very recently suggesting that overall diversity of these geckos in this particular region is still
underestimated. In our study we used material comprising more than 200 specimens densely covering
Oman, Yemen (including Socotra Island), UAE, Jordan as well as several localities from adjacent
Northwest Africa (Egypt, Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia) and Iran. Sequence data gained from up to four
mitochondrial (12S rRNA, ND4, tRNAs and cytochrome b) and four nuclear genes (RAG-1, RAG-2, C-
mos, MC1R) were used to infer the phylogenetic relationships among all known Arabian species from the
Arid clade species group. As our results suggest, the real diversity of Hemidactylus in Arabia is much
higher than ever expected. Analysis of mtDNA revealed about nine new main lineages (depending on the
level of accepted intraspecific variation), all of them were also clearly identifiable and supported by
nuclear data. Most of these new lineages inhabit mountain areas in northern Oman and southern and




                                                                                                             667
central Yemen. In addition, several oversea dispersal events of the gecko fauna across the Gulf of Aden
are reported.



Smith, Freya (Institute of Zoology); Durrant, Chris; Peniche, Gaby; Cunningham, Andrew (Institute of
Zoology, Canada)

Temporal Changes in the Prevalence of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in Temperate Mixed
Species Amphibian Assemblages

Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ( Bd ) is an amphibian pathogen that has received global recognition as
a fundamental driver underpinning amphibian declines worldwide. Heralded by the Amphibian
Conservation Action Plan as ‗the worst infectious disease ever recorded among vertebrates‘ this
extraordinary organism is known to infect amphibians of over 450 species and can be found in almost
every habitat in which it has been sought. Taking into consideration, also, that amphibians are frequently
to be found within mixed species communities, this presents an enormous diversity of ecological systems
within which to study the epidemiology of this pathogen. In 2010 we undertook an intensive regime of
sampling at 8 mixed-species breeding sites in the UK, all of which had a history of infection with Bd . The
primary aim was to gain a greater understanding of Bd dynamics at system level, but with a wider goal
of identifying trends which might be more generally applicable. Specifically, our objectives were (1) to
identify differences in infection prevalence between UK species and (2) to identify differences in infection
prevalence through time. To achieve this, each of the 8 selected sites was surveyed on 5 separate
occasions during the breeding season (March-June). At each time point, the surveyor was tasked with
catching and sampling the maximum number of metamorphosed amphibians as was possible, within a 6
hour time frame. Samples for Bd were collected by swabbing the skin with a dry-tipped rayon swab and
were subsequently analysed using qPCR. In total, over 2,500 samples were collected, representing all 6
UK native species and 2 introduced species of amphibian. Primary analyses suggest a number of
significant results, including both temporal and species components of Bd infection. The final results of
this study will be presented and their implications for Bd surveys of temperate, mixed species amphibian
assemblages will be discussed.



Smith, Geoffrey (Utah State University);

Do habitat characteristics limit population densities of American alligators in Arkansas?

Abstract—Once threatened with extinction, American alligators have recovered across most of their
historic range.    Alligators reach the northwestern boundary of their range in Arkansas, where habitat
characteristics might limit populations.     Although low population densities have been dismissed by
managers as consequences of poor habitat, no habitat studies have been performed for alligators in
Arkansas. It is crucial that habitat requirements of alligators throughout the range be better understood
to protect this species from future population declines.        Towards this goal, we conducted habitat
assessments and population surveys for nineteen bodies of water within the known range of alligators in
southern Arkansas to determine which habitat characteristics were most important.            Nine habitat
characteristics, including depth, Secchi depth, canopy cover, vegetative cover, shoreline canopy cover,
shoreline vegetative cover, shoreline development, area, and corridor distance were incorporated into a
stepwise multiple regression model with alligator population density as the dependent variable for all
sites. Vegetative cover near the shoreline was the most important component of the model, followed by
distance to the nearest river corridor.    Although significantly higher population densities of alligators



                                                                                                        668
were observed at privately owned sites, subsequent analysis revealed no significant difference in
measured habitat variables between private and publicly owned sites.           Although the privately owned
sites displayed higher population densities on average, the significance was marginal.             However,
considering the measured habitat variables were not statistically different, there could be anthropogenic
factors limiting alligators on public lands that would have otherwise suitable habitat.



Smith, Gerald (University of Michigan); Carpenter, Nathan (College of Idaho, Canada)

Late Cenozoic Ancestors of Western U.S. Freshwater Fish Species

Fish species diversity of Mio-Pliocene western U.S. was higher than modern diversity because of wetter
climates at that time. Hydrographic isolation of drainage basins between barrier mountains in the Great
Basin and surrounding ranges blocked immigration; that isolation permits identification of many ancestors
of our modern western fauna. Species diversity was highest in the rift lakes on the Snake River Plain,
Idaho and Oregon. Later, drainage of those lakes decimated the fauna. We now have specimens of 35
genera and over 60 species scattered across 96 different formations and horizons in 10 western states.
Some genera are known back to 12 Ma and many of these possess traits more apomorphic than in their
recent descendants. Because lineages have dense records with age constraints they provide good
estimates of first appearance dates for molecular clock studies. These fossils provide interpretations of
past assembly of modern river drainages useful to geologists and biogeographers. They permit estimates
of rates of origination, extinction, and diversification. The morphological synapomorphies that diagnose
clades of ancestral cyprinids and catostomids call into question many molecular phylogenies that have
been misled by introgressive homoplasy. The most important perspectives offered by this fossil record
concern effects of climatic and environmental change on fish evolution.



Smith, Kieran (Florida Atlantic University Elasmobranch Research Lab); Kajiura, Stephen (Florida
Atlantic University Elasmobranch Research Lab, Canada)

Elasmobranch Bycatch Mitigation

Commercial longline fishing results in large amounts of incidental bycatch with elasmobranch fishes
(sharks, skates, and rays) constituting approximately 25% of the total catch. A variety of techniques have
been proposed to reduce catch rates of non-target species. Teleost species, like swordfish and tuna, lack
electrosensory systems so developing technologies which target the ampullary organs in sharks may
provide an avenue to selectively deter elasmobranchs without impacting the catch rate of target teleosts.
Lanthanide metals are extremely reactive when immersed in salt water and produce an electric field
detectable by the elasmobranch electrosensory system. The employment of lanthanide metals to reduce
shark bycatch has shown mixed results. It is therefore essential that these metals undergo further
investigation in order to properly determine their effectiveness as a tool for elasmobranch bycatch
mitigation. A controlled scientific longline study will be conducted to test the efficacy of the lanthanide
metal neodymium at reducing elasmobranch catch per unit effort (CPUE). Baited longline hooks will be
treated with neodymium and catch rates will be compared to that of controls. Preliminary data suggest
shark CPUE was decreased by 66% on neodymium treated hooks compared to untreated hooks,
whereas teleost catch rate did not differ. The effectiveness of neodymium varies among species with
significant reductions shown for blacktip ( Carcharhinus limbatus ) and Atlantic sharpnose sharks (
Rhizoprionon terranovae ) but less dramatic differences for other species indicating that interspecies
variability may exist. Galvanic interaction between the lead control and stainless steel leader created an



                                                                                                       669
electric field well within the range detectable by elasmobranchs. Based upon the large voltage produced
by dissimilar metals in seawater, we devised an alternative electrogenic stimulus. The juxtaposition of
two metals with different galvanic potentials creates in seawater an electric field nearly identical to the
lanthanide metals. Because a nearly identical voltage can be generated with common metals, producing
similar catch reductions at a fraction of the cost, this alternative technology is potentially a viable tool for
reduction of incidental shark bycatch in commercial longline fishing.



Smith, Krister (Senckenberg Museum);

Squamate historical phylogeography and Cenozoic climate change: Priming modern diversity
patterns

It is well known that climate change over the course of the Cenozoic Era was momentous. The Eocene in
particular was bounded by some of the most dramatic climatic shifts of the Cenozoic, beginning with the
rapid global warming of the Paleocene/Eocene Thermal Maximum and terminating with the global cooling
of the earliest Oligocene, a momentous shift that heralded the ice-house world of today. A variety of
studies have suggested that the cooling trend since the Eocene has led to a concentration of biodiversity
into the tropics, which may partly explain the latitudinal diversity gradient that is observed in almost all
major clades. However, direct paleontological data have rarely been brought to bear on this problem.

Recently elaborated techniques bring new insight to paleontological data. On this basis I have assembled
a data-set of Paleogene herpetofaunas to examine phylogeographic structure over time and to elucidate
the relationship between Cenozoic climate change and modern biodiversity patterns. The data-set
includes faunal assemblages deriving from different latitudes and spanning the Paleocene/Eocene and
the Eocene/Oligocene boundaries and incorporates phylogenetic relations. It is especially rich with regard
to iguanid lizards. Warming near the Paleocene/Eocene boundary appears to have resulted in a
northward dispersal of numerous lineages. This produced a comparatively homogeneous Eocene fauna
that persisted until the close of the epoch. Cooling in the earliest Oligocene then caused a retreat of
many, but not all, lineages toward the equator.

In addition to taxa with no close living relatives, mid-latitude Eocene faunas thus comprise two sets of
lineages: those whose extant members are restricted to megathermal parts of the world (the tropics,
roughly speaking), and those whose extant members remained in extratropical latitudes as climate cooled
and adapted to the harsher climatic conditions. The paleontological puzzle is still missing major pieces
and is thus far from complete. Still, it suggests the view that the basic composition of the modern tropical
and extratropical fauna of North Ameirca was set by late Paleogene cooling in addition to intercontinental
dispersal.



Smith, Leo (The Field Museum);

Evolution of the lachrymal saber with comments on the relationship between stonefishes and
scorpionfishes.

Recent anatomical investigations have identified a locking mechanism between the lachrymal and the
maxilla in stonefishes ( sensu lato ). This pawl-like linkage allows a substantive ventral spine on the
lachrymal to be projected laterally and locked out through rotation of both the lachrymal and maxilla. This
specialization also involves modifications to the cheek musculature and connective tissue. Through




                                                                                                            670
phylogenetic analysis, this feature is shown to be a synapomorphy of the stonefishes (Apistidae,
Aploactinidae, Eschmeyeridae, Gnathanacanthidae, Pataecidae, Synanceiidae, and Tetrarogidae). This
multi-system character provides support for the inclusion of Apistidae within this clade and the exclusion
of Congiopodidae from the stonefishes, as was shown in the molecular study of Smith and Craig (2007.
Casting the Percomorph Net Widely: The Importance of Broad Taxonomic Sampling in the Search for the
Placement of Serranid and Percid Fishes, Copeia 35-55). The limits, relationships, and taxonomy of the
Scorpaenoidei will be discussed in light of this new phylogeny.



Smolensky, Nicole (Texas A&M University);

Phylogeography of Dwarf Crocodiles (Osteolaemus spp.)

The dwarf crocodile, Osteolaemus tetraspis, is hunted throughout its geographic distribution primarily for
food and there is concern that this species cannot endure current harvest pressure. Moreover, there is
new evidence suggesting this species is part of a cryptic species complex (Eaton et al. 2009) making the
geographic distributions of Osteolaemus species uncertain. The Guineo-Congolian region is one of seven
regions of endemism containing mountain archipelagos and river basins that serve as biogeographic
boundaries for amphibian, bird and mammal communities. I test two alternative hypotheses that may
serve as a biogeographic divide among cryptic species of Osteolaemus. An extensive mountain range
along the Cameroon-Nigerian border may hinder gene flow among Osteolaemus species and thus serve
as a biogeographic boundary among the cryptic species. Alternatively the cryptic species may be sorting
by river basins. I collected tissues samples from Osteolaemus species on east and west side of the
Cameroon-Nigerian highlands and from the Ogoouè, Cross River and Congo River basins. Preliminary
evidence of the mitochondrial COI gene do not support the hypothesis that the highlands serve as a
biogeographic divide among cryptic species.



Snyder, Alexandra (University of New Mexico);

Curating and managing project-based collections of fishes

Fish specimens and data, curated by the Museum of Southwestern Biology (MSB), are typically used in
studies conducted by state and federal agencies to monitor the status of New Mexico fish species and
aquatic conditions. The MSB plays key research and conservation roles in providing agency biologists
with important contemporary and historical data on New Mexico river basins and fish species. Agency
biologists annually contribute specimens and data to the MSB while conducting rare species risk
assessments, life history and ecological studies, and for ―Chain of Custody‖ evidence. These collections,
which are accessioned by the MSB at regular intervals throughout the year, present challenges in
conserving such an abundance of material. The MSB has developed curatorial protocols for collections
that have associated long-term aquatic microhabitat data, contain large numbers of specimens, tend to be
redundant in species composition, and are sometimes preserved for analyses other than morphometric.
This presentation will discuss deaccessioning cataloged specimens, techniques facilitating access to
primary and ancillary collections yet meeting requirements for long-term conservation, and a database
constructed for fish ecology studies.




                                                                                                       671
Snyder, Matthew (San Francisco State University);

Variation in Armor Reduction Among Coastal Populations of Threespine Stickleback

Threespine stickleback populations have repeatedly and independently evolved armor loss, including
reduced lateral plates and pelvic spine loss, in various freshwater environments. Armor loss has been
shown to be adaptive in these environments, and the genetic basis of both traits is known. Such variable
traits that are easily quantified provide excellent opportunities to examine the spatial scales and patterns
of morphological variation associated with specific habitats. Patterns of armor loss have been
characterized from lake and stream populations. However little is known about patterns of armor loss in
coastal and near-coastal fresh water or brackish water populations. In this study, threespine stickleback
populations in California were sampled from three coastal lagoons in San Mateo County, multiple sites
along the Russian River in Sonoma Sounty, and in Bodega Bay. Frequencies of individuals with high, low,
and partial plate morphologies were quantified using lateral plate counts of fish that have been stained
using an alizarin red staining procedure to make dermal bone easily visible. Coastal lagoon populations
exhibit variable frequencies of complete, partial, and low plate phenotypes between sites. In contrast to
many lake and stream populations, we did not observe any reduction or loss of pelvic spines in coastal or
river populations in this study. The local ancestral marine population from Bodega Bay showed only the
high plate phenotype. Interestingly, the frequency of high plate morphs decreased with distance from the
ocean in the Russian River, showing a clear trend towards a reduction in the ancestral lateral plate
phenotype correlated with increasing distance from the ancestral habitat. The genetic basis for both pelvic
spine and armor plate reduction is associated with several diagnostic substitutions in Eda , the gene of
major effect for lateral plate morphology. In order to understand the local genetic basis of phenotypic
variation, representatives from our samples were genotyped for Eda , confirming that local populations
posses a similar genetic basis for reduce armor morphology. This study informs our understanding of the
spatial scales at which phenotypic and genetic variation occur and the patterns of armor loss among
coastal and near coastal populations.



Snyder, Sarah (University of Nevada, Reno); Tracy, C. Richard (University of Nevada, Reno, Canada);
Nussear, Kenneth; Esque, Todd; DeFalco, Lesley; Drake, Kristina; Modlin, Andrew (U.S. Geological
Survey, Canada)

Assessing the impact of wildfire on desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii) thermal biology

Recently, fires in the Mojave Desert have burned extensive portions of desert tortoise habitat. Changes in
vegetative cover and species composition of desert shrubs resulting from fire can be challenging for
tortoises as those vegetative elements are necessary to create the thermal heterogeneity used in
behavioral thermoregulation by these ectotherms. To assess the impact of wildfire on the thermal
environment, we quantified the thermal quality of burned and unburned habitat with respect to the tortoise
by developing a habitat quality index using operative temperature models. To determine whether
differences in habitat quality affect the thermoregulatory behavior of tortoises, we observed tortoise
behavior and measured body temperatures from temperature-sensitive data loggers attached to tortoises
residing within and outside of a fire perimeter. This enabled us to discern differences in daily activity time,
habitat usage, and body temperature patterns among tortoises in burned and unburned areas. Results
suggest burned habitat is of slightly lower thermal quality to tortoises than is unburned habitat, but
tortoises readily use both habitat types to thermoregulate effectively. Our study will help to direct
conservation efforts in restoring habitat of sufficient quality to maintain viable populations of the desert
tortoise.



                                                                                                           672
Solovyeva, Evgeniya (Lomonosov Moscow State University); Poyarkov, Nikolay (Lomonosov Moscow
State University, Canada); Dunayev, Evgeniy (Zoological museum of Lomonosov Moscow State
University, Canada)

Toad-headed agamas: some new insights on phylogeny of the genus Phrynocephalus (Agamidae,
Reptilia) inferred from mt and nuDNA markers

Phrynocephalus is a genus of agamid lizards with rather uncertain phylogeny. There are about 40 species
of Phrynocephalus (from 37 to 50 according to different opinions), they can be grouped in several species
complexes, but their phylogenetic relationships are still unclear. One of the main problems is the large
area of the genus, from Arabian Penninsula to NW China and from S Russia to Afghanistan. It is difficult
and almost unreal to collect samples of all existing species, so we used several species for one species
group. We studied 2 nuDNA gene fragments (1200 b.p. of RAG-1, recombination activating gene, and
1000 b.p. of BDNF, brain derived factor) and 3 mtDNA gene fragments (650 b.p. of COI, 1000 b.p. of ND2
and 900 b.p. of ND4), in total 4750 b.p., of more than 25 species. Maximum Likelihood and Neighbour
Joining trees where constructed on the base of separate and concatenated alignments. Several species
groups had valueble bootstrap for their monophyletic origin: viviparous chinese species, ocellatus-group,
helioscopus-group, versicolor-group and guttatus-group; Iranian and Arabian species in some analysis
splitted into two distinct independent groups. The position of Ph. mystaceus is floating on the
phylogenetic trees, but in all cases it doesn`t form a monophyletic clade with Ph. interscapularis and Ph.
scutellatus. Thus the subgenus Megalochilus previously proposed by several authors should be
considered unvalid. Basal position on the tree is occupied by Iranian and Arabian species. The recent
origin of guttatus and versicolor-groups also is supported.



Sonn, Julia (Tulane University); Chatfield, Matthew (Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, United States);
Robak, Matthew (Tulane Unversity, New Orleans, LA, United States); Richards-Zawacki, Corinne (Tulane
University, New Orleans, LA, United States)

Temperature and chytridiomycosis in Acris crepitans

Identifying which environmental features are most influential in the spread and virulence of emerging
pathogens can be critical to the prevention diseases. For example, high temperatures appear to
negatively impact the fungal pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) and may be a strong limiting
factor that can inhibit the persistence of amphibian chytridiomycosis in certain habitats. We investigated
the effects of small differences in host body temperature on pathogenicity of Bd and the outcome of
infection in Northern cricket frogs (Acris crepitans), a species that is reported to be declining in the
northern part of its range. We chose six temperature treatments (14, 17, 20, 23, 26, and 29 °C) based on
the thermal range of the fungus and analyzed how these treatments affected the course of infection with
Bd. This experiment will provide insight into the influence of host body temperature on Bd infection,
which can be used to model the pathogenicity of chytrid fungus within living amphibian hosts. In addition,
to better understand the seasonality of Bd, body temperatures selected by wild Acris crepitans infected
with Bd were determined during a two year mark-recapture study in Belle Chasse, Louisiana, in which
frogs were sampled twice a month. We tested the hypothesis that 1) hosts exhibit behavioral
thermoregulation and that infected individuals choose warmer microclimates than uninfected individuals
2) that survival differs between uninfected and infected frogs even when clinical signs of chytridiomycosis
are absent and 3) that the opportunity for thermally-mediated defense from infection changes across
seasons. This study will help predict times and locations during which hosts are unable to reach body
temperatures needed to avoid or combat Bd, leaving them susceptible to declines and extinctions.




                                                                                                       673
These studies will also help determine the functional relationship between Bd pathogenicity, body
temperature, and immune response in ectothermic hosts.



Soorae, Pritpal (Environment Agency); Al Dhaheri, Shaikha (Environmental Agency, Canada)

Ecology and Chytrid Fungus Surveillance of two toad species from the United Arab Emirates

The United Arab Emirates (UAE) is a federation of seven Emirates, which lies in the north of the Arabian
Peninsula, and is a predominantly desert country with a hyper-arid climate. It has two toad species
namely the Arabian Toad ( Duttaphrynus arabicus ) and the Dhofar Toad ( Duttaphrynus dhufarensis ),
which are restricted to the mountainous north where there are wadis (seasonal river in mountainous
areas). The wild toad populations are mostly limited to the Northern part of the UAE which is mountainous
and has wadis (seasonal rivers in mountainous areas). A chytrid fungus baseline survey was done to
collect any baseline information on chytrid fungus presence or absence in the UAE due to the lack of
information on this fungus which has decimated amphibian populations worldwide. This survey also
generated useful information on toad distribution in the UAE.



Soorae, Pritpal (Environment Agency);

Guidelines for amphibian reintroductions and translocations

The IUCN/SSC Re-introduction Specialist Group (RSG) has embarked on a project to develop
Guidelines for Amphibian Re-introductions and Translocations . The RSG developed the IUCN
Guidelines for Re-introductions in 1995 which were later printed, translated and distributed widely in
1998. Since then the RSG has developed various taxon and species-specific guidelines such as for
Primates in 2002, African Elephants in 2003 and Galliformes in 2009. RSG also worked in conjunction
with the IUCN/SSC Rhino Specialist Group in developing re-introduction guidelines for rhinos in 2009.
Based on the success of these taxon and species-specific guidelines the RSG has embarked on an
initiative to develop specific guidelines for amphibian re-introductions and translocations. The aim of
these guidelines is to develop a ―one-stop‖ document that can provide amphibian re-introduction
practitioners with all necessary information on: Re-introduction terminology; feasibility, implementation
and post-release monitoring phases; disease issues such as chytrid fungus which are impacting
amphibian populations worldwide and the role of disease monitoring in re-introduction projects; and
Information on relevant organizations involved in all aspects of amphibians which have relevance to re-
introductions. We hope these guidelines when developed will provide amphibian re-introduction
practitioners with all the necessary information required to plan and conduct a successful re-introduction
project. The RSG is also updating its existing guidelines in relation to issues such as global climate
change so we hope to incorporate all the latest issues in the amphibian re-introduction guidelines.



Sós, Endre (Budapest Zoo); Molnár, Viktor (Budapest Zoo, Canada); Halpern, Bálint (MME BirdLife
Hungary, Canada); Walzer, Chris (Forschungsinstitut für Wildtierkunde und Ökologie, Canada); Tóth,
Tamás (Budapest Zoo, Canada); Péchy, Tamás (MME BirdLife Hungary, Canada); Lajos, Zoltán (Duo-
Bakt Veterinary Microbiological Laboratory, Canada); Gál, János (Szent István University, Veterinary
Faculty, Department of Pathology and Forensic Medicine, Canada)

The role of the veterinarian in the hungarian meadow viper programme




                                                                                                      674
The veterinarian has a complex role in the Hungarian Meadow Viper [HMV, ( Vipera ursinii rakosiensis )]
program, including the implementation of screenings, treatments, diagnostic procedures, development of
new surgical techniques and evaluating of animal husbandry details. The paper deals with the medical
management of the whole conservation project and the most common diseases of the Eurasian
members of the Viperinae subfamily, giving examples mostly about our own cases (consisting the clinical
cases and health management of the HMV conservation program and several other Eurasian viper
species as these species support and strengthen our knowledge and skills for a successful conservation
project).



Sosa, Timothy (University of Chicago);

Patterns of ancestry and dispersal of Central American Characidae

This study explores patterns of ancestry in Astyanax (Characiformes: Characidae) and several related
genera. We used two mitochondrial markers (Cytb, CO1) and one nuclear marker (RAG1) to generate a
phylogenetic hypothesis. This builds on previous work in the Characidae and refines hypotheses of
ancestral range, patterns of dispersal and vicariance, and morphological evolution.



Sparling, Donald (Southern Illinois University);

Global Impacts of Contaminants on Amphbians

In California, USA, there is a pattern where coastal winds flow across the intensely farmed Central and
San Joaquin Valleys into the mountains. Pesticides from these valleys volatilize, are carried into
otherwise pristine montane areas, and are wet or dry deposited into ponds and meadows. These
pesticides can be joined by urban and industrial sources, also near sea level, and severely impact
amphibian populations. Studies by environmental chemists suggest that this low elevation usage/ high
elevation deposition of contaminants may be fairly common. This paper will report on the progress of a
meta-analysis to evaluate the occurrence of this low/high elevation pattern and to assess its risk to
amphibian populations at high (500-2500 m) elevations. In addition, other patterns of amphibian decline
relative to multiple stressors will be examined. The database will accumulate information from
AmphibiaWeb, Herpnet, FAO, and other reliable sources at the national, regional and species levels.
When available, national and regional levels data will include human population numbers, major crops,
amount of pesticides applied annually, geographical information, land use characteristics, etc. For those
species that have sufficient information, we will include IUCN status, distribution, elements of life history
and development, and other factors. Various modeling methods including informational analysis and
multivariate analysis will be used to address specific hypotheses.



Sparreboom, Max (NCBNaturalis Leiden);

Salamanders of the Old World - an Online Catalogue

Sparreboom, Max (2012). Salamanders of the Old World: an Online Catalogue. Electronic database
accessible at http://science.naturalis.nl/salamanders. This is an online catalogue that allows free access
to information on the natural history of the newts and salamanders of Europe, Asia and Northern Africa.




                                                                                                         675
The goal of the catalogue is to establish a ‗home page‘ for every Old World salamander species. Species
accounts are being added regularly, the first species entries were made in 2008. Publication in book form
is planned after completion of the catalogue in 2012. Salamanders of the Old World has been created at
the Netherlands Centre for Biodiversity Naturalis, Leiden, which hosts the website. The primary purpose
of Salamanders of the Old World is to provide a documented introduction to the salamander fauna of
Europe, Northern Africa and Asia. The catalogue is structured as follows. The descriptions are mostly
limited to external characteristics. Most species are depicted in colour. Eggs, larvae and the development
up to metamorphosed young salamanders are summarily described. The distribution maps follow the
latest maps published by IUCN (2011). Some of these maps were modified by Wouter Beukema and
myself. We agreed with IUCN to share the updated maps. Both aquatic and terrestrial habitat are
described. Altitude, climate, soil structure, presence of water and vegetation determine the character of
the habitat. Behaviour patterns are described, with an emphasis on reproductive behaviour. The main
threats to a species and its habitat are listed, following the IUCN (2011) definitions of Red List categories.
Much of what is known about salamander behaviour stems from observations in captivity made by
professional biologists in their labs and hobbyists in their terrariums. Most of the knowledge about
successful breeding of amphibians has been acquired by dedicated hobbyists. This paragraph cites
references to good first-hand reports of captive breeding in the hobbyist literature where this is relevant to
our knowledge of the species‘ biology.

Netherlands Centre for Biodiversity Naturalis, P.O. Box 9517, NL-2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands. m-c-
sparreboom(at)hetnet.nl



Speaks, Justin (University of West Florida);

Photoperiod and Temperature Effects on Steroid Hormone Production and Dental Plasticity in the
Male Atlantic Stingray, Dasyatis sabina

Photoperiod and temperature are recognized as two of the most important environmental cues in
temperate freshwater and marine ecosystems. While manipulations of environmental factors, and their
relative control over reproductive physiology, have been studied in many teleost fishes, elasmobranchs
are not as well represented. The Atlantic stingray has a protracted and well-defined mating season
beginning in early Autumn and ending in late Spring, and can be observed in males not only by increases
of androgens, but by changes in dentition. In this experiment the proximate affects of temperature and
photoperiod on dentition and reproductive hormones were quantified in the Atlantic Stingray. It is
proposed that if photoperiod and temperature are the dominant proximate factors for reproduction in this
species, they should directly activate androgen production.       The increase in androgens following
gonadal recrudescence should, in turn, trigger the dental modification seen in mating male stingrays.
Results indicate that temperature is a strong proximate cue for onset of testosterone production in
laboratory studies, however wild samples indicated photoperiod plays an important role as well.
Laboratory animals showed the highest hormone response in treatments that simulated both decreasing
daylength and temperatures. High temperatures in the laboratory showed a distinct inhibitory effect on
testosterone production. Dental morphology displayed a trend of increasing percentage of samples with
cuspidate dentition as the wild population moved into the breeding season, following a period of
increased androgen production. Laboratory samples also responded in a similar fashion, although not as
clearly as the wild population. Samples with low testosterone levels over the course of the experiment
showed a higher percentage of molariform dentition, while those exhibiting increased testosterone had a



                                                                                                          676
higher percentage of cuspidate and transitioning dentition. This study further elucidates the influence of
photoperiod and temperature on gonadal recrudescence in an elasmobranch. It is the first experiment to
examine associations between circulating hormone levels and changes in dental morphology, a
secondary sex characteristic that has received little attention. This research should provide an impetus
to develop new lines of investigation into the discrete physiological mechanisms that control reproduction
in elasmobranch fishes.



Spear, Stephen (The Orianne Society); Stevenson, Dirk; Jenkins, Christopher (The Orianne Society,
Canada); Olson, Brita; Waits, Lisette (University of Idaho, Canada)

Conservation genetics of the threatened Eastern Indigo Snake (Drymarchon couperi) across
southern Georgia

The Eastern Indigo Snake is a large colubrid and is one of the most threatened snakes in North America.
They have among the largest home ranges of any snake, and have been known to make single
movements of greater than 20 kilometers. However, indigo snakes rely on intact longleaf pine
ecosystems, a habitat that is highly fragmented across the southeast, which likely reduces the ability of
snakes to move across the landscape. We collected over 250 scale-clip and shed samples across
southern Georgia to assess the current state of genetic diversity and gene flow in these populations. In
total, we collected samples from indigo snakes from 28 different sites, although the majority of individuals
were sampled from 7 sites, with the remaining sites represented by 1-5 individuals each. The sampled
sites represented two broad spatial clusters of populations that are largely separated by less suitable
habitat. The greatest genetic difference was between these two clusters, but we also detected significant
genetic differentiation within the spatial clusters, and a total of 4 genetic groups were supported. While
these clusters were generally explained by distance between sites, a sharp genetic discontinuity occurred
between two groups of sites less than 20 kilometers apart. An ordination analysis suggests this is due to
more recent subdivision and thus likely caused by human disturbance in the area, including a road.
Levels of heterozygosity were intermediate relative to other snake genetic studies. However, average
relatedness among individuals was relatively high (0.16), roughly equivalent to the levels expected among
first cousins. While it is likely that the strongest genetic differences are influenced primarily by distance,
the degree of genetic subdivision has increased due to recent fragmentation. Contemporary genetic
subdivision may then be responsible for the increased relatedness observed. Under this scenario,
genetic diversity would be expected to decrease and inbreeding depression could be a future concern.
Therefore, a combination of demographic, genetic, and habitat management is likely to be the most
effective conservation strategy for this species.



Spencer, Carol (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology); Cicero, Carla; Koo, Michelle (Museum of Vertebrate
Zoology, UC Berkeley, Canada); Rios, Nelson (Tulane University, Canada); Bloom, David; Wieczorek,
John (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, UC Berkeley, Canada)

Lessons Learned from HerpNET and VertNet: Collaborative Georeferencing and Data Quality
Improvement in Natural History Collections

The main goal of VertNet and its associated projects (HerpNET, FishNet, MaNIS, ORNIS) is to make high
quality biodiversity data available online. These data come from natural history collections all over the
world, each with idiosyncratic database formats and textual-based locality information. Data have the
potential to be used in ways that were unforeseen when they were originally collected. The value of these



                                                                                                          677
data is directly related to its fitness for a variety of uses, and as data becomes more accessible, many
more uses become apparent. Georeferencing is one method to improve data quality. It is the process of
translating textual locality descriptions into geographic coordinates with their associated uncertainty, while
estimating the spatial extent of a locality. Through MaNIS, HerpNET and ORNIS, we developed
georeferencing standards, now known as the Global Biodiversity Information Facility‘s ―Guide to Best
Practices in Georeferencing.‖ From projects and workshops, we refined these methods, and we
developed and incorporated semi-automated tools, such as GEOLocate and BioGeomancer, into our best
practices. In this talk, I will present the results of past georeferencing efforts from HerpNET and VertNet,
give an overview of current collaborative automated georeferencing tools, and give our recommendations
for management of future georeferencing projects.



Spencer, Carol (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology); Cicero, Carla; Koo, Michelle (Museum of Vertebrate
Zoology, Berkeley, CA, United States); Rios, Nelson; Bart, Hank (Tulane University, Belle Chase, LA,
United States); Bloom, David (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, Berkeley, CA, United States); Guralnick,
Robert (University of Colorado, Boulder, Boulder, CO, United States); Wieczorek, John (University of
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, United States); Vieglais, David (University of Kansas, Lawrence, United
States)

Vertebrates in the Cloud: Are We There Yet?

The NSF-funded VertNet project ( vertnet.org ) brings together FishNet2, MaNIS, HerpNET, and ORNIS
into a single cloud-based platform for querying, visualizing, and annotating distributed vertebrate
biodiversity data. VertNet will combine the four vertebrate data networks into a single portal, making it
easier for researchers to aggregate and synthesize data across all vertebrates. VertNet will provide five
new and improved features, including: 1 - sustainable solutions (no local servers and fewer IT problems);
2 - improved performance and reliability (faster searching, better visualization, more mapping features); 3
- ease of discoverability (creating a thesaurus of synonyms for taxonomy and geography); 4 - data
improvement (enabling annotations from users, potential crowd-sourcing); and 5 - better integrations with
other projects (including Specify, Arctos, Map of Life, Encyclopedia of Life, AmphibiaWeb, and
iNaturalist). Development of VertNet APIs (Application Programming Interfaces) will be available to any
online project for searching and visualizing VertNet data. For example, the Map of Life project will use
VertNet APIs to display data points for species distribution maps while VertNet will display species range
maps generated by Map of Life. In addition to infrastructure development, VertNet has been very active
in outreach. Since January 2011, we have given six georeferencing workshops (in South Africa, Alabama,
California, and North Carolina) that have trained 129 people from 13 countries. A Biodiversity Informatics
Training Workshop held in June 2012 at Boulder, Colorado, trained an additional 25 students from 9
countries. We will work with institutions from existing networks over the next six months to put their data
in the cloud, and the new prototype VertNet portal will be functional within the year.



Sperry, Jinelle (University of Illinois); Michael, Ward; Weatherhead, Patrick (University of Illinois, Urbana,
IL, United States)

Use of Automated Radio Telemetry for Quantifying Behavior of Snakes

Radio-telemetry has dramatically increased our knowledge of the behavior of secretive wildlife, including
a large number of snake species. However, conventional manual tracking only allows intermittent
relocations and may affect the behavior of the tracked animals. Here we report on the use of automated
telemetry to continuously document snake behavior in Illinois and Texas, including comparisons of data



                                                                                                          678
collected for manual versus automated telemetry and the use of automated telemetry to document 24-
hour activity patterns. Automated telemetry data indicated that ratsnakes spent most of their time in small
home ranges (mean = 25 ha) but engaged in forays of up to 1.5 km away from and back to those core
areas, suggesting this species may engage in central place foraging. Depending on the frequency of
tracking events, manual tracking could miss these forays and drastically underestimate home range size.
Manual daily hand tracking produced reliable estimates of distances moved, but underestimated
distances by a factor of 4 when snakes were tracked every 5 days. We also found that snakes moved in
response to observers during hand tracking. Snakes in both Texas and Illinois exhibited nocturnal
behavior in every month of the active season. Nocturnal behavior was associated with temperature and
peaked during the warmest parts of the year. Automated receivers can greatly increase data obtained
from radio tracking snakes, providing novel insights unavailable from conventional hand tracking. There
are also drawbacks to this technology, some of which will vary among study species, so researchers
need to evaluate the appropriateness of the technology for both the species they are studying and the
questions being asked.



Spies, Brenton (California State University Northridge); Steele, Mark (California State University
Northridge, Canada)

Latitudinal variation in the early life history of the endangered tidewater goby, Eucyclogobius
newberryi

Variations in the environment have been found to strongly influence the life history of many marine
organisms that occur across with large latitudinal gradients. Species such as the endangered tidewater
goby ( Eucyclogobius newberryi ) persist in estuaries along the California coast that are highly seasonally
variable. This habitat preference may predispose them to local extirpation.          This study investigates
variations in the early life history of E. newberryi in relation to temperature trends found in eleven
habitats spanning approximately eight degrees of latitude.      Hourly temperature recordings were taken
from July-October of 2011 using ibutton thermocron data loggers. Newly settled individuals were collected
in order to determine how habitat variations affect pelagic larval duration (PLD), size at settlement, and
post-settlement growth rates.        Estuaries inhabited by E. newberryi showed high variability in
temperature with no latitudinal trend, likely due to factors such as estuary size, amount of freshwater
input, and duration of seasonal closure. Variations in all life history traits were found between high and
low temperature sites.       Fish that experienced colder temperatures had a longer PLD, slower post-
settlement growth rates, and were larger at settlement.



Squires, Kelly (Rescan Environmental Services Ltd.); Bol, Leslie (Rescan Environmental Services Ltd.,
Vancouver, BC, Canada); Buckman, Andrea (Rescan Environmental Services Ltd., Canada); Galvis,
Pedro (Pueblo Viejo Dominicana Corporation, Canada)

Developing management guidelines from habitat thresholds for conservation of frog species

Species-habitat modeling and threshold analysis can be useful to quantify habitat quality, and thus to
derive management guidelines for species conservation. Habitat modeling identifies habitat variables
important to species, while threshold analysis can be used to identify limits along the gradient of important
habitat variables that separate marginal from ‗good‘ habitat. This approach to the measurement of habitat
quality is being considered to derive quantitative guidelines for the conservation and management of
selected frogs in the Dominican Republic where many extant frog species appear to be threatened. In



                                                                                                         679
2009 and 2010, amphibians were surveyed at 200 streams in the Dominican Republic along 100 m
riparian transects. Using Generalized Linear Modeling, the occurrence of 11 leaf litter ( Eleutherodactylus
spp.) species and 5 aquatic-breeding species were related to local-scale aquatic and riparian vegetation
variables. Threshold analysis was performed using segmented regression and maximally-selected rank
statistics. The probability of occurrence for leaf litter species was highest above a threshold of 70% shade
and 70% leaf litter cover. On average, 5.17+ 4.65 more leaf-litter frogs were counted along transects with
bromeliads and other vegetation with phytotelmata, an important resource for leaf litter species. These
results suggest that while abandoned cacao plantations with shade trees that cover much of the
Dominican Republic likely provide adequate shade and abundant detritus for leaf litter species, such
areas may not provide habitat of similar quality to mature forests where bromeliads are usually more
common. Factors that influenced the occurrence of aquatic-breeding frogs were more variable among
species. Thresholds were found in water temperature, canopy cover, and vertical vegetation structure for
aquatic-breeding species. Frog species richness was highest above 45% percent cover of leaf litter, 55%
shade, and a canopy height of 17 m. While high amounts of shade, leaf litter, vegetation structure, and a
tall canopy are characteristics of older forests, these features can also be realized in young and early
seral tropical forests when disturbance has been limited.



Sredl, Michael (Arizona Game and Fish Department);

Calibrating our progress towards recovery of amphibian populations: an area-based approach
and occupancy modeling.

Like many amphibian species worldwide, the Chiricahua leopard frog ( Rana                  [ Lithobates ]
chiricahuensis) experienced a dramatic, rangewide decline during the past three decades and was listed
under the Endangered Species Act (ESA) in 2002. A species recovery plan was finalized in 2007 that
included four recovery criteria that, when reached, will have: 1) established sufficient populations and
metapopulations, 2) managed the necessary aquatic breeding habitats, 3) managed important dispersal
corridors, and 4) reduced threats so that the Chiricahua leopard frog no longer needs the protection of the
ESA. Although great progress has been made since federal listing, progress on recovery criterion 1 has
been hampered by 1) the dearth of suitably configured landscapes that could ―host‖ candidate
metapopulations and 2) the difficulty of establishing and monitoring stable and viable metapopulations
given the limited human and financial resources available.            I develop a conceptual area-based
approach to calibrate progress toward recovery that is applicable to the Chiricahua leopard frog that
utilizes occupancy modeling to gauge progress in establishing, managing, and monitoring viable
metapopulations. This approach is easier to design and implement, makes fewer assumptions, and is
less biased than the current ―strict metapopulation‖ approach and is applicable to other patchily-
distributed amphibians.



St. John, Wendy (Sonoma State University);

Spaciotemporal Patterns of Nesting Behavior in a Northern California Population of Western Pond
Turtles

We conducted field observations on a population of western pond turtles ( Emys marmorata ) living in a
semi-permanent vernal lake in Lake County, CA in the month of June for 4 consecutive years (2008 –
2011). Females were captured for morphometric data collection, marked with a unique scute identification
notch and palpated to detect if they were gravid. Gravid females were tracked visually and/or with radio



                                                                                                        680
telemetry during terrestrial forays to potential nest sites in well-drained upland areas NE of the lake. We
recorded GPS coordinates for all successful nesting attempts. Estimates were made of percent ground
cover and canopy cover at each nest location. Nests were constructed between 2 and 300 meters from
the edge of the pond, in relatively exposed areas covered with annual grasses. Analyses of this multiple-
year database of nesting activity indicate a percentage of nesting females in this population of E.
marmorata may exhibit nest site fidelity, with several individuals returning to nest in the same location in
multiple years. These turtles also appear to show a strong preference for nesting in relatively exposed
areas within 10 m of the tree line. We also analyzed other nesting behaviors, including distance traveled
from pond, and microhabitat selection and its effect upon hatchling success and sex ratios. These
findings have importance for conservation of this species, as well as other species with temperature-
dependent sex determination (TSD). E. marmorata requires upland areas for nesting adjacent to aquatic
habitats, and understanding the ways in which this species uses upland areas, and how changing global
climates may effect reproductive patterns has important implications for resource management and
species conservation.



Stabile, Jennifer (Albuquerque Biological Park);

The Role of Zoos in Amphibian and Reptile Reintroductions

Zoological institutions and aquariums have come a long way from the stigma as a road side attraction.
Many of these facilities are now leaders in captive conservation programs. With recent declining
population trends concerning both amphibians and reptiles, maintaining a collection developed to sustain
a species over time for use in a conservation program may play an integral role in minimizing this loss to
biodiversity. Combining ex situ assurance colonies with local partnerships for future repatriation efforts
may contribute to the overall success of both species survival strategies. Factors to address before
beginning any captive program include environmental qualifications, genetic variability, partnership
development with stakeholders, and long term management of populations. Only with willing and active
participation along with combined resources from all branches of conservation can we create a pro-active
response.



Stachowski, Marisa (Southeastern Louisiana University); Piller, Kyle (Southeastern Louisiana University,
Canada)

Phylogeography of Ilyodon: a Taxonomic Nightmare Indeed

The viviparous fish genus Ilyodon (Goodeidae) is endemic to west-central Mexico in basins of the Pacific
Slope. The genus has been the subject of several taxonomic, genetic, and evolutionary studies due to
complexities among morphotypes. As many as five species are currently recognized: Ilyodon furcidens ,
I. whitei , I. lennoni , I. xantusi , and I. cortesae . The widespread distribution of the genus, the disjunct
status of many of the species, as well as the long-standing taxonomic confusion in the genus warrant
further systematic and taxonomic investigation. Therefore, we conducted a range wide phylogeographic
study of Ilyodon and investigated the monophyly of the putative species in the genus. Preliminary
phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial DNA recovered two monophyletic clades that correspond to the I.
furcidens group, inclusive of I. furcidens and I. xantusi and the I. whitei group, inclusive of I. whitei ,
I. lennoni and I. cortesae . Sequence divergence between the clades was low (&lt;2%) and there was
minimal structure within each of the clades, which suggests little support for the other named species of
Ilyodon .        Although it was previously thought that Ilyodon furcidens and I. whitei were mutually



                                                                                                          681
exclusive in terms of distributions, haplotypes from the Rio Balsas basin were distributed within each of
the clades, rather than solely in the I. whitei clade as was expected. These results suggest that a
taxonomic revision of the group many be warranted.



Stanford, Kristin (Northern Illinois University); King, Richard (Northern Illinios University, DeKalb, IL,
United States); Bekker, Kent (Toledo Zoo, Toledo, OH, United States)

12 Years and Over 12,000 Snakes Served: Volunteer Assistance with the Annual Population
Census of the Lake Erie Watersnake, Nerodia sipedon insularum

Delisting of the Lake Erie watersnake resulted from annual monitoring which demonstrated that the
Population Persistence criterion of the Lake Erie watersnake recovery plan had been met. Monitoring was
heavily dependent on efforts of volunteers participating in intensive population censuses each spring and
less intensive efforts throughout the active season. Volunteer effort was restricted to sampling (capture
effort only) while quantitative measurements (e.g. body size, color pattern, stomach contents) were taken
by principle investigators to ensure data quality and consistency. During a decade of annual censuses
(2002 – 2011), more than 140 individuals participated (9 – 68 per year, mean = 27). Most volunteers
participated during just a single year and often for only a single day but many (35%) participated during
multiple years (range = 2 – 10, mode = 3.4). In decreasing order of frequency (weighted by years of
participation), volunteers included graduate students, zoo professionals, undergraduate students, regional
herpetological society members, federal agency professionals, university professionals, area residents,
state agency professionals, regional naturalists and consultants, and high school students. Professional
affiliations of volunteers included 20 colleges &amp; universities, 5 state agencies, 5 zoos, 3 regional
herpetological societies, 3 regional nature centers and forest preserves, and 2 federal agencies. The use
of a diverse group of volunteers provided an opportunity for direct community involvement (locals were
encouraged to participate and learn about recovery objectives),           an increase in the efficiency of
sampling (experienced volunteers provided guidance for novices),        an increase in the number of sites
sampled simultaneously (experienced volunteers were able to lead teams independent of primary
investigators) and an increase in the number of individual snakes captured during the census (number
of captures correlates with number of volunteers). The combination of coordinated volunteer efforts,
outreach opportunities and data collection enhanced our ability to achieve rapid recovery of this snake.



Stanford, Kristin (Northern Illinois University); King, Richard (Northern Illinois University, Canada)

A detailed analysis of survival in the Lake Erie watersnake, Nerodia sipedon insularum

 Mark-recapture data from 7888 individuals (5792 adults and 2096 sub-adults) spanning 28 years was
used to analyze survival and recapture parameters for the Lake Erie watersnake, Nerodio sipedon
insularum . Listed as threatened in 1999 under the U.S. Endangered Species Act, this snake was delisted
due to recovery in 2011. Data were parsed into subsets for separate multi-model analyses using
maximum likelihood methods (Program MARK: CJS &amp; Pradel) to 1) determine whether survival had
increased following a rapid shift in diet, 2) identify sources of temporal and spatial variation in survival, 3)
provide estimates of sub-adult (neonate and juvenile) survival and 4) provide current estimates of adult
survival and population growth for use in demonstrating recovery. Although data from early in this study
(1980-1983) are limited, comparisons at one site (North Bass Island) indicated that survival has increased
by 17% in males (from 28% in 1980-1983 to 45% in 1996-2008) and 4% in females (from 66% in 1980-
1983 to 70% in 1996-2008), providing evidence that watersnake populations have benefited from a shift



                                                                                                            682
in diet. Analysis of recent data (1996-2008) showed that spatial variation was an important factor in Lake
Erie watersnake adult survival, both among islands and among sites within islands. Sex was also found to
influence survival, but with no clear pattern; male survival was higher at some sites and female survival
was higher at others. In an effort to obtain survival estimates for younger age-classes, 1674 neonates
were wire-tagged immediately after birth and released. The use of TSM (time since marking) models
revealed that the inferred age of a snake did influence survival within a single site, increasing from 18%
as neonates, to 21-53% as juveniles before reaching adult levels (60-78%). Using data from the 8 best
sampled sites over 8 years, the realized population growth rate varied temporally (range: 0.90 to 1.21). A
random effects model using these data yielded estimates of mean adult survival of 74% (s 2 =0.024) and
mean population growth rate of 1.07 ( s 2 =0.014) and provide a baseline for comparison during the 5
year post-delisting monitoring period.



Stanley, Edward (Richard Gilder Graduate School);

Evolutionary patterns of ecology and biogeography in the Cordylidae

The Cordylidae is the only squamate family endemic to sub-Saharan Africa and comprises 80 species of
rupicolous, arboreal and fossoreal lizards. The majority of the phylogenetic and ecological diversity
occurs in Southern Africa, although the family‘s range extends to Northern Angola and Ethiopia. Previous
comparative and historical biogeographic analyses of the group has been hindered by poorly understood
phylogenetic relationships, but following a recent systematic revision of the family, comparative analyses
are now possible.

Utilizing the biogeography programs LaGrange and DIVA in conjunction with an updated phylogeny,
strong support is recovered for a Southeast African origin of the family. The ancestral platysaurines are
revealed to have a northern distribution within this range, while the Cordylinae are shown to have a
southerly distribution, dispersing into southwest Africa, with two lineages subsequently radiating to East
Africa. Ecological niche modeling reveals a strong relationship between distribution and reproductive
strategy, supporting the hypothesis that a shift from oviparity to viviparity resulted in the colonization of
higher latitudes. Ancestral state reconstructions of habitat type show that a shift from rupicoly to
arboreality coincides with northerly radiations in two cordyline lineages.



Starkey, Michael (SAVE THE FROGS!); Kriger, Kerry (SAVE THE FROGS!, Santa Cruz, CA, United
States)

Inspiring The Next Generation To Care About Amphibians

Currently only a small proportion of our society knows that amphibians are disappearing. This lack of
awareness in the general public is one of the greatest impediments to successful amphibian conservation
efforts, as most of the threats to amphibians could be ameliorated if people were aware of the effects of
their actions. Therefore, it is critical that scientists increase their efforts to educate and motivate the next
generation of humans to care about amphibians. SAVE THE FROGS! is America‘s first and only public
charity dedicated to amphibian conservation. One of our primary goals is to provide and distribute high
quality amphibian educational materials that enable teachers and students to teach and learn about
amphibians and the problems they face. The SAVE THE FROGS! website (www.savethefrogs.com) has
over 250 pages of information, including freely downloadable slideshows, webinars, fact sheets, posters,
and great ideas on how to engage people in amphibian conservation efforts. We coordinate the annual



                                                                                                            683
SAVE THE FROGS! Poetry and Art contest, which have received thousands of entries from over 30
countries. These contests are a simple and effective way to engage children in appreciating amphibians.
As part of our work with SAVE THE FROGS, we regularly give presentations on amphibian conservation
at universities, schools, government agencies and public interest groups. As part of the San Francisco
Tadpole Headstart Program (www.savethefrogs.com/sf-tadpole), we have spoken to over 3,000
schoolchildren at 30 San Francisco schools. In these presentations we educate students about the role of
amphibians in our fragile planet and inspire them to care for the planet. As San Francisco is the frog legs
eating center of the western hemisphere and as San Francisco‘s politicians have actively lobbied against
and vetoed pro-frog legislation, this program helps ensure the next generation of San Franciscans do not
actively harm amphibian populations. It is our duty as scientists to protect amphibian populations, and this
will not be possible unless we rapidly and successfully educate the public about the amphibian extinction
crisis. Whether we are conservationists, pathologists, or ecologists, we need to stand together by
reaching out to the next generation and inspire them to care about amphibians.



Starnberger, Iris (University of Vienna, Austria); Poth, Dennis; Schulz, Stefan (Institute of Organic
Chemistry, TU Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany); Vences, Miguel (Division of Evolutionary Biology
Zoological Institute Technical University of Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany); Walzl, Manfred
(Department of Integrative Zoology, University of Vienna, Wien, Austria); Hödl, Walter (Department of
Evolutionary Biology, University of Vienna, Wien, Austria)

Multimodal Signaling in African Reed Frogs: Attraction through calls, colors and chemical cues?

During calling the vocal sac serves anurans as an air reservoir, in minimizing the loss of sound energy
and in distributing calls omnidirectionally. The vocal sac‘s role beyond acoustics has been largely
neglected in the past. The diversity in vocal sac coloration and shape found in different anuran species is
striking to the human observer and recently the vocal sac‘s role as visual cue has gained vast attention.
Males of many reed frog species (Anura: Hyperoliidae) have a prominent colorful patch on their vocal sac,
which gains in conspicuousness once the vocal sac is inflated. To date, the function of this gular patch
remains unknown.

Histological analysis indicates that the gular patch is a gland extending into the vocal sac cavity. We
suggest that this gland, which exceeds 10 times the thickness of the vocal sac skin, produces volatiles
emitted while calling. Furthermore, the coloration of vocal sac and gular patch might be species specific
and serve as visual signal component in calling males. First results of an explorative study integrating
histological and biochemical analyses, spectrometry and behavioral experiments to investigate signal
modalities and their role in intra- and intersexual communication will be presented.

We propose that reed frogs use a complex combination of acoustic, visual and chemical signals in
species recognition and mate choice.



Stayton, C. Tristan (Bucknell University); Siegel-Richman, Yonaton (Bucknell University, Canada)

Variation in the material properties of turtle shell bone: preliminary investigations on the plastron
of Trachemys scripta

Physical defense against predation is one of the most important functions of the turtle shell. Predator-
induced loads (as would be produced during a predator‘s bite, for example) interact with the geometry of
the turtle‘s shell to producing variable, yet partially predictable, stresses which shell bone must resist.



                                                                                                        684
Given this, along with the variety of parts protected by the shell, it is reasonable to predict that there will
also be variation in the strength of the skeletal materials that comprise a turtle‘s shell. We tested such
predictions on the shell bone of Trachemys scripta elegans . Plastrons from 5 individuals were removed
and sectioned into 1cm x 1cm specimens. These specimens were mounted and scutes were removed.
Material properties of the bone were assessed using microindentation techniques. In these tests, a
minute cono-spherical probe (2.5 µm radius) was rapidly lowered onto the surface of the shell bone,
stressing and eventually breaking the material. The force at breaking, along with the dimensions of the
probe, was be used to calculate the strength of the bone for that particular specimen. We found a
consistent pattern of high strength in three areas of the turtle plastron: the anterior midline, the center of
the plastron, and along the anterior and posterior margins of the bridge. We suggest two non-exclusive
explanations for this variation. First, this variation might be adaptive – bone might have evolved to be
stronger in the vicinity of highly-stressed regions of the shell or external to vital areas such as the head or
heart. Second, this variation might be a consequence of shell developmental patterns. Data are currently
not available to support either of these hypotheses. However, we note that increased strength in the
anterior and posterior margins of the bridges is consistent with a mechanical explanation for increased
shell strength. These regions develop the highest stresses produced in the turtle shell under a variety of
loading regimes (including many that mimic predator bites observed in nature), even taking into account
the greater thickness of shell bone in these areas. Higher bone strength would allow those regions to
more successfully resist high stresses and prevent failure of the shell as a whole.



Steen, David (Auburn University);

Reptile Restoration in Fire-suppressed Longleaf Pine Sandhills

The once-extensive longleaf pine ( Pinus palustris ) ecosystem of the southeastern United States has
been reduced to a fraction of its historic extent. A fire-adapted system, many remaining fragments have
been fire-suppressed and invaded by hardwood trees, particularly oaks ( Quercus spp.). This change in
species composition alters the habitat and is to the detriment of wildlife assemblages associated with
longleaf pine forests. Fire surrogates and prescribed burning have been suggested as potential
management strategies to restore fire-suppressed and hardwood-invaded longleaf pine forests to target
conditions; due to the unique effects of fire, it is generally suggested that prescribed burning should follow
application of any hardwood removal treatment. To determine how fire surrogates followed by prescribed
burning affected wildlife populations and assemblages, we sampled for reptiles within 20 experimental
sites and six reference sites. Experimental sites were initially subjected to either mechanical hardwood
removal followed by fire, herbicide application followed by fire, prescribed burning alone, or remained in a
fire-suppressed state (i.e., controls). Following initial treatment, all sites experienced over a decade of
prescribed burning on an approximately two-year interval. We evaluated the effects of a given treatment
by comparison of wildlife populations and assemblages on treatment sites to those on reference sites
initially and also after over a decade of prescribed burning. If conditions associated with a given treatment
were indistinguishable from those of reference sites, we considered this as evidence that management
objectives were met. Initially, reptile assemblages within treatment sites treated with prescribed burning
alone were most similar to those of reference sites; fire surrogates did not immediately provide an
observed benefit. At the conclusion of the study, reptile assemblages at all sites were indistinguishable
from those on reference sites except for assemblages on sites treated with herbicide, suggesting
herbicide application was relatively ineffective at restoring reptile assemblages. A mark-recapture study of
the six-lined racerunner ( Aspidoscelis sexlineatus ) also identified prescribed burning as effective.
Initially, abundances on sites treated with prescribed burning alone, as well as on sites treated with
mechanical hardwood removal followed by fire, were comparable to abundances within reference sites.



                                                                                                           685
Over time, abundances at all sites were comparable to those on reference sites. Overall, effective
restoration of reptile populations and assemblages in fire-suppressed longleaf pine sandhills was
achieved and prescribed burning over approximately a decade was generally sufficient to achieve this
result. In general, there was little observed benefit or need to employ fire surrogates prior to prescribed
burning.

Stehmann, Matthias F.W. (ICHTHYS Laboratory);

Dipturus nidarosiensis (Storm, 1881), a NE Atlantic deepwater composite skate species

Storm prepublished without figures in 1881a note on Raja nidarosiensis Collett (nov. sp. in lit.), based on
correspondence with Collett. Collett himself published in 1882 the full description of Raja nidrosiensis as
a new skate from Trondhjem Fjord, along with good plate drawings of his three syntypes (immature male
138 cm, two females 181.5 and 191 cm TL). Cannas et al. published online in early 2010 molecular and
morphological evidence of the occurrence of Dipturus nidarosiensis (Storm, 1881) in the Mediterranean
Sea, based on 14 specimens taken from the deep Sardinian Channel at 600 to 1420 m depth. These
measured 240 to 1482 mm TL, including 9 adult females and the adult male of 1180 mm TL. The habitus
photographs by Cannas et al. (2010) of a female 100 cm, a young male 24 cm and the mature male 118
cm TL from off Sardinia raised the author‘s doubts about the correct identity of these specimens. The
author had seen D. nidarosiensis from the northern North Atlantic and reported in the literature, and these
showed a quite different habitus and were of markedly larger size of more than 2 metres, with beginning
sexual maturity at a size even somewhat larger than the maximum size of the Sardinian specimens.
Iglésias (2009) had published on D. batis Linnaeus being a composite species of a very large D.
intermedia and a much smaller D. flossada, just like with D. nidarosiensis. When contacted, Iglésias wrote
to eventually have found D. oxyrinchus to also be a composite species with two forms of different size.
And he confirmed to have provided the Sardinian colleagues tissue samples of D. nidarosiensis for their
comparative DNA analyses. He also confirmed to only know as D. nidarosiensis from French catches and
landings in and from southern Rockall Trough the smaller form of the Sardinian morphotype, but he had
never seen the larger, probably more northern morphotype. Agreement of DNA analyses of his samples
and the Sardinian specimens was thus explained. Both morphotypes will be demonstrated, along with
some contradictions in Collett‘s description, and the different geographical range of both D. nidarosiensis
forms. It looks like, instead of fomerly three Eastern North Atlantic species of Dipturus, we have to deal
now with six species, with wide ranging consequences for fishery management and conservation
measures.



Steinberg, David (Duke University); Leal, Manuel (Duke University, Durham, NC, United States)

Heads-up: signal modulation and receiver distance in anoline lizards

The fluid nature of the spatial relationships of individuals in a habitat presents a challenge for
communication because signal efficacy is sensitive to distance, particularly for signal components that
serve to attract the attention of potentially inattentive receivers. Therefore, it has been predicted that
selection should favour the evolution of signalling strategies that allow individuals to overcome the impact
of changes in inter-individual spacing. We evaluated this prediction by measuring the physical properties
of movement-based, head-bob displays given by the lizard Anolis gundlachi during staged social
encounters under natural conditions. Individuals of A. gundlachi modulated the maximum amplitude of
head-bob displays in response to changes in signaller-receiver distance. The observed changes in
amplitude were in accordance with predictions of a biologically-based motion detection model; changes in
amplitude are predicted to result in more effective stimulation of the receiver sensory system. Our findings



                                                                                                        686
strongly suggest that modulation of the physical properties of motion-based signals can be an effective
mechanism to tune signals to the combined effects of characteristics of receiver sensory systems and
receiver distance, and can serve as a behavioural strategy to overcome problems associated with
changes in the spacing of individuals.



Steinfartz, Sebastian (University of Bielefeld); Hendrix, Ralf (University of Bielefeld, Bielefeld, Germany);
Reinhardt, Timm (Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Magdeburg, Germany); Caspers,
Barbara (University of Bielefeld, Bielefeld, Germany)

Ecology, genes and behaviour: an integrative perspective of adaptive divergence in fire
salamanders

The adaptation of individuals to new or differing environmental conditions is one of the most promising
processes to identify and investigate underlying mechanisms that are of major importance in the context
of population divergence and speciation. Environmental adaptation leading to adaptive divergence can
have many facets. Here, we are focusing on an ecological, genetic and behavioural integrative
perspective of an adaptively diverging salamander population in Germany. Our ongoing study nicely
demonstrates that starting from an ecological perspective, i.e. the adaptation of salamander larvae to
different larval habitats, adaptive divergence of this population can be detected with neutrally evolving
DNA markers at a population genetic level. Behavioural approaches now investigate in how far mating
preferences have evolved as a consequence of habitat dependent adaptation enforcing genetic
differentiation. On the genome level, we are now focusing on the identification of possible genes that are
differentially expressed in the two distinct larval habitat types. Our research results demonstrate that
amphibians might be ideal study systems to explore the consequences of habitat adaptation on
population differentiation and possible speciation as an integrative approach.



Steinfartz, Sebastian (University of Bielefeld);

Speciation in amphibians and reptiles: from patterns to processes and mechanisms

Classically and rather successfully, speciation processes in amphibians and reptiles have been mainly
inferred from a phylogenetically and/or pattern (phylogeographically) driven perspective.    Although this
general approach has been successful to identify general species diversity and major patterns how
species are spatially distributed, we are missing approaches that are focused on processes and
mechanisms that underlie speciation in amphibians and reptiles. This talk is aimed to provide an overview
on classical speciation approaches and their outcomes and would like to point out promising approaches
that are combining the phylogenetic/phylogeographic perspective with the processes/pattern driven
approach in speciation research of amphibians and reptiles.



Stengle, Anne (University of Massachusetts); Tyning, Tom (Berkshire Community College, Pittsfield, MA,
United States); Sievert, Paul (University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, United States)

What is normal? Observations of a possible secondary disease process in northeastern timber
rattlesnake (crotalus horridus)




                                                                                                         687
Populations of Timber Rattlesnakes (Crotalus horridus) have become increasingly fragmented in the
northern and western portions of their range during the past two centuries. Observations of widespread
infections and/or facial lesions in some northeastern populations have been suggested to be the result of
decreased population size, reduced genetic variation, and/or increased summer rainfall. To determine if
snakes with facial lesions showed behavioral differences in habitat use and movement patterns,
compared to uninfected animals, we monitored both groups using radio-telemetry in western
Massachusetts. In addition we recorded the prevalence of infections/lesions in five populations based on
direct observations and analysis of shed skins. We defined lesions as any injury or infection affecting
15% or more of the face. Lesion rates in five separate Massachusetts populations ranged from 5.6% to
26.7%, with all lesions being found on males. Biopsies were conducted on the lesions from10 New
England snakes and were found to contain ? species of fungi and ? species of bacteria, none of which
were considered to be primary pathogens. Male timber rattlesnakes with (N = 4) and without (N = 7)
lesions, tracked using radio telemetry, showed no difference in mean body mass, maximum home range,
minimum distance moved from den, or activity range length. All snakes followed more than one year
gained weight. Habitat use by snakes with and without lesions did not differ, as shown by a repeated
measures ANOVA. Prevalence of disease, and possible causative agents, are rarely reported for free-
ranging snakes. We encourage others to report their findings on disease prevalence in rattlesnakes
measured at the center and periphery of the range. Even though we did not detect significant effects of
lesions on the physiology, behavior, or survival of timber rattlesnakes, we urge caution in interpreting
these results due to our small sample sizes, and the tendency of snakes with lesions to move shorter
distances. In addition, conservation strategies involving the translocation of individuals between
populations should be carefully reviewed in order to reduce the possibility of disease spread.



Stephens, Jeff (Oakland University);

Anthropogenic changes to litter composition affect fitness traits of a larval amphibian

Human activities, invasive species introductions and climate change have significantly altered the
composition of native forest plant communities in North America.           These changes to the terrestrial
landscape have altered the composition of leaf litter in woodland pond habitats, whose nutrients can be
subsidized by this litter. The consequences of such changes for ephemeral ponds and the organisms
they harbor, such as amphibian larvae, are largely unknown.                 In this experiment, we utilized
mesocosms to assess how ten species of allochthonous litter, that differ in their regional abundance and
chemical composition, affect ephemeral ponds, particularly larval amphibian fitness traits, including
metamorphic mass, larval period and survival.       We found that litter had dramatic effects on larval wood
frog fitness traits and on multiple facets of the mesocosm ecosystem, including water chemistry and
phytoplankton and periphyton biomass.       Litter from green ash, a species of tree that has dramatically
declined in parts of the eastern United States due to the emerald ash borer, caused frog larvae to grow
larger, develop faster, and have greater survival than larvae from the other litter treatments.
Interestingly, we found that three invasive wetland plant species produced heavy metamorphs, with
shorter larval periods and higher survival relative to non-invasives.      Litter from red maple (which has
become one of the most abundant tree species in the eastern United States), cattail, and sedge produced
metamorphs that were significantly smaller and had lower survival relative to the other species examined.
Mass at metamorphosis was best explained by litter quality (carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorous content)
and primary producer biomass, while survival and larval period were best explained by a combination of
litter quality, primary producer biomass, and water chemistry (polyphenolics and pH). Additionally, we
found that litter quality and primary producer biomass was related to differences in the elemental
composition of metamorphs. Lastly our data suggests that litter nitrogen may be a limiting resource and



                                                                                                        688
facilitates the export of metamorphic frog biomass. Combined, our results indicate that changing plant
communities, leading to qualitative changes in allochthonous input, have great potential to affect
amphibian fitness.



Stewart, James (Southeastern Louisiana University);

Testing Subspecies Delimitation of Dekay's Brownsnake, Storeria dekayi, using Ecological Niche
Modeling

Dekay‘s Brownsnake, Storeria dekayi, has a widespread geographic distribution, ranging from Quebec
south to eastern Mexico and an isolated population in Honduras and Guatemala. Currently, seven
subspecies are recognized, varying in color patterns and morphological characteristics. These
characteristics make them difficult to identify, especially in areas where these groups overlap. Subspecies
designation is problematic empirically and philosophically. Using a combination of Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) and Ecological Niche Modeling (ENM) the subspecies of S. dekayi will be tested.
Geographic Information Systems have provided more data in ecology and biogeography studies as well
as ways to manipulate those data. Ecological Niche Modeling takes spatial data of a species with the
known habitat and environmental requirements to form models that allow for analysis of actual or
predicted range distributions. Incorporating this type of modeling coupled with the Ecological and
Evolutionary Species Concepts will enable testing putative niches of subspecies of S. dekayi. The
Ecological Species Concept will be used as the operational concept where unique niches will be
interpreted to reflect unique lineages. These unique lineages under the Evolutionary Species Concept
would be interpreted as species. ENM previously has been used as an effective technique to learn more
about an organism‘s habitat and to assist in species delimitation. By combining known presence data and
ecological parameters, ENM will be used to test the reality of the subspecies of Storeria dekayi.



Stewart, James R. (East Tennessee State University); Ecay, Tom W (East Tennessee State University,
Johnson City, United States); Heulin, Benoit (CNRS, Paimpont, France)

Calcium Mobilization by Embryos of a Viviparous Lizard, Zootoca vivipara, Incubated ex utero

Females of the viviparous European common lizard provision eggs with calcium from two sources, yolk
and uterine secretion. Yolk calcium (0.17 mg) contributes only 26% of neonatal calcium content (0.65
mg). A thin eggshell containing 0.08 mg of calcium is secreted soon after ovulation. Eggshell calcium
content increases to 0.24 mg prior to the embryonic growth phase and remains stable throughout
gestation. Embryonic mobilization of calcium from either yolk or uterine secretions primarily occurs late
in development. Embryonic calcium uptake is correlated with expression of the calcium binding protein,
calbindin-D 28K , in the chorioallantoic membrane. As embryos gain mass, calbindin-D 28K expression
and embryonic calcium content increase, likely in response to increased uterine secretion of calcium.
Coordination of uterine secretory capability with competence of embryos to acquire calcium is a critical
component of placental function. Neither the timing of uterine secretion, nor the developmental pattern
of the embryonic response to calcium availability, is known.     We surgically removed embryos from
females and incubated them in either, 1) nominally calcium-free saline or 2) saline with 2 mM calcium, to
determine 1) if embryos can conserve calcium in the absence of exogenous calcium and 2) if the
mechanism of embryonic calcium uptake is continuously responsive to calcium availability.            We
analyzed total calcium in egg compartments using atomic absorption spectroscopy at the initial time point
(embryonic stage 36 – 37) and after 11 days of incubation (embryonic stage 40).            The incubation



                                                                                                       689
medium was replenished every two days and we measured calcium concentration in the recovered
medium with a calcium electrode. There was no difference in total calcium in the initial sample of eggs
and in day 11 eggs in calcium-free saline, but calcium mass was significantly greater in eggs incubated in
2 mM calcium.     Embryos in either treatment lost calcium on day two of incubation. Beyond day 2,
embryonic calcium content was stable until day 10 - 11 when embryos in 2 mM calcium gained significant
calcium from the medium. We conclude that embryos have the capacity to conserve calcium in the
absence of exogenous calcium and that embryonic response to exogenous calcium is dependent on
embryonic maturation during the ultimate embryonic stage.



Stewart, James R. (East Tennessee State University); Russell, Kylie J.; Thompson, Michael (University
of Sydney, Sydney, Australia)

Development of the Yolk Sac in an Oviparous Scincid Lizard, Oligosoma lichenigerum

Development of the yolk sac of squamate reptiles (lizards and snakes) differs from other amniote lineages
in the pattern of growth of extraembryonic mesoderm, which generates an enclosed space, the yolk cleft,
within the yolk sac cavity. Function of the yolk cleft is unknown, but variation in this structure contributes
importantly to variation in extraembryonic membrane development of oviparous species and in placental
structure among viviparous lineages.             We used light microscopy to describe the yolk sac in a
developmental series of the oviparous scincid lizard, Oligosoma lichenigerum .            Development of yolk
sac splanchnopleure, surrounding the yolk sac cavity, and initial stages in formation of the yolk cleft are
typical compared to other lizards. During later development, the yolk cleft is transformed into a novel
structure, a tube-shaped cavity with a cuboidal germinal epithelium. Yolk splanchnopleure is composed
of endoderm and mesoderm supplied by omphalomesenteric blood vessels.                  Intravitelline mesoderm
contributes the epithelium of the yolk cleft.       Throughout development, the epithelium of the yolk cleft
generates cells that reside initially in the yolk cleft. In contrast to non-squamate amniotes, three types of
cells occur among yolk platelets within the yolk sac cavity.            One of these is structurally similar to
endodermal cells lining the yolk sac splanchnopleure; the other two are smaller and contain vesicles,
which give the cytoplasm a granular appearance. Distribution of the granulocyte-like cells suggests that
the yolk cleft epithelium is the source.          Granulocyte-like cells associate with endoderm and blood
vessels along the yolk sac splanchnopleure and throughout the yolk sac cavity and aggregations of these
cells occur in regions of fluid and low yolk platelet density late in development.         These observations
suggest that the yolk cleft epithelium is a type of myeloid tissue that produces granulocyte-like cells that
contribute to yolk digestion and perhaps immune defense.                Given that the yolk cleft is unique to
squamate reptiles, it is likely that a novel system of yolk digestion and mobilization evolved in early
squamates, or lepidosaurs, and that monotremes, turtles and archosaurs retain the basal amniote
pattern.



Stiles, Jimmy (Auburn University Department of Biological Sciences); Stiles, Sierra; Guyer, Craig (Aubun
University Department of Biological Sciences, Canada); Godwin, James (Auburn Universtiy
Environmental Institute, Canada)

Monitoring the Reintroduction of Eastern Indigo Snakes into Alabama: Survival and Home Range

A program to reintroduce Eastern Indigo Snakes (Drymarchon couperi) to the Conecuh National Forest
(CNF) in southern Alabama is currently underway. Monitoring of snakes will be important for elucidating
important variables affecting the establishment of a viable population of D. couperi. Snakes have been



                                                                                                           690
released on CNF for the last 3 years. A proportion of these snakes were outfitted with surgically implanted
radio transmitters. Radio telemetry techniques and Geographical Information Systems (GIS) are being
used to monitor the success of this reintroduction. Two strategies are being employed to release the
snakes. One release technique (hard release) consists of releasing snakes directly onto the site where
they are allowed to move freely across the landscape. ―Soft‖ releases employ the use of 6 enclosures
approximately .5-.75 hectares in size. One or 2 snakes were released into the enclosures then allowed to
disseminate, spending (5-121 days) in the enclosures. We are evaluating this technique to determine if
penning the reintroduced snakes decreases active ranges and improves survival. This talk will focus on
radio telemetry data gathered from snakes released in 2010 and 2011. Home ranges of snakes were
calculated using three different methods: Minimum Convex Polygons, Kernel Density estimators, and
Adaptive Local Convex Hulls. Preliminary analysis supports the hypothesis that penning of snakes
decreases their active ranges once they left the enclosures. We are also using the home range data to
compare areas of overlap between males and females. Understanding how penning affects male-female
overlap will be important to determining the effectiveness of soft releases in influencing reproduction.
Reproduction in the wild will be a key component to the overall success of the reintroduction program.
Survival rates of the snakes being monitored by radio telemetry is also important for determining the
effectiveness of hard and soft release techniques on establishment of a viable population. Kaplan-Meier
estimates for censored data suggest a survival rate of approximately 50% for reintroduced snakes, with
female snakes having a dramatically higher survival rate than males. Cox Proportional Hazards Models
were used to evaluate the two release techniques and determine if the soft release technique is
beneficial. While home ranges do appear to be decreased for the soft release snakes, survival rates
appear to be higher for hard released snakes. Using survival estimates and home range data to compare
the effects of hard and soft release strategies is helping us to elucidate which methodology is best suited
for reintroductions of D. couperi.



Stiles, Sierra (Auburn University Department of Biological Sciences); Stiles, Jimmy; Guyer, Craig (Aubun
University Department of Biological Sciences, Canada); Godwin, James (Auburn Universtiy
Environmental Institute, Canada)

Shelter Use by Translocated Eastern Indigo Snakes (Drymarchon couperi) in Conecuh National
Forest, Alabama

Reintroduction has become an increasingly popular conservation method for reestablishing extirpated
populations of declining species. One measure of success for this method, in the short term, is habitat
use that mirrors that of individuals from the source populations. We radio-tracked 38 Eastern Indigo
Snakes translocated to Conecuh National Forest, Alabama to evaluate post-release habitat use. Conecuh
National Forest lies in the northern extent of the geographic range of Drymarchon couperi. Previous
studies of this species in the northern part of its range have indicated that shelter availability may be a
potent environmental constraint. In particular, Eastern Indigo Snakes in this part of their range are
documented to rely chiefly on gopher tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus) burrows for shelter. Translocated
Eastern Indigo Snakes in our study used shelters in a manner similar to snakes studied previously near
the source site. Our observations indicate that maintenance of high quality gopher tortoise habitat,
including prescribed burning will be critical for reestablishing Eastern Indigo Snake populations in this part
of their range.




                                                                                                          691
Stöck, Matthias (Department of Ecology and Evolution, Biophore, University of Lausanne, CH-1015
Lausanne, Switzerland); Betto-Colliard, Caroline (Department of Ecology and Evolution, Biophore,
University of Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland, Canada); Dufresnes, Christophe (University of
Lausanne, Switzerland); Savary, Romain (Department of Ecology and Evolution, Biophore, University of
Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland, Canada); Bonato, Luico (Dipartimento di Biologia, Università
di Padova, via Ugo Bassi 58b, I-35131, Padova, Italy, Canada); Kornilios, Panagiotis (Section of Animal
Biology, Department of Biology, School of Natural Sciences, University of Patras, GR-26500 Patras,
Greece, Canada); Lymberakis, Petros (Natural History Museum of Crete, University of Crete, Knosos Av.,
P.O. Box 2208, GR-71409 Irakleio, Crete, Greece, Canada); Novarini, Nicola (Museo di Storia Naturale di
Venezia, Santa Croce 1730, I-30125, Venezia, Italy, Canada); Pio, Dorothea (Environmental Sciences
Unit, UNESCO Jakarta, Jalan Galuh II No 5, Kebayoran Baru, Jakarta, Indonesia, Canada); Sicilia,
Alessandra (Dipartimento di Biologia Animale, University of Palermo, Via Archirafi, 18, I-90123 Palermo,
Italy, Canada); Turrisi, Guiseppe Fabrizio (University of Catania, Cutgana, Section of Nature Reserve
Management, via Terzora 8, I-95027 San Gregorio di Catania, Catania, Italy, Canada); von Ungern-
Sternberg, Alexander; Perrin, Nicolas (Department of Ecology and Evolution, Biophore, University of
Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland, Canada)

Comparative analyses of secondary contacts in three hybrid zones: Data on four anuran lineages
from the same radiation in relation to divergence time

Speciation research in amphibians can rarely compare secondary contacts of differently diverged
lineages from the same radiation. We study four lineages of green toads ( Bufo viridis subgroup) around
the northern Mediterranean Sea, diverged during different Plio-Pleistocene periods. Using mitochondrial,
and nuclear DNA, we examine divergence times, and interactions with up to 12 autosomal and sex-linked
microsatellites. Sicilian endemic B. siculus and Italian mainland-origin B. balearicus (divergence 2.7
Mya) form a narrow (40 km) hybrid zone in NE-Sicily with limited bidirectional mtDNA introgression.
Nuclear genomes barely admix, and hybrid breakdown occurs in backcrosses (Colliard et al. 2010, BMC
Evol. Biol. 10: 232). Selection against hybrids likely has intrinsic genomic causes, possibly reinforced by
adaptation to climate, as ecological niches overlap just 38%. Thus, B. siculus and B. balearicus have
evolved almost complete reproductive isolation. In contrast, Italian B. balearicus and SE-European B.
viridis , diverged only 1.9 Mya, display a wider (130 km) zone of mtDNA introgression and considerable
nuclear admixture (40 km) in the Po Plain. Ecological niche models identified overlap between parental
and hybrids‘ space, and their distributions not matching climatic gradients. Instead, rivers (Po, Adige)
pose strong dispersal barriers. The best-fitting neutral scenario presents a 5 kya paleo-river shift that
isolated frontline balearicus to the north of the modern Po, where colonizing viridis introgressed,
leading to advanced nuclear admixture, while female-biased dispersal led to greater introgression of
balearicus mtDNA into the viridis gene pool. Alternatively, mtDNA &gt;&gt; nuDNA introgression might
indicate intrinsic selection, in accordance with Haldane‘s rule for male heterogamety (XY) (Dufresnes et
al ., in review). The third hybrid zone (work in progress) involves Balkan and Central European viridis
and Asia Minor-origin variabilis (divergence &lt;1.8 My, most recent split) along the SE-shores of the
Balkan Peninsula. A uniform mtDNA lineage of variabilis has colonized the viridis glacial refugium
(harboring several mtDNA haplotypes) from the East. Nuclear admixture stretches &gt;200 km. Our study
supports the predicted inverse relationship of divergence and natural hybridizability of young lineages
from the same radiation, and facilitates dating incipient speciation, which is particularly under-investigated
in amphibians.




                                                                                                          692
Stock, Melanie (University of Wisconsin - Madison); Balster, Nick (University of Wisconsin - Madison,
Madison, WI, United States)

Overwintering of American Toads (Bufo americanus) under differences in soil temperature

Amphibians using belowground hibernacula, such as the American Toad (Bufo americanus), rely on a
specific range of soil temperatures to maintain metabolic demands throughout winter. However, few
studies have examined the effect of overwintering stress on the fitness of these amphibians, especially
within urban landscapes where temperatures are typically elevated relative to rural environments (i.e.
urban heat islands, UHI). We hypothesize that elevated urban air temperatures may decrease the
thickness of soil surface insulation (snow) and increase soil temperature fluctuations, therefore, causing
urban toads to emerge in spring with lower body masses than rural toads. To test this hypothesis, we
designed two field studies (observational and experimental) that house a total of 25 American Toads at
three sites in Dane County, WI, where soil temperature, air temperature, and frost depth are recorded. In
our observational study, we established five toads at a rural site and five toads at an urban site to
compare the loss of body mass over winter, timing of emergence in spring, and variation in year round
abiotic factors between the two environments. In our experimental study, we are quantifying the loss in
body mass as well as the depth of belowground hibernacula of 15 toads across three soil temperature
regimes that are maintained by altering the presence and thickness of insulation at the soil surface (e.g.
snow, straw). In our observational study, we expect greater differences in soil temperature and frost depth
at the urban site due to greater variation in snow accumulation, which may in turn elevate metabolic
demands, decrease body fat content, and increase winter mortality rates compared to toads overwintering
under less variable temperature regimes at the rural site. In our experimental study, we expect to
measure shallower hibernacula and less fat loss in toads as the thickness of surface insulation increases
across treatments. As urbanization continues to modify natural habitats, toads may serve as a proxy for
understanding the overwintering patterns of amphibians within these anthropogenic landscapes and
improving the conservation of these fossorial species.



Stockwell, Michelle P (University of Newcastle); Clulow, John; Mahony, Michael (The University of
Newcastle, Canada)

Chytrid management scenarios from models of host population dynamics: costs vs benefits

Infectious diseases of wildlife can be some of the most challenging threats to manage due to difficulties in
identifying causal relationships between infection, disease and population decline. It is only through an
understanding of infection outcomes on the vital rates that drive host population size that its impact can
be quantified and effective targets for management determined. This study uses multistate models of
mark-recapture and radio-tracking data to quantify the impact of chytrid ( Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis
) infection on survival and transition probabilities in a green and golden bell frog ( Litoria aurea )
population over a 12 month period. These parameter estimates were then used to model host population
dynamics over time under different management scenarios and each was evaluated under a cost-benefit
framework. The results reveal that counteracting the negative effects of chytrid on host survival probability
by increasing recruitment rate and survival via management of non-disease related threats, may be more
effective at increasing host population persistence than attempting to reduce transmission and disease
directly. Given that conservation resources are often limited, such comparisons of management scenarios
may assist in identifying and prioritizing actions, particularly if the complexities and costs associated with
each scenario are also incorporated.




                                                                                                          693
Stokes, Amber (Utah State University); Ray, Andrew (United States Geological Survey, Canada);
Buktenica, Mark (Crater Lake National Park, Canada); Gall, Brian; Paulson, Dale; Paulson, Elva; French,
Susannah (Utah State University, Canada); Brodie III, Edmund (University of Virginia, Canada); Brodie,
Jr., Edmund (Utah State University, Canada)

Tetrodotoxin levels in high elevation populations of Taricha granulosa in Oregon and predation by
otters

Tetrodotoxin (TTX) is a low molecular weight neurotoxin that is found in a wide variety of taxa. TTX
blocks voltage-gated sodium channels, preventing the propagation of action potentials, inducing
paralysis. Death is typically due to asphyxiation. Taricha granulosa have been known to possess TTX
in high quantities and only have one positively identified predator, Thamnophis sirtalis . However, recent
observations of predation events on T. granulosa by otters were documented in a high elevation
population just outside of Crater Lake National Park in Oregon. Given this observation, we quantified
TTX levels in this population of T. granulosa as well as three other populations within Crater Lake
National Park and compared them to one another. Additionally, we compared these three populations of
newts to one from a very toxic population in Benton County, Oregon.



Stoler, Aaron (University of Pittsburgh); Relyea, Rick (University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United
States)

Tadpoles as litterbugs: assessing the influence of leaf litter chemistry and diversity on larval
anurans in artificial wetlands

Forest wetlands are important for a wide variety of amphibians that spend their larval stage in these
environments. The chemistry of leaf litter entering these wetlands is a major determinant of bottom-up
resource supply and can modify environmental conditions.                Although litter chemistry varies widely
among plant species, the effects of this variation on amphibian growth and development remain largely
unknown. We investigated the effects of litter species, chemistry, and diversity on larval anurans in two
studies using artificial wetlands. In a 4-month study using large, outdoor mesocosms, we hypothesized
that responses to 10 common tree litter species would be correlated with four broad aspects of litter
chemistry: lignin, phenolic, soluble carbon, and nitrogen content.          To understand how mixtures of leaf
litter species with similar or contrasting chemistry influence larval anurans, we conducted a second
mesocosm study where we hypothesized that greater diversity would result in faster development and
larger growth. We found dramatic effects of individual litter species on anuran survival and metamorph
mass.      For both spring- and summer-breeding anurans, phenolics and soluble carbon were strong
determinants of survival and metamorph biomass. Indeed, survival of American toad ( Bufo americanus
) was as low as 20% with litter species that produced highly soluble carbon.              For summer-breeding
anurans, we found additional correlations with lignin content. Results were due to a combination of litter
chemistry, litter-induced changes in abiotic conditions, and community interactions. Although we found
strong effects of individual litter species, we found few effects of litter chemical diversity. However, post-
hoc analyses suggest that diversity of some chemical attributes more strongly correlates with responses
than others. Together, these studies provide a wealth of new insight regarding the effects of riparian
diversity on larval anurans, at a time when forest diversity and species composition is highly threatened.




                                                                                                           694
Stoot, Lauren (Carleton University/University of Ottawa); Cairns, Nicholas (Carleton University/University
of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada); Cooke, Steven (Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada); Blouin-
Demers, Gabriel (University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada)

Consequences of incidental capture of freshwater turtles in commercial fisheries

Commercial fisheries are an important industry in marine and freshwater ecosystems. Although the
majority of catches consist of targeted species, a percentage of annual global catches are non-targeted
organisms. Bycatch is the capture of non-targeted species and frequently occurs in commercial fisheries.
Captured individuals are exposed to a wide range of stressors. Interactions with fishing gear can cause
both acute and chronic issues influencing the health, condition, and behaviour of the individual. In
extreme cases, animals may die. Many vertebrate groups are at risk of being captured as bycatch
including fish, mammals, reptiles and birds. Recently, greater efforts have been made to quantify and
prevent bycatch. Most efforts have been directed towards marine ecosystems with relatively little research
and attention devoted to freshwater. Freshwater turtles are frequently encountered as bycatch in fyke-net
fisheries in eastern Ontario. Typical setting techniques can result in trapped individuals being exposed to
anoxic conditions for up to seven days. Although freshwater turtles tolerate anoxic conditions during
hibernation, their ability to withstand prolonged submergence decreases as water temperatures increase.
This is concerning as most commercial fishing activity occurs during the spring and fall. Turtle mortality
associated with bycatch is a conservation concern due to their at-risk status and life-history
characteristics including delayed maturation and high adult survivorship. The purpose of the current
study is to test three turtle species for the presence of acute and chronic physiological and behavioural
consequences of capture in commercial fishing nets. We simulated stressors that captured turtles would
experience and measured physiological parameters on three typically encountered turtle species. Our
work showed that entrapped individuals displayed considerably higher blood lactate and lower blood pH
values compared to free-living control individuals. Moreover, entrapped turtles had reflex impairments
that were not apparent in control turtles. We will use biologging techniques to monitor turtles post-release,
assessing the behaviour and survival of captured individuals. Collectively, this research along with
associated fishing gear modification projects will clarify the role of fisheries interactions in the
conservation biology of turtles.



Straube, Nicolas (College of Charleston); Naylor, Gavin (College of Charleston, Charleston, SC, United
States); Ebert, David (Pacific Shark Research Center Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, Moss Landing,
CA 95039, CA, United States); Corrigan, Shannon (College of Charleston, charleston, United States); Li,
Chenhong (College of Charleston, Charleston, Canada); Rochel, Elisabeth (College of Charleston,
Charleston, SC, United States); Leslie, Robin (Branch Fisheries Management, Department of Agriculture,
Forestry and Fisheries, Roggebaai 8012, South Africa)

A molecular approach to estimate the etmopterid species-diversity off South Africa.

The cold waters of the Benguela current on the South African west coast and the subtropical warm
temperate waters of the Agulhas current on the east and south coasts in conjunction with the suitable
habitat afforded by the Agulhas and Mozambique plateaus, are believed to be the primary factors driving
high shark species diversity off South Africa. One of the most speciose families of squaliform deep-sea
sharks is the Etmopteridae (Lantern Sharks). An estimated 13 species of etmopterids have been reported
from South African waters. The phylogeography and taxonomy of these species is debated in current
literature, as some etmopterids show a wide distribution range contrasting more locally distributed
species. Here, we present mtDNA analyses using the NADH2 gene (ca. 1000bp), applied to an extensive
South African etmopterid sampling. Preliminary results indicate the presence of at least one cryptic cold-




                                                                                                         695
water species formerly referred to as Etmopterus cf. granulosus, as well as an unknown warm water
species from the Etmopterus lucifer clade. We further discuss results in a phylogeographic context, i.e.
presence of widespread species questioning the validity of some South African etmopterids considered
endemic.



Straube, Nicolas (College of Charleston); Corrigan, Shannon (College of Charleston, Charleston, SC,
United States); Li, Chenhong (College of Charleston, Charleston, United States); Rochel, Elisabeth;
Rosana, Kerri; Naylor, Gavin (College of Charleston, Charleston, SC, United States)

Putting some jaws on the Tree of Life: Taxon-rich estimates of elasmobranch phylogeny based on
mitochondrial and nuclear DNA markers

Exploring patterns and processes of evolutionary change in the elasmobranch fishes may be critical to
understanding vertebrate diversification and success. The elasmobranchs hold an important position in
the gnathostome tree because they are basal, sister to the Osteichthyes while also showing similarities
with the mammals in terms of genome organization. In spite of this importance, and widespread
fascination with sharks among the scientific and general communities, we know relatively little about the
interrelationships among constituent members of the group. To date, most molecular based estimates of
elasmobranch phylogeny have been based on mitochondrial DNA sequence data. While such estimates
are useful, they constitute a single gene tree, which may or may not accurately depict true species level
relationships. To be reliable, estimates of phylogeny must be based on multiple independent markers. In
the few cases where independent nuclear gene markers have been used to estimate the relationships
among elasmobranchs, taxon-sampling has been sparse and the resulting trees have been highly
discordant. We present, for the first time, a phylogeny based on 8 protein coding loci (7 nuclear, 1
mitochondrial) among 150 of the 190 described genera of elasmobranchs, representing 56 of 57 extant
families. We identify the phylogenetic signal that is common to all 8 markers and discuss the differences
in signal among genes.



Strickland, Jason (University of Central Florida); Territo, Gregory; Carter, Sharon (University of Central
Florida, Canada); Kraus, Fred (Bishop Museum, Canada); Parkinson, Christopher (University of Central
Florida, Canada)

New Guinea and the surrounding islands have a geological history that has generated a diverse
assemblage of species, many of which are endemic. Much of this diversity, however, has not yet been
described or assessed evolutionarily. One group of poorly understood New Guinean reptiles is the elapid
snake genus Toxicocalamus . There are 11 documented species described based on morphological
characters, three of which are only represented by a single specimen. These snakes are small, secretive
burrowers that apparently feed only on earthworms and are not commonly collected. Although previous
research has placed them in the subfamily Hydrophiinae within the Elapidae, the exact placement of the
genus has not been well supported. It is also unknown if the currently described species represent a
monophyletic lineage: species currently placed therein had formerly been assigned to three different
genera. The most recent phylogeny of Hydrophiinae included two Toxicocalamus species and indicated
that the genus is polyphyletic. Our objective was to determine the phylogenetic position of
Toxicocalamus within Elapidae and to evaluate species relationships within the genus using genetic
data. We generated full mitochondrial cytochrome –b sequences (~1100 base pairs) for 26 samples
representing 10 species within this genus. To determine the evolutionary relationships of Toxicocalamus
within Elapidae, we included sequences from GenBank for numerous members of the Hydrophiinae. We



                                                                                                       696
estimated relationships using Bayesian and maximum likelihood methodologies. Aspidomorphus is a
closely related and similarly distributed taxon to Toxicocalamus that exhibits high levels of genetic
divergence among species. We found that Toxicocalamus also shows high levels of genetic divergence
among species. The prevailing hypothesis for the level of diversity in the Papuan region is that it‘s
complicated biogeographic history has created many barriers that limit gene flow and facilitate speciation.
The phylogenetic tree inferred in this study supports this hypothesis and will help shape further
investigation into the mechanisms of speciation on New Guinea and the surrounding islands.



Stuart, Yoel (Harvard University); Campbell, Todd (University of Tampa, Tampa, FL, United States);
Losos, Jonathan (Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States)

A real-time test of a classic hypothesis: rapid, replicated character displacement in Anolis
carolinensis following invasion by a congeneric competitor

The theory of ecological character displacement (ECD) posits that natural selection will favor divergence
in resource use and phenotype when sympatric species compete for limited resources. Today ECD is
broadly considered an important agent of diversification in evolution, yet despite the enthusiasm for the
idea and nearly 50 years of study, the number of solid empirical cases is surprisingly few and limited to
observational data. To our knowledge, there are no experimental tests of the ECD hypothesis in nature
even though it is becoming increasingly recognized that natural selection and evolution can be observed
in the wild. We test the ECD hypothesis using a natural experiment initiated by the recent invasion of the
lizard Anolis sagrei to manmade spoil islands in Mosquito Lagoon, FL. These islands already housed the
native lizard, A. carolinensis, so the colonization by A. sagrei to some but not all of these islands created
a replicated, controlled natural experiment that allowed us to test whether the presence of a congeneric
competitor alters habitat use and promotes evolution in populations of A. carolinensis. We visited the
islands in 2010 and 2011 to measure lizard habitat use and morphology, survey island plant communities,
and collect lizards for a common garden experiment. We found that A. carolinensis has shifted its habitat
use to become more arboreal in the presence of A. sagrei compared to islands where A. carolinensis is
allopatric. Moreover, populations of A. carolinensis in the presence of A. sagrei had larger toepads with
more setae-bearing scales, likely enhancing clinging ability, consistent with predictions for an arboreal
lifestyle. Data from the common garden experiment indicate that the morphological change is evolved
rather than plastic. Last, there are no confounding differences in island physical characteristics or plant
diversity and abundance between treatments. Thus, our data provide strong experimental support for the
rapid evolution of ecological character displacement in nature.



Stubbs, Alexander (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology); Karin, Benjamin (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology,
UC Berkeley, Canada); Umilaela, Umilaela; Iskandar, Djoko (Institut Teknologi Bandung, Canada);
McGuire, Jimmy (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, Canada)

Phylogeography and diversity of the Indonesian skinks Carlia and Lygisaurus

The skink genera Carlia and Lygisaurus are known from Australia, New Guinea, and Eastern Indonesia.
They are well studied as a model species in Australia; however, almost no genetic work has been done
on their representatives in Indonesia.

We conducted fieldwork in remote areas of the Lesser Sunda Islands (Eastern Indonesia: Nusa Tenggara
and Maluku) and made a large collection of both Carlia and Lygisaurus from the islands of Alor, Banda




                                                                                                         697
Besar, Banda Api, Ai, Seram, Gorom, Kei Kecil, Tam and multiple islands within the Aru island complex.
We sequenced over 100 individuals representing six described species of Carlia and, based on these
data, describe the phylogenetic relationships of the following named species: C. diguliensis (Aru), C. storri
(Aru), C. beccarii (Kei), C. leucotaenia (Seram), C. peronii (Alor) and C. tutela(Halmahera). We also are
able to place previously unassigned and newly collected populations from the Banda Archipelago,
Gorom, and Tam, as well as a unicolor population on Kei Kecil. Lygisaurus collected in Indonesia are
typically referred to as L. novaeguineae, but the type locality of this species is on Irian Jaya (West Papua,
Indonesia). While it has been recognized that specimens from other Indonesian islands likely represent a
number of species, we provide the first phylogenetic analysis of this taxon. We collected one specimen
from Aru, a group of low-lying islands separated from Irian Jaya by a shallow channel. Our sample from
Aru matches the morphological description of L. novaeguineae. However, other samples from Kei, Tam,
Seram, Gorom, Banda, and Sulawesi are morphologically distinct from C. novaguineae and are highly
divergent genetically. We present morphological characters used to differentiate these populations and
attempt to describe some of this cryptic diversity within Lygisaurus.



Stuckert, Adam (East Carolina University); Summers, Kyle (East Carolina University, Canada)

Mimicry complexes in Peruvian Ranitomeya

Poison frogs are characterized by their bright coloration and striking patterns. Coupled with toxic skin
alkaloids, this coloration is a warning to potential predators—an example of aposematism. Ranitomeya
imitator (formerly Dendrobates imitator ) is a poison frog endemic to the lowland and montane forests of
Peru where it mimics the color patterns of sympatric congeners throughout its range ( R. fantastica,
summersi, and variabilis ). This complex is a putative example of Müllerian mimicry though empirical
data demonstrating this is lacking. Therefore we tested this hypothesis in a series of predator learning
experiments using naïve chicks ( Gallus domesticus ) as model predators. Preliminary analyses of a
spotted population of R. imitator and its model R. variabilis indicate that both species are noxious and
contribute to learned avoidance of a shared morph. These data therefore support the hypothesis of
Müllerian mimicry in this system.



Stump, Kristine (University of Miami - RSMAS); Crooks, Christopher (University of Manchester,
Manchester, United Kingdom); Gruber, Samuel (Bimini Biological Field Station, Miami, FL, United States)

Hunted hunters: an experimental test of the effects of predation risk on juvenile shark habitat use

The effects of predation on a species occur either directly, through consumption, or indirectly as risk
effects. Risk effects arise when prey alter their behavior in an attempt to decrease encounters, detection
and/or capture. Often, a perceived predation threat leads to risk effects which manifest as changes in
habitat use by the prey species, and these effects can be significant and even greater in consequence
than direct effects. In Bimini, Bahamas, neonate and juvenile lemon sharks (Negaprion brevirostris) use
mangrove-fringed shorelines as nursery areas in part due to the protection afforded from predators,
namely larger conspecifics. We investigated the small-scale use of mangrove structure by neonate and
juvenile lemon sharks as an anti-predatory response to predation risks. Controlled experimental trials
were conducted on captive sharks to assess the degree of the sharks‘ use of artificial mangroves when
solitary, with a size-matched conspecific and with a potential predator (subadult conspecific). Results
showed a significant increase in use of artificial mangroves when in the presence of a potential predator
as compared to when with a size-matched conspecific. In addition, a significant negative correlation was



                                                                                                         698
found between body size and the use of artificial mangrove structure when in the presence of a potential
predator, indicating that size is an important factor in anti-predatory behavior.



Stümpel, Nikolaus (Naturhistorisches Museum Braunschweig); Joger, Ulrich (Naturhistorisches Museum
Braunschweig, Canada)

Phylogeny and Biogeography of west Palaearctic vipers

We reconstructed the phylogeny of the true Vipers (Viperinae) of western Palaearctic based on molecular
data. We sequenced two mitochondrial and four nuclear genes of 75 representative evolutionary Viper
lineages and reconstructed their ancestry with Bayesian Inference and Maximum Likelihood approaches
and found oriental Vipers of the genus Montivipera , Macrovipera and Daboia to be monophyletic.
Hence, Daboia is the sistergroup of Montivipera and Macrovipera . We then used complete
mitogenomes from a subset of Vipers and calculated divergence times, calibrated with deep amniote
fossils and correlated them with tectonically events in the circum Mediterranean region. With the data at
hand we reconstructed the biogeography of west Palearctic vipers. We found strong incidence that the
repeated isolation of the Anatolian landmass from the beginning of Oligocene was one of the driving
forces of allopatric speciation of oriental vipers.



Stynoski, Jennifer (University of Miami); Saporito, Ralph (John Carroll University, University Heights,
OH, United States)

Investigating natural predators of poison frog tadpoles (Oophaga pumilio) with video cameras and
choice tests

Many organisms including some poison frogs use chemical defenses to avoid predation. Several poison
frogs transport and/or rear their tadpoles in small water pools called phytotelmata. Predator avoidance in
poison frogs is well-studied in adults, but not in early life stages. Recent work revealed that later stages of
phytotelm-dwelling tadpoles of the strawberry poison frog, Oophaga pumilio, contain the same alkaloids
that defend adult frogs (see symposium talk by Saporito et al.). Still, 67% of tadpoles are predated before
metamorphosis. In the first of a series of studies to investigate the effectiveness of alkaloids as a
chemical defense in O. pumilio tadpoles, we aimed to identify the natural predators of O. pumilio
tadpoles. We placed IR motion-activated video cameras above natural and artificial tadpole sites at La
Selva, Costa Rica. Videos revealed at least 10 predation events, primarily nocturnal, by 7 snakes (6
Leptodeira septentrionalis and 1 Rhadinaea decorata), 2 spiders (Cupiennius sp.), and a large Coleoptera
larva (collected from the bromeliad for species identification). Field videos provide the first evidence of
predation of a vertebrate by a vertebrate in an otherwise invertebrate bromeliad microcosmic ecosystem.
This poster will also include upcoming results of predator choice tests by the predators identified in
videos. For example, in preliminary tests, L. septentrionalis snakes did not show a food preference
between either (1) tadpoles of O. pumilio and the red-eyed tree frog, Agalychnis callidryas, or (2) early
and late stage O. pumilio tadpoles.




                                                                                                           699
Sulikowski, James (University of New England); Carlson, Amy; Knotek, Ryan; Peterson, Cassidy
(University of New England, Canada); Bubley, Walter (Texas Parks and Wildlife Division, Canada);
Driggers, William; Hoffmayer, Eric (National Marine Fisheries Service, Canada); Tsang, Paul (University
of New Hampshire, Canada)

Spiny Dogfish: How new hypotheses', new data, and a little luck, may lead to a better
understanding of this species in the U.S. western north Atlantic Ocean

The spiny dogfish, Squalus acanthias , was once considered to be the most abundant shark off the east
coast of the United States. As a result of reported declines in abundance, a management plan was
implemented in 2000 which imposed annual quotas and possession limits in both federal and state
waters. Due to characteristics such as slow growth, long gestation, small brood size, and an estimated
spawning stock biomass (SSB) below threshold levels, the spiny dogfish population was not anticipated
to rebound until 2020. However, increases in the SSB have recently occurred that cannot be explained
when considering what is known about the biology of this species. Based on the previously reported
population decline and the life history characteristics of this shark, conservation groups are suggesting
the species should be protected. In contrast, the commercial fishing industry believes spiny dogfish are
actually abundant and are adversely      impacting commercially important groundfish stocks. Thus, state
and federal agencies charged with managing this species are in the middle of a volatile issue.       We
present data to support hypotheses‘ that are divergent to common paradigms: 1) this shark has a more
active vertical movement pattern that prevents representative sampling during trawl surveys used for
stock assessment purposes; 2) this species horizontal movement patterns are more regional than
previously thought; 3) this shark reaches sexual maturity faster and has a shorter gestation period than
the literature suggests (resulting in an increased reproductive output); and 4) that a larger dogfish
population will impact the ecosystem.



Sumida, Masayuki (Institute for Amphibian Biology, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University);
Satou, Naoki; Islam, Mohammed Mafizul; Igawa, Takeshi; Kurabayashi, Atsushi (Institute for Amphibian
Biology, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University, Canada); Ukena, Kazuyoshi (Section of Life
Science, Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, Canada); Oumi, Shohei
(Section of Agriculture and Forest, Amami City Government, Amami, Kagoshima, Canada); Katsuren,
Seiki (Biology and Ecology group, Okinawa Prefectural Institute of Health and Environment, Nanjo,
Okinawa, Canada); Fujii, Tamotsu (Faculty of Human Culture & Science, Hiroshima Prefectural
University, Hiroshima, Canada)

Artificial and natural breeding of the endangered frog species Odorrana ishikawae and Odorrana
splendida, analysis of genetic diversity, and usage as resource materials: Case study of fauna
conservation in Japan

Odorrana ishikawae, an anuran endemic to the Okinawa and Amami Islands, has been described as the
most beautiful frog in Japan. Regrettably, over-hunting and environmental destruction over the last
several decades have devastated local populations. Odorrana ishikawae is therefore listed as a class IB
endangered species on the IUCN Red List and is protected by law in both Okinawa and Kagoshima
prefectures. Recently, the Amami population was regarded as a new and distinct species, O. splendida.
In addition, it was recently found that large-type specimens inhabit a limited area of the Amami Island and
can be morphologically distinguished from the common-type. In the present study, we performed the
following: (1) artificial breeding of frogs and testing of farming techniques in the laboratory to preserve
these endangered species and promote natural breeding; (2) mitochondrial DNA and allozyme analyses
to evaluate genetic diversity and population composition; (3) antimicrobial peptide extraction from the skin
to find biologically active agents with strong antimicrobial effect. Field-caught male/female pairs of each



                                                                                                        700
species were bred using an artificial insemination method in the 2004, 2006, and 2008 breeding seasons.
Although fewer than 50% of the inseminated eggs achieved metamorphosis, approximately 500, 300,
and 250 offspring from the three respective trials are currently being raised in the laboratory. During the
2009 and 2010 breeding seasons, second-generation offspring were produced through natural breeding
of the first offspring. These findings appear to be applicable to the temporary protection of local
populations. Mitochondrial ND2 data showed that genetic diversity is relatively low (1.0%) between the
two Amami types but comparatively high (7.5%) between the two species. Allozyme data confirmed very
low (0.016) genetic distance between the Amami types and comparatively high (0.204–0.234) genetic
distance between the species. These results revealed clear genetic diversity between the species but
slight genetic divergence between the types. We can therefore consider the following possibilities with
regard to the Amami two types: speciation and genetic divergence are currently in progress; or speciation
occurred in the past but genetic interaction has resumed. We succeeded in identifying 11 antimicrobial
peptides from the skin of this species. Some peptides showed strong antimicrobial activity and wide
antimicrobial spectrum against bacteria.



Summers, Kyle (East Carolina University); Tumulty, James (East Carolina University, Greenville, NC,
United States)

Parental Care and Mating Strategies in the mimic poison frog, Ranitomeya imitator

We present an overview of recent research on the mating and parental strategies of the mimic poison
frog, Ranitomeya imitator. First, we review evidence that R. imitator exhibits social and genetic
monogamy, and that the evolution of this mating system is associated with the use of very small breeding
pools and the evolution of biparental care. We then present the results of recent experiments
investigating the role of male parental care on offspring growth and survival. Male removal experiments
demonstrate that male care is crucial for offspring growth and survival in this species. Genetic analyses
confirm that the males removed were in fact the parents of the tadpoles putatively under their care. This
evidence, combined with previous research, indicates that biparental care provides a crucial foundation
for the evolution of monogamy.



Sutton, Tracey (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Bergstad, Odd Aksel (Institute of Marine Research,
Canada); Bucklin, Ann (University of Connecticut, Canada); Burghart, Scott (University of South Florida,
Canada); Cook, April (Virginia Institute of Marine Science, Canada); Falkenhaug, Tone (Institute of
Marine Research, Canada); Hopkins, Thomas (University of South Florida, Canada); Porteiro, Filipe
(Universidade dos Açores, Canada); Schiel, Sigrid (Alfred-Wegener-Institut Für Polar- und
Meeresforschung, Canada); Torres, Joseph (University of South Florida, Canada); Vecchione, Michael
(Smithsonian Institution, Canada); Wiebe, Peter (Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Canada)

The Bathypelagic Biome of the Atlantic Ocean: Character and Ecological Discreteness of the Fish
Fauna

Recent global synthetic analyses have revealed that marine taxonomic inventories are far from complete,
nowhere more so than in the deep-pelagic ocean. At over a billion km3, it is the largest biome on Earth,
yet only a tiny fraction of the biogeographic records include the bathypelagic fauna. This data gap served
as the impetus for recent deepwater surveys, many of which have altered our perceptions of pelagic
ecosystems. Here we examine data from four deep-pelagic (0-5000+ m) sampling programs in the
Atlantic (60°N-25°S) in order to assess the character of bathypelagic fish communities with respect to
faunal distinctiveness and ecological connectivity. Regions studied include the Gulf of Mexico, Sargasso



                                                                                                       701
Sea, eastern North/South Atlantic, and mid-North Atlantic. Quantitative analyses give contrasting pictures
with respect to faunal composition and ecosystem operation. The discreteness of the bathypelagic zone
is exhibited faunistically by the suite of ―holobathypelagic‖ species found only below 1000 m, most of
which are highly modified morphologically. Geometric abundance class analyses reveal that the character
of relative species abundance distributions between the meso- and bathypelagic zones is fundamentally
dissimilar; the former exhibit a much higher proportion of common species, while the latter exhibit a much
higher percentage of rarer species. From a community energetics perspective, however, the bathy- and
mesopelagic zones are highly interconnected. Approximately 70% of fish species collected below 1000 m
are also found in the mesopelagic zone, and in the far North Atlantic, are also found in the epipelagial.
These species comprised 66 to &gt;90% of individuals collected below 1000 m in the regions sampled. In
the mid-North Atlantic, these species contribute to the unexpected water-column biomass maximum
observed between 1500-2300 m. Thus, the ―transient‖ taxa (primarily mesopelagic migrators and spanner
taxa) add considerably to the ichthyofaunal diversity of the world ocean below 1000 m, and appear to be
the vectors that support the diverse array of holobathypelagic fishes whose taxonomic composition is
dominated by piscivores. Data from the four regions studied suggests that classic pelagic biogeographic
boundaries do not apply to bathypelagic realm, as shared species are the rule rather than the exception.
Last, cumulative species curves suggest we are far from understanding the true complexity of the
bathypelagic zone.



Swanson, Penny (NOAA Fisheries); Beckman, Brian; Larsen, Donald (Northwest Fisheries Science
Center, Canada)

Physiological insights into mechanisms of plasticity in age of male maturity in salmonid fishes

Age of maturity (puberty) is a key component of the species-specific life history strategy in fish, which has
evolved to achieve maximal reproductive fitness. In salmonid fishes, age of puberty is highly plastic,
particularly for males, but the underlying mechanisms involved are not understood. A wide variety of
internal and external cues must be integrated for the initiation of sexual maturation. These signals provide
critical information on when an animal should reproduce: whether it is of sufficient size or energy status to
reproduce (metabolic cues), whether conditions are optimal for reproductive success (environmental
cues), and whether an appropriate mate is present (social cues). Although the mechanisms involved in
integrating this information are not known, ultimately the onset and completion of puberty involves
increases in brain gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and subsequent effects on pituitary
gonadotropins and gonadal physiology. We have used a variety of endocrine and molecular tools to
monitor the earliest stages of initiation of spermatogenesis in male spring Chinook salmon and summer
run steelhead to determine the seasonal timing of puberty onset in males relative to the timing of
smoltification and downstream or upstream migration in these species. In hatchery-reared spring Chinook
salmon that spawn in late September and October, for example, initiation of spermatogenesis occurred
over several months, from late September through March. Similarly, we monitored steelhead smolts prior
to release from the hatchery and found evidence that initiation of maturation in male steelhead had
occurred in a portion of the males a year before expected spawning, even though there were no a
significant changes in gonadosomatic index.             Changes in expression of genes that regulate
spermatogenesis provided sensitive tools to monitor the earliest phases of puberty, and to estimate
proportions of steelhead males that may residualize because maturation had already been initiated for the
next year.     Our data suggest that ―maturation decisions‖ in both species were being made a year in
advance of spawning and imply that the influence of metabolic or environmental factors on the onset of
maturation occurs well in advance of this.




                                                                                                         702
Sztatecsny, Marc (University of Vienna);

Don't feel blue: The nuptial colouration in male Balkan moor frogs facilitates visual sex
discrimination and reduces intrasexual harassment during explosive breeding.

Among anurans, male-male competition is most intense in explosive breeders with scramble competition.
Short breeding periods and highly male biased operational sex ratios cause males to actively search and
struggle for the access to mates instead of calling to attract individual females. .. Male explosive breeders
coerce females and clasp onto almost any live or inert object including conspecific males. The moor frog
differs from the majority of explosive breeders in the fact that during spawning males change colour from
brown (similar to females) to a conspicuous blue which has so far been assumed to act as a cue in
female choice. Given the limited opportunity for choice in females, however, we tested if the colouration is
advantageous for males as a visual signal, facilitating sex discrimination in dense male aggregations. To
do so, we first measured the colouration of mated (in amplexus) and unmated males by the means of a
spectrophotometer and then analysed interactions of male moor frogs in natural spawning aggregations
with a brown and a blue male model frog. Mated and unmated males did not differ in colouration.
Interestingly, male moor frogs spent 75% less time in contact and 85% less time in amplexus with the
blue compared to the brown model frog. Our results show that the blue nuptial colouration is unlikely to
influence mating success per se but makes mate search more efficient by making sexes clearly
distinguishable and reducing unwanted male-male interaction similar in function to release calls.



Takahashi, Mizuki (Bucknell University);

On the role of sexual selection in ecological divergence: a test of body-size assortative mating in
the eastern newt Notophthalmus viridescens

Speciation processes initiated by divergent selection often fail to complete. Although reproductive
isolation is essential to the completion of ecological speciation, how sexual selection affects the progress
and completion of ecological speciation is rarely understood. Intraspecific body-size variation affects
mate preference and male-male competition, which can consequently lead to assortative mating based
on body size. We tested the importance of body size difference in the potential of assortative mating
between the two eastern newt subspecies, larger Notophthalmus v. viridescens and smaller N. v.
dorsalis . Through differential expression of life-cycle polyphenism, these two subspecies are adapted to
contrasting environments between mountains and coastal plain. This differential adaptation has likely led
to the subspecific body-size difference. We found that males of both subspecies preferred larger females
of N. v. viridescens as mates presumably because of the fecundity advantage of larger females. On the
other hand, no evidence of female choice was found. Larger males of N. v. viridescens exhibited greater
competitive ability and gained primary access to larger females of their own kind. However, smaller males
were able to overcome their inferior competitive ability by interfering with larger males‘ spermatophore
transfer and sneakily mating with larger females. Thus, the subspecific body-size difference importantly
affected sexual selection processes, resulting in non-random but not completely assortative mating
patterns between the larger and smaller subspecies. While life-cycle polyphenism facilitates ecological
divergence, sexual selection processes, namely smaller males‘ mate preference for larger females and
sexual interference during spermatophore transfer, may be halting the completion of ecological speciation
of the eastern newt subspecies.




                                                                                                         703
Takahashi, Mizuki (Bucknell University); Wunder, Julie; Lampazzi, Noel; Acre, Kelsey; Bent, Nick;
Canter, Sadie; Chapman, Alexandra; Davies, Margaret; Kashan, David; Keiley, Jon; MacIntyre, Rachel;
Milton, Tamara; Weichler, Kara; Wilson, Matt (Bucknell University, Canada)

Promoting amphibian conservation through the college classroom: detection of Batrachochytrium
dendrobatidis among local amphibians

Amphibian populations are in decline worldwide. Many of these declines have been linked to the fungal
pathogen Batrachochytriumdendrobatidis ( Bd ). Yet, we lack sufficient knowledge in Bd‘s spatial
distribution in many areas of the world, including the United States. Detection of Bd requires specific
skills and knowledge, appropriate facility, and funding; thus, it is difficult for laypersons (e.g., volunteers)
to conduct such surveys. On the other hand,such projects often lack scientific novelty and may not be
rewarding or appealing to many university researchers. The college classroom provides an excellent
opportunity to not only expand our knowledge of Bd distribution but also promote amphibian
conservation education among students. Here, we describe an example of such research projects
integrated into a laboratory section of a college biology course to detect Bd prevalence among previously
unsurveyed amphibian populations in central Pennsylvania, U.S.A. Thirteen students in an upper level
Amphibian Biology course were divided into four groups, each of which conducted an individual project
focusing on amphibians in one of three habitat types: ponds, streams, and forests. Toe clips of six local
amphibian species, Plethodon cinereus, Desmonagthus fuscus, Notophthalmus viridescens, Lithobates
catesbeiana, Lithobates clamitans, and Lithobates sylvaticus (total of 59 individuals) were collected to
conducted PCR assays for detection of Bd . We only found Bd infection in 5.6% of all N. viridescens
individuals, but no infection in the other species. As relatively high prevalence of Bd has been reported
in surrounding areas, our results suggest spatial or temporal heterogeneity in Bd occurrence at a
regional scale. The college classroom can be an important resource for testing the prevalence of Bd at
a regional scale. At the end of the semester, each group presented their work to the class, wrote up a
manuscript by following a specific journal format, and submitted it to the instructor. While providing data to
the scientific community, through such semester-long research projects students learned scientific
processes by doing science and also developed deep understanding of conservation issues surrounding
world amphibians.



Talley, Brooke (Southern Illinois University); Lips, Karen (University of Maryland, College Park, Canada);
Vredenburg, Vance (San Francisco State University, San Francisco, United States)

Untangling the effects of environmental and biological factors on the intensity and prevalence of
chytridiomycosis in Illinois amphibians

Disease dynamics are a result of complex interactions among hosts, pathogens, and their shared
environment. Many environmental (e.g., temperature, season) and biological (e.g., species richness,
aquatic associations) factors are known to affect disease dynamics in the Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis
(Bd)-amphibian system, so we designed a systematic stratified sampling design to identify primary causes
and interactions among factors. We visited 22 sites, composed of 77 wetlands, and swabbed 2,804
individuals from 12 species during a state-wide survey for Bd in Illinois in 2008-2009. At each wetland we
measured water temperature, amphibian density, species richness, species evenness, and anuran
familial proportions. In 2008, we intensely sampled five sites comprised of 22 wetlands, and determined
that statewide prevalence varied, but was relatively high at 7 – 61% among sites. In 2009, we sampled 17
sites comprised of 55 wetlands and found that prevalence varied among sites 23 – 91%. Bd prevalence
differed between years (χ2 = 8.8908, df = 1, p = 0.0029). Bd was ubiquitous in both years, present in all
sites, wetlands, and species. Infection intensities were high in both years; average intensity in 2008 was



                                                                                                            704
1,773 zoospores (range 0.04 – 57,020), and 2,159 zoospores (range 0.01 – 130,307) in 2009. To identify
the most important contributing factors to Bd- dynamics, we created multivariate models in R based on
site- and wetland-level assessments. We used AIC to identify the environmental and biological
parameters that explained the intensity and prevalence of disease in 2009. Water temperature and
familial composition best explained site-level Bd prevalence (AIC = 2241.85, ΔAIC = 17.51), while water
temperature, alone, best explained wetland-level Bd prevalence (AIC = 2442.54, ΔAIC = 92.34). All ten
biological factors significantly contributed to the best models predicting Bd intensity, but density was the
strongest (AIC = 3408.51, ΔAIC = 144.97). Our results support previous studies in which prevalence was
associated with temperature while intensity – which is related to survival – was affected by density (e.g.,
Briggs et al 2010). No die-offs or extinctions have been reported from Illinois, but Acris crepitans has
experienced widespread declines, and our reported infection levels have caused mortality and population
declines in other systems. We recommend mark-recapture studies to assess population trends of Illinois
amphibians.



Tanaka, Sho (Tikai University, School of Marine Science & Technology); Nohara, Kenji (Tokai University,
School of Marine Science & Technology, Shizuoka, Japan); Burns, Finlay; Neat, Francis (Marine
Laboratory, Aberdeen AB11 9DB, United Kingdom)

Morphological and genetic comparison of the genus Deania between European and Japanese
waters

The genus Deania is a group of deep-sea squaloid dogfish. Deania spp. inhabit worldwide along upper
continental slopes at the depth of 400 to 1500 m and are caught incidentally with deep-sea longline
fishery and/ or bottom trawl fishery. The genus is distinguishable easily into squaloid dogfish by having a
long snout, and currently contains 4 valid species from the world; D. calcea, D. hystricosa, D.
profundorum, and D. quadrispinosum. Among them, D. calcea is known to have considerable variation in
the morphometric characters, especially with the growth. Up to the present, 4 species were reported from
Japanese waters: D. eglantine Jordan & Snyder, 1902; Acanthidium aciculatum Garman, 1906; A.
rostratum Garman, 1906; A. hystricosum. Among them, the former three species have been synonymized
with D. calcea and there are two species, D. calcea and D. hystricosa, in Japanese water at the present
time. In this study, general morphology of external futures and genetics were examined in Deania spp.
from European and Japanese waters. As a result, Japanese D. calcea was different from European D.
calcea in the length of the 1st dorsal fin base and the distance between the 1st and 2nd dorsal fins. The
species name will be discussed with a result of genetic study.



Tang, Kevin (University of Michigan-Flint); Fielitz, Christopher (Emory & Henry College, Canada)

Phylogenetic relationships within the family Muraenidae (Teleostei: Anguilliformes)

The anguilliform family Muraenidae consists of 16 recognized genera and approximately 200 species.
Moray eels are predominantly marine fishes found in tropical and temperate waters worldwide, where
they are important predators on reefs. They are characterized by a high posterior nostril, long fang-like
teeth, and the absence of a pectoral fin. Loss and reduction of bones in the skull and caudal fin limit the
morphological characters that can be used to resolve their phylogeny, relative to the number of species.
Sequence data from 12S and 16S ribosomal DNA were analyzed for 42 muraenid species representing
ten genera (Anarchias,       Echidna,      Enchelycore,    Gymnothorax,      Gymnomuraena, Muraena,
Rhinomuraena, Scuticaria, Strophidon, and Uropterygius) from both subfamilies, Muraeninae and



                                                                                                        705
Uropterygiinae. Additional anguilliform and elopomorph taxa were examined to determine theplacement
of the Muraenidae within the order Anguilliformes. Two osteoglossomorph species were included for
outgroup comparison. A tree of relationships will be presented and the monophyly of the family, its
subfamilies, and its genera will be discussed.



Targino, Mariane (Universidade de São Paulo); Taboada, Carlos; Faivovich, Julián (Museo Argentino de
Ciencias Naturales Bernardino Rivadavia- Conicet, Canada)

The vocal sac structure in Microhylidae (Amphibia, Anura)

The anuran vocal sacs are described as diverticulae of the lining of the mouth that communicate with the
later by slit-like apertures. They lie directly above the superficial, ventral mandibular muscles with which
they comprise the vocal sac structure. While the superficial mandibular muscles of Microhylids have
already been studied in some subfamilies, the vocal sac structure has never been describedin detail. In
this presentation we describe the vocal sac structure of some gastrophrynines, using both gross
dissections and histological techniques. In the Australo-Papuan genera, the sac has been reported to be
covered by the M. interhyoideus forming a single sheet lying ventrally to the M. intermandibularis, which
is consistent with a regular anuran vocal sac structure. In the Neotropical genera studied, the vocal sac
seems to be independent of the ventral muscles and posteriorly surpasses them; probably this is what
has been described in the literature as ―involuted pouch, dorsal to the M. intermandibularis ‖. This sac
may have a more predominantly elastic or muscular structure. The histological sections of the mandibular
region of Dermatonotus muelleri indicate avocal sac dorsal to the M. intermandibularis and M.
interhyoideus , and just posterior to M. submentalis. Histologically, the vocal sac is a structure composed
of an external and internal epithelial sheet, and between them three distinct connective tissue layers,
depending on the distribution andorientation of elastic and collagen fibres. The posterior region of the sac
is thick and has many muscular fibers immersed in the matrix of connective tissue. Beneath the sac, the
M. interhyoideus emits from its posterodorsal apex a thin flap of connective tissue with interspersed
muscular fibres that contour the subjacent muscle and attach to the sac anteriorly. Elastic fibers are also
present in the subgular lymphatic septum, dermis, hypodermis, and interspersed in the muscle fibers of
the M. intermandibularis and M. interhyoideus .



Tarrant, Jeanne (North-West University); Armstrong, Adrian (Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife, Cascades, South
Africa)

Using Ecological Niche Modelling to predict and survey the distribution the Critically Endangered
KwaZulu-Natal endemic Pickersgill's Reed Frog (Hyperolius pickersgilli)

Hyperolius pickersgilli has recently (2010) been listed as Critically Endangered and has an estimated
AOO less than 9 km2. It is endemic to the KwaZulu-Natal coastal area and is known only from a few
localities, most of which are unprotected and face increasing pressure from anthropogenic development.
Given its status, cryptic behaviour and limited distribution, this species is an ideal candidate for predictive
modelling. Here we use a maximum entropy model (MaxEnt) to create a predicted distribution for this
species based on limited occurrence data. Predicted sites with an occurrence-probability greater than
sixty percent were surveyed during the species‘ breeding season of 2010-2011 and 2011-2012. Despite
extensive surveys, few new localities were revealed: in total 5 new populations were discovered during
the study period. In addition, known historical locations (pre-2007) were re-visited to verify the species‘
presence there. Of 15 historically known sites, H. pickersgilli was deemed absent at seven. Taking this



                                                                                                           706
into account and including additional populations discovered between 2007 and 2010, the total number of
localities currently known is fourteen. We also use our results to recalculate AOO and EOO. The Critically
Endangered status of this species is warranted given its limited and very fragmented distribution. The
degree of isolation, development pressure and human-posed threats facing the majority of locations make
the long-term survival of these populations dubious and thus emphasises the need for urgent
conservation action, including ex-situ measures, for this species.



Taylor, Dylan (Villanova University); Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University, Villanova, United States);
Blackburn, David (California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, CA, United States)

Diet of two species of Libyan Acanthodactylus (Lacertidae) based on historical museum material

Although modern herpetological collections from Libya are limited, extensive historical material from the
Italian colonial period in the early 20th century is represented in a number of European collections, most
notably the Museo Civico di Storia Naturale di Milano, Italy. We used this historical material to study diet
in the common desert-dwelling lacertid lizards Acanthodactylus boskianus and A. scutellatus. Although
the two species are broadly sympatric A. scutellatus is a loose sand specialist, whereas A. boskianus
prefers more hard-packed substrates. Stomach contents were investigated in 100 specimens of A.
boskianus and 104 specimens of A. scutellatus initially collected between 1922 and 1937 in southern
Libya. 60% and 61% of specimens of these two species, respectively, contained prey items. The most
important prey categories are the same for both species, albeit ranked differently. Formicids were the
most important for A. scutellatus (70% by number, 33% by volume), followed by insect larvae of multiple
orders (11% by number, 15% by volume), followed by coleopterans (5% by number, 16% by volume). For
A. boskianus, larvae were the most important (33% by number, 54% by volume), formicids were second
(39% by number, 9% by volume), and coleopterans were third (8% by number, 19% by volume). Diets
also included spiders, scorpions, and cockroaches. Intersexual dietary overlap was considerable (92%) in
both species. These species of Acanthodactylus appear to show substantial variation in diet across their
broad ranges. Although ants make up a large part of the diet in other locations, as in Libya, elsewhere
spiders, orthopterans, and other groups predominate. Unfortunately, seasonal patterns in diet could not
be assessed as many of the specimens lacked complete collection data. These results reveal both the
usefulness of museum collections as data sources, particularly for areas with limited accessibility, as well
as the limitations imposed by the use of data-incomplete historical material.



Taylor, Eric (University of British Columbia);

Minding the gap: plasticity's role in the ability of salmonids to cope with environmental change

Pacific salmonids have evolved within the context of variable and changing environments. The result has
been a spectacular example of an adaptive radiation of species as well as the evolution of variability
within species. Despite this evidence of the general ―evolvability‖ of salmonids, their capacity to adapt to
environmental change accelerated by various anthropogenic activities is unknown and raises serious
concerns about their capacity to persist over the current range of habitats in which they exist.
Consequently, a major question in salmonid biodiversity conservation is: can adaptive change in
salmonids ―track‖ environmental shifts and minimize the loss of local populations in environments
undergoing such change? If not, then many local populations may be extirpated or disperse to more
suitable environments, the latter of which may pose its own problems for biodiversity. One process that
may influence the probability of these alternative outcomes is phenotypic plasticity; the ability of a given



                                                                                                        707
genotype to express different phenotypes in different environments. Being poikilotherms, the greatest
large-scale environmental stress facing salmonids is directional change in water temperature that impacts
their physiology, behaviour, and the timing of life-history events critical to their persistence in local
environments. This presentation examines evidence for plasticity‘s role in the persistence of organisms in
environments as a direct response to anthropogenic changes to those environments. I addition, I suggest
critical information that is required to make informed judgments on the extent to which plasticity may
minimize extirpations of salmonids in local environments undergoing rapid environmental change



Taylor, Julia (San Francisco State University); Crow, Karen; Saxton, Mike (San Francisco State
University, Canada); Graves, Kerry (Tishomingo National Fish Hatchery, Canada)

Pinning the tail on paddlefish

Hox genes specify body plan features such as fins and limbs. They are well known for setting up anterior-
posterior and proximodistal axes during animal development. The posterior HoxA and HoxD genes exhibit
nested and overlapping expression domains during pectoral fin development that are associated with
specific fin morphologies. However, the pectoral fin develops early relative to medial fins and various
paired structures that develop at later stages, which have not previously been characterized. Ray-finned
fishes exhibit a variety of caudal fin morphologies yet little is known about the molecular basis for this
variation. The North American paddlefish Polyodon spathula occupies an interesting phylogenetic
position as a basal ray-finned fish and exhibits an ancestral heterocercal caudal tail morphology. Using
in-situ hybridization, we found expression of HoxD12, HoxD13, and HoxA11 genes in the development
of several prominent external body features. These structures are involved in locomotion, sensory
systems, and excretion. Many of these features lie along the fish‘s midline, including an essential cavity
known the pelvic vent. Other medial structures expressing HoxA and HoxD genes include dorsal, caudal,
and anal fins; as well as paired structures such as pelvic fins and rostral barbels. Looking at later time
points during development, we found that the posterior HoxA and HoxD genes are expressed in waves
and the patterning of distal outgrowth during heterocercal tail morphogenesis is associated with HoxA11
expression. Several phases of Hox genes have been characterized during pectoral fin development and
the posterior genes have been coined ―late phase‖ expression. However, our data suggest that Hox
genes are redeployed at various time scales beyond pectoral fin development and recur on a morphing
body plan.



Taylor, Mollie (Florida State University); Craig, Kevin (NOAA NMFS, Canada)

Spatial and temporal variation in nursery habitat for juvenile fishes in a river-dominated estuary:
a diet and stable isotope analysis

The value of estuaries as nursery habitat for juvenile fishes depends on their connection with coastal
watersheds that provide nutrients, freshwater, and other materials essential to the productivity of these
ecosystems. This connectivity is of particular importance for river-dominated estuaries that experience
considerable spatial and temporal variation in hydrography and flow of alluvial materials. Apalachicola
Bay is one of the most productive estuaries in the northern hemisphere, largely due to the intensity and
duration of freshwater output. Variation in nutrient and fresh water input to the Bay may alter habitat
quality with regard to foraging success for juvenile estuarine-dependent fishes. Using juvenile spot (
Leiostomus xanthurus ), I am testing the hypothesis that spatial and temporal variation in diet
composition, foraging success, and organic matter source are related to seasonal variation in river flow



                                                                                                       708
and associated environmental conditions. The diets of 868 juvenile spot (9 – 171 mm standard length)
were sampled monthly in 2009 and 2010 from 12 locations throughout Apalachicola Bay. Stomach
fullness was quantified and prey was identified to the lowest possible taxonomic level, counted, and
volume of each prey category was estimated. Juvenile spot prey included harpacticoid and calanoid
copepods, ostracods, small bivalves, nematodes, amphipods, chironomid larvae, and polychaetes. A
comparison of feeding intensity and the relative importance of different prey groups between regions of
Apalachicola Bay will test the hypothesis that foraging dynamics of juvenile spot vary in relation to river
flow. A stable isotope analysis of δ 13 C, δ 15 N, and δ 34 S was conducted on 230 of the samples.
Isotope values will provide insight on the organic contributions over a longer time scale than the diet
analysis and will provide better understanding of how alluvial materials contribute to juvenile fish growth
during their residency in estuarine nursery habitats. It is important to understand how alluvial materials
contribute to juvenile fish foraging in order to better inform policy makers on decisions regarding water
diversions and upstream river modifications.



Taylor, Murdoch (University of Alberta); Paszkowski, Cynthia (University of Alberta, Canada)

Movement Patterns of Urban Wood Frogs (Lithobates sylvaticus) in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada

Amphibian populations in North America worldwide are facing increased habitat loss due to the
destruction of wetlands and riparian areas. Habitat loss is often a direct result of urbanization and
anthropogenic expansion into wetlands. Although an increasing number of studies are focusing on the
effects of urbanization on amphibian species richness and abundance as well as breeding success, very
few studies have examined the movement patterns of amphibians in urban environments. We
characterized habitat use and movement patterns of the wood frog ( Lithobates sylvaticus ) within the city
of Edmonton, Alberta, Canada through the use ofradio-telemetry. We radio tracked a total of 31 adult
wood frogs at 9 urban wetlands (4 natural and 5 constructed) during April-September 2011. Frogs were
captured during wetland perimeter searches and individuals ≥ 8 g were affixed with a radio transmitter
(Holohil Systems Ltd. BD-2N) and released. Frogs were relocated every 2-3 days during the tacking
period and upon each relocation, GPS coordinates were recorded as well as microhabitat characteristics.
We predicted that frogs at natural wetlands would show greater daily movement distances and move
farther from wetlands during the summer months due to the presence of more complex and natural
vegetation surrounding these wetlands compared to constructed ponds. Body size was also predicted to
be an important factor determining movement distances with larger frogs moving greater distances from
breeding ponds than smaller individuals. The31 adults wood frogs (22 females and 9 males) with a mean
mass of 13.05 ± 0.65g were tracked onaverage for 29 ± 4 days . The average daily-movement distance
was 7.53 ± 0.812m with frogs moving farther at natural sites (8.74 ±4.91m) than at constructed sites
(5.86 ±3.43m) .      Maximum single-day travel distance was recorded at 67.8m and maximum distance
from water was 34.4m. The frogs tracked in our study tended to show similar movement patterns in terms
of total distance travelled and distance travelled per day to those recorded in other studies quantifying
wood frog movement in natural, non-urban environments. In contrast, the frogs tracked at our urban
wetlands tended to stay much closer to the fringes of their breeding ponds than frogs tracked at natural,
non-urban wetlands. We believe that these restricted migrations could be due to narrow riparian zones
(constructed ponds) and potential topographic constraints (natural ponds).




                                                                                                       709
Tedeschi, Jamie (University of Western Australia);

How about some fried eggs? Assessing marine turtle embryo resilience to temperature extremes

My project attempts to answer three questions concerning the thermal biology of a marine reptile species
and their potential to adapt to climate change: 1) Is there geographic variation in the tolerance of marine
turtle embryos to extreme temperatures? 2) Is there intra- and inter-specific variation in expression of the
heat-sensitive genes affecting thermal tolerance? 3) Can I estimate how rapidly thermal thresholds could
evolve in marine turtles? It is proposed that incubation experiments, gene expression scoring and
paternity analysis will provide details on the adaptability and heritability of the thermal properties of
marine turtle embryos, with implications for marine park management.



Teixeira, Livia (Departamento de Biologia Estrutural e Funcional, Instituto de Biologia, Universidade
Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas/SP); Tacioli, André (Departamento de Zoologia, Instituto
de Biociências, Universidade Estadual Paulista Júlio de Mesquita Filho (UNESP), Rio Claro/SP, Canada);
Bolsoni Lourenço, Luciana (Departamento de Biologia Estrutural e Funcional, Instituto de Biologia,
Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas/SP, Canada)

Cytogenetic analysis of two species of Dendropsophus (Anura, Hylidae): a contribution to the
study of the D. marmoratus species group

The monophyletic genus Dendropsophus (Anura, Hylidae) includes 92 neotropical hylid species that are
distributed in nine groups. This genus has recently been revalidated to include species with 2n=30, which
is a synapomorphic trait for this group. Currently, 27 species have been karyotyped, but only information
about the diploid number of chromosomes and their morphology is available in most cases. An interesting
characteristic observed in this genus is the variety in the number of telocentric chromosomes among the
species. Dendropsophus seniculus and Dendropsophus soaresi are currently assigned to the
Dendropsophus marmoratus group along with seven other species, only three of which - D. marmoratus,
D. nahdereri, and D. melanargyreus - have been studied cytogenetically. In the present study, we
karyotyped the former two Brazilian species, sampled from Ribeirão Grande, São Paulo State, and
Barreiras, Bahia State, respectively, and compared them with other Dendropsophus species. The
chromosome preparations were obtained from intestinal epithelial cell suspensions and subjected to
conventional staining, C-banding, DAPI staining (for C-banded metaphase spreads), and silver
impregnation using the Ag-NOR method. Both species had similar 30-chromosome karyotypes with five
submetacentric, five metacentric and five telocentric chromosome pairs. The C-banding technique
revealed only centromeric heterochromatin in all of the chromosomes, which were also stained with DAPI.
A secondary constriction was observed on the long arm of the metacentric Chromosome 8 in both
species, which was identified as a nucleolar organizer region (NOR) using silver impregnation. This NOR-
bearing chromosome is similar to a medium-sized submetacentric chromosome of D. marmoratus in
which a secondary constriction was observed interstitially onthe long arm. Interestingly, the NOR
occupies a distinct site in D. nahdereri , on the short arm of the submetacentric pair 1. The number of
telocentric chromosomes (five pairs) found for the species studied herein was the same observed in D.
marmoratus and D. nahdereri . Curiously, several species from other groups also show fivetelocentric
pairs, including D. sanborni (gr. D. microcephalus) and D. labialis (gr. D. labialis). Further studies will
be necessary to clarify the cytogenetic differences and possible homeologies among the telocentric pairs
ofdifferent Dendropsophus species.




                                                                                                        710
Telemeco, Rory (Iowa State University);

Effects of temperature during development on the offspring phenotype of a facultative
thermoregulator, the southern alligator lizard (Elgaria multicarinata: Anguidae)

Developmental environment greatly affects offspring survivorship and phenotype. Temperature in
particular has profound fitness-relevant effects in diverse organisms. Because most reptiles deposit their
eggs in nests without further parental care, ambient thermal conditions within the nest greatly impact
many reptiles. Understanding these effects illuminates important aspects of the ecology and evolution of
these species, and is important for determining the likely effects of impending climate change. To date, no
study has examined the effects of thermal variation during embryogenesis on any member of the
Anguidae, a diverse and conspicuous family of lizards found throughout the northern hemisphere. To
begin bridging this knowledge gap, I incubated southern alligator lizard (Elgaria multicarinata) eggs at five
temperatures (24°C, 26°C, 28°C, 30°C, and 32°C). Hatchling size and performance were measured at
hatching, 7 days, and 30 days of age. Eggs incubated at 26°C and 28°C resulted in the highest quality
offspring (increased survivorship, performance, and size), with eggs incubated at both 24°C and 30°C
resulting in lower quality offspring, and eggs incubated at 32°C failing to hatch. These data allow
estimation of the thermal reaction norm for development in this species, with the optimum and critical
maximum temperatures being ~ 27°C and 31°C, respectively. Similar to adult southern alligator lizards,
these thermal parameters are relatively cool compared to those of many sympatric species, suggesting
that E. multicarinata is adapted to relatively cool environments throughout their ontogeny. Southern
alligator lizards might therefore be particularly susceptible to decline resulting from regional warming
associated with climate change.



Territo, Gregory P. (University of Central Florida); Sims, Kenneth R. (Canada); Hickson, Jason B.;
Schrum, Michael I.; Parkinson, Christopher L. (University of Central Florida, Canada)

Systematics of the Salt Marsh Snake (Nerodia clarkii)

Scientific understanding of evolution has changed dramatically in the last 50 years, particularly with the
widespread use of molecular genetic data in research. Conservation biologists and systematists have
incorporated these changes into their disciplines to reflect the current scientific climate. Systematists
seek to identify, classify, and name ―natural‖ groups, or lineages, which have a shared ancestry and a
unique set of heritable, genetic characters. Conservationists strive to protect the heritable units of
biodiversity and often rely on systematists to identify and name these units. In the past, systematists
have depended on overall phenotypic and geographic similarity to infer natural lineages.
Conservationists frequently default to historically delimited taxa as units for protection, sometimes without
testing the evolutionary context of these units. These historically delimited taxa provide hypotheses of
evolutionary lineages for modern systematists to test. An example of a taxon in need of rigorous
systematic assessment is the Salt Marsh Snake, Nerodia clarkii . There are three morphologically-
described subspecies within this species: the Gulf Coast Salt Marsh Snake ( N. clarkii clarkii ), the
Mangrove Salt Marsh Snake ( N. clarkii compressicauda ), and the federally-threatened Atlantic Salt
Marsh Snake ( N. clarkii taeniata ). In this study, we investigate the subspecies designations of Nerodia
clarkii using molecular data. We infer the relationships of the three subspecies using Bayesian inference
and haplotype networks with statistical parsimony of the full cytochrome-b gene (cyt-b). Prior research
has suggested that the Salt Marsh Snake subspecies hybridize with their sympatric sister species, the
Southern Watersnake ( Nerodia fasciata ), which we also investigate. Preliminary phylogenies cannot
resolve the relationships within and between the N. clarkii and N. fasciata species. Our results have




                                                                                                         711
implications for conservation management of the federally-threatened N. clarkii taeniata and Florida
saltmarshes.



Testerman, Christine (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute); Fitzpatrick,
Sean; Prodöhl, Paulo (Queen's University, Canada); Simpfendorfer, Colin (James Cook University,
Canada); Shivji, Mahmood (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute,
Canada)

Global Phylogeography and Mating System Analysis of the Great Hammerhead Shark (Sphyrna
mokarran)

The population status of the great hammerhead shark ( Sphyrna mokarran ) worldwide is of management
and conservation interest due to its high bycatch mortality and high market value fins. We evaluated the
population genetic structure of S. mokarran based on samples from the central western Atlantic (US
Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean), Indian Ocean (Red Sea, Persian Gulf and western Australia)
and south western Pacific (eastern Australia) using complete mitochondrial control region sequences
(n=277) and twelve nuclear microsatellite loci (n=286). The population structure results based on
mitochondrial and microsatellite markers were concordant, revealing strong geographic partitioning
between samples from the central western Atlantic and Australia. We found shallow but statistically
significant genetic structuring within oceanic basins, albeit with some differences between the two marker
types in fine scale patterns involving Red Sea and Persian Gulf samples. Standard molecular diversity
indices and coalescent analyses suggest that the species originated in the western Pacific with
subsequent radiation into the Indian and Atlantic oceans. We also conducted parentage analysis of four
complete litters (litter sizes n=55; n=23, n=20, n=19) and one partial litter (n=6) using the nuclear
microsatellite markers. The parentage analysis showed multiple paternity in all 5 litters with a range of 2-
6 sires per litter, suggesting a genetically polyandrous mating strategy in S. mokarran . Evidence of
geographic patterns of genetic structure in this species suggests that genetic data may prove useful to
source the broad geographic origin of S. mokarran fins in trade and assist with delineation of stocks for
individual population assessment and general conservation efforts.



Testerman, Christine (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute); Wintner,
Sabine (University of KwaZulu-Natal, Canada); McAuley, Rory (Western Australia Fisheries and Marine
Research Laboratories, Canada); Cartamil, Dan (Scripps Institute of Oceanography, Canada); Shivji,
Mahmood (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute, Canada)

Global Population Genetic Analysis of the Smooth Hammerhead Shark (Sphyrna zygaena)

The smooth hammerhead ( Sphyrna zygaena ) is a globally distributed shark frequently caught as
bycatch and in fisheries, and its fins are valued in the international fin trade. Despite its wide distribution
and importance in fisheries, published information on its population dynamics is scarce. We evaluated
the global population genetic structure and demographics of S. zygaena using complete mitochondrial
control region sequences (1,090 nucleotides) and 19 nuclear microsatellite loci. Our genetic assessment
is based on a widely distributed set of 397 samples from the North and South Atlantic, northern, central
and southern regions of the eastern Pacific, and the southwest Indian and western Pacific Oceans. The
mitochondrial sequence and microsatellite-based findings were generally concordant, revealing strong
genetic partitioning between samples from the Atlantic and Indo-Pacific, and shallower but statistically
significant genetic structuring within oceanic basins. As coastal nursery areas have been reported for this
species, we also investigated the extent of female natal site philopatry and male mediated gene flow



                                                                                                           712
using mixed-marker analyses. Statistical analyses of genetic diversity in S. zygaena are also providing
insight into current and historical population trends that may be informative for conservation and fishery
management efforts.



Testerman, Christine (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute);
Brunnschweiler, Juerg (ETH Zurich, Canada); Gulak, Simon (Southeast Fisheries Science Center,
National Marine Fisheries Service/NOAA, Canada); Werry, Jonathan (Griffith University, Canada);
Jabado, Rima (United Arab Emirates University, Canada); Jones, Catherine (University of Aberdeen,
Canada); Shivji, Mahmood (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA & Guy Harvey Research Institute,
Canada)

Global Population Genetic Structure and Parentage Analysis of the Bull Shark (Carcharhinus
leucas)

Population structure, demographic trends and mating system biology are important information
components of national and international management and conservation efforts. The bull shark (
Carcharhinus leucas ) is a globally distributed, large coastal shark that occurs in marine, estuarine and
freshwater habitats. It has been assessed as near threatened by the IUCN, is caught in recreational and
commercial fisheries throughout its range, and shows evidence of recent declines in the Gulf of Mexico.
Recent reports have provided evidence of strong geographic structuring between northern and southern
populations of C. leucas in the western Atlantic at the maternally inherited mitochondrial control region
locus, but no structure within the western Atlantic at 5 nuclear microsatellite loci. We expanded on this
study by evaluating the global population genetic structure of C. leucas based on 490 samples from the
central western Atlantic (northern Gulf of Mexico and US Atlantic coast) and the Indo-west Pacific (South
Africa, Persian Gulf, Arabian Sea, Indonesia, eastern and western Australia, and Fiji) using twelve
nuclear microsatellite loci. We also genotyped 4 individuals from the eastern Pacific. The microsatellite
data revealed strong geographic partitioning between samples from the Atlantic and Indo-Pacific and
shallow but statistically significant genetic structuring within oceanic basins. We present statistical
analyses of genetic diversity that provide insight into current and historical population trends. Finally,
parentage analysis of 2 litters (12 pups each) suggests that the species may be genetically polyandrous.



Thomas, W. Kelley (UNH/Hubbard Center for Genome Studies); King, Benjamin (Mount Desert Island
Biological Laboratories, Canada); Genome, Skate (Northeast Bioinformatics Collaborative, Canada)

The Skate Genome Project

The little skate ( Leucoraja erinacea ) is a member of the most primitive surviving clade of jawed
vertebrates, thecartilaginous fishes, that first appeared approximately 450 million years ago.
Cartilaginous fishes exhibit manyfundamental vertebrate characteristics, including a neural crest, jaws
and teeth, an adaptive immune system, and a pressurized circulatory system. The skate is a powerful
comparative model to study biological processes shared among jawed and limbed vertebrates such as
renal physiology, immunology, toxicology and regeneration.             The North East Bioinformatics
Collaborative of the North East Cyberinfrastructure Consoritum (NECC) is a team ofbioinformatics experts
from five member states and is currently sequencing the genome of the skate to enable comparative
genomic studies.      We are characterizing the genome using the whole genome shotgun sequencing
approach and Illumina high-throughput sequencing.      To date, we have 59x coverage of the estimated
3.4 Gbp genome by generating over 200 Gbp of sequence in 1.8 billion sequencing reads that are
primarily from a paired-end fragment library with a 500bp insert size.     An initial de novo genome



                                                                                                       713
assembly yielded three million contiguous (contig) sequences. Together the contigs represent 40% of
the estimated genome. One of these contigsrepresents the entire 16.7kb mitochondrial genome. We
are currently constructing mate-pair sequencing libraries that will be used to build scaffolds. So far, a
3.5 kbp mate-pair library was generated and sequenced at low depth.          Theskate genome sequence
project has served as an important model for highly collaborativebiomedical research, especially with
regards to improved biomedical workforce development through cyber-enabled research. Three week-
long workshops provided bioinformatics training in genome andprotein sequence analysis and annotation
to faculty, students and other researchers among NECC institutions.



Thompson, Jacob (University of Oklahoma);

Influence of Habitat Complexity on Survival of Juvenile Red River Pupfish in the Presence of Red
Shiner

The red river pupfish (Cyprinodon rubrofluviatilis) is highly tolerant of extremes of both salinity and
temperature, but is a very poor competitor, and previous research has shown that the presence of a
generalist minnow, red shiner (Cyprinella lutrensis), would suppress survival of juveniles through
predation. Increased habitat complexity can allow for higher species diversity by creating additional
niches, as well as providing cover for species to aid in avoiding predation. It has been suggested that
increased habitat complexity may allow for greater juvenile survival of the red river pupfish in the
presence of red shiner. To test this, I conducted an experiment to examine the effects of habitat
complexity on the reproductive success of red river pupfish in the presence of red shiners, a generalist
minnow which will actually prey upon juvenile fishes of small enough size. To test this, I established
pupfish populations in 12 artificial outdoor stream units. In a two factorial design, presence of red shiners
and habitat complexity were varied such that six units had red shiners and six had increased complexity,
divided in such a fashion as there were three each of the four combinations. To increase habitat
complexity I added artificial vegetation, woody debris, large rocks, and a cinderblock. I let the experiment
run for the summer and early fall of 2011, and captured and preserved all remaining fishes, including
juveniles. Results show that while increased habitat complexity did not increase juvenile survival in the
presence of red shiners, pupfish tended to have higher reproductive success in high complexity
treatments that lacked red shiners. I also found support for what previous research had indicated—that
red shiners depressed juvenile survival of pupfish.



Thompson, Michael (University of Sydney); Bridget, Murphy; Matthew, Brandley (University of Sydney,
Sydney, N, Australia); Christopher, Murphy (University of Sydney, University of Sydney, N, Australia)

Morphological variation of the placentae of Eulamprus quoyii group skinks

Frequent evolutionary changes in reproductive mode have produced a wide range of placental structures
in viviparous squamate reptiles. Closely-related species with different placental structures are particularly
useful for reconstructing how placentae might have evolved. We used light microscopy to study placental
morphology in late stage embryos of four species of Eulamprus , a genus of viviparous scincid lizards
that we had reason to suspect may display significant interspecific variation in placental morphology.
The genus is of particular interest because it formed the basis of the historical definition of a Type I
chorioallantoic placenta. Embryos from all four species display a chorioallantoic placenta, an
omphaloplacenta and an interomphalopleuric membrane, characteristics present in other viviparous
skinks. Unlike other viviparous skinks, but characteristic of oviparous skinks, the allantois expands to



                                                                                                         714
surround the yolk sac in each species, supplanting the omphalopleure with a larger area of
chorioallantois, until a chorioallantoic placenta surrounds the entire egg a few days from birth. All four
Eulamprus species share the same extraembryonic membrane morphology, but the cellular morphology
of the uterine epithelium in the chorioallantoic placenta and omphaloplacenta vary between species. The
entire area of the chorioallantoic placenta comprise squamous uterine epithelium in E. heatwolei , E.
kosciuskoi and most E. tympanum specimens, while E. quoyii and one specimen of E. tympanum
showed regional specialisation of the chorioallantoic placenta in the form of tall irregular uterine epithelial
cells at the mesometrial pole. In the omphaloplacenta, E. heatwolei , E. kosciuskoi , and E. tympanum
display a mixture of squamous and cuboidal uterine epithelial cells, while E. quoyii shows no cuboidal
uterine epithelium and only squamous cells. We used new phylogenetic information to predict that the
placental variation we observed is the result of two character state changes in the chorioallantoic placenta
and a single character state change in the omphaloplacenta.



Thoney, Dennis (Vancouver Aquarium);

Anuran breeding programs at the Vancouver Aquarium

Nearly half of the 6,000 species of amphibians are threatened with extinction. Over 160 species are
thought to have gone extinct in our lifetime. Habitat changes resulting from human development and
climate change are the main contributing causes, but pollution and invasive species such as the bull frog
and chytrid fungus also take their toll. Through the display of 23 amphibian species in ―Frogs Forever‖
the Vancouver Aquarium introduces the issues facing amphibians to the public. As part of this exhibit
and other conservation efforts, well over twenty species have been bred at the aquarium. The Aquarium
also is involved in direct conservation by maintaining assurance populations of the two most endangered
amphibians in Canada and a Neotropical frog that is extinct in the wild. The Oregon Spotted Frog (OSF),
Rana pretiosa, is the most endangered amphibian in Canada with only three breeding populations and
less than 300 breeding females in total. The Vancouver Aquarium assists the OSF Recovery Team by
maintaining a captive assurance population. In 2010, the Aquarium was the first institution to breed the
OSF in captivity. Of the approximately 3,000 tadpoles hatched in 2011, three hundred were used for
enclosure survival studies, three hundred were retained for radio tagging studies, fifty were retained by
the Aquarium to produce F2 generation, and over 2,000 tadpoles were released into a new adjacent wild
site. With many more frogs maturing over this winter, we expect to produce a magnitude more young in
2012. The Northern leopard frog, Rana pipiens, is also endangered in British Columbia, with frogs only
occurring in one natural and one introduced site in southeastern BC. The Aquarium assists the British
Columbia Northern Leopard Frog Recovery Team by maintaining captive assurance population and
expects to first breed and release young in 2012.



Tidwell, Kyle (Portland State University); Shepherdson, David (Oregon Zoo, Portland, United States);
Hayes, Marc (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Olympia, United States)

Inter-population Variability in Evasive Behavior in the Oregon Spotted Frog (Rana pretiosa)

The Pacific Northwest endemic Oregon Spotted Frog (OSF; Rana pretiosa) is postulated to be strongly
affected by the American Bullfrog (Lithobates catesbeianus; hereafter bullfrog) based on high overlap in
their habitat requirements. The Endangered status of OSFs populations in Washington State led to a
multi-institutional pilot translocation program at Joint Base Lewis McChord (JBLM). As part of this 5-year
effort, OSF eggs from two donor populations (Conboy Lake National Wildlife Refuge (CLNWR), east of



                                                                                                           715
the Cascade Mountains, and the upper Black River, in the Puget Lowlands) were collected and reared for
release on the JBLM recipient site as post-metamorphic animals (juveniles or adults). Based on
observations that captive Oregon Spotted Frogs from CLNWR appeared to display a more vigorous
response to predator approach than Black River animals, we developed a method to quantify their
evasion behavior. This method used a tethered 150-mm ball as a pseudo-predator that could be released
from an overhead location over an aquatic stage in which each tested frog was placed. Quantifying
latency-to-response as the time between release of the ball and a frog reaction, we video-archived the
responses of individual Oregon Spotted Frogs tested with this stimulus. We found that captive-reared
Oregon Spotted Frogs from CLNWR did indeed respond significantly faster than their Black River
counterparts. Further, regression of response time on size showed that the speed of response increases
with body size. The basis of the differential response time is unclear, but it may result either from
adaptations to the different predator sets affecting each population, or from some impairment to the
behavior of Black River frogs that may be water-quality related or both. The differential in response times
between the two source populations led us to compare captive-reared frogs to wild ones from one source
population, and we made the prediction a priori that captive-reared frogs would respond more rapidly that
wild frogs. Non-intuitively, using frogs from Conboy Lake, we found that wild frogs respond less rapidly
and less frequently to the same pseudo-predator stimulus than their captive reared counterparts. This
finding led us to consider the possibility that captive-rearing may be effecting the frogs response to
predator stimuli. This work is part of a broader study that seeks to determine whether intrinsic aspects of
the anti-predatory behavior of native ranid frogs may make them vulnerable to the American Bullfrog
(Lithobates catesbeianus) predation.



TinHan, Thomas (California State University, Long Beach); Erisman, Brad; Aburto, Octavio (CMBC -
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, CA, United States); Weaver, Amy (Niparaja A.C., La Paz,
Mexico); Vazquez, Daniel (Niparaja AC, La Paz, Mexico); Hernandez, Dalia (CMBC - Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, La Paz, Mexico); Lowe, Chris (California State University, Long Beach, Long Beach, CA,
United States)

Long-term horizontal and vertical movements of yellow snapper and leopard grouper at the Los
Islotes reserve, Gulf of California.

Gulf of California coastal fisheries heavily target species that form seasonal spawning aggregations. The
exploitation of spawning aggregations is thought to have lasting effects on populations, and marine
reserves have been proposed as a tool to mitigate losses resulting from this practice. However, it is
unclear to what extent fish may use these protected areas with regards to spawning. While some species
spawn year round and remain near or within their home ranges when spawning (resident), others may
travel over great distances at specific times to spawn (transient). From August 2010 to June 2011, we
implanted 32 yellow snapper (Lutjanus argentiventris) and 25 leopard grouper (Mycteroperca rosacea)
with coded acoustic transmitters, a portion of which were depth-sensing. Fish movements were
continuously monitored by an array of underwater acoustic receivers at the Los Islotes no-take reserve, a
small rocky reef and reported spawning site for both species in the southwest Gulf of California. For each
species, site fidelity was calculated as the proportion of days present since release. As of November
2011, grouper showed a high degree of site fidelity to Los Islotes (87 ± 27 % of days). Although snapper
showed only moderate fidelity to the reserve (58 ± 32 % of days), periods of absence typically only lasted
days or weeks. No changes in site fidelity were found to correspond with spawning periods of each
species (snapper: July-Sept; grouper: April-June). For both species, levels of horizontal and vertical
activity increased during crepuscular periods, while spectral analyses revealed diel and tidal rhythms in
presence to the reserve. Overall, snapper used less of the available reserve area, exhibited a greater




                                                                                                       716
degree of site attachment to specific portions of the reserve, and occupied a shallower, narrower range of
depths than grouper (snapper, 11.6 ± 6.3 m; grouper, 15.2 ± 8.8 m). Frequent use of the reserve by both
species, coupled with the lack of evidence that these species emigrate seasonally, implies that snapper
and grouper at Los Islotes are resident spawners, and are likely to benefit from the year-round protection
afforded by a permanent no-take reserve.



Tinius, Alexander (University of Calgary); Anthony P. Russell, Anthony P. (University of Calgary,
Canada)

The in situ Relationships of the Clavicle in Lizards: Employing C-T Scanning to Explore the
Anatomy of the Breast-Shoulder Apparatus

The pectoral limb and girdle play important roles in the locomotion of lizards, and their form is likely
related to patterns of ecological diversity, although little is known of this at present. The forelimbs connect
indirectly to the axial skeleton through a multi-joint complex that constitutes the breast-shoulder apparatus
(BSA - consisting of the scapula, coracoid, clavicle, interclavicle, sternum and rib cage). This arrangement
permits a greater range of motion of the limb girdle on the boy wall than is evident in the more direct
linkage between the pelvicgirdle and vertebral column. The BSA is involved in various
overlappingfunctions, such as locomotion, respiration, defence, mating and cleaning behavior. An
exploration of the structural and functional-morphological variability of the BSA in situ willenable
enhanced interpretation of its anatomical form. Computed tomography permits imaging of internal
structure and allows for visualization of in situ relationships. Imaging the BSA in this way allows
assessment of the morphological diversity shown by its constituent parts. In this contribution we present a
comparison of the morphology and anatomical disposition of the clavicles, a morphologically variable
component of the BSA. We investigate this for a phylogenetically diverse array of exemplar lizard taxa,
representing the Iguania, Gekkota, Varanidae and Lacertidae. As generally understood the clavicle
articulates with the interclavicle midventrally and the acromion process of the scapulocoracoid dorsally.
This seemingly simple kinematic linkage, however, is expressed differentially through the form and three-
dimensional disposition of the clavicle and its anatomical interconnections. In Sceloporus, for example,
the clavicles abut each other directly in the midline, and the dorsal half of the clavicular shaft approaches
the scapula in an almost vertical orientation. This configuration alters the angle of attack of the associated
shoulder musculature with respect to the humerus, and influences the biomechanical implications of the
scapula and the interclavicle in comparison to patterns of articulation that are seen in other lizards. The
exemplars investigated demonstrate the anatomical and morphometric variables that can be explored
using a CT-scanning approach for examination of this structurally complex region.



Tinôco, Moacir (DICE - University of Kent at Canterbury / ECOA - Universidade Católica do Salvador);
Griffiths, Richard (DICE - University of Kent at Canterbury, Canada)

Atlantic Forest Habitat Loss and Herpetofauna Hotspot Conservation

There a few herpetofauna mega diverse hotspots on Earth. The Australian desert, the Colombian forest,
the Kalahari desert, the North American desert and the rainforests of southeast Asia, are some relevant
regions for reptiles and amphibian. The Atlantic forest in Brazil, a highly disturbed ecoregion, is one of the
most important global herpetofauna hotspots. On the north coast of Bahia, a small fraction of the biome
with its 220 km coast line, it is estimated to house over 150 species. The region is one of the last Atlantic
forest refuges, and its diversity is shared with the Brazilian Savannah and the Brazilian Dryland, together,



                                                                                                           717
they create an unique ecosystem: The Bahia Restinga Sand Dune. A study has been carried out within
the region since 2008. The project aims to describe the region's herpetofauna diversity and indicates how
habitat loss and disturbance influence the reptile and amphibian species distribution. The project was
able, to detect so far, 121 species. Over 10,000 individual records were made, after 1,760 visual search
hours on nine different sites. Forty four frogs species, 37 snakes, 34 lizards, four freshwater and land
turtles and two caimans. The region shows high diversity indices (11.4), and richness indices estimate
over 130 species. Although higher diversity is found on forest habitats, the river plain and the sand dune
fringes also houses high levels. The Bahia whiptail, the broad nose caiman, the moustache tree frog and
the Bahia lava lizard are some of the endangered or endemic species. Some species have not been
described for the region before: the spiny tail lava lizard (found on the Brazilian Savannah), the snouted
nose snake (found on the south and centre of the country), the glass tree frog (found on the southern
Atlantic forest) and the giant gecko (found on the Brazilian Dryland). However, although highly diverse,
the region undertakes the effects of urban development. That affects herpetofauna, which is the most
abundant vertebrate group within the ecosystem. Most impacts come from urban development,
agriculture, and recently, the development of massive hotel resorts. Despite the contribution describing
the local reptile and amphibian diversity, the project has been able to aid biodiversity management
policies, advising the creation of four protected areas, as well as promoting the enrichment of public
and private awareness towards the conservation of a global importance hotspot for biodiversity
conservation.



Tipton, Michelle (Wesleyan University); Chernoff, Barry (Wesleyan University, Canada)

Post-Glacial Recolonization of Rhinichthys atratulus, the Eastern Blacknose Dace

Post-glacial colonization is well researched in the field of phylogeography. However, a large gapexists for
the study of post-glacial colonization of flora and fauna in the Northeast region of the United States and
adjacent Canada. We have been conducting phylogeographic studies of Rhinichthys atratulus, the
Eastern Blacknose Dace (Tipton et al. 2011). At the end ofthe last glacial maximum, deglaciation in New
England began only ~20,000 yearsago (Hewitt 2000), representing a very recent (geologically and
evolutionarily speaking) starting point for recolonization of flora and fauna into communities that we
consider native today. But where was their refugium or refugia located? This study will determine the
glacial refugium or refugia responsible for harboring the populations of R. atratulus that recolonized the
northern parts of its current distribution. Phylogenetic analyses of two mitochondrial genes and nine
microsatellites reveal that R. atratulus recolonized northern regions from multiple refugia. There are
two dominate haplotypes that are geographically separate.           Each of these geographic regions have
populations with low nucleotide diversity. These genetically distinct populations rarely mix, illustrating an
east-west divide. This identifies that at least two refugia harbored fish that dominated the recolonization
process. The data indicate refugia were likely in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, supporting the
Pleistocene refugia theory that southeastern regions harbored populations close to the glacial maximum
during the last ice age (Schmidt 1986; Whitworth 1996). We also conclude that the rivers in the state of
Connecticut served as a gateway to the eastern post glacial recolonization. We theorize that R. atratulus
dispersed through the temporary glacial river in Long Island Sound before it was inundated by seawater
(Stone et al. 2005; Tipton et al. 2011). Our study begins to reveal the complex recolonization history of
fishes in New England. This helps to fill a knowledge gap of their origins and recolonization routes so that
we may derive a more complete understanding of their recent biogeographic and evolutionary histories




                                                                                                         718
Tipton, Michelle (Wesleyan University); Kraczkowski, Krystal (University of Colorado Boulder, Canada);
Chernoff, Barry (Wesleyan University, Canada)

The Blacknose Dace Complex Revaluated: Large Genetic differences within and between
Rhinichthys obtusus and Rhinichthys atratulus

The debate over the distinction and geographic locations of the Eastern vs. Western Blacknose Dace has
lingered for decades. Morphological analyses have been ambiguous and field identification is complicated
by the lack of consistently diagnostic characteristics. Added to this confusion is the unclear history of their
taxonomic classification/reclassifications and syntopic zones. In this study, we clear up some of these
issues from analyses of mitochondrial and nuclear DNA from Blacknose Dace across the eastern half of
North America. Our results show large genetic differences between the Eastern Blacknose Dace,
Rhinichthys atratulus and the Western Blacknose Dace, R. obtusus . The most surprising result was that
genetic variation within the R. obtusus clade was about five times higher than in the R. atratulus clade.
For R. obtusus, there are genetic differences between its sub-clades of approximately 5% and are
roughly clustered by geographic region. We suggest that the R. obtusus clade may need a taxonomic
revision based on these phylogenetic relationships. By providing a map of dace identified genetically to
species we provide a new geographic view of the Blacknose Dace complex that will serve as the
foundation for more detailed morphological and genetic studies.



Tirhi, Michelle (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife);

Western Pond Turtle (Clemmys marmorata) Recovery Project: Celebrating 20 years of
conservation in Washington State.

Western pond turtles (Clemmys marmorata) were once common from Baja California to Puget Sound
Washington, USA. Historical declines of this species resulted from commercial exploitation for food,
alteration and loss of habitat, and introduced predators such as bullfrogs (Rana catesbeiana) and bass
(Micropterus sp.). Western pond turtles were essentially extirpated in the Puget Sound lowlands by the
1980s, and in the mid 1990s, they were found in only two small populations in Skamania and Klickitat
counties totaling some 150 turtles. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife listed the western pond
turtle as endangered in 1993 although they remain locally common in parts of California and Oregon.
The Washington State Recovery Plan for the Western Pond Turtle was published in 1999. Now in its 20th
year, the Western Pond Turtle Recovery Project seeks to re-establish self-sustaining turtle populations in
Puget Sound and the Columbia Gorge regions of Washington State. Western pond turtles have a slow
growth rate, taking 10 to 12 years to reach reproductive age. Hatchling to adulthood survival rates in the
wild seldom exceeds 15% decreasing the likelihood that these populations will ever recover without
intervention. Continuing habitat degradation and predation compound the situation. To give these
animals a head start, Washington Department Fish and Wildlife in partnership with Woodland Park Zoo in
Seattle, Washington launched a captive rearing project in 1991. Oregon Zoo in Portland, Oregon joined
the effort in 2000. The first nest laid by a captive-reared (headstart) turtle took place in 2001 and by 2005
Western pond turtles in the wild reached the 1,000 mark. By 2011, the 20th anniversary of the project,
western pond turtles in the wild reached 1,500 in Washington. These turtles are contained at three
managed recovery sites in Pierce, Mason, and Klickitat counties. The recovery objectives are to establish
at least 5 populations of >200 pond turtles, composed of no more than 70% adults, which occupy habitat
that is secure from development or major disturbance. It is also necessary that the populations show
evidence of being sustained by natural recruitment of juveniles. Preferred recovery sites are wetland
complexes that may be less susceptible to catastrophic events than sites of a single water body. The




                                                                                                           719
greatest constraint to full recovery of this species is locating and securing recovery sites that provide
short term management control yet long term population viability.



Titon Jr., Braz (Universityof São Paulo);

Water balance and locomotor performance in species from the genus Rhinella

Amphibian locomotor performance is affected by temperature and dehydration and interaction between
these factors can potentially reduce the ability to perform important behavioral patterns, such as prey
capture and escape from predators. We compared the sensitivity of locomotor performance to
dehydration (SLPD) of three Brazilian species of toads from the genus Rhinella . We measured distance
moved during 10 minutes of locomotion in a circular track, at different temperatures (15, 20, and 25C) and
levels of hydration (100, 90, 80, 75, and 70% of body mass). Results show patterns associated to
differences in both geographical distribution and season of reproduction. SLPD was lower at low
temperatures for R. icterica , a species reproductively active during winter, and lower at intermediate
temperatures for R. schneideri , a species that reproduces mostly during spring, suggesting a pattern of
thermal adaptation of locomotor performance for these species. Otherwise, R. ornata , a species with
broader reproductive season and geographical distribution more tightly associated to forested
environments, shows high SLPD at all temperatures tested. We are now expanding this comparative
study by increasing the number of species and biomes sampled. We also expanded the range of
temperatures tested (15, 20, 25, 30, 35, and 40C) and testing SLPD only at 25C. In addition to the
sustained locomotion test, we are using a high-speed camera to test for the effects of temperature and
dehydration on biomechanical parameters of a single jump. By now, we have analyzed data for R.
granulosa from the Brazilian semi-arid area (Caatinga). Our results show that dehydration and
temperature affect both sustained locomotion and biomechanical parameters, but in different ways. The
effects of temperature and dehydration on sustained locomotion are linear, with higher performances at
higher temperatures and levels of hydration. Otherwise, the effects of these parameters on the
biomechanics of a single jump show more complex patterns: most biomechanical parameters (force,
acceleration, velocity) exhibit a rise at the first three levels of dehydration followed by an abrupt fall.
Otherwise, variation in most of the biomechanical parameters with temperature show an abrupt rise from
20 to 25C, and a maintenance of values from 25 to 35C, and falling at 40C. Implications of these results
in studies attempting to relate locomotor performance with ecological aspects will be discussed.



Titus, Valorie (Wildlife Conservation Society);

Preserving Salamander Diversity: How PARC partnerships can work to conserve our endemic
caudates

North America has the most diversity of salamander species in the world. Very little is known about the
majority of the taxa and new species are continually being described. With such high species diversity
and the lack of basic natural history data, it is difficult to make educated conservation plans. There is a
need for partnerships across the US, Canada and Mexico to preserve the amazing salamander diversity
seen in North America. Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation (PARC) is a venue through
which these partnerships can be established. Using several case studies, I will address challenges and
current successes between partners and how PARC can be integral in herpetological conservation
efforts.




                                                                                                       720
Titus-McQuillan, James (Villanova University); Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University, Villanova, PA, United
States); Jackman, Todd (Villanova University, Villanova, CA, United States); Blackburn, David (California
Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, CA, United States)

Molecular Phylogenetics of the Palearctic Naked-toed Geckos (Squamata: Gekkonidae)

Palearctic ―naked-toed‖ or ―angular-toed‖ geckos are a group of gekkonid geckos that range from North
Africa to northern India and western China, with their greatest diversity in Iran and Pakistan. The lack of
adhesive toe pads has suggested a close relationship of Palearctic geckos, and indeed recent molecular
phylogenetic studies have verified that these geckos, exclusive of Microgecko and Alsophylax, form a
monophyletic group that is sister to Cyrtodactylus + Hemidactylus. However, relationships among the
Palearctic naked-toed gecko genera remain incompletely resolved and the monophyly of many
constituent genera remains unverified. Further, competing classifications are in current use and many
species have been allocated to different genera by different authors. We used both mitochondrial (ND2)
and nuclear genes (RAG1, PDC) to explore relationships among representatives of all but one genus in
the group (Rhinogecko), including four genera not previously included in phylogenetic analyses
(Asiocolotes, Altigekko, Indogekko, and Siwaligekko). We found that Siwaligekko and an unnamed
Tibetan clade (together often referred to the ―Tibeto-Himalayan group of Cyrtopodion) are, in fact, more
closely related to Cyrtodactylus than to naked-toed geckos and that both should be considered valid at a
generic level. Asiocolotes and Altigekko are valid genera and are sister to one another. Cyrtopodion
sensu lato is paraphyletic. Mediodactylus and Tenuidactylus, which have variably been considered as
valid genera or as subgenera or synonyms of Cyrtopodion should be treated as valid. Indogekko is
closely related to Cyrtopodion sensu stricto and is best regarded as a junior synonym. Bunopus and
Crossobamon are closely related to one-another, and with Agamura are interdigitated among taxa
previously assigned to Cyrtopodion. Our data confirm earlier studies demonstrating that Tropiocolotes
sensu stricto is sister to Stenodactylus, with Pseudoceramodactylus as sister to this pair. Based on
morphology and biogeography we believe that Indo-Pakistani species assigned to Altiphylax are referable
to Altigekko and that the type species of Altiphylax is probably allied to Alsophylax spp., as originally
suggested by its authors. Although intergeneric relationships among Palearctic naked-toed geckos are
now mostly resolved, taxonomic stability in the group will require the sampling of more Indo-Pakistani and
Iranian species in order to establish generic composition.



Tobe, Edith (Squamish River Watershed Society);

A Community Approach towards Amphibian Restoration in Squamish, British Columbia

Squamish, British Columbia is a coastal community situated at the upper end of Howe Sound, a fjord
within the Salish Sea. The city is located half way between a major city, Vancouver, BC, and a resort
municipality, Whistler, the host of the 2010 Winter Olympics. As a result of being an Olympic site there
were numerous upgrades to the only highway that connects the resort municipality of Whistler to the city
of Vancouver, that being the Sea to Sky Highway, also known as Highway 99. From 2005 - 2009 highway
upgrades along Highway 99 resulted in significant impacts to amphibian habitat, in particular, that of the
red-legged frog. The Squamish River Watershed Society, working in partnership with Ministry of
Transportation, Ministry of Environment, the Sea to Sky Highway Improvement Project, the District of
Squamish, and Squamish Nation, was able to secure enhancement funds and later compensation funding
to restore amphibian habitat in lands adjacent to those that had been impacted from highway upgrades.
The Squamish River Watershed Society received permission from the District of Squamish to construct
wetland habitat on lands owned by the municipality and through staff support, secure permanent
protection of the wetlands, the first stage of which were constructed in August 2011. The Squamish River



                                                                                                       721
Watershed Society, working with the local community, has also developed a long-term monitoring
program that is both scientific and community based, providing long-term stewardship initiatives that will
extend well beyond the three year term of post construction monitoring funding.



Todd, Brian (UC Davis); Bolster, Betsy (California Department of Fish and Game, Canada); Lotz, Aaron
(UC Davis, Canada)

A guiding vision for the conservation and management of California's amphibians and reptiles

California has a rich assemblage of native amphibians and reptiles. More than half of the state‘s
amphibian species have special status (53%) and a similar proportion of reptiles fall into this category
(39%). Many species that do not have formal status receive little or no management attention and the
laws and policies regarding special status species are often complex or could be more easily discerned.
Both common and special status amphibians and reptiles face conservation threats similar to those of
other taxa, including climate change, habitat loss, diseases, introduced species, environmental
contamination, and unsustainable take. Given these concerns, there is an urgent need to evaluate the
current management framework for these taxa in California and to develop a more comprehensive
management strategy to guide future conservation decisions. Here, we outline a process recently begun
to develop a guiding vision for the management of these taxa in California. We describe the ways in
which protected amphibians and reptiles and their ecological communities are currently managed in the
state and we describe opportunities to extend these models to common and unprotected special status
species. Additionally, many native amphibians and reptiles are allowed to be legally taken in California
with a sportfishing license. However, these taxa present unique management challenges for the
application of the traditional North American model of wildlife management. We describe the
NorthAmerican model of wildlife management and discuss the challenges and opportunities this model
presents for the management of amphibians and reptiles.



Todd, Melissa (BC Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations); McEwan, Alexis;
Johnson, Chris (University of Northern British Columbia, Canada); Govindarajulu, Purnima; Paige, Kathy
(BC Ministry of Environment, Canada); Steventon, Doug; Hetherington, Anne; Vanderstar, Len (BC
Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations, Canada); Turney, Laurence; Rach, Lis
(Ardea Biological Consulting, Canada)

Habitat Factors Influencing the Distribution of Coastal Tailed Frogs (Ascaphus truei) in North-
western British Columbia

 In coastal British Columbia, Canada, post-metamorphic Coastal Tailed Frogs ( Ascaphus truei ) inhabit
cool, moist micro-sites and habitats closely associated with old growth and mature second growth forest,
away from larval streams. These terrestrial habitats are afforded little to no protection and are at high
risk of degradation or permanent loss from development activities such as logging, Run-of-River
independent power projects (IPP), and urban development.              Where applied, BC conservation
management focuses on streamside retention (30 to 50m) to protect aquatic and stream bank integrity.
The extent to which this meets the life requisites of terrestrial post-metamorphic frogs in the face of
human- and climate-induced change is largely unknown. To address this knowledge gap, we have
established 15 research sites - 3 riparian forest treatments (undisturbed, 50m buffer, harvested) in 5
watershed blocks - in the upper reaches of small (&lt;3m wide) occupied streams in the forests of north-
western BC. We are evaluating the influence of terrestrial habitat factors on the distribution and




                                                                                                       722
persistence of tailed frog populations at a range of scales by integrating a study of post-metamorphic frog
habitat use and movement, as characterized by radio-telemetry, mark- recapture studies, and visual
encounter surveys (McEwan et al. 2012), with an assessment of terrestrial habitat conditions
(microclimate, structure, composition) within and between buffer treatments and watersheds. Aquatic
larval populations and habitat conditions in adjacent stream reaches are monitored to confirm continued
reproductive occupancy, with high variability in larval abundance between sites (0 to 64 larvae per 60
minutes of survey) due to watershed and stream effects.         Preliminary stand-level results indicate frog
use of moist micro-sites tied to within-stand topography (e.g., seepages, gullies, and ephemeral draws),
and fine-scale selection of downed wood elements within those moist micro-sites. Autumn breeding
aggregations were associated with such micro-sites 12 to 31m away from streams. Frogs distribute
themselves closer to stream edges (mean distance to stream = 29.8m, SD 12.60m; range 3 to 71m), but
occur farthest from streams in undisturbed treatments. Microclimate monitoring indicates warmer and
drier mid-summer conditions further from streams in harvested and buffer sites. A preliminary study of
genetic connectivity is underway to better assess distribution and dispersal at larger scales.



Todd, Melissa (BC Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations); McEwan, Alexis;
Johnson, Chris (University of Northern British Columbia, Canada); Govindarajulu, Purnima (BC Ministry of
Environment, Canada)

Use of Radio-telemetry to Investigate the Habitat Ecology of Post-metamorphic Coastal Tailed
Frogs (Ascaphus truei) in North-western British Columbia.

We are investigating the habitat ecology of post-metamorphic Coastal Tailed Frogs within 3 riparian buffer
treatments (undisturbed, 50m buffer, harvested) distributed across 3 watersheds in north-western British
Columbia. This research is part of a larger study designed to determine the influence of habitat factors on
the distribution of Tailed Frogs in landscapes affected by human development. Post-metamorphic frogs
are rarely encountered during larval surveys in this area due to their association with moist habitats and
micro-sites away from streams. Studies to date have used mark-recapture techniques to examine post-
metamorphic habitat use and movement, but are limited by narrow spatial scope and low recapture rates.
We are using radio-telemetry, a first for this species, to track the movements of individual post-
metamorphic frogs. These data will allow us to quantify p atterns of terrestrial habitat use and movement.
In 2011, we used visual encounter surveys to locate 60 post-metamorphic frogs within 100m of occupied
larval streams from mid-July to early November. We fit 12 adult males and 6 adult females with radio-
transmitters (BD-2N Holohil) as part of a use-availability study. Of those, 5 males and 4 females were
monitored for the full nominal life-span of the transmitters (10-14 days). We measured microclimate
conditions (light intensity, temperature and relative humidity) at all used and random locations, and
habitat attributes at three nested scales (micro-(1m 2 ), meso-(25m 2 ) and macro-(100m 2 )). Results
demonstrated a strong association between radio-tagged frogs and downed wood, debris piles and root
hollow elements as well as moist micro-sites (e.g., Devil‘s Club and Skunk Cabbage sites). Adult females
were larger than males in all sites, averaging 11.1g (SD=1.92; n=13) as compared to a male average of
6.4g (SD=0.74; n=38); males outnumbered females in captures in all seasons. In summer, frogs were
located up to 70m from larval streams, with daily movements in localized areas of &lt;15m 2 . In contrast
to summer distribution, we observed late fall (mid-October – early November) aggregations of frogs (8 to
39 breeding and non-breeding adults and juveniles), another first in the study of this species, at 2
research sites located 32km apart. Work continues in 2012, with frogs permanently marked (visual
implant elastomer) for long term population assessment, and the installation of pitfall arrays for a mark-
recapture study to supplement telemetry data.




                                                                                                         723
Toledo, Gabriela (University of Kansas Biodiversity Institute);

X-frogs: "wolverine frogs" found in Borneo

 Phylogenetic studies of Limnonectes kuhlii , a fanged frog from Southeast Asia, have shown substantial
genetic variation among lineages, which is surprising given the phenotypic uniformity among the species.
As a consequence, L. kuhlii is considered a cryptic species complex in which different species remain
subsumed under the same name. The species complex condition has potentially detrimental implications
with regards to conservation efforts. A recent phylogenetic evaluation of the group recognized 22
divergent clades within the L. kuhlii complex. Morphological data are necessary to corroborate the
phylogenetic findings and to properly diagnose the individual species currently within the complex. In this
study, we examined the presence of digital claws in the L.kuhlii complex. The terminal phalanges of the
hind limbs act as claws by protruding through the skin in the toe pad. It is likely that the claws serve as
defense structures to escape predators. These claws were present in 6 clades, representing all of the
known diversity of the complex in Borneo. Histological analysis of the claws was used to describe the
internal anatomy and to note differences among clades. These results divide the clades into two groups
with respect to the presence of one morphological character. These preliminary data represent the first
step in the attempt to use discretemorphological characters to distinguish among the species of this
complex.



Toledo-Hernandez, Carlos (UPR-Rio Piedras); Vélez-Zuazo, Ximena; Ruiz-Diaz, Claudia; Patricio, Rita;
Mege, Pascal; Navarro, Melissa; Sabat, Alberto (UPR-Rio Piedras, Canada); Betancur, Ricardo (George
Washington University, Canada); Papa, Riccardo (UPR-Rio Piedras, Canada)

Population ecology and genetics of the invasive lionfish in Puerto Rico

Lionfishes ( Pterois spp. ), endemic tropical and subtropical Indo-Pacific Ocean reef-fish, are now
establishing sustainable breeding populations along the Northwest Atlantic and Caribbean coasts. As
many Caribbean reefs have exceeded their resilience capacity due environmental stresses, this invasion
presents an immense threat to their communities. Since 2008 lionfishes have been consistently reported
throughout inshore waters of Puerto Rico, however no scientific study has addressed that incident (there
might be a better expression than incident) yet. In this study, we sampled 24 sites around Puerto Rico for
lionfishes to investigate their sex- and life-stage-specific ratios, length-weight relationship, and relative
condition factor . Furthermore we documented the number of lionfish species inhabiting local waters, their
genetic diversity and population of origin . A total of 227 lionfishled to an overall sex-ratio of 1:1 and a
similar ratio of juveniles to adults. When individuals were classified by sex and life-stage, juveniles were
biased towards females and adults towards males. Juveniles had positive allometric growth, suggesting
allocation of resources into somatic growth, whereas adults showed isometric growth, with most
resources allocated into reproduction. According to their relative condition factor, juvenile males are under
sub-optimal conditions, not observed for other classes. Genetic analyses demonstrated that P. volitans
L. is the only lionfish species present in Puerto Rico, originating from the Florida invasive population. Only
4 haplotypes out of the 9 haplotypes identified in the Atlantic, were detected suggesting a secondary
founder effect after the initial invasion.




                                                                                                          724
Tolley, Krystal (SANBI); Herrel, Anthony (CNRS/MNHN, Paris, France); Measey, G. John (Nelson
Mandela Metropolitan University, Port Elizabeth, South Africa); Townsend, Ted M. (San Diego State
University, San Diego, United States); Vences, Miguel (Technische Universitat Braunschweig,
Braunschweig, Germany)

Chameleons through time and space: Extinction or Adaptation?

Biogeographic patterns are often explained by spatial shifts that match changing environmental
conditions to which species are adapted. We hypothesize that biogeographic patterns however, can also
be explained through the adaptation of organisms in situ to changing environments over time, rather than
purely through shifting distributions as a response to those changes. We combined multiple existing and
newly dated phylogenies, using between three and thirteen genetic markers, for 174 taxa representing ca.
90% of described species in the family Chamaeleonidae (BEAST, MrBayes). We show that most genera
radiated in the Oligocene, and that recent radiations are scarce, resulting in a phylogeny dominated by
paleo-endemic lineages. We suggest that the reduction of the Pan African forest coupled to the increase
in open habitats (savannah, grassland, fynbos) since the Oligocene has generated a preponderance of
paleo-endemic lineages (e.g. Brookesia, Kinyongia, Nadzikambia, Rieppeleon, Rhampholeon).
Geographic regions (Eastern Arc, northern Madagascar, and eastern Madagascar) which contain
fragments of ancient forests show comparatively higher phylogenetic diversity (PD) due to the retention of
paleo-endemic lineages. Randomisations were performed to obtain a null model for comparison against
observed PD, and the result shows that PD is lower than expected by chance across all areas. This
suggests that on the whole, the phylogeny is over-dispersed, possibly as a result of extinction filtering
(and/or undiscovered taxa). Recent radiation (e.g. Pliocene and later) is uncommon, and occurs primarily
within the genera Bradypodion and Trioceros. We suggest that these lineages were able to take
advantage of fine-structure microhabitats (e.g. grasses, fynbos) within the open vegetation that has been
dominant since the Pliocene. We investigated a combination of morphological and performance data (bite
force, gripping, sprinting) among Bradypodion species, and conclude that some Bradypodion lineages
adapted to fine-structure habitats through the evolution of small body size, limb lengthening, hand/feet
reduction, and ornamentation reduction. In contrast, paleo-endemic lineages have not radiated
substantially since the Oligocene-Miocene, and these lineages retain morphological features that are
adaptive in habitats that lack fine-structure vegetation (i.e. bushes/trees, or leaf litter). Our work suggests
that biogeographic patterns of chameleons can be explained primarily by lineage loss that corresponds
with forest habitat reduction since the Oligocene, but that certain lineages in this family have adaptively
radiated to new habitats since the Pliocene.



Tomita, Taketeru (Hokkaido University Museum); Sato, Keiichi (Okinawa Churaumi Aquarium, Motobu,
1, Japan); Suda, Kenta; Kawauchi, Junro (Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Japan); Nakaya, Kazuhiro
(Hokkaido University, Hakodate, 4, Japan)

Feeding of the megamouth shark (Pisces: Lamniformes: Megachasmidae) predicted by its hyoid
arch: A biomechanical approach

Studies of the megamouth shark, one of three planktivorous sharks, can provide information about their
evolutionary history. Megamouth shark feeding has never been observed in life animals, but two
alternative hypotheses on biomechanics suggest either feeding, i.e., ram feeding or suction feeding. In
this study, the second moment of area of the ceratohyal cartilages, which is an indicator of the flexural
stiffness of the cartilages, is calculated for 21 species of ram- and suction-feeding sharks using computed
tomography. The results indicate that suction-feeding sharks have ceratohyal cartilages with a larger
second moment of area than ram-feeding sharks. The result also indicates that the ram–suction index,



                                                                                                           725
which is an indicator of relative contribution of ram and suction behavior, is also correlated with the
second moment of area of the ceratohyal. Considering that large bending stresses are expected to be
applied to the ceratohyal cartilage during suction, the larger second moment of area of the ceratohyal of
suction-feeding sharks can be interpreted as an adaptation for suction feeding. Based on the small
second moment of area of the ceratohyal cartilage of the megamouth shark, the feeding mode of the
megamouth shark is considered to be ram feeding, similar to the planktivorous basking shark. From these
results, an evolutionary scenario of feeding mechanics of three species of planktivorous sharks can be
suggested. In this scenario, the planktivorous whale shark evolved ram feeding from a benthic suction-
feeding ancestor. Ram feeding in the planktivorous megamouth shark and the basking shark evolved
from ram feeding swimming-type ancestors and that both developed their unique filtering system to
capture small-sized prey



Torello-Viera, Natalia (UNESP); Braz, Henrique (University of São Paulo, Canada); Araújo, Daniela
(Butantan Institute, Canada)

Activity patterns and substrate use of the snail-eating snake, Dipsas bucephala

The genus Dipsas is widely distributed throughout the Neotropical region. Diet is specialized in slugs and
snails. They are considered semi-arboreal and present exclusively nocturnal. However, duration of the
daily activity, seasonal activity and the differences in the substrate use for activity or resting are still
unknown for several species. Here, we study the seasonal and daily activity patterns, and substrate use
of Dipsas bucephala . Moreover, we verify the influence of food availability on the duration of the activity.
We inferred seasonal activity pattern from the number of specimens collected in southeastern Brazil (n =
114) between January 1990 and December 2010, totaling 21 years. To characterize daily activity and
substrate use, three individuals of D. bucephala (2 females and 1 male) were individually and
continuously filmed during 20 days (10 days with available food and 10 days without food). Individuals
were kept individually in terraria with a pot of water, branches, dry leaves and natural photoperiod. Food
was offered daily, varying of 2 to 6 snails and slugs. Use of the rest substrate was characterized by
recording daily for each individual (during 10 days) the place where the animal was found: (1) branches
and (2) ground. Adult D. bucephala were collected during all months of the year but more commonly in
the summer (peak in March), showing a highly seasonal activity. Minimum and maximum temperature
and precipitation explained together 63% of the variation in number of captures, but none of the variables
contributed significantly more than other for the observed variation. Daily activity in D. bucephala was
registered between 05:30 pm and 6:00 am, occurring practically during all the nocturnal period. The food
availability seems to influence directly the activity with a decrease in the lack of food. Slugs and snails,
food items of D. bucephala , are nocturnal and more abundant in the rainy season what may explain the
seasonal and activity patterns of the species. However, other factors such as reproductive events may
also influence activity patterns. Regarding the use of the substrate, branches and ground were similarly
used corroborating the semiarboreal habits of the genus. Nevertheless, our data suggest differences in
the form of using the substrate by D. bucephala in relation to the played activity (foraging or rest).
Branchesare more used during activity whereas ground is more used during inactivity period.




                                                                                                         726
Towns, David (Department of Conservation and Auckland University of Technology);

Beyond invasives: the practice and politics of island restoration in New Zealand

Invasive species devastate island ecosystems and New Zealand is a well-documented example; in
particular for extinctions among avifauna. Extinctions and declines of herpetofauna are less well known.
In New Zealand, half of the frog fauna and at least two species of lizards became extinct and others
underwent massive range declines that coincided with the arrival of people and their associated
predators. However, in the late 19th Century, attempts were made to translocate species of birds
threatened by spreading invasive species, and eradications of introduced species from some islands
soon followed. A systematic approach to these eradications has, over the last 25 years, resulted in the
eradication of all invasive mammals from more than 100 islands. Ecological restoration of these systems
is now underway, including reintroductions of amphibians and reptiles. The reconstruction of devastated
island ecosystems presented many ecological challenges, but induced little controversy while they were
at a small scale and largely out of sight. More recently, very large projects on islands with high public
interest have been undertaken. These have been more controversial. Regardless of their ecological
justification, projects on large inhabited islands are likely to be thwarted unless there is high public
involvement in planning and implementation alongside a transparent system for dealing with the
increasingly complex value-judgments required.



Tracy, Richard (University of Nevada Reno); Maloney, Nichole; Hunter, Kenneth; Mohammadpour,
Hamid; DuPre, Sally; Sandmeier, Franziska; Hyde, David; Marlow, Ronald (University of Nevada Reno,
Canada)

Transmission of Mycoplasmal URTD in Gopherus agassizii

Mycoplasma agassizii has been identified as a cause of disease, and a possible cause of declines in wild
populations of desert tortoises (Gopherus agassizii) (USFWS 1994). In Clark County in Nevada, more
than 3,230 federally‑protected desert tortoises were euthanized, over the course of 17 years, as a means
to reduce transmission of upper respiratory tract disease (URTD) to a wild population. Previous research
has identified Mycoplasma agassizii as one of the pathogens causing URTD. Immunological tools have
been developed to diagnose an immune response to the pathogen. However, there remains a paucity of
information as to what is required to transmit the disease, and how the immune response in the host
influences transmissibility. Reported here are the results of a three-year, semi-natural field experiment in
which serological tests and clinical signs are used to assess transmission of M. agassizii among desert
tortoises. This study is the first large-scale, longitudinal investigation of transmission of pathogen in this
host/pathogen complex. We found that appearance of disease does not require exposure to ill tortoises,
but that tortoises exposed to seropositive tortoises had a higher probability of developing clinical signs.
The appearance of clinical signs does not significantly result in seroconversion. Tortoises emerge from
brumation immunologically challenged, and for most tortoises, there is a lag period of eighteen months
between clinical signs and seroconversion. The contemporary model of this disease is one of epizootic
responses to a novel Mycoplasma escaping from pet turtles. Our research indicates that a more
parsimonious model of this host-pathogen system includes the notion that Mycoplasma is present in high
proportions of wild tortoises, but that it causes few infections unless tortoises are challenged with stress
(including brumation). In some tortoises, the Mycoplasma likely evolves greater virulence in situ insofar as
this microbe has on the order of 1,000,000 generations per year within the host, and the host can live for
many years. The evolved more virulent strain then can cause an infection, but the timing of onset of an
infection is not predictable, and this complicates management prescriptions for this threatened species.




                                                                                                          727
Trapaga, Ann (University of California at Berkeley); Spencer, Carol; Cicero, Carla (University of
California at Berkeley, Canada); McGuire, Jimmy (University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA,
United States)

The Big Chill: A framework for the conversion of the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology genetic
resources collection from ultra-cold to liquid nitrogen storage

The Museum of Vertebrate Zoology (MVZ) Genetic Resources Collection is one of the largest museum
vertebrate tissue collections in the world, with over 100,000 tissues vials representing approximately
95,000 individual specimens, collected since 1965. With NSF funding we are converting our tissue
collection from ultra-cold to liquid nitrogen (LN2) storage. We based this conversion on: 1) preventing
catastrophic loss and needing to replace the aging bank of ultra-cold freezers that currently house the
collection, 2) ensuring long-term viability and maximum research utility of genetic samples, 3) reducing
carbon footprint and improving cost efficiencies, and 4) increasing opportunity for growth and storage. We
created a new cryogenic laboratory facility, implemented a new tissue barcode labeling system for field
and curatorial practices, and integrated the barcoded vials and their location into our Arctos database.
This conversion provides a unique opportunity to re-inventory and consolidate the collection, discover and
correct tissue issues, record the volume of tissue per specimen and the exact location of each vial. All
vials, boxes, rack slots, racks, and freezers are barcoded and exist as hierarchical containers in Arctos.
We also examined existing curatorial practices related to data management and handling of tissue
specimens for loans and curatorial workflow. The conversion was warranted in terms of cost/benefits,
collection preservation, and growth. Such a conversion could be beneficial for many collections but
requires dedicated resources and oversight. Challenges that arose during the conversion will also be
discussed.



Travers, Scott (Villanova University); Bauer, Aaron; Jackman, Todd (Villanova University, Villanova, PA,
United States)

Diversification of an African dwarf: Molecular phylogenetics, species limits, and historical
biogeography of southern African dwarf geckos (Gekkonidae: Lygodactylus)

Dwarf geckos of the genus Lygodactylus are a species-rich group of small, diurnal lizards. Currently, 64
species are recognized. Most are distributed in sub-Saharan Africa and Madagascar, but two species are
endemic to South America. Although these diminutive geckos are morphologically conservative, they
have diversified considerably in an ecological context, occupying most of the major African biomes. Some
species or species complexes are widespread across large parts of sub-Saharan Africa, whereas others
are restricted to single mountaintops. Given their ubiquity in much of sub-Saharan Africa, their high
species richness, and their range of spatial patterns of diversity, dwarf geckos provide an excellent model
to test a variety of hypotheses regarding the evolution and biogeography of continental African
organisms. We here provide the most comprehensive hypothesis of phylogenetic relationships among
African Lygodactylus to date, with a regional focus on southern African representatives. Phylogenetic
relationships were inferred from the analyses of mitochondrial (ND2) and nuclear (RAG1 and MXRA5)
genes of 38 Lygodactylus species (> 200 individuals), including all 15 nominal species and subspecies
from southern Africa. We used this hypothesis to: (1) test the monophyly of the previously proposed
mainland African species-groups of Lygodactylus, and evaluate the validity of the currently recognized
species and subspecies within southern Africa; (2) investigate species limits in members of the
widespread capensis-group; and (3) reconstruct the historical biogeography of southern African
Lygodactylus. Our results indicate extensive paraphyly in the species-groups and non-monophyly of the
polytypic southern African species. There are also high levels of cryptic diversity in the widespread



                                                                                                       728
capensis-group. Lastly, southern African Lygodactylus appear to have undergone two independent
radiations, one in the savanna and the other in the Afromontane biome, which account for most of the
diversity found in the region today. The results of this study have taxonomic and conservation
implications, and add to the growing body of knowledge on the origin and evolution of African biodiversity.



Treglia, Michael (Texas A&M University); Fisher, Robert (U.S. Geological Survey, Western Ecological
Research Center, Canada)

A Species Distribution Model for the Endangered Arroyo Toad, Anaxyrus californicus, in
Southwestern California

The arroyo toad, Anaxyrucalifornicus , is a U.S. endangered species, endemic to southern California,
U.S.A. and northern Baja California, M.X. The species is generally associated with streams in large,
sandy floodplains throughout the region. A number of factorshave caused the species to become
endangered including altered flow regimes,invasive predators, and invasive vegetation that alters habitat
structure. To better understand large-scale factors that influence the distribution of A. californicus , we
developed species distribution models for a portion of its range, in Orange, Riverside, and SanDiego
Counties of southwestern California. We incorporated landscape variables such as topography, soil type,
and land cover, as well as vegetation and climatic data. The distributional data that we used to develop
our models were derived from multiple sources including locality information associated with voucher
specimens in museum collections, data provided by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and distribution
surveys conducted by the U.S. Geological Survey, Western Ecological Research Center. We used
maximum entropy methodology for data that were considered as ―presence-only‖ (i.e., no survey data are
available to confirm absence of the species from sites), and regression-based approaches for data that
could be considered as ―presence/absence‖ (i.e., specific distribution surveys that could confirm presence
as well as absence). These species distribution models can be used to identify potential habitat where A.
californicus may exist but has not been surveyed. Additionally, our approaches can be used to help
predict changes in the species‘ distribution under various future scenarios including climate change and
regional alterations to land cover. We will continue to develop these models to incorporate the recent
history of regional land cover change, and to analyze changes in the distribution of A. californicus . By
analyzing influences of regional land cover on the presence of habitat for this endangered species, we
hope to develop a more thorough understanding of the steps necessary for its conservation.



Tricas, Timothy C. (Department of Zoology, University of Hawai'i / Hawai'i Institute of Marine Biology);
Boyle, Kelly S. (University of Hawai'i at Manoa, Canada)

Acoustic behavior and sound distinction of Hawaiian coral reef fish

Previous studies on sound production by marine fishes have identified the characteristics of sounds made
by single species in the lab or field, with much work concentrated on those that produce distinct, long or
repeated sounds. Less complete field work exists on small species that produce relative low intensity
sounds, are members of species-dense coral reef communities or are of non-commercial value. More
than 600 fish species inhabit the inshore and reef areas of Hawai'i but sound production is characterized
for only a few.    We used closed circuit rebreather diving, which produces almost no acoustic noise and
allows close approach to wild fish, to record synchronized video and sonic behaviors of fish on west
Hawai'i reefs. From the videos we have identified 45 sonic species in 12 families that produced a total of
82 sound types associated with intra and interspecific aggression, feeding, courtship and spawning.



                                                                                                       729
Cross correlation analyses of sound waveforms and spectra from identified species show broad overlap
within and among some species, and also some unique sounds that represent narrow acoustic clades.
These acoustic waveforms and features show promise as templates to determine species identification
from long-term passive acoustic recordings in the field. This technique may be of future use to coral reef
resource managers to remotely characterize seasonal and annual periods of fish population activity.



Triska, Maggie (The University of Western Australia); Hobbs, Richard; Craig, Mike (The University of
Western Australia, Crawley, Australia); Stokes, Vicki (Alcoa World Aluminum Australia, Dwellingup,
Australia); Pech, Roger (Landcare Research, Lincoln, New Zealand)

Reptile occupancy across unmined and restored forest in southwestern Australia

The jarrah (Eucalyptus marginata) forest in southwestern Australia lies within one of the world‘s 25
biodiversity hotspots. Due to this diversity there is limited knowledge about the habitat requirements of
much of its native fauna. Additionally, the jarrah forest has been drastically changed by habit clearance.
For example, Alcoa World Alumina Australia mines and restores forest patches totaling 600 ha annually
creating a mosaic of seral and mature forest. The restoration techniques used are intended to return the
forest to a fully-functioning ecosystem and many native fauna species have been documented in restored
forest, but if these areas do not meet habitat requirements, species may traverse, but not permanently
occupy, restored forests. We determined detection attributes for 6 native reptile species through
occupancy modelling using 5 years of detection histories from 35 trapping grids in unmined forest around
Alcoa‘s Huntly mine. We used this information, along with data collected on restored forest vegetation
structure to predict species occupancy and the potential success of restoration over time. Occupancy
models indicated that reptile species‘ detection probabilities were often influenced by weather covariates
such as temperature, solar radiation, or survey month. These results imply that survey times greatly
impact species detection and provide a guide of when, and under what conditions, to survey for specific
species. However, the best models of species‘ occupancy often included null models and only 2 reptile
species‘ occupancies were influenced by covariates (Hemiergis initialis; bare ground and Menetia greyii;
0-1 meter cover). Our recent surveys (2011/2012) were similar to older surveys in regards to species
present and covariates influencing detection probability and they provide additional data for assessing
occupancy. Currently, restored sites are missing slow-forming features (tree hollows, fallen trees) that
develop over time, however the development of these features along with present structure, (e.g., bare
ground, canopy cover, etc.) may be critical and can be directly influenced by modifying restoration
processes. Determining which species are present in the restoration as it matures is essential because
mining companies aim to return restored forest back to its original state. Our study supports the idea that
restoration practices may need to be modified to accelerate fauna species return and increase restoration
success.



Trudeau, Vance L. (University of Ottaewa); Schueler, Frederick W. (Bishops Mills Natural History Centre,
Bishops Mills, ON, Canada); Somoza, Gustavo M. (Instituto de Investigaciones Biotecnológicas-Instituto
Tecnológico de Chascomús, Chascomús, Argentina); Natale, Guillermo S.; Salgado Costa, Carolina
(CIMA, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, La Plata, Argentina); Thoney, Dennis (Animal Operations,
Vancouver, BC, Canada); McGinnity, Dale (Nashville Zoo, Nashville, TN, United States)

Hormonal control of spawning in amphibians

Improved understanding of the neuroendocrine control of spawning is critical for species conservation. In
fish and frogs it is the surge release of luteinizing hormone (LH) that causes coordinated egg release in



                                                                                                       730
females and sperm release in males, leading to fertilization. Many neurohormones are involved in
controlling pituitary LH release in fish and mammals, but only a few have been studied in amphibians.
The decapeptide Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) is critical. Various synthetic GnRH agonists
stimulate LH release, and sometimes spawning in frogs. The catecholamine dopamine (DA) is a potent
inhibitor of LH release in many teleosts and several mammals, yet little is known about its role in LH
release in frogs. Increasing evidence indicates that combined GnRH agonist/DA antagonist treatments
effectively stimulate spawning. We have named this the AMPHIPLEX method. It is simple and effective
because both sexes are injected at the same time. There is no need to sacrifice males to obtain viable
sperm because amplexus is induced. We have successfully induced spawning on a large scale in
Lithobates pipiens both in the breeding season and outside of the breeding season after a short
‗hibernation/brumation period‘. This method has been applied to both abundant and endangered species
where there is very little information on their physiology. In L. clamitans, L. pretiosa, Ceratophrys ornata,
C. cranwelli, C. aurita, and Odontophrynus americanus we obtained successful spawning and high fertility
with subsequent tadpole development and metamorphosis.                   In the case of the hellbender,
Cryptobranchus alleganiensis, one female produced hundreds of eggs and milt was easily stripped from
the 3 males approximately one week after AMPHIPLEX. Sperm collected from the males was
successfully cryopreserved and had similar morphology, concentration and motility to milt cryopreserved
from both healthy and declining populations of wild hellbenders in Tennessee. Some eggs were artificially
fertilized, started to develop but did not reach metamorphosis. Post-spawning examination indicated an
initial poor egg quality (white yolk sac) in this single female, providing an explanation for failed egg
development in hellbender. Our current efforts are focused on a new and easy-to-use formulation and
improved induction of spawning outside normal breeding seasons in captive animals. Funded by
Environment Canada and the University of Ottawa Research Chair program.



Trumbo, Daryl (Washington State University); Spear, Stephen (University of Idaho, Moscow, ID, United
States); Baumsteiger, Jason (University of California, Merced, Merced, CA, United States); Storfer,
Andrew (Washington State University, Pullman, WA, United States)

Rangewide landscape genetics of an endemic Pacific Northwestern salamander

Individuals of a species often vary in their responses to ecological and landscape processes in different
portions of their geographic range, yet landscape genetics studies are rarely replicated spatially.   The
Cope‘s giant salamander (Dicamptodon copei ) is a neotenic, dispersal-limited amphibian with a restricted
geographic distribution in the Pacific Northwestern USA. We investigate which landscape factors affect
D. copei gene flow in three regions spanning its geographic range that vary in climate, land cover, and
degree of anthropogenic disturbance.       Least cost paths and circuit current analyses reveal that gene
flow patterns vary across the range, in addition to unique combinations of landscape variables affecting
gene flow among regions. Populations in the northern core areas of the range have relatively high gene
flow rates and are dependent on streams for dispersal. Near the southeastern edge of the range gene
flow is more restricted, with increased effects of fragmented forest cover andtemperature and
precipitation gradients. Overall, our results suggest that landscape genetic models and conservation
measures should not beextrapolated from one portion of a species‘ range to another.




                                                                                                         731
Tuberville, Tracey (University of Georgia / Savannah River Ecology Lab); Buhlmann, Kurt (University of
Georgia, SREL, Aiken, United States)

Lessons learned from gopher tortoise translocations in South Carolina: a synthesis

Gopher tortoises (Gopherus polyphemus) are large terrestrial turtles associated with xeric habitats of the
southeastern Coastal Plain. However, due to habitat loss and degradation, tortoise numbers are declining
and populations have become fragmented and isolated. Continued loss of upland habitat, coupled with an
increased focus on rigorous translocation research and post-translocation monitoring, points to
translocation as an increasingly important management tool for this species. In Fall 2001, we translocated
105 gopher tortoises from an industrial development site to the Savannah River Site (SRS), South
Carolina – an area within the historic range but from which tortoises were previously extirpated. The goals
of the project were to re-establish a protected viable population, test efficacy of existing relocation
methods, and develop a model for relocation of other tortoise species. Experimental releases and two
years of subsequent monitoring via radiotelemetry were conducted to test the relative effectiveness of no
penning, 9-month and 12-month penning treatments. Penning significantly increased site fidelity both in
terms of reducing activity areas and limiting the proportion of animals dispersing. Longer-term monitoring
efforts also included survival of translocated juveniles and head-started hatchlings, winter dormancy
behavior and survival, body condition, and social interactions. We will summarize the results of the SRS
translocation and, based on our subsequent experiences with translocation at other sites and data
reported in the literature, provide recommendations for future translocations of gopher tortoises with
application to other species of turtles.



Tuberville, Tracey D. (UGA Savannah River Ecology Lab); Andrews, Kimberly M. (UGA Savannah River
Ecology Lab, Aiken, SC, United States)

Evaluating climate change vulnerability of reptiles and amphibians in the Sandhills ecoregion,
USA

Due to their sensitivity to slight changes in their environments, ectotherms (particularly reptiles and
amphibians) serve as ideal taxa for which to develop and perform climate change vulnerability
assessments. In addition, reptiles and amphibians collectively possess a wide range of life history,
physiological and behavioral traits that presumably translate into variability among species in their ability
to acclimate and/or adapt to changing conditions. The Sandhills Ecoregion has among the highest
diversity of reptile and amphibians, including species that are endemic or otherwise have restricted
distributions. Ranking species based on these biological traits will aid in assessing vulnerability of extant
species to climate changes predicted to occur in the region over the next 50 years. We used
NatureServe‘s Climate Change Vulnerability Index (CCVI) to predict the relative vulnerability of Sandhills
herpetofauna, identify potential species at risk, and evaluate common factors contributing to their
vulnerability. However, we found that the CCVI did not capture all of the life history traits and natural
history characteristics that might contribute to their vulnerability. We will present the quantitative results of
the CCVI analysis, provide recommendations for additional factors to consider, and propose additional
potentially vulnerable species based on those factors.




                                                                                                             732
Tucker, Derek (Brigham Young University); McBrayer, Lance (Georgia Southern University, Canada)

Overcoming obstacles: the effect of obstacles on locomotor performance and behavior

Sprinting and jumping ability are key performance measures that have been widely studied in vertebrates.
The vast majority of these studies, however, use methodologies that lack ecological context by failing to
consider the complex habitats of many animals. Because successfully navigating obstacles within the
habitat is critical for predator escape, running, climbing, and/or jumping performance are each likely to
directly affect fitness. Here, we quantify how behavioral strategies and performance change as lizards
approach obstacles of varying height. Obstacle size had a significant influence on behavior (e.g. obstacle
crossing strategy, intermittent locomotion) and performance (e.g. sprint speed, jump distance). Jump
frequency and distance increased with obstacle size, suggesting that it likely evolved because it is more
efficient (i.e. it reduces time and distance to reach a target position). Jump angle, jump velocity, and
approach velocity accounted for 58% of the variation in jump distance on the large obstacle, and 33% on
the small obstacle. Although these variables have been shown to significantly influence jump distance in
static jumps, they do not seem to be influential in running (dynamic) jumps onto a small obstacle.
Because selection operates in simple and complex habitats, researchers should consider quantifying
additional measures such as jumping or climbing in future studies of the evolution of locomotion
performance.



Tucker, Mitch (University of Missouri);

Parallel changes in mate-attracting calls and female preferences in autotriploid treefrogs

 For polyploid species to persist, they must be reproductively isolated from their diploid parental species,
which coexist at the same time and place at least initially. In a complex of biparentally reproducing
tetraploid and diploid tree frogs in North America, selective phonotaxis—mediated by differences in the
pulse- repetition (pulse rate) of their mate-attracting vocalizations—ensures assortative mating. We show
that artificially produced autotriploid females of the diploid species ( Hyla chrysoscelis ) show a shift in
pulse- rate preference in the direction of the pulse rate produced by males of the tetraploid species (
Hyla versicolor ). The estimated preference function is centred near the mean pulse rate of the calls of
artificially produced male autotriploids. Such a parallel shift, which is caused by polyploidy per se and
whose magnitude is expected to be greater in autotetraploids, may have facilitated sympatric speciation
by promoting reproduc- tive isolation of the initially formed polyploids from their diploid parental forms.
This process also helps to explain why tetraploid lineages with different origins have similar
advertisement calls and freely interbreed.



Tuma, Michael (SWCA Environmental Consultants);

Individual-based, spatially explicit modeling of desert tortoise population response to
anthropogenic threats

The decline in desert tortoise population densities and abundances since the 1970s has been attributed
to numerous threats, leading scientists, land managers, and conservationists to describe the plight of the
species as a ―death by a thousand cuts.‖ Because the desert tortoise is threatened by so many
anthropogenic stressors, and because the distributions and severity of these threats vary in time and
space, the challenge of determining management priorities for the species is daunting. Further, because




                                                                                                        733
the desert tortoise is long-lived, has delayed sexual reproduction, and has long generation times, it is
difficult for field-based studies to mechanistically link population response to the presence or absence of
specific threats. We have attempted to overcome these difficulties through use of the HexSim population
modeling software. HexSim makes it possible to examine single threats in isolation, and multiple threats
in concert, to determine their individual and combined effects on populations. We developed a predictive
habitat model that describes the potential for occurrence of desert tortoises based on the occurrence of
importance habitat elements within the Gold Butte-Pakoon tortoise conservation area, located in southern
Nevada and northwestern Arizona. We used this habitat model in HexSim, where we linked it to rules
governing tortoise movement and population density. We obtained information on vital rates and
movement behaviors from field studies and existing literature on the species. After developing a baseline
tortoise model, we added threats (human presence, subsidized predators, grazing livestock, and wildfire)
to evaluate population responses, and to prioritize the importance of each threat in limiting tortoise
population growth. Previous population models developed for turtle and tortoise species have determined
that increased adult mortality, particularly of females, was the most influential factor limiting population
growth. However, these models could not account for spatial variance in threat number or intensity. Our
spatially-explicit model determined that threats with a widespread distribution were much more important
in limiting population growth than those that were patchily-distributed over a limited area. Moreover, our
results suggest that threats that cause habitat degradation over a broad area, such as livestock grazing
and illegal off-road vehicle use, could be more important contributors to desert tortoise population decline
than patchily distributed threats that cause mortality alone, such as the presence of subsidized predator
populations or road mortality. These results challenge previous assumptions pertaining to desert tortoise
population management, and set the stage for a re-evaluation of management priorities.



Tupy, John (Western Carolina University); Sisson, Michael (North Carolina Wildlife Resources
Commission, Canada); Lee, Jim (The Nature Conservancy, Canada); Baxley, Danna (Kentucky
Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources, Canada); Murphy, Michael (The Nature Conservancy,
Canada); Pechmann, Joseph (Western Carolina University, Canada)

Translocation of the endnagered dusky gopher frog

The Mississippi or Dusky Gopher Frog, Rana sevosa, is considered by many as the most imperiled
amphibian in North America. Only one productive population remains, ―Glen‘s Pond‖ in Harrison County,
MS. In an effort to establish a separate, self-sustaining population, translocation of Glen‘s Pond offspring
began in 2004. The translocation site, ―TNC 1 Pond‖, is located 35 km southeast of Glen‘s Pond on a
property owned by The Nature Conservancy in Jackson County, MS. Prior to translocation efforts no
gopher frogs were known to occur at this site. The property was a slash pine (Pinus elliotti) plantation,
the pond basin was overcrowded with hardwood trees and shrubs. Management actions before and
during translocations have included tree thinning in the pond basin and surrounding uplands, frequent
intervals of prescribed fire in and around the pond and longleaf pine (Pinus palustris) replanting. Animals
released at TNC 1 were either tadpoles hatched in a laboratory, tadpoles head-started in 350 gallon tanks
or newly metamorphosed frogs (metamorphs) also raised in tanks. A total of 4,867 newly hatched
tadpoles, 3,587 head-started tadpoles and 245 metamorphs have been released at TNC 1 Pond to date.
Animals were translocated every year except 2006 and 2011, when no breeding took place at Glen‘s
Pond. One R. sevosa male was recorded calling at TNC 1 Pond in December 2007, subsequently one
egg mass was found.         Multiple (approx. 4- 10) R. sevosa were recorded calling Jan. - Apr. 2010, yet
only a single egg mass was found. This evidence of R. sevosa breeding can be considered initial
success of translocation efforts. Lack of multiple egg masses maybe a result of low survivorship or timing




                                                                                                        734
to female maturity ( ≥ 3 yrs). Additionally, many cohorts of tadpoles were lost to pond drying before
metamorphosis during these 5 years of translocation efforts



Turner, Andrew (CapeNature); de Villiers, Atherton (CapeNature, Stellenbosch, South Africa)

Impacts of fire on the fynbos frogs of South Africa

Data from CapeNature‘s Long Term Frog Monitoring Project at two monitoring sites over the last 8 years
show that fire can have dramatic effects on certain species of frogs in the fynbos biome of South Africa.
Although these frogs evolved in a fire-driven environment over the last 5-3 million years, changes in land-
use, fire frequency and the presence of invasive alien vegetation presents an unprecedented threat to
these species. Species affected are species in the genera Arthroleptella, Capensibufo, and Poyntonia
and Microbatrachella. Most of the species in these genera occur in small and very patchily distributed
habitat. This may be a result of the past effects of fires and a drying climate. These patchy distributions
and the generally small extent of suitable habitats exposes individual populations to an increased risk
from fires.

The impacts of fire include the direct reduction of population sizes, reduction in permanently available
surface moisture and increased invasion of fire-adapted alien plant species. The described threats may
result in the local extirpation of populations and eventually extinction of these range-restricted
amphibians. Recolonisation of breeding sites from nearby populations is slow relative to the average
inter-fire interval. This coincidence of factors has direct implications for: A) the threat assessment of these
species: individual populations need to counted and monitored; B) the mitigation of these threats through
management of alien invasive species: local removal of pine trees; and C) pro-active fire management:
creation and maintenance of tracer belts and rapid response to ecologically damaging wild fires to
maintain viable meta-populations.



Turner, Thomas (University of New Mexico); Osborne, Megan (University of New Mexico, Canada)

From pariah to panacea and back: genetic monitoring and recovery planning for the endangered
Rio Grande silvery minnow

Endangered species issues have intensified already contentious water disputes in New Mexico. For the
first time in the history of the basin, the ESA requires water allocation to benefit a biological entity – the
Rio Grande silvery minnow – through maintenance of instream flows during critical periods.            Species
recovery requires establishment of conditions that would permit a self-sustaining wild population, but over
allocation in drought years and a highly fragmented habitat are obstacles to recovery. For the last 14
years, we have annually monitored genetic diversity in Rio Grande silvery minnow. Compared to other
cyprinids, our data indicate that the species is genetically depauperate, and that downstream advection of
eggs and larvae past dams alters demography and reduces genetic diversity compared to expectations
based on census size.         Consequently, a large population is necessary to maintain genetic diversity.
Genetic data also suggest that augmentation from hatcheries is sustaining the species in the wild and that
a self-sustaining population has not been achieved. Our work has been criticized because it implies that
recovery must be implemented across the entire species‘ range rather than by small-scale habitat
restoration. Here, we review some potentials and pitfalls of genetic monitoring and implementation of
recovery goals based on such data.




                                                                                                           735
Tuttle, Krysia (LGL Limited);

Creating habitat for amphibians in hydroelectric reservoirs: a proof-of-concept constructed
wetland

Constructed wetlands are one example of habitat restoration that can be effectively used to mitigate for
the loss of aquatic habitat and to offset the impacts of human activities such as hydroelectric
development. In 2007, BC Hydro‘s Fish and Wildlife Compensation Program funded a conservation
project to create wildlife wetland habitat within the drawdown zone of Diversion Reservoir in the Jordon
River Watershed on Southern Vancouver Island. This wetland habitat restoration strategy was proposed
to compensate for the loss of wildlife (specifically amphibian) habitat during the impoundment of Jordan
River and as a proof-of-concept design to demonstrate the utility and effectiveness of constructed
wetlands adjacent to the drawdown zones of reservoirs. In 2009, LGL Limited designed and built a two-
tiered wetland on the edge of Diversion Reservoir consisting of a lower pond of 3,300 m 2 and an upper
pond of 4,050 m 2 . Two years of post-construction monitoring in 2010 and 2011 revealed that 1) the
wetlands were maintaining structure and holding water for two years post-construction, 2) the process of
plant succession was occurring naturally, mostly with aquatic and terrestrial plants native to the area, and
3) multiple wildlife species were using the newly constructed wetland habitat. Amphibian species were of
particular interest, in part because of the diversity of species that occur on Vancouver Island, but also due
to their world-wide decline in numbers. Four amphibian species were documented to successfully breed
(as evidenced by egg mass, tadpole and metamorph life stages present) within the constructed wetlands:
Red-legged Frog ( Rana aurora ); Northwestern Salamander ( Ambystoma gracile ); Pacific Chorus Frog (
Pseudacris regilla ); and Rough-skinned Newt ( Taricha granulosa ). Two species of garter snake were
also documented using the area and feeding on newly emerged metamorph amphibians. The success of
this constructed wetland provides a model that could be applied to other watersheds in BC affected by the
impoundment of rivers and creation of reservoirs. To further ensure success of this wetland over time, we
recommend additional monitoring surveys to targeting species at risk (e.g., Red-legged Frog, Western
Toad, rare plant surveys, and general monitoring of wetland physical characteristics including water
quality and berm integrity.



Twomey, Evan (East Carolina University); Summers, Kyle (East Carolina University, Canada)

Mimetic divergence and the evolution of reproductive isolation in the mimic poison frog
Ranitomeya imitator

Understanding mechanisms that promote population divergence has been a central topic in evolutionary
research and is key to our understanding of speciation and global biodiversity. In several examples of
Müllerian mimicry, where two or more toxic species resemble each other, a single species is known to
resemble more than one model species. This situation would seem to provide a good scenario for
speciation: as populations diverge to resemble different models, both pre-mating and post-mating
isolation could evolve. Ranitomeya imitator is a species of poison frog from central Peru which is involved
in Müllerian mimicry with 3 other species of poison frogs. There are four primary mimetic morphs of R.
imitator, each of which occurs in different geographical regions. We have identified three distinct transition
zones which occur where two morphs come into contact. Ongoing analyses of morphological variation
across contact zones (in both the model and mimic species) are providing insights as to the width of the
transition zones, which may provide some information as to the balance between migration and selection
across morph boundaries. We are also conducting mate choice experiments between the mimetic morphs
in order to infer levels of reproductive isolation that may have arisen through mimetic divergence. We



                                                                                                          736
approaching these mate choice experiments in such a way as to test for reproductive character
displacement, that is, whether strength of mate preference (if any) is increased near mimetic transition
zones. Although evidence to test for reproductive character displacement is currently incomplete, we
have evidence that least two of the four primary mimetic morphs prefer to court within their own morph. In
one of these cases, we have been able to conclude that mating preference is based on color pattern
(rather than acoustic cues). Thus, we have found an apparent example of an ecologically relevant trait
subject to divergent sexual selection.



Uetz, Peter (VCU); Sakhawalkar, Neha (VCU, Canada)

Reptile distributions, morphological characters, and species

Species are defined primarily by morphological characters and subspecies are usually geographically
defined populations within these species. We have analyzed the a few simple characters (such as size,
pattern, color) in North American snake species and relate them to their geographic distribution. The first
goal of this analysis was the creation of a simple identification tool that uses the locality and only a few
characters that are easy to recognize. The second goal was to correlate these characters with geographic
distribution and phylogeny. The long-term goal is to collect character information and develop an ontology
of morphological characters that can be used to describe and identify all species world-wide; in addition,
such character catalogs could be useful for all kinds of phylogenetic, macroecological, or taxonomic
analyses. The data will be available at the Reptile Database (http://www.reptile-database.org).



Uetz, Peter (VCU); Mohan, Agne (Virginia Commonwealth University, Canada); Hosek, Jiri (Reptarium,
Canada)

The Reptile Database and the Catalogue of Life

The Reptile Database (http://www.reptile-database.org) was founded in 1996 as EMBL Reptile Database
and has evolved into a major online resource for systematic herpetology. Currently (7 March 2012) it lists
9,574 species and 2,846 subspecies, although these numbers change almost daily. For instance, 136
new speices were described in 2010 and another 129 in 2011, i.e. one every 2-3 days. All species have
distribution information and their original citations, with a total of 29,485 literature records of which 10,187
were linked to web sites where they can be obtained (many at the Biodiversity Heritage Library and other
public sites). At the time of this writing, 1,904 species had diagnoses, 2,700 had etymologies, 8,207 had
type localities (many with coordinates that are mapped to Google maps online), and 6,704 had type
information (i.e. museum specimens). Currently the database receives ~ 45,000 visits and ~190,000 page
views a month. The database is a member of the Catalogue of Life consortium of ~100 global species
databases, which can be queried at http://www.catalogueoflife.org/, and which provides the taxonomy for
the Encyclopedia of Life (http://www.eol.org).




                                                                                                            737
Ukuwela, Kanishka (Univerisity of Adelaide); Lee, Michael (University of Adelaide, Canada); de Silva,
Anslem (Amphibian and Reptile Research Organization of Sri Lanka, Canada); Rasmussen, Arne
(University of Copenhagen, Canada); Mumpuni, Mumpuni (Museum of Zoology, Bogor, Indonesia,
Canada); Sanders, Kate (University of Adelaide, Canada); Fry, Bryan (University of Queensland,
Australia, Canada)

Evolution and faunal assembly of the viviparous sea snakes (Elapidae: Hydrophiinae) of the
Indian Ocean

One of the major goals in biogeography is to understand how biotas have been assembled in different
regions of the world. The origins of the viviparous sea snakes in the Indian Ocean pose a unique question
in this regard. Viviparous sea snakes evolved from the viviparous terrestrial elapids in the Australasian
region approximately 8 mya (million years ago). Ancestors of present day viviparous sea snakes initially
colonized the seas adjacent the northern Australian regions and then dispersed to the Indian and Pacific
Oceans. Thus, the Indian Ocean sea snake fauna is currently considered a recent derivative of the
Southeast Asian and Australian sea snake faunas. To test this hypothesis we assessed the phylogenetic
relationships of the Indian Ocean sea snakes to their counterparts in Southeast Asia and Australia and
estimated their divergence times. We used a six-locus molecular dataset and Bayesian inference to
assess the phylogenetic relationships and divergence times. Our results support the dispersal and
colonization hypothesis but indicate evidence for in-situ radiations and vicariant speciation in the Indian
Ocean sea snakes. In several species, our results revealed deep genetic divergence between the
populations in the Indian Ocean, Southeast Asia and Australia that is largely congruent with patterns
reported for marine fishes and invertebrates. Divergence dating suggested that most South Asian species
diverged from their Southeast Asian populations approximately 2.0-3.5 mya. These results indicate that
viviparous sea snakes have a relatively long and complex evolutionary history in the Indian Ocean region
and have a unique conservation value.



Uller, Tobias (University of Oxford);

Sexual selection and the evolutionary consequences of multiple introductions

Recent research suggests that multiple introductions of distinct lineages are common in invasive species.
Yet, its evolutionary implications are poorly understood. Human introductions of walllizards ( Podarcis
muralis ) into the UK have brought into contact several genetically and phenotypically distinct lineages.
Here I present new experimental data that show how sexual selection influences patterns of admixture
following multiple introductions, and its implications for colonization success and morphological evolution
in the non-native range.



Unger, Shem (Purdue University); Williams, Rod (Forestry & Natural Resources Purdue University, West
Lafayette, United States)

Population Genetics of the Eastern Hellbender (Cryptobanchus alleganiensis alleganiensis) at
multiple spatial scales

The eastern hellbender ( Cryptobranchus alleganiensis alleganiensis ) is a large paedomorphic
salamander experiencing population declines throughout its geographic range. The genetic ramifications
of these declines are currently unknown. To this end, we developed a suite of 12 hyper-variable genetic
microsatellite markers    to examine levels of genetic variation and genetic structure across multiple



                                                                                                       738
scales. We collected ~1,000 individuals from 50 rivers throughout 11 states from June 2008 to September
2010. Levels of genetic diversity were relatively high among all sampling locations. The number of alleles
per locus ranged from 4 to 32 (mean of 8.79), while observed and expected heterozygosity averaged
0.812 and 0.831, respectively. We detected significant genetic structure across sample locations (F st
values ranged from 0.001 - 0.218). We also detected significant genetic structuring at all hierarchal levels
within a watershed (AMOVA; among catchments p = 0.018, among steams, p &lt; 0.0001) with most
genetic variation occurring within individuals within streams (93%). We did not detect significant isolation
by distance either across the range (Mantel, r             = 0.146) or at the local scale ( r = 0.001).
Understanding range-wide levels of genetic variation and differentiation will enable natural resource
managers to make informed decisions and plan watershed specific conservation strategies for this
cryptic, protected species.



Upton, Katy (Durrell Institute of Conservation Ecology);

Amphibian diversity and temporary habitat use in Pacaya-Samiria Reserve, Peru

Peru has high levels of biodiversity, including nearly 500 species of amphibians. This diversity is due to
Peru‘s diverse range of habitats from arid deserts, high Andean plateaus to tropical rainforests This
research is being conducted as part of long-term biodiversity assessments in the Pacaya Samiria
National Reserve within the Loreto region of Peru in the north-east of the country. Pacaya Samiria
consists of low lying varzea forests which are seasonally inundated with floodwaters. This dynamic
environment creates a wide range of niches which supports many species. Over sixty species of
amphibians were recorded in just 100 surveys days (across 2009 – 2011). There are 62 frog species and
one salamander species which are representative of nine families. The microhabitat use of these species
changes with seasonal fluctuations. Floating meadows consist of herbaceous water plants that grow on
lakes and are washed downriver during heavy rain fall. Anurans utilise these temporary habitat potentially
for breeding and foraging, they also offer researchers an insight into the distribution of hylid species which
rarely venture down from the rainforest canopy. When these meadows are washed downriver sections
inevitably break away creating floating rafts which have the potential to transport amphibians‘
downstream potentially aiding dispersal. However, these meadows are easily affected by changes in
flooding patterns. 2009 saw the lowest flooding in Pacaya Samiria on record while 2010 saw the highest.
These extreme weather patterns are becoming more common in this area and may have significant
implications for the diversity and distribution of amphibian species found in this region.



Ursenbacher, Sylvain (Institut für Natur-, Landschafts- und Umweltschutz (NLU), Universität Basel);
Zwahlen, Valerie (Institut für Natur-, Landschafts- und Umweltschutz (NLU), Universität Basel, Basel,
Switzerland); Mebert, Konrad (-, Merenschwand, Switzerland); Golay, Philippe (Cultural Foundation
Elapsoïdea, Aire-Geneva, Switzerland); Monney, Jean-Claude (karch, Neuchâtel, Switzerland); Durand,
Thierry; Thiery, Gilles (-, -, France); Ott, Thomas (-, -, Switzerland)

Color polymorphism and population genetic in the asp viper: is local selection stronger than
gene-flow?

The asp viper (Vipera aspis) is a very polymorphic species, with ground color varying from light grey, dark
gray to reddish brown. The subspecies exhibit different dorsal patterns which could be rhomboid (in V. a.
hugyi), with thin to large dark blotches (in V. a. aspis and V. a. francisciredi) or with a zigzag band (in V.
a. zinnikeri) similar to the one displayed by the adder (Vipera berus). Melanistic individuals are frequently




                                                                                                          739
found in the Alps, representing locally more than 50% of the population. In addition, previous studies
demonstrated that the dorsal pattern is substantially affected by abiotic factors, such as temperature or
humidity (Golay, 2005).

We investigated a mountain massif in the French Alps containing up to 50% of concolor individuals (i.e.
showing no or greatly reduced dorsal pattern; see Mebert et al., 2011). This peculiar morph is restricted to
a small area and become rare of absent 5 km away from the source population. We consequently took
this opportunity to study the gene flow and the morphological differentiation at a small scale in order to
understand if local selection or limited gene flow could explain this particular dorsal pattern.

First results demonstrated that morphological differentiation is more marked that genetic structure
(QST>FST), suggesting a local selection over particular dorsal pattern. Further evaluations will be
conducted to understand the environmental parameters favoring this particular coloration.



Golay, P., 2005. Systématique du complexe Vipera aspis (Serpentes, Viperidae) en Suisse. Université de
Monptellier, Montpellier.

Mebert, K., Zwahlen, V., Golay, P., Durand, T., Ursenbacher, S., 2011, Ungewöhnlich hoher Farb-
Polymorphismus in alpinen Aspisvipern in Frankreich – Zufall oder natürliche Selektion? Elaphe 2011, 13-
19.



Valenzuela, Nicole (Iowa State University); Neuwald, Jennifer; Literman, Robert (Iowa State University,
Ames, IA, United States)

Wild Turtle Sex: Ecogenomics And The Risk Of Climate Change

Species whose sexual development depends on the environmental temperature during embryogenesis
(TSD), as in many reptiles, are particularly susceptible to climate change. Yet, the extent of the effects
that climate change will have on the persistence of TSD reptiles is incomplete as the molecular
underpinnings of TSD under thermal fluctuations remain obscure. Recent research in our lab shows that
increases in thermal variance predicted to occur within seasons can reverse sex ratios and exacerbate
the detrimental effect of raising mean temperatures. Here we show for the first time the effect that varying
fluctuating temperature regimes have on the expression of genes known to be important in gonadal
development, Wt1 , Sf1, Dax1, Sox9, and Aromatase in the painted turtle Chrysemys picta , and
compare our results to new data from constant temperature, and under natural nest profiles. Results from
constant temperature confirm the previously reported differential expression of Wt1 and Sf1 prior to the
onset of the thermosensitive period and their potential role as TSD master switch, reveal new surprising
differential patterns for Dax1, Sox9, and Aromatase at these early developmental stages, while
uncovering expression patterns in the gonad alone during the thermosensitive period that are concordant
to those reported for some other TSD turtles. We detected the first evidence of Dax1 involvement on
male development in any reptile. Fluctuating temperature caused remarkable changes in expression
patterns by treatment and overtime from those under constant temperature. The expression of some
genes clustered by mean temperature while that of the other genes clustered by the sex ratio that was
produced by each treatment. Expression patterns under replicated natural male- and female-producing
profiles recorded from natural nests helped elucidate the ecological relevance of the observations from
the laboratory experiments and to disentangle the likely slaves in the developmental cascade from the
likely masters for thermal sensitivity. Our findings indicate that rising mean and variance scenarios pose a



                                                                                                        740
real challenge for TSD taxa as they profoundly disrupt the gene regulatory network underlying sexual
development, and underscore the urgency to decipher the regulation of global transcriptomic responses if
we are to fully understand the perils faced by TSD systems and their evolutionary potential as climate
changes.



Valenzuela-Quiñonez, F (CIBNOR); Garza, JC (NOAAA SWFSC, Santa Cruz, CA, United States); de-
Anda-Montañez, JA; García-de-León, FJ (CIBNOR, La Paz, B.C.S., Mexico)

Infering Past Demographic Changes In Collapsed And Crytically Endangered Fish

Most of worldwide fishery stocks are overexploited or collapsed, fishery induced changes at several levels
into population: biomass reduction, phenotypic and evolutionary changes. However, the dynamic of
fishery collapse at genetic level is still unknown, how the magnitude that fishery can reduce genetic
variability and then drive species to extinction. Here we present as a model of study the case of totoaba a
long lived fish and first worldwide marine fish considered as critically endangered that suffered not only a
fishery collapse also has faced habitat degradation, poaching and baycatch. Thus, we test the hypothesis
of genetic diversity loss. Data indicate that genetic diversity of totoaba is in the range expected for fish
with similar biological treats and no treated. The historical demographic analysis showed no
contemporary genetic diversity loss but a strong long term population reduction was detected 9550 years
ago which could be linked to climatic events on Holocene. Furthermore, effective size is large enough to
ensure long term genetic diversity conservation (>1000). We conclude that past population collapse had
not consequences at genetic level and that totoaba still conserve its evolutionary potential to face
environmental adversities. Finally, more studies are needed to understand the impacts of fishery collapse
on Ne and therefore in genetic diversity at neutral markers.



Vamberger, Melita (Senckenberg Natural History Collections Dresden); Stuckas, Heiko; Fritz, Uwe
(Senckenberg Natural History Collections Dresden, Dresden, Germany)

Speciation Under Gene Flow? The Case Of Mauremys Caspica And M. Rivulata

The stripe-necked terrapins Mauremys caspica and M. rivulata are a sister species occupying a similar
ecological niches and occurring in more or less mutually exclusive parapatric distribution ranges. The
ranges of the two species are forming a narrow contact zone over hundreds of kilometres. We used 13
quickly evolving microsatellite loci and five nuclear genes for gaining insights in gene flow and
hybridization of 13 populations of M. caspica and 18 populations of M. rivulata from the contact zone and
compared these to randomly chosen individuals from the whole distribution range of each species.



Van Dyke, James (Virginia Tech); Hopkins, William (Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, United States);
Jackson, Brian (Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, United States)

Influence Of Trophic Ecology On Selenium Exposure In Turtles From A River System Impacted By
A Coal Fly-Ash Spill

Selenium (Se) is a major componentof coal fly ash that can disrupt reproduction of oviparous wildlife. The
2008 coal ash spill in Kingston, TN introduced 5.4 million cubic yards of fly ash into the Emory and Clinch
River systems. While the majority of ash was removed, the potential for Se to enter local food webs and




                                                                                                        741
affect biota is still being addressed. Turtles are excellent model organisms for assessing the effects of Se
exposure in vertebrates because they are long-lived, have small home ranges, and feed at a variety of
trophic levels. Because Se does not biomagnify in food webs as strongly as many other bioaccumulative
contaminants, we hypothesized that the highest trophic enrichment of Se would occur in turtle species
feeding at lower relative trophic levels. We used stable isotopes ( δ 13 C and δ 15 N ) to infer relative
trophic positions of several turtle species at the Kingston, TN site, and then examined the effects of
feeding ecology on Se exposure. Delta- 13 C and δ 15 N were quantified in claws, and Se
concentrations were quantified in blood, sampled from turtles captured 0-5 miles downstream from the
spill. We compared δ 13 C and δ 15 N among species using MANCOVA, with carapace length as a
covariate. We also regressed Se concentrations against both δ 13 C and δ 15 N, across and within
turtle species. Claw δ 13 C and δ 15 N varied significantly among species, and with carapace length.
Stable isotope results suggested relative trophic positions of turtles as: Chelydra serpentina           &gt;
Graptemys sp. &gt; Apalone spinifera = Sternotherus odoratus = Trachemys scripta &gt;
Pseudemys concinna . As predicted, Se concentration decreased with increasing δ 15 N across species,
and within A. spinifera , but also decreased with increasing δ 13 C across species, and within A.
spinifera , and S. odoratus . Because δ 15 N is thought to increase with trophic position, our results
are consistent with the hypothesis that Se accumulation is greater in turtles feeding at lower trophic levels
than in those feeding at higher trophic levels. In addition, the decreasing relationships between Se
concentration and δ 13 C



Vance, Carrie (Mississippi State University); Martin, Michelle (University of Memphis, Memphis TN,
United States); McDonough, Caitlin (Beloit College, Beloit WI, United States); Cole, Judith (University of
Memphis, Memphis TN, United States); Willard, Scott (Mississippi State University, Mississippi State MS,
United States); Kouba, Andrew (Memphis Zoo, Memphis TN, United States)

Frequency of hormone induced gamete production in the Fowler’s Toad (Bufo fowleri)

Hormone induced gamete production in amphibians has been gaining ground over the past decade as
increasingly more species have been subjected to artificial reproductive technologies(ART). Two
prominent questions still remaining are: 1) how frequently can animals be treated with hormones and still
produce viable gametes; and, 2) does hormone therapy work for gamete production outside the breeding
season. We examined these questions in Fowler‘s toads (Anaxyrus fowleri) which had been held in non-
seasonally adjusted captive environments for at least 14 months, and assessed gamete quantity(egg
counts or sperm concentration) and quality (fertilization and embryo development rates and sperm motility
parameters). Female toads (n=7/treatment) were hormonally induced to produce eggs at an interval of 4,
8 or 12 months after initial treatment in August 2010, when 20/21 animals spawned eggs. Females were
treated at each interval with two priming doses of 100 IU hCG(human chorionic gonadotropin), followed

fertilized with fresh sperm collected from multiple males that were hormonally induced with 300 IU hCG.
The percent of females producing eggs again after 4, 8 or 12 months was 57%, 86% or 100%,
respectively. The mean number of eggs per female was similar (P>0.05) across treatments, as were
fertility and embryo development rates. Male toads (n=5-6/treatment) were hormonally induced with 300
IU hCG at a frequency of every 0.5, 1.0, 2.0 or 3.0 weeks. Sperm concentration and percent motility of
the biweekly treatment group was significantly lower (P<0.01) than at other treatment frequencies.
Moreover, these effects were reached at a much faster rate (P<0.01) in this group, and although the
motility did recover over time, sperm concentration remained depressed. No differences were seen in
sperm forward progression for any treatment or time effect. We have shown that too frequent hormone
treatments for either gender can have a negative effect on gamete production. However, we have also



                                                                                                         742
shown that gametes can be generated repeatedly from an individual throughout the year in females, after
a 4 month resting period, and in males sperm could be collected every two weeks with no significant
difference in quantity or quality. These results are valuable for designing repeated breedings of critically
endangered species where a captive assurance colony is needed to prevent extinction.



Vangewege, Michael (Texas State University); Crump, Paul (Houston Zoo, Houston, TX, United States);
McHenry, Diana; Dittmar, Hahn; Jones, Melissa; Forstner, Michael (Texas State University, San Marcos,
TX, United States)

The use of genetic markers to trace the fate of released Houston toads among a reinforced wild
population

Post-release monitoring of individuals during a population supplementation, translocation, or
reintroduction is an essential component of the program. Amphibians present unique challenges because
of their biphasic life history, small body size, and cryptic behavior. At best, traditional field marking
methods have inherent failure rates that confound the detectability of low frequency recaptures of
released individuals; at worst, they are incompatible for use on certain life stages. Too often,
reintroductions are initiated with poor to no pre-release survey effort, and reports of reintroduction
success are correlated with increased activity at the release site rather than empirically shown to be the
result of the reintroduction. In an attempt to overcome the difficulties associated with re-identification of
late stage larvae or recently metamorphosed individuals of the endangered Houston toad (Anaxyrus
[Bufo] houstonensis) released during a population supplementation program, we used molecular
techniques to develop a genetic profile of the sibling group. The utility of these techniques was
demonstrated in populations of Houston toads having sufficient genotypic diversity to differentiate among
sibling groups, with results from historical reintroduction efforts assessed with surprisingly positive results.
The applicability of the method remains problematic for low diversity populations, but overall underscores
the need for as much genetic information as pragmatic to assist with guiding conservation efforts.



Varella, Henrique (Museu de Zoologia da USP);

Taxonomic revision of the species of Crenicichla Heckel, 1840 from the Paraná and Paraguay river
basins (Teleostei: Cichlidae)

Crenicichla Heckel, 1840 is currently recognized as the most species rich cichlid genus in South America,
including 85 valid species distributed in most rivers of cis-Andean South America. Of the eighteen
nominal species recorded from the Paraná and Paraguay river basins, fourteen were considered as valid
previous to the present study. In this contribution, a comprehensive taxonomic revision of all species of
Crenicichla from those basins is undertaken. Seventeen species are considered valid, four of them
undescribed. Crenicichla edithae is recognized as a junior synonym of C. lepidota , a widespread
species from rio Guaporé, rio Paraná below the Itaipu dam, rio Paraguay, rio Uruguay and Lagoa dos
Patos and Lagoa Mirim system. As earlier suggested by some authors, Acharnes chacoensis, Boggiana
ocellata and Crenicichla simoni are considered synonyms of Crenicichla semifasciata , which is
distributed in rio Paraguay, rio Paraná below Itaipu dam and rio Uruguay, coincident with the distribution
of C. vittata . Crenicichla britskii , C. haroldoi and C. jaguarensis are apparently restricted to the upper
rio Paraná basin. Crenicichla jupiaensis occurs in tributaries of the rio Paraná basin, from the rio
Paranaíba to the rio Paraná in Yaciretá, Corrientes, Argentina. Crenicichla iguassuensis, C. tesay and
C. yaha are distributed in the rio Iguaçu, the type-locality of C. yaha being the arroyo Urugua-í, a



                                                                                                            743
tributary of the left margin of the rio Paraná. Crenicichla hu , C. mandelburgueri and C. ypo are
distributed in tributaries of the rio Paraná from below Itaipu dam to the Yaciretá lake. Crenicichla sp.
"Paraná" and Crenicichla sp. "Paranaíba" are undescribed species from the upper rio Paraná basin,
Crenicichla sp. "Alto Paraguai/Juruena" is found in tributaries of the upper rio Paraguay basin and rio
Juruena, and Crenicichla sp. "Iguaçu" is from the rio Iguaçu above the waterfalls. Acharnes niederleinii
from the rio Uruguay basin is considered a nomen dubium and the species is not distributed in the rio
Paraná as currently assumed. Intraespecific variation related to hipertrophied lips was found in three
species from the rio Iguaçu: Crenicicha iguassuensis , C. tesay and Crenicichla sp. "Iguaçu". In
addition, a key to species identification is provided.



Vargas Salinas, Fernando (Universidad de los Andes); Amezquita, Adolfo (Universidad de Los Andes,
Canada)

Stream Noise, Hybridization, And The Evolution Of Call Traits In Two Species Of Poison Frogs

Factors promoting geographic variation in communication signals can promote phenotypic divergence
between populations and eventually reproductive isolation. According to the acoustic adaptation
hypothesis, communication signals are evolutionary shaped in a way that minimizes its degradation and
maximizes its contrast against the background noise. To test the importance of acoustic adaptation and
hybridization, an evolutionary force allegedly promoting phenotypic variation, on call divergence we
compared the mate recognition signal of two species of poison frogs ( Oophaga histrionica and O.
lehmanni ) at five localities: two (one per species) live and call alongside noisy streams, two away from
streams, and one interspecific hybrid. We recorded the call of 42 males and characterized the
microgeographic variation in its spectral and temporal features, measuring ambient noise level, body size,
and body temperature as covariates. As predicted, frogs living in noisy habitats alongside streams uttered
higher frequency calls and, in one species, were much smaller in size. These results support a previously
unconsidered role of noise on streams as a selective force promoting an increase in call frequency and
pleiotropic effects in body size. Regarding hybrid frogs, their calls overlapped in the signal space with the
calls of one of the parental lineages. Our data support acoustic adaptation following two evolutionary
routes but do not support the presumed role of hybridization in promoting phenotypic diversity. Whether
geographic divergence in advertisement call does promote reproductive isolation in poison frogs deserves
further study.



Vassilieva, Anna (Joint Russian-Vietnamese Tropical Research and Technological Center of the A.N.
Severtsov Institute of Ecology and Evolution); Galoyan, Eduard (Moscow State University, Moscow,
Russian Federation); Poyarkov, Nikolay (Joint Russian-Vietnamese Tropical Research and Technological
Center of the A.N. Severtsov Institute of Ecology and Evolution, Canada)

Rhacophorus vampyrus: a new case of obligatory oophagy in rhacophorid tadpoles

Tadpoles of recently described Treefrog Rhacophorus vampyrus from Dalat Plato, Southern Vietnam,
are known to live in tree hollows and to posses relatively long tail and specific mouthparts structure that
is unknown in another anuran larvae. We suggest that unique tadpoles morphology may be caused by
unusual larval feeding mode in this species. Our study of R. vampyrus reproductive biology revealed
that it reproduces in small water-filled tree hollows deposing clutches in foam nests above water level;
after hatching tadpoles fall in a small water bodies inside the hollows (capacity 25-300 ml) and develop
there until metamorphosis. Up to 45 tadpoles may be registered in the same small hollow. During




                                                                                                         744
development tadpoles are fed on unfertilized conspecific eggs (maternal care). Trophic eggs (more than
250 per clutch) are regularly laid in to the water and are enclosed within dense mucus. Most of analysed
larvae guts contained swallowed trophic eggs (up to 40). No other feeding objects common for tadpoles
feeding on plankton or detritus were included into their digestive tract content. Some features of R.
vampyrus tadpoles morphology indicate their specialization to oophagy, including presence of well-
defined extensible stomach and relatively small gut length (no more than 3.5 times body length) that
means exclusively macrofagous feeding mode. Highly specialized body morphology and oral disc
structure (devoided of papillae and armed by serrated horny arch on the upper jaw and two prominent
fang-like horny teeth on the lower jaw) apparently reflect the adaptation of R. vampyrus tadpoles to
mucus burrowing and egg extraction from the trophic clutches. Unusually small diameter of eggs also
seems to be an adaptation for convenient swallowing by larvae. Obligatory larval oophagy is
characteristic for quite a number of tropical anuran phytotelm-breeding species, especially among
dendrobatids and hylids. Untill now, the only one rhacophorid frog, Kurixalus eiffingeri , is known to feed
its tadpoles by trophic eggs. Our data reliably proof that R. vampyrus represent another Asian tree frog
species with highly specialized parental care and tadpole feeding modes.



Vaudo, Jeremy (Guy Harvey Research Institute; Florida International University); Wetherbee, Bradley
(Guy Harvey Research Institute; University of Rhode Island, Canada); Howey, Paul (Microwave
Telemetry, Inc., Columbia, MD, United States); Shivji, Mahmood (Guy Harvey Research Institute; Nova
Southeastern University, Canada)

Vertical movements of tiger sharks (Galeocerdo cuvier) tagged in the US Virgin Islands

Tiger sharks (Galeocerdo cuvier) are a wide ranging species that display a variety of horizontal movement
patterns, making use of coastal and pelagic waters. Far less, however, is known about their vertical
movements. To investigate the vertical movement behavior of tiger sharks around the US Virgin Islands,
seven individuals (4 males, 3 females) were tagged in 2008 with high rate, pop-up satellite archival tags
(HR X-Tag, Microwave Telemetry, sampling rate: every 3.5 to 4 min; 30-day programmed duration). Five
of the seven tags reported and uploaded 19 to 83% of archived data, providing fine-scale depth and
temperature data from a total of 105 days. Two sharks displayed post-release dive irregularities lasting
~2 days. Sharks spent the majority of their time making yo-yo dives (repeated oscillatory dives) within the
upper 50 m with 18 to 44% of their time spent within the upper 5 m. As a result, sharks typically occupied
a narrow temperature range (27 to 29°C for four sharks tagged in June and 25 to 27°C for one shark
tagged in March). Dives to greater than 200 m were common and all sharks made dives to at least 400
m, with one shark briefly exceeding 700 m and experiencing temperatures less than 9°C. Although diel
patterns were identified in four of the five sharks, whether deeper dives were made during the day or
night varied among individuals. Overall, tiger sharks in the vicinity of the US Virgin Islands displayed a
high degree of variability in their dive patterns, but typically could be found in the upper 50 m and making
regular dives to the deeper waters available to them.



Vega, Sondra (University of Puerto Rico); Puente, Alberto; Cuevas, Elvira (University of Puerto Rico,
Canada)

Omnivory in Puerto Rican Anolis lizards

The lizard‘s genus Anolis are considered as strictly insectivorous; however it is known that some species
can feed on fruits. In lizards, omnivory/frugivory is considered unusual and restricted to some species.




                                                                                                        745
The degree of omnivory within members of an ecosystem is an important aspect that can influence food
web dynamics, interspecific interactions, and trophic structure.     The natural history of Anolis lizards is
well studied; however information about their feeding habits and trophic ecology remains incomplete .
We preliminarily assessed omnivory among             Puerto Rican anole lizards using stable isotopes, a
technique that provides time-integrated information about feeding relationships. In general, herbivores
are expected to have lower δ 15 N values than carnivores, and omnivores should have δ 15 N values
intermediate between those of herbivores and carnivores.             Based in the preliminary results, the
evaluated species can be divided in two groups according with the isotopic signature of δ15N and δ13C.
The first group consist of species that exhibited levels intermediate of δ15N ranging around 6.3–6.9 ‰;
the other group exhibit a higher and broader signature for δ15N with values ranging around 7.9–9.4 ‰.
When the isotopic signature of δ15N and δ13C is compared w ithin the same species inhabiting different
habitat, the isotopic signature for both stable isotopes varied according with the habitat. Detailed studies
are being conducted to determine the level of omnivory/frugivores and trophic position of Anolis lizards.
The information gathered in those studies will allow determining the role of anoles lizards in food webs as
well as in the function and dynamics of insular tropical ecosystems.



Velez Zuazo, Ximena (University of Puerto Rico); Alfaro Shigueto, Joanna; Mangel, Jeffrey
(ProDelphinus, Canada); Papa, Riccardo; Agnarsson, Ingi (University of Puerto Rico, Canada)

What barcoding is revealing about the shark fishery in Peru

Many sharks and rays are globally threatened as a result of overfishing and bycatch. Currently, there is a
growing interest in sustainable conservation of sharks but important gaps in knowledge hinder decision-
making at the government level including a lack of basic knowledge of the diversity of species targeted as
well as incidentally captured by comercial fisheries. In Peru, in the southeast Pacific, the small-scale
fisheries comprise ca. 10,000 vessels and, for most elasmobranchs species, it goes largely unregulated
and unmonitored. Moreover, for the elasmobranchs fisheries, insufficient monitoring of landings coupled
with limited taxonomic identifications have resulted in a poor understanding of the diversity of species
caught in Peruvian waters. Molecular analyses, particularly the use of a genetic barcode approach, can
play an important role in improving our knowledge of the diversity of elasmobranchs species occupying
the marine habitats of Peru and captured by the small-scale fisheries. We analyzed samples collected
from six ports along the coast of Peru between 2004 and 2009. We successfully amplified 715bp of the
cytochrome oxidase I region of the mitochondrial DNA and identified 110 specimens at the species level.
Nine species of sharks were identified. In many cases landed specimens had been misidentified. In port,
the smooth hammerhead ( Sphyrna zygaena ) was identified correctly every time, the blue shark (
Prionace glauca ) was correctly identified 86% of the time and the shortfin mako ( Isurus oxyrinchus )
66% of the time. For other specimens with a non-informative common name (i.e. shark), molecular
identification clarified the species. Interestingly, all samples from thresher shark were identified as
pelagic thresher ( Alopias pelagicus ) although in Peru the common thresher ( A. vulpinus ) is the species
reported as more common and commercially important. We identified one specimen of the dusky shark (
Carcharhinus obscurus ) which represents a new species report for Peru. Of the nine sharks species
identified, five are considered a threatened by the IUCN Red List. This study represents the first large-
scale initiative to barcode Peruvian marine species and generated a molecular-based taxonomic list of
elasmobranches targeted by fisheries in Peru.




                                                                                                         746
Velez-Alavez, Marcela (Centro de Investigaciones Biologicas del Noroeste, S.C.); Zenteno-Savin, Tania;
De Anda-Montañez, Juan A. (Centro de Investigaciones Biologicas del Noroeste, S.C., La Paz, Baja
California Sur, Mexico); Galvan-Magaña, Felipe (Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz,
Baja California Sur, Mexico)

Vitamin C concentration in muscle of teleost and elasmobranch fishes

The fishes include a variety of species which differ phylogenetically, that inhabit different environments,
and have different capacities for vigorous excercise. Fishes, like all other aerobic organisms, are
susceptible to the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). ROS production in muscle increases
during physical activity due to the increased oxygen flow and metabolic rate associated to exercise.
Vitamin C acts as a metabolic antioxidant, protecting cell membranes and processes that are sensitive to
oxidation. The hypothesis of this study is that fish species that have the capacity for sustained vigorous
exercise have higher antioxidant defenses, both enzymatic and non-enzymatic, as compared to less
active fish species. The aim of this study was to determine the concentrations of the antioxidant vitamin C
in muscle of different species of teleosts and elasmobranchs that swim at different speeds. Vitamin C
content was analyzed by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) in muscle samples of three
teleosts (Tetrapturus audax, Coryphaena hippurus, Totoaba macdonaldi) and three elasmobranchs
(Isurus oxyrinchus, Prionace glauca, Mustelus henlei). Higher concentrations of vitamin C were found in
the most active fish, I. oxyrinchus (N = 20, average 0.395 mg 100 g-1 wet tissue), P. glauca (N = 29,
average 0.636 mg 100 g-1 wet tissue), and C. hippurus (N = 24, average 0.417 mg 100 g-1 wet tissue).
Vitamin C concentration in muscle samples from T. macdonaldi and M. henlei was below detection limit.
These results are in accordance to previous studies, in which, vitamin C concentrations were found to be
higher in cartilaginous compared to bony fishes, probably due to the evolutionary process of the
antioxidant defense strategies of each group. We found that more physically active species have higher
vitamin C concentrations, which probably contribute to balancing ROS production and avoidance of
oxidative damage during vigorous exercise. In conclusion, more active, mainly elasmobranch fishes, have
higher concentrations of the antioxidant vitamin C.



Vences, Miguel (Technical University of Braunschweig); Rodriguez, Ariel (Instituto de Ecologia y
Sistematica, Havana (Cuba), Germany)

Molecular phylogeny, skin alkaloids and aposematism in Cuban                      dwarf frogs of the
Eleutherodactylus limbatus group

Thioautotrophic endosymbionts in the Domain Bacteria mediate key sulfur transformations in marine
reducing environments.

Frank J. Stewart

The recent discovery of skin alkaloids in a clade of Cuban eleutherodactylid frogs comprising some of the
smallest frogs of the world added a fifth independent origin of lipophilic alkaloid sequestering to the
amphibian tree. The Eleutherodactylus limbatus group contains six species, four of which ( E. iberia , E.
jaumei , E. limbatus , E. orientalis ) have a highly contrasting coloration that can be interpreted as
aposematic. We provide evidence that all four of these species contain alkaloids in their skin. Molecular
phylogenetic analysis based on DNA sequence data placed dull-colored species ( E. etheridgei and E.
cubanus ) in a basal position with respect to the aposematic-colored species. Within the aposematic
clade various subclades of a similar degree of differentiation were detected, rendering paraphyletic the
formally described species and indicating the need for a taxonomic revision. The integrated phylogenetic,



                                                                                                       747
geographic distribution and coloration data suggest that the evolution of diverse variants of contrasting
coloration patterns in these miniaturized frogs has been characterized by extensive homoplasy and that
their center of genetic and species diversity is in the eastern mountains of Cuba.

Keywords: chemosynthesis, endosymbiosis, sulfide, thiosulfate, gene expression



Vences, Miguel (Technical University of Braunschweig);

Origins and biogeographic patterns of Madagascar's amphibians and reptiles

Thioautotrophic endosymbionts in the Domain Bacteria mediate key sulfur transformations in marine
reducing environments.

Frank J. Stewart

Elucidating the origin of Madagascar's biota by time-calibrated molecular phylogenies has been a major
success story. It has become obvious that a major proportion of Madagascar's vertebrates, including
amphibians and reptiles, originated on Madagascar by ancestors rafting over the ocean from Africa.
Several other groups such as microhylid and mantellid frogs probably dispersed shortly after the KT-
boundary from Asia. New analyses indicate that their diversification on Madagascar was then weakly
influenced by a time effect, early arriving lineages being today more species rich. However, the most
important influence on species richness of clades appears to be their ability to colonize rainforest – those
clades that could not adapt to this habitat and remained stuck in Madagascar's drier western regions are
remarkably species-poor. Spatial patterns of diversity within Madagascar are furthermore strongly
influenced by body size, and a remarkable degree of microendemism appears to characterize especially
miniaturized taxa such as Stumpffia frogs and Brookesia leaf chameleons. Phylogeographic case
studies as well as geographic metaanalyses suggest that a variety of mechanisms have been active in
the diversification of the Malagasy herpetofauna and highlights the southern and especially northern parts
of the islands as important centers of species richness and endemism, and possibly of centers of
adaptive speciation.

Keywords: chemosynthesis, endosymbiosis, sulfide, thiosulfate, gene expression



Venesky, Matthew (University of South Florida); Liu, Xuan (Chinese Academy of Sciences, Canada);
Sauer, Erin; Rohr, Jason (University of South Florida, Canada)

The dilution effect: linking experiments to field data and evaluating its relative strength

 The dilution effect, the hypothesis that biodiversity reduces disease risk, has received support in some
systems. However, few dilution effect studies have 1) linked mechanistic experiments to field patterns to
establish both causality and ecological relevance or 2) rigorously evaluated the strength of the dilution
effect relative to other factors known to influence disease risk, such as factors associated with the
fundamental niche of the pathogen. In a series of experiments, we show that tadpoles can filter feed
zoospores of the pathogenic chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ( Bd ) and that the degree of
filter feeding was positively associated with their dilution potential. Eastern narrowmouth toad tadpoles (
Gastrophryne carolinensis ) generally diluted the risk of chytridiomycosis for Southern toad ( Bufo
terrestris ) and Green treefrog ( Hyla cinerea ) tadpoles, whereas B. terrestris generally amplified
infections for the other species. Surprisingly, under certain combinations of density and species



                                                                                                        748
composition, hosts switched from being diluters to amplifiers, emphasizing the nonlinear, context-
dependent effects of diversity on disease risk. Field data from across the U.S. revealed that the presence
of Bufo spp. and Gastrophryne spp. were positive and negative predictors of Bd prevalence,
respectively, corroborating our laboratory findings. Furthermore, there was a significant negative
association between amphibian species richness and Bd prevalence in the U.S., but the strength of
richness as a predictor of prevalence was weak in comparison to the effects of climate. Thus, our results
suggest that increased species richness can reduce the risk of chytridiomycosis but that this dilution
effect is not very important at the spatial scale we evaluated. These results emphasize that the
relationship between species richness and pathogen prevalence is complex and the need to evaluate the
importance of the dilution effect relative to other factors that affect disease risk.



Veríssimo, Ana (CIBIO - Research Center in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources); Cotton, Charles
(Virginia Insitute of Marine Science, Canada); Buch, Robert (National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, Canada); Burgess, George (Florida Museum of Natural History, Gainesville, FL, United
States); Gullart, Javier (Universitat de València, Canada)

A revision of the gulper sharks (genus Centrophorus) in North Atlantic waters

The genus Centrophorus (Squaliformes: Centrophoridae) comprises a group of medium-sized
benthopelagic sharks usually found on continental and insular slopes of the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific
oceans. Many of the 10-12 recognized species are routinely caught in mid- and deep-water fisheries
worldwide and some have shown a considerable decline in abundance in the last few decades. Despite
the need for efficient and sustainable management of these species, clear and consistent species
discrimination and taxonomic identification of Centrophorus is still problematic. The poor resolution of
diagnostic morphological characters coupled with the absence or poor condition of the type material and
the lack of detail in the original species descriptions contribute to the widespread confusion in the alpha
taxonomy of the genus.

We used molecular and meristic characters as well as detailed morphometric measurements to re-
evaluate and characterize the diversity of Centrophorus in the North Atlantic, including the Gulf of Mexico
and the Mediterranean Sea. Molecular characters were obtained from nucleotide sequences of the
mitochondrial DNA cytochrome oxidase I (COI) and 16S ribosomal RNA (16S) gene regions. Data were
collected from fresh specimens caught by commercial and research vessels, from preserved specimens
deposited in museum and research institute collections, and from publicly available databases (e.g.
GenBank; BOLD) and the scientific literature.

Nucleotide polymorphisms at COI and 16S separated North Atlantic Centrophorus specimens into five
well-supported groups consistently retrieved by both markers. Morphometric measurements corroborated
the existence of these five groups but also indicated the presence of additional groups not represented in
the molecular matrix. We provide a morphological characterization of each group and present a
combination of morphometric measurements useful for species discrimination in the field.

Comparison of North Atlantic specimens with those collected elsewhere showed that four of the five
groups identified above also occur in the Indian and/or Pacific oceans. Our results extend the reported
range of some species considerably and suggest that most Centrophorus species have wider geographic
distributions than previously reported. Assignment of species names to each of the morphotypes retrieved
here is pending further evaluation of Indian and Pacific specimens and a thorough analysis of all extant
Centrophorus types.




                                                                                                       749
Vickaryous, Matthew (University of Guelph); Gilbert, Emily (University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada);
Delorme, Stephanie (University of Guelph, Guelph, Canada)

Anatomy, histology and protein expression during tail loss and regeneration

It has long been observed that many lizards are able to voluntarily self-detach (autotomize) a portion of
the tail as an anti-predation strategy.        For most, tail autotomy is followed by tail regeneration.
Beginning with a mass of mesenchymal-like cells—the regeneration blastema—a replacement
appendage is formed complete with nerves, blood vessels, and skeletal support.         Using the gekkotan
Eublepharis macularius , the leopard gecko, we investigated the anatomy and histology of tail loss,
wound healing and tissue restoration. Autotomy is facilitated by intravertebral fracture planes, permitting
controlled breakage of the skeleton, and smooth muscle sphincters on the caudal artery, to minimize
bleeding. We demonstrate that autotomy is not a requirement for regeneration: original and previously
regenerated tails will regenerate after surgical amputation outside the fracture plane. Autotomized and
amputated tails follow a matching sequence of anatomical and histological events, beginning with the
formation of an exudate clot. Deep to this clot, a highly proliferative wound epithelium forms and the tail
stump is eroded to provide a new structural interface for the regenerating tissue. The wound epithelium
differs from the original epidermis by expressing the protease MMP-9 and the keratin marker WE6.
Blastema cells accumulate between the wound epithelium and tail stump and are also proliferative and
immunopositive for MMP-9.        Continued expansion of the blastema is matched by angiogenesis and
outgrowth of the ependymal tube lining the central canal. Although we have identified several important
proteins known to be involved in embryonic development, including the morphogen Shh, the transcription
factor Sox9, and the homeobox protein Msx1/2, their functional role during regeneration remains unclear.
Our data indicates that regeneration is not a simple recapitulation of development but a secondarily
evolved process.



Vickers, Mathew (James Cook University / CSIRO); Schwarzkopf, Lin; Alford, Ross (James Cook
University, Canada)

Null model for behavioral thermoregulation

Classically, assessing behavioural thermoregulation in ectotherms involves comparing field-active body
temperatures of an organism to available habitat temperatures from where the organism lives. The closer
the mean difference between field-active body temperature to the organisms‘ preferred temperature, the
better a thermoregulator it is, and similarly, the closer habitat temperature is to the preferred temperature,
the higher the thermal quality of the habitat. However, a behavioural thermoregulator doesn‘t experience
static temperature, nor can it choose among all possible habitat temperature at each moment; rather,
through moving, it sequentially samples spatially contiguous temperature through time. Accordingly, the
appropriate null model for behavioural thermoregulation is a random walk through a spatially explicit
temperature-field. By modelling a random walk through a realistic fine-scale thermal environment we are
able to estimate the body-temperature distribution of a non-thermoregulator, and more accurately
estimate the quality of thermoregulation of a real ectotherm: an Australian skink. In addition, we
demonstrate the importance of distinguishing environments that are too-hot from too-cold by inverting
habitat temperature for the non-thermoregulator around the organisms‘ preferred temperature.




                                                                                                          750
Vijayakumar, SP (Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science); Shanker, Kartik (Centre
for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Canada)

Radiation in a Refuge: Contrasting patterns of in-situ diversification of bush frogs (Raorchestes)
in the Western Ghats, Peninsular India.

AIM: One of the striking features in the evolutionary history of life is species radiation. Depending on the
degree of ecological and phenotypic disparity, radiation can take an adaptive or a non-adaptive form.
Radiations allow us to understand the causes and consequences of diversification and recognizing and
describing exceptional radiations is an important first step towards this goal. This talk is based on one
such radiation that we discovered in the Western Ghats of Peninsular India. As an initial step towards
generating causal hypothesis, we tested the significance of regional scale factors including that of an
ancient barrier and that of a southern refugia in the initial diversification of the bush frog clade
(Raorchestes, Rhacophoridae). METHODS: Results are based on an extensive sampling over four years
across &gt;240 sites in all the eight major hill complexes, across elevation (0-2650m) and latitudinal
gradient (8 to 18 degrees). Phylogeny of the bush frogs was reconstructed with a ~2600bp data matrix (4
mtDNA and 2 nuclear) using Bayesian and maximum likelihood methods. We included outgroups
composed of members from major genera in rhacophoridae. Spatial analyses is based on &gt;1900 point
records. Lineages were delimited based on multiple criteria and a final dated tree was generated using
secondary calibration points. RESULTS: Analyses uncovered a spectacular radiation of bush frogs
consisting of 61 lineages (including &gt;19 new species) with two strongly supported clades: north and
south, separated by the geographic barrier. Ancestral range reconstructions showed that there has been
limited dispersal across this barrier, highlighting its significant role in the initial diversification of bush frog
clade. In addition, presence of a deeply nested clade consisting of SE Asian members in the northern
clade supports a single out-of-Peninsular India range expansion and a vicariance scenario. Constant rate
model of diversification was rejected (Gamma= -2.329) at the scale of Western Ghats. The initial
diversification of the north and south clades coincides with Oligocene glaciation followed by an
accelerated diversification during the Miocene. Out-of-Peninsular India range expansion coincides with
the Mid-Miocene Climate Optimum. Species richness in space was strongly influenced by latitude (Rsq=-
0.853***) with a greater concentration of species in southern Western Ghats. In addition, comparison of
northern and southern clades showed that the southern clade is species rich with greater proportion of
endemics and also exhibit greater morphological and ecological diversity. These results support the
existence of a southern refugia and it‘s role in the adaptive radiation of Western Ghats bush frogs.



Vila Pouca, Catarina (CIBIO - University of Porto); Queiroz, Nuno (CIBIO - University of Porto, Vairão,
Portugal); Mucientes, Gonzalo (Instituto de Investigaciones Marinas, CSIC, Vigo, Spain); Humphries,
Nick; Sims, David (Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, Plymouth, United Kingdom)

High-resolution diving behaviour revealed by satellite tagging of blue sharks

Recent advances in satellite tagging technologies have provided increased resolution in studying the
movements, patterns of activity and behaviour of individual animals in relation to different environmental
features. Such accurate records of long term vertical movements of large predators at fine temporal
resolutions have enabled the identification of variable behavioural patterns amongst species, such as diel
temporal shifts in behaviour. In addition, by investigating diving behaviour in relation to changing
oceanographic variables and to potential foraging success, we are beginning to understand why such
behaviours occur at particular times and places. The characteristics of dive profiles, including dive shape,
have often been useful to address such questions. For most species, dives can be classified into
predefined dive types based on their two dimensional shape, and these types, or the dive characteristics



                                                                                                                751
within a type, may reflect activities such as foraging, travelling or resting. Concerning marine fish, two
main dive types, V- and U-shaped, have been largely identified. Overall it is thought that V-shaped dives
are associated with transiting/prey searching behaviour, while U-shaped profiles are related to foraging
on aggregated prey. The identification of different habitat uses, namely transiting and foraging areas, by
analysing the spatial distribution of the dive profiles is of great importance to the recognition of key marine
habitats. Thus, the ability to identify such critical habitats, by combining data from many different species
including large pelagic predators, may be a valuable tool when identifying potential marine protected
areas. Here we analysed high resolution data (10s) on depth and temperature experienced by satellite
tagged blue sharks Prionace glauca in the eastern Atlantic Ocean and obtained a detailed description of
their vertical movements. A total of 2890 dives by 4 blue sharks were recorded. Five dive types,
previously described for other species, were found to be commonly performed by blue sharks. Type 1 (U-
shaped) and 2 (V-shaped) dives were the most frequently performed by blue sharks (ca. 48% and 32% of
the total number of dives, respectively) with all other dive types each representing &lt;6% of the total.
Dives that did not conform to the generic classiﬁcation scheme represented 9.8% of total dives. Further
analyses examined spatial and temporal patterns of diving profiles in the eastern Atlantic Ocean.



Vinnikov, Kirill (University of Hawaii at Manoa);

Phylogenetic relationships and morphological diversity of Awaous and Stenogobius species
(Gobiidae)

Amphidromous gobies are the common representatives of native freshwater fish fauna in tropical and
subtropical islands and in a coastal zone throughout the whole Indo-Pacific region. These fishes are
similar by having a marine larval stage that presumably allows them to spread out from one island to
another. After recent morphological and molecular studies, most genera of amphidromous gobies were
combined into one monophyletic subfamily Sicydiinae. However, phylogenetic relationships of some other
amphidromous genera of gobies remained unresolved due to a lack of sampling. In the present study I
aimed to analyze the phylogenetic relationships between two genera Awaous and Stenogobius, which
were not included to Sicydiinae, as well as to check taxonomic validity of their species by using both 62
morphological characters and COI mitochondrial gene sequences. Several sicydiine gobies were used as
the ingroup sister taxa and two genera, Gnatholepis and Acanthogobius, were added as the outgroup to
the current phylogenetic analysis. Small samples of each species from the different geographic locations
including South Africa, Hawaiian Islands, French Polynesia, Society Islands, Solomon Islands, Guam,
Vanuatu, Fiji and New Caledonia were used as taxonomic units in maximum parsimony, maximum
likelihood and Bayesian approaches. Most trees, which resulted from the reconstructions with
morphological data, showed higher statistical support for the relationships between different genera, while
the analyses with only nucleotide sequences gave better evidence for the species and intraspecific
relationships. All phylogenetic approaches revealed paraphyly for Awaous species. The genus
Stenogobius was placed as the basal group for subfamily Sicydiinae. Although there was a divergence
within Stenogobius group with high support values, the branch lengths of all species were relatively short
in comparison with species from the other genera that indicates recent colonization events and
presumably high migration rates in some cases, where support was not significant. The latter may be the
reason of very high morphological similarity between all Stenogobius species. On the contrary,
remarkable morphological differences between males and females as well as between different age
groups were observed in Stenogobius hawaiiensis from the one stream on Oahu Island (Hawaii).
Obtained results also support the evidence that species with longer marine larval period have the largest
range of their distribution.




                                                                                                           752
Vitt, Laurie (Sam Noble Museum);

Walking the Natural History Trail

Nearly all, if not all, conceptual studies and hypotheses that we test in biology begin with natural history
observations. Nevertheless, Natural History has almost become a bad word in biological sciences.
Funding agencies do not have a category for Natural History studies. The last Professor of Natural
History that I know of was Dr. Ken Norris of the University of California, Santa Cruz. I trace my history as
a herpetologist, pointing out how basic natural history studies led me to ask conceptual questions. I begin
with childhood observations on garter snakes, rattlesnakes, and scorpions and travel from the open
sagebrush lands of Montana to the Sonoran Desert, the swamplands of South Carolina, then to the New
World Tropics with natural history stories and their implications for conceptual biology. I end with a few
comments on what I view as particularly exciting frontiers that take advantage of modern technologies
and methods.



Vojar, Jirí (Faculty of Environmental Sciences, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague); Dolezalová,
Jana (Faculty of Environmental Sciences, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague, Prague, Czech
Republic); Solský, Milic (Faculty of Environmental Sciences, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague,
Prague, Canada)

Technical reclamation and spontaneous succession produce different water habitats: A case
study from Czech post-mining sites

Despite the ecological value of unreclaimed post-mining areas, in the Czech Republic, however, rigorous
technical reclamation still prevails. Such approach usually leads to a more uniform environment and
destroys the habitat diversity of successional sites, including the variety of water bodies that are crucial
habitats for many aquatic and semiaquatic species. The aim of our study was to assess the water
environment on reclaimed and unreclaimed post-mining sites from an ―amphibian point of view‖. We
compared the proportion of water habitat area, the number of ponds and their habitat features on 14
technically reclaimed and 6 unreclaimed sections of spoil banks in the North Bohemian brown coal basin
in the Czech Republic. The proportion of water area, number of ponds per hectare of spoil bank, and
number of ponds in a vicinity of 300 m were significantly higher on successional sections than on
reclaimed sections of spoil banks. We also found on successional areas a higher proportion of smaller
shallow ponds, with gentle shore slopes, partial insolation of water surface and partial vegetation cover.
The ponds on technically reclaimed parts of spoil banks were larger and deeper, with steeper shore
slopes, full insolation and partial vegetation cover. We conclude that primary succession leads to a more
preferable environment for amphibians than does technical reclamation, and it should be considered as
an equal type of post-mining site restoration.




                                                                                                        753
von May, Rudolf (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California, Berkeley); Pitman, Nigel
(Center for Tropical Conservation, Duke University, Canada); Catenazzi, Alessandro (Department of
Biology, Gonzaga University, Canada); Koo, Michelle S. (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of
California, Berkeley, Canada); Rodríguez, Lily O. (Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad Nacional
Mayor de San Marcos, Lima, Perú, Canada); Yánez-Muñoz, Mario H. (Museo Ecuatoriano de Ciencias
Naturales, Quito, Ecuador, Canada); Mueses-Cisneros, Jonh Jairo (Fundación para la Investigación en
Biodiversidad Amazónica (FIBA), Colombia, Canada); Venegas, Pablo J. (Centro de Ornitología y
Biodiversidad (CORBIDI), Lima, Perú, Canada); Knell, Guillermo (Ecologística Perú, Lima, Perú,
Canada); Rivera, Dani (Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Lima,
Perú, Canada); Markel, Jon; Vriesendorp, Corine (Environment, Culture, and Conservation (ECCo), The
Field Museum, Canada); Gordo, Marcelo (Departamento de Biologia/ICB, Universidade Federal do
Amazonas, Manaus, Brasil, Canada)

An evaluation of the impact of a rapid inventories program on amphibian conservation in the
Andes-Amazon region of Peru, Ecuador, and Bolivia

The Environment, Culture, and Conservation Department of the Field Museum (ECCo) is best known for
its rapid inventories of remote, poorly known forests in the Andes-Amazon region
(http://fm2.fieldmuseum.org/rbi/). During these two-to-three week inventories, international teams of
biologists survey the flora and fauna of sites that have been identified by host nations as high
conservation priorities but have often never before been visited by biologists. While the biologists survey
forests and rivers, sociologists and anthropologists visit nearby communities to explore conservation
opportunities with local residents. Over the past 12 years, ECCo has conducted 16 inventories in the
Andes-Amazon region. The information collected in these expeditions has so far helped create new
protected areas covering several million hectares. What is often overlooked is these surveys‘ impact on
the conservation of specific taxonomic groups. ECCo‘s rapid inventories have catalyzed the
establishment of 12 new parks, which together protect more than 4 million hectares of high-quality
amphibian habitat. Protection has been strengthened for a similarly sized area. The newly protected
habitats are focused in the Andes-Amazon region, home to the most diverse amphibian communities on
Earth. These habitats range from windswept Andean grasslands above 3000 m elevation to Amazonian
swamps only a few dozen meters above sea level, from white sand forests to peat bogs to savannas, all
of them crisscrossed by rivers, streams, lakes, and pools that are home to literally millions of rare,
threatened, and poorly known amphibians. We evaluated the impact of ECCo‘s rapid inventories
program on the conservation of amphibians in Peru, Ecuador, and Bolivia. We conducted a
comprehensive review of the datasets generated during these inventories and found that over 220
amphibian species live in the survey areas. About 10-12 of these species were new to science; four of
them have been formally described whereas the others are currently being described. The new parks
protect a significant portion of the habitat of approximately 200 amphibian species. While only 10 of these
species



von May, Rudolf (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California, Berkeley); Angulo, Ariadne
(Departamento de Herpetologia, Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos,
Lima, Peru, Canada); Catenazzi, Alessandro (Department of Biology, Gonzaga University, Canada);
Aguilar, César (Departamento de Herpetología, Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad Nacional Mayor
de San Marcos, Lima, Perú, Canada); Siu-Ting, Karen (Molecular Evolution and Bioinformatics Unit,
National University of Ireland, Canada); Morales, Víctor R. (Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas y Museo de
Historia Natural, Universidad Ricardo Palma, Lima, Perú, Canada); Chaparro, Juan C. (Museo de Historia
Natural, Universidad Nacional de San Antonio Abad del Cusco (MHNC), Cusco, Perú, Canada);
Gagliardi, Giussepe (Peruvian Center for Biodiversity and Conservation (PCB&C), Iquitos, Perú, Canada);
Venegas, Pablo J. (División de Herpetología, Centro de Ornitología y Biodiversidad (CORBIDI), Lima,




                                                                                                       754
Perú, Canada); Pérez, José (Departamento de Herpetología, Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad
Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Lima, Perú, Canada)

The Peruvian Association of Herpetology

Between 150 and 200 herpetologists currently work in Peru. With such a large community of
professionals studying the amphibians and reptiles of Peru, a logical next step was to give a voice to this
community and to help inform and coordinate research and conservation initiatives, increase capacity
building and outreach through the creation of a professional society with a focus on Peruvian
herpetofauna. In this regard we would like to report that the Asociación Peruana de Herpetología (APH;
Peruvian Association of Herpetology) was legally established in 2011. The APH‘s mission is to promote
scientific activities that increase the knowledge on amphibians and reptiles in Peru and that contribute to
the advancement of international herpetology. The APH‘s founding members are associated with several
academic institutions, including universities in four different regions in Peru, as well as non-profit
organizations and natural history museums, and most of them are IUCN SSC Amphibian Specialist Group
members. We expect that the APH will promote collaboration among both national and foreign
colleagues, development of research proposals, and study plans throughout the country. We look forward
to seeing a significant growth in membership during the forthcoming years, and we welcome people
interested in joining and contributing to the growth of the APH.



von May, Rudolf (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California, Berkeley); Donnelly, Maureen
A. (Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University, Canada)

The relationship between leaf-litter frog assemblages and substrate characteristics in
southwestern Amazonian lowland forests

In this study, we evaluated the potential effect of soil and leaf-litter characteristics, and forest type, on the
local assemblage of Amazonian leaf-litter frogs. We used 5×5 m leaf-litter plots to quantify the species
richness and abundance of frogs at two lowland sites in south-eastern Peru. We found that soil and litter
characteristics explained part of the observed variation in species presence, richness, and relative
abundance of leaf-litter frogs. However, species exhibited individualistic responses: some species did not
show any association with the variables we measured while other species were strongly associated with
some variables. We found that soil total phosphorus concentration and, to a lesser extent, soil humidity,
leaf-litter mass, and soil pH explained part of the observed variation in species occurrence, richness, and
relative abundance. We also found that community structure of leaf-litter frogs varied between two distinct
forest types (floodplain and terra firme). Our study highlights the importance of considering both
microhabitat and macrohabitat characteristics when evaluating patterns of frog community structure.



Vörös, Judit (Hungarian Natural History Museum); Gál, Júlia Tünde (Szent István University, Faculty of
Veterinary Science, Department of Ecology, Canada); Dán, Ádám (Department of Molecular Biology,
Central Agricultural Office Veterinary Diagnostic Directorate, Canada); Bosch, Jaime (Museo Nacional de
Ciencias Naturales, Canada)

Chytridiomycosis in yellow-bellied toad (Bombina variegata) populations in Hungary

The amphibian chytrid fungus (Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis) was first recognized in Europe in
Peñalara Mountains of Spain in 1997. Since then it was detected in most of Western Europe and part of
Central and Eastern Europe. Distribution of Bd in Hungary have been surveyed in the last few years and



                                                                                                             755
infected populations have been found throughout the country, mostly in the low elevation mountains of
North and West Hungary and in three taxa (Bombina variegata, Pelophylax esculentus complex and
Mesotriton alpestris). As the yellow-bellied toad (Bombina variegata) seems to carry the infection with
very high proportion we used the species for further monitoring. We followed a B. variegata population in
the Bakony Mountains for two years in 2010-2011 and applied individual identification coupled with Bd
screening. Overall 193 individuals were captured during the study period. In the first year the toads were
found in a lake which dried out for the next year when toads moved to the neighboring stream located in
the forest. Both prevalence and genomic equivalent values significantly decreased when toads spent
breeding season near the stream. Every specimen caught in the springtime and recaptured during the
summer or fall cleared the infection by the time of recapture. Similarly specimens tested positive in 2010
and recaptured in 2011 lost their infection during hibernation. Besides mapping the distribution of Bd in
Hungary and to survey the selected B. variegata population we also aimed to identify the phylogenetic
lineage of the pathogen infecting Hungarian amphibians. For that we used a nested PRC assay to amplify
the ribosomal ITS region. We found two haplotypes of Bd in Bombina variegata from which one was
identical to a haplotype previously found only in Ecuador and North America, and one belonged to a
global haplotype.



Waddle, Hardin (U.S. Geological Survey);

Long-term trends in anuran occupancy in the Atchafalaya Basin of Louisiana

The Atchafalaya River Basin in southern Louisiana is the largest contiguous tract of river bottomland
remaining in North America. The U.S. Geological Survey has been monitoring anuran amphibians in the
Atchafalaya for the last decade (2002–2012). Monitoring from 2002-2006 consisted of a series of
vocalization surveys conducted on rainy nights at 40 sites. Sampling was suspended in 2007 and from
2008-2012 monitoring resumed using both visual encounter surveys and vocalization surveys. Additional
sites have been added, but the majority of the 40 original sites are still being surveyed. This long-term
dataset provides an excellent opportunity to examine the occupancy dynamics of the 12 species of
anurans found in this area. Most of the species declined in site occupancy during the 2002-2006 period
when only vocalization surveys were employed. Analysis of the vocalization data from 2008-2012 will
reveal if this 5-yr trend was indicative of a long-term decline in occupancy or only the downward phase of
a cyclical occupancy pattern in the Atchafalaya. Examination of the visual encounter data from recent
surveys will also help determine the value of capture data in estimating occupancy and detecting a trend
relative to vocalization surveys alone. Because anurans call for specific purposes and calling is influenced
in various ways by environmental conditions, it may be difficult to account for all of the causes of
heterogeneity in detection probability using occupancy analysis based solely on vocalization surveys.
Combining visual detections may provide a dataset that is more reliable for determining true occupancy
dynamics and less disposed to trends than vocalization data only.



Wagner, Alexander (University of Vienna);

Skeletochronology of phalanges underestimates the true age of long-lived Alpine newts
(Ichthyosaura alpestris)

Skeletochronology has become the most widely used method of ageing amphibians. However, bone
remodelling, double lines and rapprochement of peripheral lines all hamper exact skeletochronological
age determination. In a long-term field study, the age of long-lived Alpine newts ( Ichthyosaura alpestris )



                                                                                                        756
from a high-altitude population was estimated from cross-sections of phalanges at the time of tagging with
PIT tags and again 10–16 years later.              The skeletochronologically assessed age at recapture
underestimated the time since first capture by 2–19 years, and the observed deviance increased with
increasing age estimates at first capture. It is very likely that most skeletochronological studies at high
altitude or latitude conducted so far have underestimated the true age of amphibians.           Although the
reliability of skeletochronological age estimates is higher in short-lived amphibian species, there is a need
to develop new techniques to permanently mark young metamorphs. Annotation from the author: Walter
Hödl (University of Vienna) has affirmed my decision to submit this paper because of the importance of
this study for amphibian age determination.



Wagner, Norman (Trier University); Chipperfield, Joseph; Lötters, Stefan (Trier University, Trier,
Germany); Esch, Sandra (Trier University, Biogeography Department, Trier, Germany, Canada); Veith,
Michael (Trier University, Biogeography Department, Trier, Germany, Trier, Germany); Sinsch, Ulrich
(University of Koblenz-Landau, Department of Biology. Koblenz, Germany, Koblenz, Germany)

Can glyphosate-based herbicides contribute to amphibian population decline?

The use of glyphosate-based herbicides (GBH) is increasing globally, especially so after the adoption of
genetically modified herbicide-resistant crops. Several lab and mesocosm studies have shown adverse
effects of GBH on amphibian individuals, particularly anuran larvae. Here we integrate information of
agrarian practices and amphibian biology to parameterise population models and investigate whether
GBH may contribute to declines both at the population and species level.



Wagner, Philipp (Villanova University); Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University, Villanova, PA, United States)

Out of the blue: a preliminary review of the African whorl-tailed agamas (Agamidae:
Acanthocercus)

The African whorl-tailed agamas include two genera: the eight lizards in the genus Acanthocercus
Fitzinger, 1843 are widespread in savannas and woodland, while the two Xenagama Boulenger, 1895
species occur from woodland to semi-deserts to savannah areas. Most of the species occur in the nearly
herpetologically unexplored areas in the Horn of Africa. Two are present in the southwestern part of the
Arabian Peninsula, but on the African continent only a single species, A. atricollis, is known to occur
outside the Horn region.

In general, relationships between these whorl-tailed species as well as the relations of these genera to
the Asian whorl-tailed lizards and other members of the Agaminae are poorly understood. A robust
phylogeny of the whorl-tailed lizards as well as a good understanding of diagnostic characters and
species delimitation are required. Relationships and distinctions between subspecies of the A. atricollis
Smith, 1849 complex are particularly vexing, but the boundaries between other Acanthocercus species
are also unresolved. However, African whorl-tailed agamas are an ideal group for testing zoogeographic
hypotheses of colonization events in the so-called ‗arid corridor‘ linking the Horn of Africa to the
southwest arid region. We provide a preliminary morphological and molecular phylogeny of the whorl-
tailed agamas that clarifies species limits and establishes their position within the Agaminae. First results
support that the diagnostic value of the whorl-tail has been over estimated and that Acanthocercus is a
mixed genus including several distinct lineages which will be described as new genera. The species
status of A. cyanogaster is supported and it is clearly distinct from A. atricollis, with which it has often




                                                                                                         757
been considered conspecific. A preliminary review of the A. atricollis complex shows that several
subspecies ust be elevated to species rank.



Wagner, Philipp (Villanova University); Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University, Villanova, PA, United States)

Zoogeography of arid Africa

The African tropical rain forests, extending from southern Senegal in the west to the East African coastal
forests of Kenya and Tanzania in the east harbor a huge number of reptile species and have been
inventoried. A zoogeographical analysis revealed complex faunal ―relationships‖ between the forests but
also gave insight to the ―arid history‖ of the continent. A comparison of distribution patterns of both arid
and rainforest species shows two main corridors allowing a migration of arid species from north to south
and east to west in sub-Saharan Africa and indicates a possible colonization of Africa by certain taxa from
the southwestern Arabian Peninsula. However, the analysis also shows that our knowledge of arid Africa
is limited and that savannah eco-regions and dry woodlands seem to be the most unexplored parts of the
continent.



Wahbe, Tanya (University of British Columbia); Yueh, Hesther (University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada); Bury, R. Bruce (USGS Forest and Rangeland Ecosystem Science Center,
Corvallis, OR, United States); Welsh, Hartwell (USDA Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research
Station, Arcata, CA, United States); Ritland, Kermit; Ritland, Carol (University of British Columbia,
Department of Forest Sciences, Vancouver, BC, Canada)

Tailed Frogs in the Pacific Northwest: Genetic variation, isolation, and population status

The tailed frog (Ascaphus) is endemic to the Pacific Northwest of North America and is sometimes placed
in its own family, Ascaphidae. It is among the most primitive of living frogs. Coastal tailed frogs (Ascaphus
truei) range from BC southward to northern California in coastal drainages, and Rocky Mountain tailed
frogs (A. montanus) occur in western Montana, northern Idaho, and southeast BC. They are fairly evenly
distributed along their coastal range, but more scattered in their interior range. They frequent
mountainous, coniferous forests with cool, clear streams. In Canada, A. truei is listed as special concern
(―at risk‖) and A. montanus is endangered. In the US, they are protected at the state level. Several studies
demonstrate fragmentation impacts on Ascaphus populations. Reduced genetic diversity found in a
degraded habitat was consistent with demographic data showing reduced larval movement, adult
dispersal and breeding adults in clearcut habitats (Wahbe et al. 2005). These studies also support a
smaller effective population size. Absence of forest cover was a key restrictor of genetic connectivity in a
study examining landscape-level gene flow. Nielson et al. (2006) split Ascaphus into two species (coastal
and interior). When estimating relationships among populations, Canadian and American researchers
reported strong genetic differences (i.e., low gene flow) suggesting a complex history of restrictions to
geographic refugia but also range expansions. We used mitochondrial cytochrome b and ND2 sequences
to further explore phylogeography from coastal BC to northern California and interior populations from
BC, Montana and Idaho. Using these molecular tools, we confirmed the global level of interior and coastal
divisions but locally restricted haplotypes in the coastal south---possibly reflecting greater genetic
diversity. Current evidence suggests that populations in degraded habitats have reduced genetic diversity
owing to lower effective population sizes and temporary contractions of population size. Based on existing
knowledge, we predict that there will be increased isolation of populations due to habitat fragmentation,
climate change, and further degradation of remaining habitat due to logging. Recolonization may be slow,




                                                                                                         758
if at all. Because Ascaphus populations exist in a metapopulation structure, population connectivity
should be maintained to ensure population persistence.



Waldman, Bruce (Seoul National University);

Conservation successes with Archey's Frog (Leiopelma archeyi) in New Zealand

New Zealand endemic frogs (genus Leiopelma ) are ‗living fossils‘, the most archaic lineage of living
anurans. Their conservation presents special challenges. The species exist in small, isolated or highly
fragmented populations, with limited gene flow and highly structured populations. Of most concern is
Archey‘s frog, Leiopelma archeyi . Populations surveyed in optimal habitat declined by over 80% since
1996. But in many areas where frogs were common in the early 1990s, none remain. After the discovery
of amphibian chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), infecting Canterbury hylid frogs in
1989, reducing risk of exposure of Leiopelma frogs to Bd became a primary management objective.
While a low proportion of Archey‘s frogs have been found infected by Bd in the field, infections have not
been observed to cause morbidity or mortality. Sick frogs have been frequently found in the field,
however. These frogs typically demonstrate clinical signs, including blisters and necrosis of epidermal
tissue, associated with other diseases. A captive breeding programme was established at the University
of Canterbury in 2002 to safeguard the species from disease. Infected individuals, rescued from the field,
showed full, spontaneous recovery within 6 months under optimised ex situ conditions. Soon after release
from quarantine, frogs successfully bred under conditions that simulated their natural habitat. Genetic
approaches, including selective breeding for MHC alleles known to confer disease resistance, should be
incorporated into management strategies to ensure successful reintroductions. Saving a species requires
detailed knowledge and appreciation of the organism‘s biology, solid scientific research, and meaningful
collaboration among researchers, government, zoos, and the public. Further studies are needed to
determine whether frogs remaining in the wild suffer from immunosuppression, and if so, to identify the
factors that are making them susceptible to disease. We share a responsibility to save Archey‘s frog,
ranked the most evolutionarily distinct amphibian in the world, from extinction.



Waldman, Bruce (Seoul National University); Cha, Moonsuk; Bataille, Arnaud; Fong, Jonathan; Baek,
Hae Jun; Lee, Hang; Min, Mi-Sook (Seoul National University, Canada)

Haplotype diversity and distribution of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in South Korea

The amphibian chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) has been associated with population
declines and extinctions of amphibians worldwide. Since the discovery in 2009 of Bd on the Asian
continent, in Korea, Bd has been detected in several Asian countries. However, the impact and history of
emergence of this pathogen in Asia remain unclear. We conducted a study to determine the prevalence,
diversity, and distribution of Bd in South Korea using a nested PCR assay to amplify and sequence its
ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region. We also estimated the intensity of infection in native
and introduced amphibians by a quantitative PCR method. We analysed swabs from 1978 individuals of
10 different amphibian species collected in 89 localities. Three hundred thirty-nine individuals tested
positive, with the highest Bd prevalence observed in the American bullfrog, Lithobates catesbeianus, and
the Jeju salamander, Hynobius quelpaertensis (18% in both species). ITS sequence was obtained from
106 infected individuals. A total of 36 haplotypes were identified, including 28 novel haplotypes not
previously reported. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that Korean haplotypes are highly diverse and
appear closely related to haplotypes that have been isolated in China and Japan. Levels of infection in



                                                                                                      759
Korean amphibians were low in all samples tested (Bd infection load < 300 zoospores/swab; N = 45),
consistent with initial observations in other Asian countries. Our results provide support for a historical
presence of the pathogen in Asia. Highest haplotype diversity and prevalence were observed near zones
of international access to the country (i.e., Incheon, Seoul, and Busan areas), whereas amphibians in the
most isolated regions of the country demonstrated the lowest Bd prevalence and haplotype diversity. The
data suggest an ongoing spread of multiple strains of the fungus, probably associated with urban
development, wildlife management, and the international pet trade.



Waldron, Jayme (University of South Carolina); Welch, Shane (University of South Carolina, Lugoff, SC,
United States); Johnson, Catherine (USDA Forest Service, Canada); Pauley, Thomas (Marshall
University, Canada)

Effects of Habitat Fragmentation on Cheat Mountain Salamander Demographics

The Cheat Mountain Salamander (CMS; Plethodon nettingi ) is a federally threatened species endemic
to high elevations of the Allegheny Mountains, West Virginia. Like most plethodontid salamanders, the
CMS has limited dispersal ability, making the species extremely sensitive to landscape change and
habitat fragmentation. We used repeated count surveys conducted along trails, roads, and control sites in
a natural experimental design to examine the effects of roads and recreational trails on local CMS
populations in the Monongahela National Forest, WV. We used occupancy models to assess whether
these forms of habitat fragmentation affected CMS demographics. Both roads and trails had significant
negative effects on CMS demographics as compared to control sites; however, recreational trails
appeared to have stronger negative effects as compared to roads. We suspect these results reflect the
cumulative effects of habitat fragmentation over a longer period of time, given that many trails were
located along old logging roads from the early twentieth century and study roads were relatively new. For
CMS populations, negative effects of habitat fragmentation may continue for decades, which should be
an important consideration when assessing the effects of human land use on this threatened species.



Walker, James (University of Arkansas); Weaver, Robert (Department of Biological Sciences, Central
Washington University, Ellensburg, WA, United States)

Discovery of the Parthenogenic Colorado Checkered Whiptail (Aspidoscelia neotesselata) in
Washington State

Whiptail lizards of the genus Aspidoscelis , occur throughout the southern and southwestern United
States, with the ranges of some species extending into southeastern Oregon and adjacent Idaho.
Throughout their composite range, whiptail lizards are associated with dry, open habitats, particularly
desert, grassland, and shrub-steppe. They are diurnal, active and widely-foraging heliothermic reptiles
that prey on invertebrates, and occasionally small vertebrates. Several species of Aspidoscelis are
comprised solely of females (i.e., unisexual) and reproduce by parthenogenesis, a form of asexual
reproduction in which offspring are genetically identical to their diploid, triploid, or tetraploid mothers. Of
the 22 currently recognized species of Aspidoscelis found in the United States, 10 reproduce
parthenogenically. These populations may occur in limited areas unoccupied by sexual species and in
disturbed habitats, but some parthenogenetic species of Aspidoscelis are also widely syntopic with
sexual species. In the Pacific Northwest there are 2 species of whiptail lizard, Western Whiptail (
Aspidoscelis tigris ) and Plateau Striped Whiptail ( Aspidoscelis velox ). The former is a native bisexual
species found throughout North American deserts from southeastern Oregon and southern Idaho, south



                                                                                                           760
into mainland México and Baja California. Aspidoscelis velox is an introduced, unisexual species whose
natural range is the Colorado Plateau region of northern Arizona, southwestern Colorado, northwestern
New Mexico, and southeastern Utah. The Colorado Checkered Whiptail ( Aspidoscelis neotesselata )
was described in 1997 and is endemic to southeastern Colorado. Aspidoscelis neotesselata is a
parthenogenetic species that originated as the result of hybridization between a diploid unisexual
Common Checkered Whiptail ( Aspidoscelis tesselata ), and a diploid sexual species, Six-lined
Racerunner ( A. sexlineata ). The result of reproduction between a unisexual and a sexual species is an
extra set of chromosomes possessed by A. neotesselata , resulting in triploidy. Within the limited natural
range of A. neotesselata in a 4 county area, it is known from scattered localities along the Arkansas
River and tributaries. Like many other parthenogenic species, A. neotesselata inhabits disturbed areas,
such as canyonlands, campgrounds, and heavily grazed pastureland. Here we present the discovery of
A . neotesselata



Walker, Jr., H.J. (Scripps Institution of Oceanography); Smith, W. Leo (The Field Museum, Chicago, CA,
United States)

Establishing and maintaining tissue collections for DNA

Liquid nitrogen is currently the best method for the long-term preservation of tissues for DNA research.
However, there are effective alternatives for those collections that do not have the space or funding for
liquid nitrogen facilities. A brief survey of the some the largest repositories of fish tissues in the United
States has revealed that the overwhelming majority of tissues has been preserved in ethanol, and that
many of those tissues subsequently have been deposited into freezers of various kinds. We will discuss
some of the advantages and disadvantages of liquid nitrogen, ethanol, dimethyl sulfoxide, standard and
ultra-cold freezing, etc., with additional reference to both Sanger and next-generation DNA sequencing
technologies.



Walls, Susan (USGS-Southeast Ecological Science Center); Barichivich, William (USGS Southeast
Ecological Science Center, Gainesville, United States); Brown, Mary (USGS Southeast Ecological
Science Center, Gainesvillle, United States)

Occupancy dynamics in a pair of pond-breeding amphibians: Testing contrasting predictions
about the impacts of climate change

Climate change is anticipated to be one of the major drivers of ecological change of this century. In the
last three decades, the average annual temperature in the southeastern U.S. has risen approximately
1.1°C, with the greatest increase occurring in winter. During this time, precipitation has decreased,
primarily in winter and spring. Continuation of these trends could negatively impact pond-breeding
amphibians, especially those that rely on winter and spring rains to fill seasonal wetlands, trigger
breeding, and ensure reproductive success. From 2009 to 2012, we monitored two winter-breeding
amphibians (the Ornate Chorus Frog [OCF], Pseudacris ornata, and the Mole Salamander [MS],
Ambystoma talpoideum) at St. Marks National Wildlife Refuge, in northwest FL, USA. Life histories differ
in these species: MS typically occurs in long-hydroperiod wetlands and exhibits paedomorphosis,
whereas OCF preferentially breeds in fishless, ephemeral ponds with short hydroperiods. We predicted
that, under a scenario of ongoing drought, estimates of local extinction would increase and occurrence
probabilities would decrease for MS if breeding sites dried prematurely. Because OCF has high
dispersal, short larval periods, and exploits ephemeral ponds, we predicted that this species would



                                                                                                         761
occupy sites at or near historically known breeding sites if inundated long enough for successful larval
development. Under these conditions, occupancy for OCF should be stable over time, but could
decrease in years of severe drought. We deployed automated recorders to monitor calling activity of
OCF and used traps to capture MS at upland ponds. Overall, approximately 22% and 62% of the ponds
we sampled were occupied by MS and OCF, respectively. For MS, model-averaged estimates of
occupancy probabilities, corrected for imperfect detection, progressively decreased over time as drought
severity increased. Estimates of extinction probabilities for MS increased from 0.0 to 0.699 over the
course of our study, whereas estimates of colonization probabilities were low (0.085-0.096) and less
variable. These results suggest that the decline in occupancy may have been due to an increase in the
probability of extinction rather than a decrease in the probability of colonization. In contrast, estimates of
occupancy probabilities for OCF were stable over time, except for one year with breeding failure due to
dry ponds. These results demonstrate that species with contrasting life histories may respond differently
to perturbations such as drought. Under the current scenario of rapid global ecological change, it is
especially important that a species‘ life history and ecology serve as the foundation for predictions about
climate change impacts, as well as for identifying species as ―models‖ for studying environmental change.



Walsh, Cathy (Mote Marine Laboratory); Luer, Carl; Yordy, Jennifer; Miedema, Jodi; Leigh, Brittany;
Adams, Philip (Mote Marine Laboratory, Canada)

Epigonal Conditioned Medium from Bonnethead Shark Induces Apoptosis in T-cell Leukemia
Cells, and Preferentially Targets Breast Cancer Cells Compared with Normal Breast Cells

Protein factors secreted into the surrounding medium by short-term cultures of epigonal cells (epigonal
conditioned medium, ECM) from bonnethead shark ( Sphyrna tiburo ) are cytotoxic against human tumor
cells in vitro . Using a T-cell leukemia cell line (Jurkat) as target cells, apoptotic pathway intermediates
affected by ECM treatment were identified through western blotting, and protein and PCR arrays.
Western blotting and gene expression indicated significant decreases in the apoptosis inhibitor, XIAP, at
both the protein and genetic levels in response to ECM treatment. A significant increase in expression
of the adaptor protein, FADD, was observed at the protein level in response to 2 mg/ml ECM. Protein
array analysis indicated treatments at both 1 mg/ml and 2 mg/ml ECM resulted in greater than 120%
relative increase in expression of Fas, as well as apoptosis promoters bad and bax. At the same ECM
treatments, analysis using a human apoptosis array kit showed significant changes in expression of some
caspase genes, adaptor proteins, and death receptors.         To determine effect of ECM on normal cells,
growth inhibition was measured in paired malignant/non-malignant cell lines derived from human breast
tissue (Hs 578T/Hs 578Bst), with statistically greater growth inhibition demonstrated in transformed cells
(Hs 578T) compared with normal cells (Hs 578Bst) in response to both 1 and 2 mg ECM protein/ml. A
PCR array focused on death receptor pathways showed significant up-regulation of CASP8, BID, and
TRAF2 in transformed cells compared with normal cells in response to 2 mg/ml ECM treatment. Several
decoy receptor genes (TNFRSF10C, TNFRSF6B, TNFRSF10D) were also down-regulated in transformed
cells compared to normal cells following treatment with 2 mg/ml ECM.



Wang, Ian (Harvard University);

Strong selection in a polymorphic poison frog

Aposematic coloration should be subject to strong stabilizing selection because individuals that vary from
a predator-recognized warning signal will incur a greater risk of predation.     Nevertheless, significant



                                                                                                          762
color variation does exist in some aposematic species.     Field and lab-based studies have identified
potentially important sources of natural and sexual selection.    However, the strength of stabilizing
selection on aposematic coloration has seldom been quantified. In this study, I measure the strength of
selection on coloration in an aposematic poison frog using population genetic methods along steep
phenotypic clines.



Wang, Yuan (IVPP, Chinese Academy of Sciences); Evans, Susan (UCL, London, Canada); Dong,
Liping (IVPP, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Canada)

New research on Chinese Mesozoic lissamphibians and squamates

Paleoherpetology has been thriving in China for the past 15 years, particularly with respect to specimens
from Mesozoic strata in northeastern China. The fossils include frogs, salamanders, turtles, lizards, and
choristoderans, and are often well-preserved as complete skeletons, some even with soft tissue
impressions, such as external gills, eyes, and fins. Rare occurrences of body scalation, stomach
contents, and unborn young have also been documented.

Chinese Mesozoic lissamphibian and squamate fossils have been the focus of study because they
provide not only important information on the early evolution and paleoecology of relevant clades, but
also help to understand some biological aspects of modern taxa. The discoveries can be referred to two
separate biotae that lived in the same region of northeastern China (Liaoning and Hebei provinces, Inner
Mongolia Autonomous Region): the Midde/Late Jurassic Daohugou Biota (―Yanliao Biota‖ of some
authors) and the Early Cretaceous Jehol Biota. The former bears, at generic level, four caudates
(Chunerpeton, Jeholotriton, Liaoxitriton,Pangerpeton) and one squamate (―Yabeinosaurus‖), as well as
two other unnamed lizards; the latter has yielded four named anurans (Callobatrachus, Liaobatrachus,
Mesophryne[=Dalianbatrachus],       Yizhoubatrachus),    four    urodelans    (Laccotriton, Liaoxitriton,
Regalerpeton,Sinerpeton),       and    five   squamates      (Yabeinosaurus[=Jeholacerta],    Xianglong,
Dalinghosaurus, Liaoningolacerta (nomendubium), Liushusaurus).

In the last three years, new research has increased our knowledge of these fossil groups. The anurans in
the Jehol Biota are probably not as diversified as originally proposed. They all have amphicoelous centra
and nine presacrals, and may be referred to a single genus, with slight differences at specific level.
Phylogenetic analyses suggest that they lie outside crown group anurans, but are more advanced than
taxa from the Jurassic of North and South America.

Research on fossil salamanders has proved more fruitful with respect to biology and ecology than to
phylogeny. The phylogeny of living caudates is not fully resolved, and is complicated by the addition of
Mesozoic fossil representatives. The frequency of paedomorphosis within Caudata undoubtedly adds to
the difficulties of coding of juvenile and adult characters in a cladistic analysis. However, the exceptional
preservation of the Chinese fossil material has revealed interesting aspects of their biology. Multiple
specimens of the Jurassic crown group salamander, Chunerpeton tianyiensis, show a range of limb
anomalies, including polydactyly, polymely, and abnormal phalangeal numbers, comparable to those
found in some living salamander populations. Also significant is the discovery of stomach contents in
Chunerpeton and the neotenic stem-caudate Jeholotriton which show that these two salamanders ate
insects and conchostracans respectively. Prey selection is clear from food size and type, providing the
first direct fossil evidence of predator-prey relationship in Mesozoic caudates.

Work on squamates from the same localities has similarly revealed new information on both phylogeny
and paleobiology. New material of the long-established taxonYabeinosaurushas not only permitted more



                                                                                                         763
rigorous phylogenetic analysis, but has revealed it to be a large, slow growing lizard that, while mainly
terrestrial, also preyed on fish. Furthermore, one recently recovered specimen contains more than fifteen
late stage embryos, providing the first documentation of viviparity in a terrestrial fossil reptile, and
extending the temporal distribution of the trait in squamates by at least 30 Ma. The Early Cretaceous
Jehol lizards also include the first record of long-ribbed gliding in squamates(Xianglong) and the earliest
representative (Dalinghosaurus) of the lineage leading to the living Chinese Crocodile-lizard Shinisaurus.



Waples, Robin (NOAA, National Marine Fisheries Service); Douglas, Marlis (University of Arkansas,
Fayetteville, AR, United States)

Pacific Salmon Symposium: Introduction and key questions to ponder

Salmonids have complex life histories and are prime examples of adaptive radiation and accelerated
evolution. It is also well documented that salmonids can exhibit phenotypic plasticity, whereby the same
genotype produces different phenotypes in different environments. This pattern of differential phenotypic
expression in different environments defines the norm of reaction for an individual or a population. In this
symposium, we go beyond merely documenting plasticity; instead, we use the past as a lens through
which to consider the future of these species and ask what plasticity means for conservation,
management, and persistence in a rapidly changing world. Special emphasis will be placed on how
plasticity can shape evolutionary trajectories that currently clash with anthropogenic activities. Key
questions the speakers will be asked to ponder include: (1) What are the limits to salmon plasticity? (2)
How fast can reaction norms evolve? Will adaptive plasticity of salmon be largely constrained to moving
along an existing reaction norm, or can populations evolve new (potentially more adaptive) norms of
reaction within time frames of decades to a century? (3) Can plasticity allow salmon to persist in human-
altered environments long enough to evolve new adaptations? (4) What is the relationship between
phenotypic plasticity and evolutionary plasticity (capacity for rapid evolution) in salmon? (5) For species
like salmon (and birds) that migrate between different environments, adaptive plasticity requires high cue
reliability (e.g., freshwater cues that trigger smolt migration must reliably predict optimal times to enter the
ocean). What effects will climate change have on cue reliability and adaptive plasticity? (6) What new
insights into plasticity can be provided by emerging tools like genomics? (7) How important are
epigenetics and trans-generational phenotypic plasticity?



Warkentin, Karen (Boston University);

Environmentally cued hatching: Integrative and evolutionary biology of a critical life-stage
transition

At hatching, animals trade the protection and constraints of the egg for new opportunities and dangers.
Optimal hatching timing varies with conditions in the egg and posthatching environments and a great
diversity of animals – from flatworms to mammals, including many fishes, amphibians, and reptiles – alter
hatching timing or stage accordingly. Embryos can hatch early to escape from egg predators or
pathogens or delay hatching in response to larval predators; some do both. Some embryos on land wait
for flooding to hatch, and embryos above water can hatch early from drying eggs. Parents can induce or
cue hatching, and embryos alter hatching timing in response to the quality of parental care. Hatching may
also be timed to match favorable periods in environmental cycles. The breadth and depth of
environmentally cued hatching (ECH) is currently better understood in amphibians than any other major
clade. In at least 12 families of frogs and salamanders, with diverse reproductive modes, embryos alter



                                                                                                            764
hatching timing in response to abiotic or biotic conditions affecting egg or larval mortality. Some shared
ancestral mechanisms likely underlie embryos' capacity to sense their environment and alter hatching
timing, but similar cued hatching responses appear to have evolved convergently in multiple lineages. I
will review the ecological and phylogenetic diversity of ECH across amphibians and consider the
integrative biology of red-eyed treefrog embryos as an exemplar. Red-eyed treefrogs hatch up to 30%
early to escape from egg-eating snakes and wasps, pathogenic fungus, flooding, and egg dehydration.
Early hatchlings suffer higher predation by multiple aquatic predators, and safe embryos typically delay
hatching substantially past the onset of hatching competence. I will discuss physiological mechanisms
that extend the facultative embryonic period, how embryos assess risk and decide when to hatch, and the
hatching process that enables embryos to escape in seconds if attacked. In many animals, eggs and
early hatchlings suffer high mortality, creating opportunities for strong natural selection, but their lives are
relatively simple compared to adults. Embryos clearly respond to environmental cues and conditions, and
some show surprisingly complex discrimination. The study of hatching offers excellent opportunities for
integrative and comparative research on a critical transition point in animal lives.



Warner, Daniel (Iowa State University); Harrison, Alexis (Harvard Univesity, Cambridge, MA, United
States); Reedy, Aaron (Thomas Kelly High School, Chicago, IL, United States)

Spatial and temporal variation in phenotypic selection after experimental introduction in the lizard
Anolis sagrei

Variation in environmental and demographic conditions can influence the strength and form of natural
selection. However, how this variation affects selection and population establishment immediately after
initial introduction to novel environments is poorly understood. To address this issue, we performed a
large-scale manipulative study on island populations of the invasive brown anole ( Anolis sagrei ) in
Florida. We founded nine experimental populations and manipulated the adult sex ratios on each island in
order increase the level of intra-sexual competition. Subsequent mark-recapture studies enabled us to
quantify survival and assess the strength and form of viability selection over the first reproductive season
after experimental introduction. Our results reveal substantial spatial variation in adult survival and
reproduction across islands. The strength of selection operating on body size also varied spatially and
differed between males and females, but was not always consistent among replicate populations. Spatial
variation in selection was not due to island size, but may have been associated with habitat differences
among islands. Our on-going research will assess phenotypic selection during the post-reproductive
season and viability selection on second-generation hatchling/juvenile phenotypes to enable robust
evaluation of spatio-temporal variation in, and ontogenetic shifts in the targets of, natural selection.



Warner, Jason R. (California State University, Northridge); Sanabria, Eduardo A. (Universidad Nacional
de Cuyo, Canada); Quiroga, Lorena B. (Universidad Nacional de San Juan, Canada); Espinoza, Robert
E. (California State University, Northridge, Northridge, CA, United States)

Getting' High and Chillin': Cold Hardiness of Liolaemus Lizards Living Along an Elevation
Gradient

Reptiles inhabiting cold-climates have evolved strategies to survive freezing temperatures. However,
cold-hardiness adaptations have been studied in very few reptile species and no study has investigated
cold-hardiness in a lineage that is distributed over an elevational gradient. We are studying the evolution
of cold hardiness strategies of Liolaemus lizards living along an elevational gradient (1650–4070 m) in




                                                                                                            765
Argentina. Species were selected to represent multiple independent invasions of high-elevation living. We
hypothesized that high-elevation (&gt;3000 m) species will have either retained or evolved greater
capacities to supercool and tolerate freezing in comparison to their low-elevation relatives. We tested the
supercooling and freeze-tolerance capacities of six species of Liolaemus by cooling them below 0° C at
an ecologically relevant rate. The extent that a lizard was able to supercool was determined as the
temperature immediately before a dramatic rise in temperature is observed, as heat is liberated during the
formation of ice. Freeze-tolerance capacities were determined by inoculating bodily ice formation near 0°
C, then freezing the lizards to the lowest temperature recorded from their habitats. Estimates of the
susceptibility of each species to freeze were determined by recording the temperature at which ice
inoculation occurs. Lizards were then subjected to the minimum temperature for one of eight time
treatments (15–180 min), then thawed and checked for survival. Percent ice composition was determined
by calorimetry and related to survivorship. Data analyzed to date indicate that two of the high-elevation
species and some individuals of the others can survive subzero body temperatures via supercooling and
others are freeze tolerant. Analyses of data collected in summer 2012 will allow more thorough tests of
our hypotheses.



Warth, Peter (University of Tuebingen); Konstantinidis, Peter (University of Jena/Virginia Institute of
Marine Sciences, Canada); Moritz, Timo (Deutsches Meeresmuseum Stralsund, Canada)

Comparative Ontogeny of the Caudal Skeleton in Otomorpha

Despite recent advances in teleostean phylogeny there is still much work to be done regarding the
solution of basal nodes. One grouping that was repeatedly obtained by phylogenetic investigations is the
sistergroup relationship of Clupeomorpha and Ostariophysi, a clade named Otomorpha or
Ostarioclupeomorpha. The support is mainly based on mitochondrial data and the latest molecular
studies place alepocephaloids within Otomorpha. But also possible shared morphological characters,
uniting Ostariophysi and Clupeomorpha, have been proposed. One of them is the presence of the
pleurostyle, formed by fusion of the first uroneurals with the compound centrum, consisting of preural
centrum 1 and ural centrum 1. The presence of a pleurostyle and the connected modifications lead to an
own type of caudal skeleton, the pleurostylar type, opposed by the urostylar type. Since it is absent in
Denticeps, the most basal extant clupeomorph, and in fossil gonorynchiforms the status whether it is a
shared or a convergent character remains unclear.

In this study a comparative ontogenetic approach was conducted to test homologies of certain structures
in the caudal skeleton of otomorphs using cleared and Alizarin/Alcian double stained larval stages of
herring (Clupea harengus), twaite shad (Alosa fallax), bay anchovy (Anchoa mitchilli), zebrafish (Danio
rerio) and red piranha (Pygocentrus nattereri). For microstructural analysis histological sections of C.
harengus and D.rerio were prepared. The findings were compared with other taxa where ontogenetic
material was not available. In addition a literature research was conducted to trace the character
distribution in as many taxa as possible.



Wassersug, Richard (Dalhousie University);

Neither fish nor frog, but polliwog: Key features in the design of anural larvae

Anuran larvae have a suite of unique features that concurrently facilitate their fast aquatic growth and
rapid transformation into frogs at metamorphosis. These features make them distinctly different from all



                                                                                                       766
other aquatic vertebrates. In this keynote address, I will summarize my research from the last half century
on tadpole feeding, breathing, and swimming biomechanics. I will first review what we have learned from
high speed videography about on how tadpoles use their oral disc, labial teeth, and keratinized jaw
sheaths to both capture food in the water and air during air-breathing. I will then summarize what we have
learned from fluid mechanics modeling about the adaptive significance of the tadpole body form in
swimming. I will show how the general shape of anuran larvae, with a thin flat tail appended to a globose
head-body, allows for efficient aquatic locomotion yet rapid reconfiguration at the time of metamorphosis.
I will discuss how tadpole form and function collectively influence how tadpoles interact with aquatic
parasites. Lastly, I will end the talk by flagging outstanding questions about tadpole biology that I feel can
and should be addressed in the next decade or two.



Waters, Mark (Ohio University Eastern Campus);

Resident alien: Tadpole size selection by the exotic viperine snake (Natrix maura) from Mallorca,
Spain.

The viperine snake ( Natrix maura ) is a common semiaquatic snake native to the western Mediterranean
region. The species is not native to the Balearic Island of Mallorca and the snakes found there are
believed to have introduced about 2,000 years ago. The viperine snake is found over most of the island,
and feeds on the tadpoles of the endemic Mallorcan Midwife Toad ( Alytes muletensis ). Consequently,
viperine snake predation has been implicated in the toad‘s near extinction. A previous study observed a
bimodal-size distribution of toad tadpoles, and suggested that prey-size selectivity by viperine snakes
may be responsible. However, this suggestion was not based on direct observations of prey selection. I
tested the hypothesis that viperine snakes preferentially feed on medium sized tadpoles. Subjects were a
long-term captive sample (10 F, 9 M, mean mass = 68 g) of viperine snakes from Mallorca maintained at
Ohio University Campus. Green Frog ( Lithobates clamitans ) tadpoles were used as proxies for the
endangered toads. Twenty tadpoles from each of three size classes were placed in an artificial pool (166
cm long x 120 cm wide x 42 cm deep) in the laboratory. Snakes were allowed to forage in the pool. After
24 hours, the remaining prey were tallied to determine consumption. Viperine snakes did not eat tadpoles
in proportion to numeric availability. Mean (min-max) numbers eaten were 6 (0-17) large, 4.26 (0-12)
medium, and 0.95 (0-5) small tadpoles. The results also indicate a scaling effect, with the number of
tadpoles taken in each size class increasing with snake gape index (which itself correlates positively with
snake size). Total meal volume also increased with size/gape index. Overall, prey size selection in this
gap-limited species is similar to other snakes. I tentatively conclude that the ―missing‖ size class of
tadpoles on Mallorca is not a consequence of snake prey choice, and may be explained by Midwife Toad
phenology or demographics. Comparative data on palatability and evasiveness of Midwife Toad and
Green Frog tadpoles would refine this conclusion.



Watkins-Colwell, Gregory (Yale Peabody Museum of Natural History); Sabaj Perez, Mark (The
Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, PA, United States); Giermakowski, Tom (Museum of
Southwestern Biology, Albuquerque, NM, United States)

Technology and Innovation in Herpetology and Ichthyology Collections: Symposium Opening
Remarks and Collection Survey Results

Specimen collections have long been important to a wide variety of studies of natural history.
Collections have always reflected changes in research techniques because they have been used as



                                                                                                          767
repositories for vouchers and additional research materials such as preserved materials, microscope
slides and molecular samples. Furthermore, advances in data management systems, from innovations
in archival paper production to computer databases, and advances in geographical information
technologies have also lead to changes in collections and collection management practices.       In a full
day symposium we will explore some of the ways that technology has changed collections and lead to
innovative ways to use collections for scientific exploration. We will also reflect upon the results of a
survey of collections that indicate areas where improvements are needed.



Watling, James (University of Florida); Doan, Tiffany; Bell, Kristen (Unaffiliated, Canada); Donnelly,
Maureen (Florida International University, Canada)

Can small samples predict relative species richness?

Counting the number of species among sampling sites is central to efforts to describe latitudinal gradients
in species richness, identify biodiversity hotspots and describe ecological responses to land-use change
and other stressors.         Because it can be difficult to conduct exhaustive biotic inventories even of
relatively conspicuous taxonomic groups, a variety of methods have been developed to compare species
richness among sites based on incomplete sampling (e.g., rarefaction) or estimate asymptotic species
richness (e.g., extrapolation). Here we use amphibian and reptile survey data from Florida, Costa Rica,
Peru, and Bolivia to show that relative species richness among sites based on small subsets of more
complete surveys correlates with total species richness observed at completion of faunal inventories.
Overall, the strongest results were obtained from Costa Rica and Bolivia, where small samples were
excellent predictors of final species richness. The accuracy with which small samples predicted final
relative species richness was robust to differences in sampling method in Costa Rica.         In Peru, small
samples of a quadrat data set were good predictors of relative species richness, but small samples from
transect data did not accurately predict total relative species richness until approximately 300 individuals
had been sampled at each site.        Seasonal effects on the ability of small data sets to predict relative
species richness among sites at the end of surveys were apparent at a site in central Florida, but not in
tropical Costa Rica or Bolivia.      Knowing the relative species richness among sites can help inform
conservation decisions based on rapid, incomplete surveys and increases the utility of small data sets for
applications in basic and applied ecology.



Waye, Heather (University of Minnesota, Morris);

Navigation and orientation in red-sided garter snakes

The mechanism by which animals find their way through a complex environment with great accuracy, and
often over long distances, is still poorly understood for many species. Visual or olfactory cues are used
by many animals for navigation or orientation, while other species rely on more specialized senses that
are able to detect polarized light or the Earth‘s magnetic field. In addition, in some vertebrate species the
magnetic sense appears to be mediated or modified by light cues. Red-sided garter snakes ( Thamnophis
sirtalis parietalis ) in the Interlake region of Manitoba, Canada, directionally migrate to overwintering
hibernacula for long distances from the marshes where they feed over the summer. This highly-specific
directional movement makes this population an ideal system for examining the senses used by snakes to
navigate. Snakes migrating towards an Interlake hibernaculum were captured and relocated to a site 28
km away, individually released into a circular arena, and their direction of travel recorded. The snakes
were then placed into one of four treatment groups (control weight on head, magnet on head, polarized



                                                                                                         768
filters over eyes, or polarized filters plus magnet) and retested. Results suggest that these snakes are
able to determine the general direction of their hibernaculum from a relatively long distance and this
ability was reduced by application of magnets and/or polarized filters. It seems likely that garter snakes,
like many other animals, are able to use a combination of cues for navigation and/or orientation.



Weaver, Robert (Department of Biological Sciences, Central Washington University);

Ecology of the Desert Nightsnake (Hypsiglena chlorophaea) in the Pacific Northwest

The night snake ( Hypsiglena chlorophaea ) is a small snake (&lt; 66 cm TL) found throughout the
western United States, from Kansas west to California, from the southwest, north to south central British
Columbia. Here I present data on the ecology and behavior H . chlorophaea gathered from over 500
specimens. Hysiglena chlorophaea is known from a wide range of habitats, from dry shrub-steppe and
oak woodland to coniferous forests and disturbed agricultural areas. The monthly activity patterns of H.
chlorophaea in the Pacific Northwest are from early March through late October. Specimens were
collected at temperatures ranging from 9‑35.5 °C. Males were collected more frequently than females
during May, but in equal numbers during June and July, while females were found in higher numbers from
August to September. Juvenile and hatchling snakes were collected from late July into September. Daily
activity patterns were from 2100 and 0600 hr. Snakes were collected more often during periods of low
moon-light (e.g. new moon) than high (e.g. full). In this region, males ranged in size from 184–402 mm
SVL (301.7 ± 5.8 mm), while females were 158–540 mm SVL (344.5 ± 69.4 mm). Body mass of males
was 2.6–22.1 g (10.2 ± 5.04 mm), and females 2.3–53.9 g (15.1 ± 9.49 mm). Throughout this region H.
chlorophaea feeds on a wide variety of prey such as scincid and anguid lizards, thamnophiine snakes,
anurans, mammals and the eggs of other squamate reptiles. The reproductive ecology differs little from
other parts of the range of H. chlorophaea . Males with enlarged testes were found from mid-May
through late August. Females with enlarged follicles and ova were found from May through June, with
recent hatchlings collected during mid-August. Based upon these data, in the Pacific Northwest, H .
chlorophaea has a more varied diet compared to southern populations, but shows a similar preference
for lizards. This species is easily one of the more abundant species in Washington State, and throughout
much of the Pacific Northwest.         Given the status of H . chlorophaea as endangered in British
Columbia, these data presented here may aid in conservation and management



Wegner, Nick (National Marine Fisheries Service); Pribyl, Alena; Hyde, John (National Marine Fisheries
Service, Canada)

Post-release survival and behavior of deep-dwelling rockfishes (genus Sebastes) suffering from
barotrauma: Using recompression devices to reduce bycatch mortality

Rockfishes (genus Sebastes ) experience high rates of catch-and-release mortality associated with
barotrauma. As these fishes are brought to the surface, gas in the gas bladder expands with the change
in ambient pressure. This causes the gas bladder to rupture and leak gas into the visceral and cranial
cavities often causing bloating, crushed organs, eversion of the esophagus, exophthalmia (bulging of the
eyes), emphysema and emboli in various organs, and excessive buoyancy. Excessive buoyancy makes
it difficult for many species to return to depth under their own power.       Discarded rockfishes are thus
often left floating on the surface where they eventually succumb to their injuries or predation. This study
assesses the ability of deep-dwelling rockfishes to recover from barotrauma-related injuries if returned to
depth using a descending device. Long-term survival and recovery of five rockfish species [sunset



                                                                                                        769
rockfish, S. crocotulus (n=12), bocaccio, S. paucispinis (n=12) , bank rockfish, S. rufus (n=12),
cowcod, S. levis (n=9), and starry rockfish, S. constellatus (n=3 )] were monitored with VEMCO V9AP
accelerometer and pressure sensing acoustic transmitters within an acoustic receiver array.        Rockfish
survival and movement patterns will be discussed in relation to fishing regulations and potential measures
to reduce bycatch mortality.



Wehrle, Beck (California State University, Northridge); Espinoza, Robert (California State University,
Northridge, Northridge, CA, United States)

Why do lizards lounge? The role of social aggregations in exchanging microbial communities
among hatchling Iguana iguana

Researchers first attempted to identify the sources of the gut microbes harbored by herbivorous reptiles
&gt;30 years ago. These endosymbionts are needed to digest plant fiber and their fermentation products
can contribute substantially to their host‘s energy budget, yet this symbiosis is poorly understood. Iguana
iguana are herbivorous throughout life, yet emerge from their eggs with sterile guts. How do they acquire
their gut microflora? Although rare in lizards, social interactions are a hypothesized route of microbe
transfer via direct contact and/or eating feces of older conspecifics or previously inoculated peers. Why
sociality evolves is poorly understood, but both biotic and abiotic factors have been implicated. Sociality
may have evolved in some herbivorous reptiles (such as Iguana iguana ) to foster the transfer of gut
microbes. Early attempts to characterize this microbial community in hatchling iguanas provided crude
assessments of bacterial turnover. Our study is the first to characterize the spatial, temporal, and social
variation of these vital microbial communities using modern genomic techniques. We hypothesized that
microbial communities will be more similar within than between sites, increase in diversity over time, and
will vary with groups size and proximity. We observed and individually marked juvenile, subadult, and
adult iguanas alone and in social lounges at 11 sites on and around Barro Colorado Island, Panamá over
two hatching seasons . Of the 540 focal observations of hatchlings, 38% were of social aggregations
(mean = 2.9 lizards/group). Only 3.5% of social groups contained hatchlings and subadults/adults.
Hatchlings in groups averaged 1.2 m from their nearest neighbor (range = 0–6 m), although site densities
varied. We collected microbe samples from the hindguts of iguanas over the first 60 days posthatching.
One hundred samples were selected for analyses, chosen to represent sites, age classes, varying social
group sizes, and individuals resampled over time. Microbe-specific DNA was isolated from fecal samples
and the 16S rDNA region was pyrosequenced to characterize the gut microbe communities of iguanas
over space, time, and with respect to observed social interactions. These analyses are underway. We
predict that microbial communities will be most similar among proximate hatchlings, will exhibit higher
diversity in hatchlings from larger lounges, and will increase in total diversity over time.




                                                                                                       770
Weideli, Ornella (University of Basel); Gruber, Samuel (Bimini Biological Field Station, Miami, FL, United
States); Stump, Kristine (University of Miami, Miami, FL, United States); Chapman, Demian (Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, NY, United States); Feldheim, Kevin (The Field Museum, Chicago, IL, United
States); Salzburger, Walter (University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland)

Has resort related large-scale mangrove habitat destruction resulted in a change of the prey
community and therefore in a dietary shift of nursery bound juvenile lemon sharks, Negaprion
brevirostris (a BACI study)?

Non-lethal eversion for collecting and sampling shark stomach contents is a common method used in
dietary studies. By also sampling available prey communities, the overlap between observed diet and
prey availability can be investigated. Recent studies have shown that sharks are capable of foraging as
selective predators, not simply feeding on the most available prey, which makes dietary studies more
interesting and complex. The waters around Bimini, Bahamas (25˚44‘N, 79˚16‘W) provide an ideal
nursery location for juvenile lemon sharks (Negaprion brevirostris). The near-shore nursery areas offer
large seagrass beds fringed by mangroves, a favorable habitat for a large number of subtropical coastal
organisms such as teleosts (e.g. juvenile reef fish) and small invertebrates. However, large scale
development has resulted in the removal of shoreline mangroves (up to 50 %) and dredging of seagrass
beds (~750,000 m3). This has led to a drastic habitat alteration in one of the main lemon shark nurseries.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether this anthropogenic habitat alteration has led to a change
in the diet of nursery-bound juvenile lemon sharks. Samples were collected in both the impacted nursery
and a nearby but undisturbed control nursery prior and post development, making it possible to conduct a
Before-After, Control-Impact (BACI) study. The current dataset originates from two different time periods:
before (year 2000-2003) and after the development (year 2010-2011). The former data collection is pre-
development, and the later as a post-development subsample of the original dataset. Post-development
samples obtained for this study consist of 111 full and 90 empty stomachs and a prey community
collection of 9,920 individuals (teleosts and invertebrates) weighting 152,694 grams. Prey community and
stomach contents of both sampling periods were identified to the lowest taxonomic level, both visually
and through DNA sequencing, and were then grouped into families, enabling the comparison of post- and
pre-development data using an index of relative importance (%IRI). Dietary analyses of prey groups
revealed in both studies that teleosts dominated the diet by number, weight and occurrence, followed by
crustaceans as the most important invertebrate prey group. Results indicate that post-development,
juvenile lemon sharks were feeding from lower number of available prey species with an increased level
of scavenging from anthropogenic sources.



Weigmann, Simon (Zoological Museum Hamburg); Stehmann, Matthias (ICHTHYS - Ichthyological
Research Laboratory and Consultancy, Hamburg, Germany); Thiel, Ralf (Zoological Museum Hamburg,
Hamburg, Germany)

Okamejei n. sp., a new deep-water skate (Elasmobranchii, Rajidae) from the northwestern Indian
Ocean off Sokotra Islands, with comments on congeners in the area

A new species of the Indo-Pacific skate genus Okamejei will be presented from around the Socotra
Islands and the slope off northeastern Africa. The 10 specimens of the new species were sampled aboard
the Russian RV ‗Vityaz‘. As is typical for the genus all specimens have dark ventral pores, a relatively
long, slender tail, a wide interdorsal space, and a long postdorsal tail section. The new species differs
from its congeners in having a unique rosette-like dorsal pattern of numerous dark brown spots. The
dorsal ground color is ocher, but the anterior snout is dusky. Compared to its sympatric congeners the
new species for example has a shorter preorbital snout length, an intermediate distance between first gill



                                                                                                       771
slits, a greater orbit diameter, an intermediate number of upper jaw tooth rows and less pectoral radials.
Furthermore, comments on the questionable record of the Okamejei pita holotype from the very inner
Persian Gulf at the estuary off Iraq and its taxonomic status will be given. Additionally, a brief overview of
some other new taxa from the so-called ‗Vityaz‘ collection will be given. This collection, which became
property of the Zoological Museum Hamburg in the 1990s, is a very rich collection of the diverse but
largely unknown deepwater chondrichthyan fauna in the western Indian Ocean. Geographically, this
deepwater survey ranged from the Gulf of Aden to the southern end of the Madagascar Ridge at Walters
Shoal. It included remote and largely unknown localities, such as around the Socotra Islands, the slope
off Somalia and Kenya, the deep southern Mozambique Channel, the Madagascar Ridge and the Saya
de Malha Bank. Quite a number of new taxa of deepwater sharks, skates and rays, and holocephalans
have been discovered, along with first geographical records of many taxa in partly large series.



Weir, Scott (Texas Tech University); Yu, Shuangying; Suski, Jamie (Texas Tech University, Canada);
Talent, Larry (Oklahoma State University, Canada); Salice, Christopher (Texas Tech University, Canada)

Terrestrial reptile ecotoxicology: recent trends and future directions

Reptiles have been identified as an underrepresented taxon in the field of ecotoxicology and the effects of
contaminants on reptiles are still largely unknown. We summarize recent research in terrestrial reptile
ecotoxicology focusing on acute and sublethal effects of contaminants. Few published studies of acute
contaminant toxicity to reptiles were found in the last 10 years. Much like adult amphibians, the acute
effects of contaminants (especially pesticides) are relatively unknown in terrestrial reptiles. Investigations
of sublethal effects of contaminants on reptiles include behavior, energetics, endocrine signaling
pathways, reproduction, and developmental effects; however, relatively few studies have been published
relative to other taxa. With so little data available, no sublethal endpoint has emerged as particularly
useful for reptile ecotoxicological investigations. To place reptile ecotoxicity in a broader context,
sensitivity of reptiles to toxicants was compared to sensitivity of other terrestrial vertebrates. Despite
widespread belief that reptiles are ―tough‖ and generally tolerant to chemical contamination, in many
cases (5 out of 15 chemicals) reptiles were more sensitive than birds. This was especially true for
emerging insecticides such as natural pyrethrins and their derivative synthetic pyrethroid insecticides. For
assessments of ecological risk based on exposure models and toxicity data, reptiles can have much
greater risk to contaminants than birds, despite greater dietary exposure in birds. In some cases,
ecological risk is very high for reptiles suggesting that some currently used insecticides should be
reconsidered for potential adverse effects to terrestrial reptiles relative to birds. In an effort to better
characterize and direct ecotoxicological research activities, we examined several reptile population
models to determine which stages are most important to the life cycle, and thus, may have the strongest
population-level effect if altered by contaminants. Preliminary investigation of life cycle data and
population models suggests that survival of the juvenile stage is very important for terrestrial squamates.
Future contaminant studies on reptiles (specifically acute and short term sublethal experiments) should
perhaps use juveniles as they are likely to be the most demographically important life stage. This review
pointed to glaring data gaps including a general lack of information on contaminant effects on reptiles in a
larger community context. While amphibian toxicology has grown in recent years with the use of
simulated aquatic communities (mesocosms) no such efforts have been made for reptiles. As an
example, there is limited understanding of contaminant-induced alterations on reptiles and their
interactions with other terrestrial species. Simulated terrestrial enclosures would improve our
understanding of how contaminant effects may manifest in terrestrial communities. Lastly, we stress the
need for additional ecotoxicological studies that would improve risk estimates for reptiles, a necessary
step in order to inform conservation and/or management strategies at polluted sites.



                                                                                                          772
Weitzman, Chava (University of Nevada, Reno); Sandmeier, Fran; Nieto, Nathan; Tracy, C. Richard
(University of Nevada, Reno, Canada)

Mycoplasma Across the Range: Presence and Relationships of Disease-Causing Bacteria in the
Desert Tortoise (Gopherus agassizii)

The desert tortoise, Gopherus agassizii , is listed under the Endangered Species Act, partly due to an
upper respiratory tract disease (URTD) that has been detected throughout the Mojave Desert. URTD can
be caused by the mollicute bacterium Mycoplasma agassizii , and severe cases are thought to result in
lethargy and high mortality rates. The importance of this disease as an extinction threat continues to be
unknown and controversial. Thus, understanding the prevalence of Mycoplasma across the range is
extremely important. However, with both enzootic and epizootic infections present in tortoise populations,
we need to know if there are differences among those bacteria found in tortoise populations more
prominently affected by disease compared with those with low disease levels. We use nasal lavage to
collect mucous from the upper respiratory tract, and we have sampled tortoises from across the range in
geographically distinct areas (valleys) in California, Nevada, and Utah. Using M. agassizii -specific DNA
sequences as an indicator for presence of the bacterium in an individual, we have mapped spatially
explicit pathogen occurrences. Insight into evolutionary relationships among M. agassizii across the
landscape derives from gene trees based upon 500 bp sequences of the 16S-rDNA. The variation we
have found in this locus allows for comparisons of bacterial types and presence of disease signs in
individuals and regions.           This work continues as we have added two additional DNA loci for
sequencing to be used in phylogenetic analyses. We are also testing blood plasma for presence of
infection in the tortoises, and expanding this research to determine the presence of Mycoplasma in the
nares of all of the North American species of the genus Gopherus .



Welch, Mark (Mississippi State University); Rasberry, Armed (Mississippi State University, Canada);
Grant, Tandora (San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research, Escondido, United States); Van
Veen, Rick (University of the West Indies, Canada); Robinson, Orlando (Hope Zoo, Kingston, Canada);
Wilson, Byron (University of the West Indies, Canada)

Assessing the genetic impact of headstarting on the Jamaican Iguana (Cyclura collei) in the
Hellshire Hills

Since the 1990 rediscovery of Cyclura collei in Jamaica‘s Hellshire Hills, hatchlings have been collected
for headstarting at the Hope Zoo in Kingston. Animals were first released from the headstart program in
1996. This program has been extraordinarily successful. It appears to have reversed the trend of
declining population size. However, the collection of hatchlings for the headstart program may have
favored offspring from a limited sample of the breeding population. We have assessed this potential using
six polymorphic microsatellites originally designed for congeners of C. collei . Our findings suggest that a
significant amount of genetic variation, 13%, that was present at the onset of the headstart program is
absent from recent cohorts of hatchlings, and that allele frequencies in recent cohorts are far more similar
to those of animals caught in the immediate vicinity of the known nesting sites. This finding suggests that
headstarting has effectively increased the reproductive success of relatively few individuals. It may also
indicate that some genetic variation in early cohorts was derived from animals living outside the core
area. Since these are long-lived animals, genetic loss may be mitigated or reversed by targeting animals
with rare genotypes as genetic stock for future headstart generations.




                                                                                                        773
Weldon, Ché (School of Environmental Sciences and Development, North-West University); Botha,
Vidette; Taylor, Jonathan (North-West University, Canada)

The use of the South African Diatom Index in conservation management of Hewitt¿s Ghost frog

The critically endangered Heleophryne hewitti (Hewitt‘s Ghost Frog) is only found in four streams of the
Elandsberg Mountains, Eastern Cape. The species entire habitat is restricted to the bounds of the
Mountain to Ocean (MTO) forestry area. This study focuses on three areas within this habitat, each
differing in shade coverage due to the density of pine trees in the riparian zone. Diatoms have value as
water quality indicators, which qualify them for use in conservation management. In addition diatoms
comprise a large part of tadpole diet, thus providing information about the ecology of amphibians. The
aim of the project was to determine the impact of water quality and shading on the distribution of
diatoms. A survey for adult H. hewitti frogs was conducted during breeding and non-breeding seasons,
i n order to provide forestry with the information needed to make informed decisions regarding the future
wellbeing of H. hewitti . Initial results indicate that samples from riverine substrate and tadpole gut
content samples differ in terms of diatom species composition, which could be attributed to tadpole
grazing strategy. Cell deformities in diatom species suggest the possible presence of environmental
toxins.



Welsh, Hartwell (USDA Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station);

Frogs, fish and forestry: an integrated watershed network paradigm conserve biodiversity and
ecological services

I review research on the distributions of amphibians in whole stream networks in the temperate
rainforests of Northwest California, documenting dependence on key stream attributes, and examining
linkages between attribute states and natural and anthropogenic disturbance processes. I explore the
implications of these relationships for other elements of native biological diversity such as salmonids. I
compare riparian management guidelines from the U. S. federal Northwest Forest Plan with those of
three Pacific Northwest states, and discuss the fluvial and geomorphologic process domains of stream
networks as they relate to these guidelines. Focusing on headwater (1st to 3rd order) channels, I review
evidence for the effectiveness of current riparian management to maintain viable populations of native
headwater amphibians. Using examples from studies of the environmental relationships of these
amphibians, I evidence the ineffectiveness of current riparian rules to protect critical ecological processes
in headwater environments. I examine three key stream attributes that are poorly protected by current
rules, and document the responses of resident amphibians to anthropogenically altered attribute states.
Combining the concepts of process domains, the stream continuum, and dendritic networks, I examine
the status of biota in headwater reaches, and the implications for downstream e biota like salmonids, all
of whom depend on attributes and conditions that result from the inherent linkages among the parts of
these stream networks. This analysis indicates that to recover and maintain sensitive species at both
upper and lower extremes, and throughout stream networks, will require recognizing and applying the
concept of hydrologic connectivity. This concept can guide management of stream networks to protect all
the parts and the interconnecting processes required to maintain catchment-wide ecological integrity.
This paradigm has important im plications for stream networks worldwide.




                                                                                                         774
Welton, Luke (University of Kansas); Siler, Cameron (University of Kansas, Canada); Diesmos, Arvin
(National Museum of the Philippines, Canada); Brown, Rafe (University of Kansas, Canada)

Multilocus Phylogeny and Bayesian Estimates of Species Boundaries Reveal Hidden Evolutionary
Relationships and Cryptic Diversity in Southeast Asian Water Monitors (genus Varanus)

 Recent advances in conceptual, numerical, and methodological approaches in phylogenetic systematics
have enabled increasingly robust approaches to the question of species delimitation in empirical studies
of biodiversity.     As the diversity of lines of evidence available to systematists has increased,
theinferential power of species delimitation methods has also expanded. Here we showcase a model
system in a data-rich, comparative approach to evaluating methods of species delimitation among the
abundant and conspicuous monitor lizards ( Varanus ).            The water monitors ( Varanus salvator
Complex), a widespread lineage distributed throughout Southeast Asia and southern India, have been the
subjects of numerous taxonomic treatments, drawing particular attention to the possibilityof
undocumented species diversity in the Philippines. Despite these taxonomic changes reliance on
purportedly diagnostic differences in morphological characters, no attention has been given to the genetic
underpinnings of currently recognized species diversity in Philippine water monitors. We collected a 5-
gene dataset, estimated the phylogeny of the Varanus salvator Complex, and inferred species
boundaries using a Bayesian coalescent approach. Our results contradict previous systematic and
taxonomic hypotheses and reveal surprising affinities between Philippine and non-Philippine lineages.
We reject previous traditional taxonomic treatments, and simultaneously uncover levels of cryptic diversity
never alluded to in past studies.    In general, our results suggest that a combination of both phenotypic
and genetic data will be most informative to taxonomists, systematists, and biodiversity specialists when
attempting to estimate species diversity. We advocate the use of multilocus datasets for testing the
validity of recognized evolutionary lineages and estimating species boundaries, and recommend
reserving taxonomic changes for cases in which multiple lines of evidence, namely molecular and
morphological, agree.



Wenbo, Wang (Institute of Bio-inspired Structure and Surface Engineering); Yezhong, Tang (Chengdu
Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chengdu, Sichuan, Canada); Hao, Lei (Wuhan
Institute of Physics and Mathematics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China., China); Xuxia,
Wang (Wuhan Institute of Physics and Mathematics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.,
Canada); Zhendong, Liu (Institute of Bio-inspired Structure and Surface Engineering, Nanjing,China,
Canada); Carr, Catherine E. (University of Maryland at College Park, Maryland, United States);
Zhendong, Dai (Institute of Bio-inspired Structure and Surface Engineering, Nanjing,China, China)

Auditory Brainstem and Midbrain in Tokay Gecko Visualized by Manganese-enhanced Magnetic
Resonance Imaging

Geckos use vocal communication in social interactions with other geckos. Furthermore, gecko ears are
highly directional, with middle ears connected through the mouth cavity (Christensen-Dalsgaard &amp;
Manley, 2005). We have used manganese-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging to reveal the auditory
nuclei in brainstem and midbrain in live animals, after injection of manganese into the torus semicircularis.
Manganese labeled the nucleus magnocellularis (NM) in the dorsomedial caudal medulla. The nucleus
laminaris (NL) was located beneath the rostral part of NM. A nucleus lateral to caudal NM was also
visualized and potentially associated with the auditory system, since it was also imaged by the 2-
Deoxyglucose method. A large nucleus angularus (NA) was located rostral to NM/NL. Two clearly
separated nuclei of the superior olive were shown at ventrolateral area of the medulla, and the nucleus of
the lateral lemniscus was located on the lateral wall of the pons. The torus semicircularis was fused in the




                                                                                                         775
dorsal midline caudally, then split into two parts that decreased in size rostrally. These results were
consistent with results of our previous studies using immunohistochemistry, neurophysiology, 2-DG and
track tracing and suggested that auditory pathways are conserved among reptilians.



Weng, Kevin (Pelagic Fisheries Research Program, U of Hawaii); Comfort, Christina (University of
Hawaii, Canada)

Habitat of a globally distributed deep water shark, Hexanchus griseus, in Hawaii

Demersal and deepwater sharks have received less attention than high profile epipelagic species,
although their overlap with fisheries and high vulnerability to overexploitation makes them high priority
species for research and conservation. Hexanchus griseus may be a top predator on most of the world‘s
continental shelves and slopes, but we have limited understanding of its biology. It is found from the
equator to boreal zones, and from near the surface to almost 2000 m, deepening its habitat towards the
equator. In Hawaii the species has been observed from submersibles and with baited cameras, and
captured across a range of sizes from juvenile to adult. Conventional and satellite tagging reveals that H.
griseus typically has high residency but makes occasional long distance movements. Foraging behavior
is dominated by strong diel vertical migrations that bring the species up to 200 m at night, potentially into
contact with deep reef and epipelagic species.



Werneck, Fernanda (Brigham Young University); Gamble, Tony (University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minneapolis, MN, United States); Colli, Guarino (Universidade de Brasília, Brasília, DF, Brazil);
Rodrigues, Miguel (Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil); Sites Jr., Jack (Brigham Young
University, Provo, UT, United States)

Lizard diversification in the South American               dry diagonal:      integrating   continent-wide
phylogeography and distribution modeling

The relative influence of Neogene geomorphological events and Quaternary climatic changes as causal
mechanisms on Neotropical diversification remains largely speculative, as most divergence timing
inferences are based on a single-locus and have limited taxonomic or geographic sampling. To
investigate these influences, we use a multilocus (2 mitochondrial and 11 nuclear genes) range-wide
sampling of Phyllopezus pollicaris, a gecko complex widely distributed across the poorly studied South
American ‗dry diagonal‘ biomes. Our approach couples traditional and model-based phylogeography with
geospatial methods, and demonstrates Miocene diversification and limited influence of Pleistocene
climatic fluctuations on P. pollicaris. Phylogeographic structure and distribution models highlight that
persistence across multiple isolated regions shaped the diversification of this species complex.
Approximate Bayesian computation supports hypotheses of allopatric and ecological/sympatric speciation
between lineages that largely coincide with genetic clusters associated with Chaco, Cerrado, and
Caatinga, standing for complex diversification between the ‗dry diagonal‘ biomes. We recover extremely
high genetic diversity and suggest that eight well-supported clades may be valid species, with direct
implications for taxonomy and conservation assessments. These patterns exemplify how adequate
sampling of low-vagility species complexes, characterized by strong genetic structure and pre-
Pleistocene divergence histories represent ideal radiations to investigate broad biogeographic histories of
associated biomes.




                                                                                                         776
Werner, Philine (Trier University); Lötters, Stefan (Trier University, Trier, Germany); Schmidt, Benedikt
R. (KARCH, Neuchâtel, Switzerland); Engler, Jan O. (Trier University, Trier, Germany); Rödder, Dennis
(Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Bonn, Germany)

The role of climate for the range limits of parapatric European land salamanders

The study of ecological and evolutionary factors that determine species distributions is essential when
trying to understand the maintenance of abrupt range limits in parapatric species. Such abrupt range
limits can be related to changes in climatic conditions along a strong environmental gradient or to
dispersal limitations due to biotic interactions e.g. interspecific competition. The European land
salamanders, Salamandra salamandra and S. atra , are parapatric but exhibit small contact zones.
Since the cause of this pattern and the restricted range of S. atra are poorly understood, we studied the
role of climate in the sharp range delimitation between the two species. This study combines recent
approaches in species distribution modeling and univariate and multivariate techniques in order to
compare the species‘ climatic tolerances and their realized niches in the available environmental space to
determine whether their ranges are limited by climatic conditions or by other factors. The analysis was
repeated for three contact zones in Switzerland to assess possible geographic variation. The results show
that the species occur at locations with different climatic characteristics along with the identification of a
strong climatic gradient across the species‘ range limits. Although the species‘ realized niches differ
moderately, interspecific niche overlap is found. The wide climatic tolerance range of S. atra suggests
that alternative factors contribute to the restriction of its geographic range. For all approaches, the results
showed a similar pattern but also confirmed variation in the climatic niche among the contact zones. The
change in climatic conditions along the recognized gradient within contact zones may represent a major
determining factor for species‘ range limits. However, detailed studies of geographic variation in
environmental conditions and climatic niches imply that interspecific interactions may also be range-
determining.



Werning, Sarah (University of California Berkeley); McGuire, Jimmy (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology,
Canada)

A phylogeographic study reveals cryptic genetic diversity in sunbeam snakes (Xenopeltis)

Sunbeam snakes (Xenopeltidae: Xenopeltis ) are semifossorial animals well-known for their highly
iridescent scales. Two species comprise the family; X. hainanensis (found only in southeastern China
and northern Vietnam), and X. unicolor (which occurs across most of southeast Asia). Despite its broad
distribution and good representation in museum collections, genetic variation in Xenopeltis has not been
examined. To date, the species status of X. hainanensis has not been confirmed by molecular studies,
and the level of genetic diversity in X. unicolor remains unknown. This is unfortunate because an
understanding of the genetic structure (or lack thereof) within Xenopeltis would inform questions about
the timing and pace of its expansion across southeast Asia, as well as the possibility of overlooked
species diversity in this basal snake family. We sequenced over 80 individuals of X. unicolor and X.
hainanensis for three genetic markers. Our sample includes specimens from across the generic range,
representing all major areas where it occurs, and including areas in which both species occur in
sympatry. We found that the two species are highly genetically divergent despite morphological similarity.
Additionally, we found evidence of cryptic diversity within X. unicolor , which is comprised of several
divergent clades. We discuss the geographic distribution of these clades and their implications for the
phylogeographic history of the taxon.




                                                                                                           777
Westley, Peter (University of Washington); Fleming, Ian (University of Washington, Canada)

Adaptive phenotypic plasticity and the successful invasion of novel environments by non-native
brown trout

Phenotypic plasticity – the ability of an organism to respond to an environmental stimulus with a change
in state, form, movement, or behaviour – is increasingly thought to represent a mechanism for
populations and species to cope with abruptly changing environmental conditions. Over a hundred years
ago, J. M. Baldwin proposed a ‗new factor‘ in evolution whereby plasticity could facilitate survival in new
environments and allow selection to act on the survivors in the direction of the plastic response. These
predictions encapsulate the first vital stages of the ‗Baldwin effect‘; however, few studies have attempted
to empirically test these predictions in nature. In this talk I report on the results of a combined common-
garden and reciprocal- transplant experiment along with formal quantifications of natural selection to test
the hypotheses that phenotypic plasticity acting on functional morphology in juvenile brown trout (Salmo
trutta) should allow individuals to persist when introduced to novel environments and that plasticity should
be predictable based on patterns of natural selection. To do so, we raised individuals from three
populations in common laboratory conditions until large enough to tag and track in the wild. We detected
marked plasticity in swimming morphology, specifically the depth of the head and body, after
approximately two months of rearing in three wild streams. Populations that survived introduction were
generally consistent in their plastic responses, though we did detect evidence of population-specific
plasticity suggesting underlying genetic variation. Counter to predictions, the plasticity we observed was
frequently in the opposite direction from selection even though it moved in a direction generally assumed
to be adaptive (i.e. small rivers seemed to plastically induce shallow-bodies and vice versa in large
rivers). We did detect evidence of greater survival and growth of individuals reared in their local
environments compared to when reared in foreign locations, suggesting local adaptation has evolved in
these populations recently descended from common ancestors. Overall, our results suggest that plasticity
may shape phenotypes in unpredictable ways and that attempts to forecast the response of populations
to rapidly changing global environments may be prone to failure.



Westphal, Michael (Bureau of Land Management); Davis-Rabosky, Alison (University of California,
Berkeley, Canada); Johnson, Paul (National Park Service, Canada)

Patchy in Panoche: Genetic subdivision in a disjunct northern population of the desert night
lizard, Xantusia vigils.

 The effect of global climate change on within-population genetic structure is a growing topic of interest.
Increased fragmentation and reductions in genetic diversity are predicted responses to climate change.
Populations at latitudinal boundaries can provide clues to the outcome of historical range expansion and
restriction and thus may be useful models for the future effects of climate change. We studied genetic
subdivision in the desert night lizard, Xantusia vigilis , in the Panoche Hills of west Fresno County,
California.      The Panoche Hills population is a disjunct northern outpost of the species, which is
otherwise widely distributed throughout the desert Southwest.      Night lizards in the Panoche Hills and
adjacent hill ranges appear to be restricted to small, isolated yucca patches, suggesting that
fragmentation might have occurred within the population.          We analyzed a suite of well-behaved
microsatellite loci to estimate measures of genetic subdivision among subpopulations and found
significant restriction in gene flow among yucca patches on a very small geographic scale. Given that
this population is already highly fragmented it seems unlikely that it can function as a source population
for a northward expansion in the face of a rapid warming trend.          Long-term monitoring of genetic




                                                                                                        778
subdivision and allelic diversity in Panoche night lizards could provide a glimpse into trends of genetic
response to global climate change.



Wetherbee, Bradley (University of Rhode Island/Guy Harvey Research Institute); Harvey, Guy (Guy
Harvey Research Institute, Canada); Burnie, Neil (Bermuda Shark Project, Hamilton, United Kingdom);
Aming, Choy (Bermuda Shark Project, Canada); Byrne, Mike (University of Georgia, Canada); Shivji,
Mahmood (Guy Harvey Research Institute, Canada)

Contrary to ordinary - long-term movements of tiger sharks reveal both variable and consistent
movements

Tracking of 58 tiger sharks ( Galeocerdo cuvier ) in the Western Atlantic, Caribbean and Australia using
satellite transmitters has revealed that their movements are highly variable among locations and
individual sharks. Sharks tracked in Bermuda demonstrate the most consistent behaviors characterized
by seasonal north-south migrations although movements among sharks vary. Bermuda tagged sharks
show an impressive ability to utilize two very different marine ecosystems for nearly equal periods of time,
spending warmer months in the open ocean covering long distances, in contrast to winter months
primarily concentrated in coastal waters of The Bahamas. Individual sharks tracked for extensive periods
of time (&lt; 1 yr) exhibited remarkable consistency of movement between years, following similar
migratory pathways and occupying similar seasonal areas. Areas searched intensively by sharks in
oceanic waters were an order of magnitude larger than areas searched intensively in insular waters.
Long-term tracking of tiger sharks has illustrated a combination of both behavioral plasticity and
consistency resulting in connectivity of disparate and distant marine ecosystems on multiple scales.



White, Easton (Arizona State University); Nagy, John (Scottsdale Community College, Arizona State
University, Canada); Gruber, Samuel (Bimini Biological Field Station, Canada)

A stage-structured stochastic model of lemon shark population dynamics

While some general mathematical models of shark population dynamics have been important in fisheries
management, there is a need for more detailed treatments to assess causes of population fluctuations.
For example, nursery sites are an important habitat element for juvenile lemon sharks ( Negaprion
brevirostris ), exposing this species to potential anthropogenic impacts not faced by pelagic species.
However, nursery site use has been largely overlooked in mathematical population models. Here we
define a novel stage-structured, Markov chain stochastic model to study how this life history characteristic
interacts with demographic stochasticity to generate fluctuations in lemon shark populations. We show
that demographic stochasticity accounts for 27 to 40% of the variance observed in a 17-year,
longitudinally studied population of lemon sharks. We therefore, conclude that unmodeled environmental
factors can be important drivers of interannual population fluctuations. These factors may include habitat
loss, weather patterns, global climate change, and random catastrophic events. Our model is easily
applicable to many large vertebrate predators in which age structure and demographic stochasticity are
important considerations. It may also be used to estimate demographic parameters that cannot be
feasibly estimated in the field




                                                                                                        779
White, Lauren (Erell Institute);

Home Range and Spacing Patterns of the Wedge Snouted lizard, Meroles cuneirostris.

Space use patterns can help interpret social structure, and can also indicate habitat preferences.
Meroles cuneirostris, a diurnal lacertid endemic to the west-central coast of Namibia , occupies an
ecotone consisting of sparsely vegetated sand dunes and an interdune gravel plain. The habitat varies in
both prey availability, with termites common in the gravel plain but rare in the dunes, as well as in
predator avoidance options; lizards can easily bury themselves in sand or escape into bushes in the
dunes but the coarse, packed sand and dearth of large shrubs precludes these strategies in the gravel
plain. Space use may reflect the relative advantages offered by the two habitat types as well as social
structure. Over a 4 week period during December 2011 – January 2012, resighting locations were
recorded for 95 marked adults on a study site approximately 30 m x 500 m following the base of a large
sand dune in the Namib-Naukluft National Park, Namibia. Recorded locations were compiled to estimate
home ranges and core areas using the Minimum Convex Polygon method. Home range estimates were
calculated for 89 animals. The mean ± SE home range size was 0.1887 ± 0.0417 ha for females and
0.1896 ± 0.0278 ha for males. Home range size did not differ significantly between the sexes. Results of
regression analysis also showed no significant relationship between body size and home range size.
Individuals in this population exhibit a high level of home range overlap (mean overlap: males = 973.4 ±
54.5% and females = 929.6 ± 54.5%), and with no relation to body size. The high levels of home range
overlap we found suggest that M. cuneirostris is not territorial. For each resighting, habitat was recorded;
the proportion of sightings and home range relative to each habitat was determined. Patterns of home
range/core area size, overlap, and habitat characteristics will be addressed by further analyses within and
between the sexes.



White, Mary (Southeastern Louisiana University); Sandage, Kelly (Southeastern Louisiana University,
Canada)

Salinity Stress in Green Treefrogs (Hyla cinerea)

Salinity levels in the Lake Pontchartrain Basin of southern Louisiana have been rising over the past few
decades, potentially placing osmotic stress on the freshwater inhabitants of the region. Amphibians are
often considered to be indicators of environmental quality, as their permeable skin and reliance on
aquatic habitats make them susceptible to disturbances in their environment. Studies have shown that
increases in salinity can have large effects on amphibian survival and development, though there is a
great deal of variation in salt tolerance among species. We have been investigating biochemical effects
of increased salinity during the development of Green Treefrogs ( Hyla cinerea ). Our work focuses on
expression of stress-inducible genes such as heat shock genes and pro-opoimelanocortin (POMC).



White, Matthew (Ohio University); Kohli, Brooks; Kilbarger, Molly (Ohio University, Athens, OH, United
States)

Microsatellite DNA variation among natural, supplemented, and broodstock populations of Ohio
River

The muskellunge (Esox masquinongy) is an important game fish species. Although historically considered
to consist of 3 subspecies, none are currently recognized. It has been extensively managed both within
and outside its native range. A previous study indicated little variation in mitochondrial DNA control region



                                                                                                         780
sequences across the entire range of muskellunge. Our study evaluated microsatellite DNA variation
among populations within the Ohio River drainage. Ten populations consisting of 4 broodstock
populations, 4 natural populations, and 2 populations with a history of supplementation were surveyed at
5 tetranucleotide microsatellite loci. DNA was purified from fin clip and scale material. A STRUCTURE
analysis detected at least 5 genetic populations. There was evidence of both contemporary and historical
gene flow and no evidence for population bottlenecks. Mitochondrial DNA data suggested a recent (post-
Pleistocene) range expansion. The data suggests that 1) broodstock populations are retaining levels of
variation found in other natural populations; 2) supplemented populations do not show evidence of
reduced variation, and 3) population connectivity appears to have been maintained despite habitat loss
and lock and dam construction on the Ohio and Kanawha rivers.



White, Travis (Acadia Univeristy); Herman, Tom (Acadia University, Wolfville, NS, Canada); Pulsifer,
Mark (Nova Scotia Department of Natural Resources, Antigonish, NS, Canada)

Habitat selection, site fidelity, and communal behaviour of overwintering wood turtles (Glyptemys
insculpta) In Nova Scotia

The primary goals of this study are to gain a deeper understanding of micro-habitat properties that are
critical to overwintering in wood turtles (Glyptemys insculpta) near their northern range limit, and to
investigate possible relationships between sites selected, site fidelity, and group size. During times of
rapid environmental change, understanding population dynamics, structure, and movements at species‘
range limits is essential. This is usually difficult since most peripheral populations are small. However, our
study area in eastern Nova Scotia (ca.45° N) contains one of the densest and largest known wood turtle
populations within the entire species range. Adult wood turtles (n=25) were captured opportunistically
from May to October 2010 and fitted with radio transmitters. In 2011, 14 additional turtles were equipped,
including 7 juveniles. In November of both years, telemetry was used to locate each overwintering site;
thermal, chemical, and structural attributes were then characterized at each. Temperature data loggers
were deployed at each site. Our findings to date reveal that a notable portion of turtles are using
overwintering strategies that deviate from those reported elsewhere. Conventionally, wood turtles rely on
cool, highly oxygenated rivers and streams, and have been described elsewhere as "anoxia/hypoxia-
intolerant". In our study, most turtles (year 1: n=19; year 2: n=28) appear to follow conventional patterns,
overwintering in highly oxygenated rivers and tributaries. However, in year one, two females used
backwater pools that approached hypoxic conditions. Presently, a female is using an anoxic backwater
site (0.13 – 3.54 mg/L); and 3 females and 1 juvenile are using hypoxic sites with dissolved oxygen
ranging from 1.78 to 8.47mg/L. Of 39 turtles presently being monitored, 18 are aggregated. Visual
observations (year 1: n=3, year 2: n=2) of dormant males within 1 meter of a female suggest that
communal behavior is related to increased mating opportunities. Of 25 turtles monitored in both years, 16
showed site fidelity.



White, William (CSIRO Marine & Atmospheric Research); Last, Peter (CSIRO Marine & Atmospheric
Research, Hobart, T, Australia)

A review of taxonomy of chondrichthyan fishes: a modern perspective

Taxonomic clarity is a fundamental requirement as it forms the foundation of all other life sciences. In the
last decade, chondrichthyan taxonomy has undergone a ‗scientific renaissance‘ with more than 180 new
species formally described. This effort encompasses about 15% of the global chondrichthyan fauna which



                                                                                                          781
consists of 1185 currently recognised chondrichthyan species. The important role of chondrichthyan
taxonomy for conservation management has been highlighted in recent years with new species
descriptions or taxonomic resolution of a number of threatened species. These include Australian gulper
sharks (genus Centrophorus ) and speartooth sharks (genus Glyphis ) in coastal waters of Australia and
Borneo. Closer examination of other wide-ranging species for which the taxonomy was thought to be
stable, have shown that they consist of species complexes, e.g. manta rays ( Manta ) and spotted eagle
rays ( Aetobatus narinari complex), and highlights the need for critical re-examination of other ‗wide-
ranging‘ species. Molecular methods have provided another useful tool to taxonomists and they have
proven to assist greatly with identifying cryptic species and species complexes. However, the limitations
of particular molecular methods being used need to be carefully considered and there are some concerns
about how these are being integrating with classical taxonomy. The fundamental importance of taxonomic
nomenclature to life sciences is often poorly understood but striving for nomenclatural stability is a critical
component of taxonomy. Similarly, biological collections are an extremely vital asset to both taxonomists
and the broader scientific community. These collections have becoming increasingly important due in part
to molecular species identification initiatives such as the Barcode of Life which has resulted in a large
number of voucher specimens linked to tissue samples being deposited. Biological collections are also
proving to be imperative in biodiversity studies as they contain a ‗gold mine‘ of historical collection
information important for assessing changes in faunal assemblages. Resources are typically limited for
taxonomic research and the ‗ageing‘ taxonomic community is another issue of concern for the future of
taxonomy on this important group. Succession planning and better resource allocation will be essential to
ensure that this fundamental discipline is maintained into the future.



Whiting, Martin (Macquarie University); Holland, Brenden (University of Hawai'i, Canada); Keogh, Scott
(The Australian National University, Canada); Stuart-Fox, Devi (University of Melbourne, Canada)

Evolution of a conspicuous dynamic visual signal in an introduced chameleon

Rapid adaptive evolution frequently follows a significant change to an organism‘s environment, such as
during colonization of a novel habitat. Vertebrates, including Caribbean Anolis lizards and Galapagos
finches, have demonstrated a remarkable capacity for morphological change of functional traits (limb
length, beak size) on ecological time scales. Traits that are sexually selected can be similarly affected,
although well-documented examples from wild populations are rare (a notable exception is Trinidadian
guppies). The Jackson‘s chameleon ( Chamaeleo x. jacksonii ) from East Africa was inadvertently
introduced to the Hawaiian island of Oahu in 1972. In its native range, Jackson‘s chameleons are preyed
upon by a wide range of predators, including snakes and birds, which are thought to shape the dynamics
of color change in chameleons. We took advantage of the Hawaiian introduction, an environment with
only a few potential predators and therefore, very low predation pressure, to test for character release of
conspicuous social color signals. To test this hypothesis, we measured color change in response to
multiple social and predator stimuli in wild chameleons in both Hawai‘i and Kenya. We used visual
modelling of colour signals, together with irradiance and vegetation background color, to estimate signal
conspicuousness to both the chameleon and predator (bird, snake) visual systems. The Hawai‘i and
Kenya backgrounds were the same color, but the major difference was in brightness: the Hawai‘i
background was darker. As a result, chameleons from both Kenya and Hawai‘i were brighter against the
Hawai‘i background. However, Hawai‘i males were more conspicuous (courtship, display) against their
own background for some body regions (mainly gular), providing evidence for character release. Also,
Hawai‘i males more conspicuous (courtship, display) to snake and bird predators against their own
background for some body regions. We discuss how relaxing natural selection can result in signal release
in systems experiencing strong sexual selection.



                                                                                                           782
Whittaker, Kellie (University of Caifornia, Berkeley);

AmphibiaWeb: Using Bioinformatics to Track the World¿s 7000+ Amphibian Species

AmphibiaWeb (www.amphibiaweb.org) is a widely used bioinformatic collaboration that integrates
contributions from amphibian researchers, students, and the public with data from museum specimen
collections, using the latest tools in biodiversity informatics. Our goal is to enhance public and global
accessibility to information and specimen data for all amphibians. AmphibiaWeb hosts 15,000-20,000
queries daily on all aspects of amphibian natural history, distribution, conservation, taxonomy, and global
declines for the world's 7000+ species of amphibians. Information uniquely accessible on AmphibiaWeb
includes up-to-date tracking of newly described amphibian species, type locality mapping for new
species, dynamic range and occurrence mapping that incorporates amphibian specimen data from
HerpNET2 with IUCN's range maps, and a taxon-based photo browser that allows visualization of
representative members of any given clade simultaneously. Other features include: community-
contributed multimedia files (sound, video, and nearly 25,000 photos); links to FonoZoo's amphibian
sound files; access to IUCN accounts and links to Amphibian Species of the World taxonomic history for
all species; unique accounts for nearly a third of the world's amphibians, with some accounts in multiple
languages (served to Encyclopedia of Life as well); a Species of the Week; an Amphibian News Box
featuring a current journal article; reviews of factors contributing to amphibian declines; and a
compendium of amphibian decline literature with monthly updates.               AmphibiaWeb has a free,
downloadable iPhone app allowing local area searches and access to the website's content for all
species. Taxonomy is updated on a regular basis. Some major revisions to our family-level taxonomy
(AmphibiaWeb 2.0) have recently been implemented by our multi-institutional working subgroup of
amphibian taxonomic specialists. AmphibiaWeb encourages public participation via our collaboration with
iNaturalist's Global Amphibian Bioblitz. Further, we invite researchers, students, and herpetology courses
to submit photos and write accounts.



Wielstra, Ben (NCB Naturalis); Arntzen, Pim (NCB Naturalis, Leiden, The Netherlands)

The shifting interchange of two species of Triturus newts deduced from asymmetrically
introgressed mitochondrial DNA

If the geographical displacement of one species by another is accompanied by hybridization,
mitochondrial DNA can introgress asymmetrically, from the outcompeted species into the invading
species, over a large geographical extent. This phenomenon is shown by the two crested newt species
Triturus macedonicus and T. karelinii , on the Balkan Peninsula in south-eastern Europe. We first delimit
a ca. 54,000 km 2 area in which T. macedonicus contains T. karelinii mitochondrial DNA. This
introgression zone bisects the range of T. karelinii . Similarity of the introgressed mitochondrial DNA
haplotypes suggests a recent transfer across the species boundary. We then use ecological niche
modeling to explore the suitability of the introgression zone under current and Last Glacial Maximum
conditions. The introgression zone was inhospitable during the Last Glacial Maximum for either species,
but has since that time become suitable. The extraordinary spatial setting of this study, in which the
advance of T. macedonicus created an enclave of T. karelinii , provides insight into the particular
process causing asymmetric mitochondrial DNA: T. macedonicus invaded T. karelinii territory and thus
moved into an area where ‗foreign‘ mitochondrial DNA was present; mitochondrial DNA was not pulled
into the T. macedonicus range by natural selection. The presence of the enclave suggest T. karelinii
was the first to colonize the eastern part of the introgression zone after the Last Glacial Maximum.
Subsequently, it was outcompeted by T. macedonicus , which captured T. karelinii mitochondrial DNA




                                                                                                       783
via introgressive hybridization in the process. The western part of the zone was probably never inhabited
by T. karelinii itself, but T. karelinii mitochondrial DNA could spread there through the bodies of T.
macedonicus.



Wiens, John (Stony Brook University);

Speciation, niche conservatism, and niche divergence in theory and in amphibians

In this presentation, I will summarize recent and ongoing work in my lab (and with my collaborators)
examining how speciation occurs in amphibians, with broader implications for how speciation occurs in
general. Our non-comprehensive analyses suggest that allopatric speciation may be the most common
geographic mode in both frogs and salamanders. What is less clear is how exactly populations become
allopatric (an essential step to initiate allopatric speciation). From first principles, a geographic barrier
consisting of unsuitable ecological conditions may be necessary to geographically split an ancestral
species into two allopatric populations, and this scenario requires that populations be unable to adapt to
those ecological conditions quickly enough to maintain populations and gene flow across the barrier.
Therefore niche conservatism (the tendency of species to retain similar ecological characteristics over
time), rather than adaptation to divergent ecological conditions, should often be an essential part of
allopatric speciation, even if niche divergence occurs later in the speciation process. Some evidence
supports the importance of climatic niche conservatism in allopatric speciation in temperate salamanders,
but the ubiquity of climatic niche conservatism in allopatric speciation is presently less clear in tropical
salamanders and across frogs. New theoretical work may shed light on when speciation should be
expected to occur through niche conservatism versus niche divergence, and why speciation may occur
differently in different groups. I will also address the factors that determine the rate of climatic niche
evolution and how this is related to speciation and species diversification. Finally, I will discuss a
particularly interesting example of non-allopatric speciation in salamanders that we have been studying.



Willey, Lisabeth (University of Massachusetts Amherst); Jones, Michael (University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Canada); Smyers, Scott (Oxbow Associates, Canada)

Patterns of Amphibian Occurrence in Alpine Wetlands in Québec, Newfoundland, and New
England

Arctic-alpine habitats are relatively rare in eastern North America, where they reach their southernmost
extent in New York and New England. Alpine habitats are more widespread and diverse in
Newfoundland, Labrador and Québec, where common alpine wetlands include bogs, fens, and rocky
pools. Alpine areas are subjected to extreme environmental conditions including summer frosts, short
growing seasons, late ice-out, strong winds, frequent fog, and elevated UV exposure. Relatively little is
known about the amphibian communities of eastern alpine wetlands, but they are likely to respond quickly
in response to environmental change and are thus reasonable long-term bio-indicators. We evaluated
patterns of amphibian occurrence in alpine environments in eastern North America at two scales. At a
broad scale, we surveyed 90 pools in 12 mountain ranges in Québec, Newfoundland, and New England.
At a finer scale, we intensively sampled and established long-term monitoring sites on the Presidential
and Franconia Ranges, New Hampshire, and the Monts Groulx in central Québec. Using acoustic
recorders and visual surveys, we documented baseline community structure and related local
environmental characteristics to species richness and calling intensity at high elevation ponds in these
three ranges. Nine species were detected across the region; these exhibited different patterns of



                                                                                                         784
occurrence. We found Anaxyrus americanus , Lithobates sylvaticus , and Pseudacris crucifer broadly
distributed in most alpine areas surveyed in Québec and New England. Lithobates clamitans,
Ambystoma maculatum , Eurycea bislineata , Plethodon cinereus and Notophthalmus viridescens
were sporadically encountered in mainland alpine environments. Some northern species such as
Lithobates pipiens , L. septentrionalis , and Ambystoma laterale were not detected in mainland alpine
areas, although introduced L. septentrionalis are locally abundant in alpine areas in western
Newfoundland, where they co-occur with A. americanus.



Williams, Rod (Purdue University); Burgmeier, Nick; Kraus, Bart; Unger, Shem (Purdue University,
Canada)

Spatial Ecology of Eastern Hellbenders

Studies that combine estimates of population density with spatial ecology analyses provide valuable
information for management of wildlife species, particularly those in need of immediate conservation. The
Eastern Hellbender ( Cryptobranchus alleganiensis alleganiensis ) has experienced drastic declines
throughout its range during the past few decades. We conducted mark-recapture surveys from June 2008
– October 2008 and July 2009 – September 2009 at 35 sites. Density was estimated at 0.06
individuals/100 m 2 and catch per unit effort was 0.05 individuals/person hour throughout the entire study
area. Sex ratios were significantly skewed towards males (2.6:1). No sub-adults or larvae were found and
only two nests were located. To address whether our population was suffering from an Allee effect, we
used radio telemetry to examine the seasonal home range, movement patterns, and habitat use of 21
adult eastern hellbenders. Individuals were located up to three times weekly from July 2008 – October
2009. Mean 100% minimum convex polygon home-range sizes were much larger than previously
reported and largest during the summer. Hellbenders moved very little throughout the year (Mean = 14.1
movements/individual) and over relatively short distances (Mean = 27.5 m) to nearby shelter rocks. The
majority of hellbenders were routinely located under large, flat shelter rocks; however, five individuals
periodically used bedrock, downed trees, and submerged tree root masses along the riverbank. Results
from the mark recapture and spatial ecology study reveal that the Indiana population consists of large,
older-age class individuals that occur at very low densities which are largely isolated from conspecifics.



Willink, Beatriz (School of Biology, University of Costa Rica); Brenes-Mora, Esteban (School of Biology,
University of Costa Rica, San Jose, Costa Rica); Pröhl, Heike (Institute of Zoology, University of
Veterinary Medicine of Hannover, Hannover, Germany); Bolaños, Federico (School of Biology, University
of Costa Rica, San Jose, Canada)

The role of anti-predator strategies driving color variation in the poison-frog Dendrobates
granuliferus

Geographic color variation is an ubiquitous feature of many poison frog species. Previous work has
shown that sexual selection can be an important force driving color divergence among populations and at
least in one species the distribution of color morphs cannot be explained by genetic drift. However, the
role of predators selecting for different colorations and anti-predator strategies in different places is by far
less studied but a possible mechanism. We studied the variation in color, behavior and predation risk
among three populations of the Costa Rican poison frog Dendrobates granuliferus . The dorsal coloration
of this species varies along a latitudinal axis. In the South of its range D. granuliferus exhibits a red
dorsum whereas in the North the dorsal color is green. At intermediate latitudes frogs exhibit a variety of




                                                                                                            785
colorations including orange, bronze, brown, yellow and green. We used visual modeling to determine
color and brightness contrast of frogs and their substrates in each type of population (red, intermediate
and green) and for the vision of a model predatory bird. Red frogs had higher color and brightness
contrast (i.e. were more conspicuous) than green frogs on all substrates. Thus, red and green frogs
seem to specialize on aposematic and cryptic strategies respectively. Behavioral observations support
these results; red frogs spent more time calling, moved longer distances and foraged at a higher rate than
green frogs, that were inactive and motionless for a higher portion of time. Additionally, red frogs initiated
an escape sooner after perceived risk than green frogs which relied on crypsis. Intermediate frogs are
similar to red frogs in color contrast and are intermediate in most behavioral elements, but they have
lower brightness contrast and resemble the green frogs in their escape behavior. However, this apparent
lack of specialization in an anti-predator strategy does not seem to increase predation of the intermediate
frogs. Using red green and brown clay frog models, we found that predation of the different color morphs
depended on the color of the local population, and that at the intermediate population the brown clay frog
models suffered the lowest predation. In D. granuliferus coloration has evolved in concert with behavior,
and different predatory environments may have influenced this divergence. It is possible that the identity,
visual systems and learning capacities of predators vary among populations, but we are still largely
unaware of how predation naturally occurs in most poison frogs.



Williston, Andrew (Museum Of Comparative Zoology);

The Harvard Embryology Collection: a case study on archival histology slides

Extensive embryology and histology slide collections are rare or unnoticed in natural history collections.
Collections focused on keeping alcohol preserved and skeletal whole animals may overlook histological
slides and other micro slides. Still, embryology and micro-slide collections have the potential to be
valuable museum resources. The Harvard Embryology Collection (HEC) is an example of a historic,
archival histological embryology collection available to researchers. The HEC was started in 1890 by
notable American anatomist Charles Sedgewick Minot. The collection was designed to be broadly
systematic, including 60 taxa—over half of which were fish (17), reptiles (15), and amphibians (5). The
HEC was founded in a collaborative spirit as a ―cyclopedia‖ to promote new research and reproducibility
in comparative embryology. The HEC was successful in the early 1900s—being cited in more than 100
papers including two volumes of Keibel‘s Normal Tables. Bashford Dean‘s notable hagfish embryo slides
were deposited in the collection. Fortunately, Minot (a former student of Louis Agassiz) had the insight to
construct the collection according to strict archival standards so, as in other museum collections, HEC
slides would act as permanent vouchers. Indeed, the slides have persisted to this day. Unfortunately the
collection sank into obscurity as embryology research waned after the early 1900s. Still, the collection
remained intact at the Warren Anatomical Museum at Harvard Medical School. Now, despite nearly a
century of disuse, the collection is safely kept at the Museum of Comparative Zoology (MCZ) and is
available to researchers. The collection‘s history stands as a reminder that even the most seemingly out
of place collection objects can have great but unnoticed value. Curatioral improvements are now planned
which will hopefully revive the collection‘s collaborative spirit and value in the research community. The
collection may also serve as a model for researchers building modern, archival histology slide collections.




                                                                                                          786
Willoughby, Janna (Purdue University); Lewis, Timothy (University of St. Thomas, Saint Paul, MN,
United States); Swanson, Bradley (Central Michigan University, Mt. Pleasant, MI, United States)

Genetic impact of demographic decline on wood turtle populations in Michigan

Populations of wood turtles, Glyptemys insculpta, have steadily decreased over the past 30 years due to
the destruction and degradation of necessary habitat. We examined populations of wood turtles in
Michigan, USA to determine the distribution of populations, quantify demographic trends, and measure
the effect of declining population size on genetic diversity. Wood turtle samples (n=68) were collected
from 3 rivers in the Lower Peninsula of Michigan and amplified at 9 microsatellite loci. The programs
STRUCTURE and BAPS identified 2 populations that split sampling sites between a North and South
population. In both populations, MSVar analysis of genealogies estimated r<0, indicating demographic
decline. However, FIS values generated in GENALEX suggested little to no inbreeding has occurred
(average North FIS=0.25, average South FIS=0.23) and no evidence of a bottleneck was detected using
the program BOTTLENECK (p=0.303 North, p=0.290 South). The relatively high genetic diversity
observed in the North and South populations, which is uncommon to find in declining populations, is likely
due to immigration between the two populations (FST=0.043) coupled with the long lifespan of the wood
turtle. The steady demographic decline observed and the slow loss of genetic diversity presents a unique
conservation opportunity to improve populations demographically without the added cost and
considerations necessary in conservation of genetically depauperate populations.



Willson, J.D. (Virginia Tech); Hopkins, William (Virginia Tech, Canada)

Beyond the wetland: Effects of environmental mercury contamination on source-sink dynamics in
a pond-breeding amphibian

Although inter-wetland dispersal is thought to play an important role in regional persistence of pond-
breeding amphibians, few studies have modeled amphibian metapopulation or source-sink dynamics.
Recent modeling studies have suggested that environmental contaminants, such as mercury (Hg), can
negatively affect density and population viability of amphibians breeding in isolated wetlands. Presumably
contaminant-induced population declines          also result in reduced dispersal to surrounding (often
uncontaminated) habitats, potentially influencing dynamics of nearby populations. We used a structured
metapopulation model to evaluate the degree to which detrimental effects of environmental Hg
contamination on individual populations of American toads ( Bufo americanus ) can disrupt inter-
population dynamics. Our study revealed that in the absence of Hg contamination, dispersal from healthy
B. americanus populations can support nearby sink populations that would otherwise decline to
extinction.    Moreover, allowing dispersal between wetland-associated sub-populations substantially
increased overall productivity of the wetland network. However, both the ability of source populations to
support nearby sinks and the increase in overall productivity were dependent on wetland size and inter-
wetland distance. Contamination with Hg substantially reduced productivity of wetland-associated sub-
populations and impaired their ability to support nearby sinks within relevant spatial scales. Our results
have implications for understanding regional dynamics of pond-breeding amphibians, the landscape-level
negative effects of environmental contaminants, and the potential for restoration or remediation of
contaminated habitats.




                                                                                                       787
Wilmont, Brittany (Simon Fraser University); Bishop, C. (Environment Canada, Pacific Wildlife Research
Centre, dfdsf, Canada); Kennedy, C.J.; Nicholson, R.A. (Simon Fraser University, Canada); Skirrow, R.;
Van Aggelen, G. (Environment Canada, Canada)

An in situ study of current use pesticides on the growth, development and gene expression of
Rana luteiventris in the Okanagan Valley, British Columbia.

Amphibians are sentinel species of the aquatic environment and can be used as indicators for risk
assessment and management. We studied the use of current use pesticides on amphibian populations
in the Okanagan valley through the parallel use of in situ field assays and genomic laboratory studies.
Our study sites where located in orchard ponds which were sites of known pesticide contamination and
that were previously examined for deleterious effects in eggs and tadpoles. The predominant chemical
contaminants were identified in source water using ultra-low detection methods. Gene expression of the
Columbia spotted frog (Rana luteiventris) in the brain and liver was assessed using Q-PCR techniques in
frogs at metamorphosies. Some genes of interest include, thyroid hormone receptor-beta (THRB),
estrogen receptor (ERA), androgen receptor (AR), and superoxide dismutase (SOD) play vital roles in the
growth and development of amphibians. Significant reductions were seen on hatching success,
survivorship and size at in-situ orchard pond sites. These observed deleterious effects significantly
correlated with gene expression data. This field and laboratory data will allow a better understanding of
the cumulative nature of chemical, biological, physical and emerging pollutants on the aquatic
environment.



Wilson, Mark (University of Alberta); Grande, Terry (Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, IL, United
States)

Fishes of the World, 5th Edition, by Nelson, Grande, & Wilson

Joe Nelson's book ―Fishes of the World‖ is one of the most widely used and cited references in the world
for fish systematics and taxonomy. Prior to Joe's untimely passing this past summer, he approached both
of us to ask if we would carry on his work by organizing, preparing, and completing a revised 5th Edition,
a project that Joe had already begun. Publication of the new edition is expected in 2014, eight years after
       th
the 4 Edition.       The purpose of this poster is to announce the book project to the ichthyological
community and to invite all of you, including not only specialists on bony fishes but also specialists on
extant chondrichthyans and on fossil fishes, to participate in this project by sending us reprints,
corrections, and suggestions for improvement and updating of the book. The book will only reach its
potential with the assistance of our many colleagues. Fish phylogeny is a rapidly evolving field, and since
the 4th Edition went to press there have been numerous important works improving our knowledge of the
phylogenetic relationships and diagnostic features of fishes. In addition, there continue to be published
revisions and discoveries of new species that change our understanding of the diversity of many groups.
We are honored to carry on Joe's tradition. We look forward to working with all of you and, with your help,
making the 5 th Edition of Nelson‘s ―Fishes of the World‖ the best ever and something of which he would
be proud.




                                                                                                       788
Wimmer, Tonya (WWF-Canada); Corke, Jarrett (WWF-Canada, Halifax, NS, Canada); Cooper, Ernie
(WWF-Canada / TRAFFIC, Vancouver, BC, Canada); McFarlane, Gordon A. (Fisheries and Oceans
Canada, Nanaimo, BC, Canada)

Developing priorities for the conservation and management of sharks in Canada

Globally, over the last two decades, shark conservation and management has emerged as a major
priority for marine conservation. In 1999 the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) developed an
international framework for shark conservation. This framework recommends that all States with fisheries
impacting shark species should participate in their management and develop National Plans of Action
(NPOA) to identify information gaps, issues and priorities for their conservation and management within
their jurisdiction. Despite international commitments, there has been little action undertaken to better
understand, manage and protect elasmobranch species in Canadian waters. The only exceptions to this
are species for which there is commercial interest (e.g. Pacific spiny dogfish and porbeagle) or species
which interact with commercial fisheries (e.g. shortfin mako, tope and sixgill). Canada has developed an
NPOA which has some useful information on commercial shark stocks. However, it does not specify
actions, priorities or timelines to assess or mitigate threats to non-commercial species, nor does it
adequately address issues throughout Canada. Furthermore, Canada‘s NPOA was developed with no
stakeholder input, which is a critical step to developing comprehensive and meaningful plans as identified
by the FAO.

To address this, WWF-Canada hosted regional forums on the Atlantic and Pacific coasts that brought
together experts from government, industry, conservation, tourism and academia to discuss the
conservation of sharks. In total, 42 people participated in the Atlantic Shark Forum and 37 in the Pacific
Shark Workshop (including several international experts). The goal of each forum was to discuss the most
pressing issues for sharks in regards to science, on-the-water practice and policy & management and to
determine the top priorities which would significantly advance the conservation and management of shark
species in Canadian waters. Despite regionally specific differences, the top priorities for both regions fell
into three broad categories: 1) more and better information on stock status and catch data for all species;
2) increased education, training and information sharing about sharks, conservation issues and initiatives;
and 3) advance understanding and research on mitigation measures and handling practices to minimize
mortality of sharks. This information and the collaborations that have resulted will be essential to the
development of national and regional action plans to address threats to these species.



Wind, Elke (E. Wind Consulting); Ashpole, Sara (University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada);
Biebighauser, Thomas (Center for Wetlands and Stream Restoration, Morehead, Kentucky, United
States); Fletcher, Neil (The British Columbia Wildlife Federation, Surrey, BC, Canada); Garcia, Ernie
(Amphibian and Reptile Conservancy, Weaverville, CA, United States); Govindarajulu, Purnima (British
Columbia Ministry of Environment, Victoria, BC, Canada); Liepens, Sarma (BC Ministry of Environment,
Kamloops, BC, Canada)

Wetland restoration for herpetofauna throughout the northwestern USA and western Canada.

The majority of herpetofauna in the northwestern United States and western Canada are dependent upon
aquatic habitats for part of their life history. However, wetlands are one of the most threatened habitat
types and thousands have been lost as a result of land management practices. The Canadian and United
States governments differ in their approach to wetland management, with the latter having more formal
regulations around wetland protection and mitigation. Wetland restoration and creation projects have
been criticised for their inability to replace natural wetlands, and possibly contributing to ongoing wetland
loss due to development (e.g., through compensation). Wetland restoration and creation projects that



                                                                                                         789
occur outside of a regulatory scenario may play an important role in preserving biodiversity, especially for
aquatic-breeding amphibians, given the number of wetlands that have been lost historically.

Individuals and groups are creating natural looking wetlands for herpetofauna throughout the Northwest.
At the helm, Thomas Biebighauser from the U.S. Forest Service and the Center for Wetlands and Stream
Restoration (CWSR) has three decades of experience restoring and creating more than a 1,200 wetland
habitats in 14 states and 2 provinces. In 2002, Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation (PARC)
partnered with the CWSR to offer training workshops that have taught hundreds of people simple, cost-
effective wetland restoration and creation techniques. An informal survey was conducted of individuals
known to have participated in PARC-sponsored wetland training. Participants of three workshops were
polled to see what proportion had since restored or created wetland habitat. Some individuals were sent a
more detailed questionnaire with the objective of identifying factors that may contribute to project initiation
and its successful outcome. The results indicate that: at least 12% of workshop attendees have since
initiated or led a wetland restoration or creation project; the amount of wetland habitat that has been
restored or created is relatively small; most projects have been focused on aquatic-breeding amphibians;
and most individuals felt that their projects were successful as measured by a simple index of amphibian
occupancy. The survey results also suggest that a positive relationship may exist between the amount of
training offered in an area and the number of wetland projects that are subsequently initiated.



Wines, Michael (Auburn University); James C. Godwin, Craig Guyer, Marie Rush, and Valerie Johnson

Optimal Egg Incubation Temperature for the Eastern Indigo Snake (Drymarchon couperi)

The Eastern Indigo Snake ( Drymarchon couperi ) is a threatened species, extirpated from Alabama. ,
Auburn University, the Orianne Society, Alabama Fish and Wildlife, Georgia Fish and Wildlife, and Zoo
Atlanta have teamed up to reintroduce the species to Connecuh National Forest in southern Alabama.
Over a four year period 188 eggs were incubated. 155 of those eggs hatched. The eggs incubated from
78-141 days prior to hatching. The temperature of incubation ranged from 20.6 Celsius to 27.8 Celsius.
During incubation and data analysis after, the optimal temperature was found for indigo snake eggs.
The temperature of incubation correlates with time of incubation.      The lower ranges led to longer
incubation time. The higher the temperature of incubation resulted in the shorter the incubation period.
The lowest mean maximum incubation temp was 23.93, which led to 122 days of incubation. The highest
mean maximum incubation temp was 26.34 which led to the shortest time of incubation of 86 days.
Time of incubation does not correlate to body weight of hatchlings or general health.      The optimal
temperature for incubation of Eastern Indigo snake eggs is between 25 and 26 C. That range leads to
an incubation time of 88-103 days. In that range fewer problems were observed with mold, dimpling or
swelling of eggs.



Witz, Brian (Nazareth College of Rochester); Floyd, Megan (Nazareth College of Rochester, Rochester,
NY, United States)

ELISA Assay for Chitinase in gastric, pancreatic, and intestinal extracts of Sceloporus undulatus

Chitin, a non-branching polymer of b-1,4-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (NAG) monomers, is among the most
stable and abundant naturally occurring polysaccharides known; it is the major component of arthropod
exoskeletons, comprising 25-60% of exoskeleton dry weight. The complete catabolism of chitin involves
two chitinolytic enzymes: first, chitinase cleaves chitin into the disaccharide, chitobiose, and then b-N-



                                                                                                           790
acetylglucosaminidase (NAGase) hydrolyzes chitobiose into the monosaccharide, N-acetyl-D-
glucosamine (NAG). Jeuniaux (1961) confirmed the presence of chitinolytic enzymes in the pancreas and
gastric mucosa of several insectivorous lizard species. Witz and Conheady (2012, in preparation)
confirmed chitinolytic activity of gastric and pancreatic extracts by incubating those extracts with purified
chitin and then assaying for the end product of chitin digestion (NAG) in the insectivorous, side-blotched
lizard, Uta stansburiana. Also, Marsh, et al., (2001) demonstrated chitinolytic activity of stomach,
pancreas, and intestinal extracts of Sceloporus undulatus garmani; they also confirmed that the
immunological properties of Sceloporus chitinase were similar to that of the rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus
mykiss using western blot analysis. We assayed the pancreatic, intestinal and gastric tissue of the
eastern fence lizard, Sceloporus undulatus, specifically for the presence of chitinase using an ELISA
immunoassy. Purified chitin from Streptomyces griseus was used as a positive control, and phosphate
buffer was used as a negative control. The presence of chitinase was confirmed, with the greatest
concentration found in the pancreas, followed in turn, by the stomach, and the intestine. We suspect that
there may be two isozymes of chitinase, one gastric and one pancreatic. Future assays will include
protease inhibitors to determine if these relative levels of chitinase are correct.



Wixson, Joel (Department of Biology, University of Florida); Lillywhite, Harvey (Department of Biology,
University of Florida, Canada); McCleary, Ryan (Department of Biological Sciences, National University of
Singapore, Canada); Heard, Darryl (College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Canada)

Heavy metal contaminants in an insular population of cottonmouth snakes (Agkistrodon
piscivorus)

Snakes are one of the least studied groups of organisms in the toxicological literature.            This is
unfortunate because snakes as well as other reptiles have been experiencing declines in the last decade.
Pollution has been attributed as one of the major causes for reptilian declines. Heavy metals are of
particular concern because of their persistence in the environment. Also many snakes are upper-level
trophic carnivores and scavengers, and the potential for bioaccumulation is high. This study focused on
an insular population of cottonmouth snakes (Agkistrodon piscivorus conanti) at Seahorse Key, which is a
small island located on the gulf coast of Florida, USA. Seahorse Key provides important nesting habitat
for colonial-nesting water birds that nest on the island in the tens of thousands. The cottonmouths here
are abundant due to a mutualistic relationship with the nesting birds, and individuals forage largely or
exclusively on fish carrion that are dropped or regurgitated by the nesting birds. These snakes associate
closely with the nesting rookery where they are exclusively terrestrial and ground-dwelling, feeding on fish
carrion. This relationship between snakes and birds provides a novel opportunity to track heavy metals
as they move from an aquatic to terrestrial environment. We determined the levels of heavy metals in
both liver and blood samples taken from cottonmouths on Seahorse Key, and these were compared with
those from cottonmouths in mainland populations. The snakes on Seahorse Key have significantly higher
levels of Arsenic, Mercury and Cadmium than the mainland populations (3.89 ± 1.76, 5.98± 4.75, 0.19 ±
0.11, vs. 0.20 ± 0.37, 1.91 ± 1.96, 0.04 ± 0.05 ppm liver wet mass, respectively) (mean ± SE; ANOVA, P
values &lt; 0.01). Because the snakes are eating the same prey as the birds, it could be assumed that
nesting birds on the island could have similarly elevated levels of these metals. Both large and small
snakes have elevated levels of these contaminants, suggesting the possibility that female snakes are
transferring heavy metals to newborn individuals. Future research should examine this possibility and
also determine the levels of contaminants in the nesting birds, further quantify the levels that occur in
piscine prey, and ultimately trace the source of these metal pollutants.




                                                                                                         791
Wizen, Gil (University of Toronto Mississauga); Gasith, Avital (Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel)

"Come and eat me" - An unusual strategy for capturing amphibians by ground beetle larvae
(Carabidae: Epomis)

 Epomis circumscriptus        and Epomis dejeani are ground beetles (Carabidae) found in the vicinity of
rain-pools in Israel. Over recent years, laboratory and field observations have revealed an unusual trophic
interaction, in which the beetle larvae attack their potential predators, adult and juvenile amphibians.
Epomis larvae feed exclusively on amphibians, and interact with both anurans and urodeles. Laboratory
observations showed that larvae of E. dejeani preyed upon six amphibian species occurring in Israel
(Anura:      Pseudepidalea        viridis, Hyla savignyi,     Pelophylax     bedrigae, Pelobates syriacus;
Caudata:        Ommatotriton        vittatus    and Salamandra infraimmaculata ), whereas larvae of E.
circumscriptus avoided predation of O. vittatus , exhibiting a congeneric difference in food habit. In
contrast to the larvae, Epomis adults feed on various invertebrates as well as amphibians, however
when preying on amphibians they exhibit the same congeneric difference in food habit as the larvae.
The Epomis larvae ambush amphibians on the ground and appear to be luring the latter with antennal
and mandible movements. Laboratory experiments revealed that the larvae display the movements
regardless to amphibian presence, however when an amphibian is present in the nearby area the
movements' frequency increases significantly. Moreover, the frequency of the luring movements
increases significantly as the distance between the amphibian and the larvae decreases. These
movements attract the amphibian's attention to the larva, which it then attacks, attempting to seize the
presumed prey. Unexpectedly, the outcome of this predatory action is reversed: the beetle larva exploits
the opportunity and grasps the fast-approaching amphibian by its skin, in most cases positioning itself
near the latter‘s throat. It then begins feeding as an ectoparasite and ultimately turns into a predator,
devouring the amphibians. At the end of each instar, the larva drops off the host, molts in a protected
place and then seeks a new host. This trophic interaction is usually fatal to the amphibian. On some
occasions we observed hosts that survived, bearing scars inflicted by the larva's mandibles.



Wojnowski, David (University of North Texas); Malonza, Patrick (National Museums of Kenya, Canada)

Caecilian conservation education project: Educating local peoples about this misunderstood
amphibian.

An overview of a successful ongoing educational program targeting Kenyan villagers' perceptions of the
Sagalla Caecilian (Boulengerula niedeni), rated critically endangered by the World Conservation Union,
will be the focus of this talk. Sagalla villagers often kill the endangered amphibian, similar in appearance
to worms or snakes, when tilling their fields. This conservation education outreach program supports the
idea that respect and understanding of indigenous knowledge, coupled with long-term consistent follow-
up and integration of a scientific perspective has worldwide implications for saving imperiled species.




                                                                                                         792
Wolf, Alexander J. (Southern Illinois University); Hellgren, Eric C.; Bogosian, Victor (Southern Illinois
University, Carbondale, IL, United States); Moody, Raymond W. (Tinker Air Force Base, Tinker Air Force
Base, United States)

Conservation implications of spatial ecology of urban Texas horned lizards

Texas horned lizards ( Phrynosoma cornutum ; THL) are a threatened species in Texas and a state
sensitive species in Oklahoma. Because of the small scale of THL space-use relative to that of humans,
it is conceivable that THL populations may persist in fragmented habitat patches in a matrix of urban
development. To assess spatial requirements for this species, we gathered data on the movements,
home-range size, and home-range fidelity of a THL population on a 15-ha urban wildlife reserve in central
Oklahoma. We monitored this population for 8 years using mark-recapture surveys and radio-telemetry.
There were greater movement rates and larger home ranges during the reproductive period, associated
with mate searching in males and nesting in females. Annual kernel-density estimated home ranges for
individuals monitored for 2 years overlapped by 67% (± 3% SE). Multi-year home-range estimates
calculated with minimum-convex polygons were larger than annual home ranges, but there was no
difference between sizes of multi-year home ranges and annual home ranges when using kernel-density
estimators. Preliminary analyses indicated that juveniles are not shifting annual home-ranges more than
adults, suggesting they are not dispersing. We propose that the relatively large movements of female
THL just before and after nesting may serve as a dispersal mechanism for this species. Overall, our long-
term data set suggests that THL make use of a larger area across multiple years than during a single
year, a notable finding when assessing minimum patch-size requirements for fragmented populations.



Wollenberg Valero, Katharina (Trier University); Wang, Ian (Harvard University, Cambridge, United
States); Glor, Richard (Rochester University, Rochester, United States); Losos, Jonathan (Harvard
University, Cambridge, United States)

Diversification within adaptive radiations: the case of Hispaniolan trunk-ground anoles

The evolutionary processes that produce adaptive radiations are still enigmatic to date, as these are by
definition recognized after the radiation has occurred, which makes it difficult to study them as an ongoing
process. One way to connect pattern to process is to study the processes driving divergence today
among populations of species that belong to an adaptive radiation, and compare the results to patterns
observed on deeper level. In this paper, we tested whether evolution is a deterministic process with equal
outcomes during different stages of the adaptive radiation of Anolis lizards. On the example of a clade of
trunk-ground anoles, we inferred the adaptive basis of spatial variation among contemporary populations,
and tested whether axes of phenotypic differentiation among them mirror known axes of diversification at
deeper levels of the radiation. Although non-parallel change associated with genetic divergence explains
the vast majority of geographic variation, we found phenotypic variation to be adaptive as confirmed by
spatial convergence across the landscape, as well as genetically independent habitat-associated
morphological variation. Morphological diversification of populations occurs recurrently along both tested
axes of diversification previously identified in the anole radiation, but different sets of characters are
affected.




                                                                                                        793
Wollenberg Valero, Katharina (Trier University); Vieites, David (Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales,
Madrid, Spain); Glaw, Frank (Zoologische Staatssammlung München, München, Germany); Vences,
Miguel (Braunschweig Technical University, Braunschweig, Germany)

Madagascar's frog radiations as a model system to test hypotheses of diversification

We review different diversification mechanisms proposed for the fauna of Madagascar, and the
perspectives for testing them. Madagascar has a diverse biota that has evolved in isolation, and is
characterized by regionally pronounced and locally steep environmental gradients, common patterns of
microendemism across taxa and numerous evolutionary radiations. These characteristics establish
Madagascar as a promising system for the study of pattern and process in species diversification.
Species diversification in Madagascar is thought to occur either via mechanisms involving the physical
landscape (e.g., river catchments and mountain chains), or via mechanisms that involve clade-specific
traits. Both types of diversification hypotheses have recently been tested on the endemic Malagasy frog
radiations. The integration of phylogenetic information with distribution records made it possible to study
the effect of extrinsic factors on patterns of diversification, which allowed to imply underlying causal
mechanisms. In contrast, the effect of intrinsic factors on lineage diversification is less well studied as
ecological and life history information on many species of Malagasy frogs is still scarce. As an example
for this type of hypothesis we present a study on the effect of body size variation on patterns of lineage
diversification in the endemic frog family Mantellidae. Based on these results we define a testable
hypothesis under which small body sizes result in limited dispersal capabilities and low physiological
tolerances, causing smaller and more strongly fragmented ranges. This can be thought to facilitate
reproductive isolation and thus favor speciation. Contrary to the expectation of the faster speciation of
such microendemic phenotype species, we only found small body sizes of mantellid frogs to be linked to
higher diversification and substitution rates, but not small range sizes. However, in order to get a better
estimate of the connection between patterns of diversification past and the general underlying
mechanisms, studies using phylogenetic comparative methods need to be integrated with population
genetic studies.



Wood, Perry (Brigham Young University); Jackman, Todd; Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University, Canada);
Grismer, Lee (La Sierra University, Canada); Kumthron, Thirakhupt (Chulalongkorn University, Canada);
Aowphol, Anchalee (Kasetsart University, Canada); Grismer, Jesse; Kin Onn, Chan (University of
Kansas, Canada); Ahmad, Norhayati (Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Canada)

Systematics and biogeography of Southeast Asian Lizard Genus Acanthosaura Gray, 1831:
cryptic species, rapid radiations and selective sweeps

The genus Acanthosaura currently contains 10 species, ranging from Northeastern India east through
Myanmar, Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, and southern China, southward through the Malay
Peninsula to Indonesia (Sumatra). Within this distribution there are three wide-ranging species
complexes ( A. armata , A. crucigera , and A. lepidogaster ) that are highly polymorphic with respect to
color pattern. Genomic data from one mitochondrial gene (ND2) and four nuclear genes (RAG1, PRLR,
KIF24, and MXRA5) from 172 individuals of nine of the ten recognized species were analyzed using three
independent phylogenetic methods, molecular dating, mismatch distributions and Extended Bayesian
Skyline Plots (EBSP). The phylogenetic analyses produced a robust well-supported monophyletic genus
that indicates two of the three species complexes are composed of multiple species. The molecular
dating analysis reveals that Acanthosaura diverged from its common ancestor 35.3-60.1 mya during the
early Cenozoic transition from the Paleocene to Eocene when the initial collision of India and Asia took
place. Following the initial collision of India a major radiation took place during the Oligocene-Miocene



                                                                                                       794
transition 26–23 mya followed by second radiation/demographic expansion during the end of the Miocene
to the beginning of the Pliocene 4–6 mya. These two subsequent radiations took place at times when
sea levels were hypothesized to be 100 meters above the current sea level and refugial forest were more
abundant. This second radiation is corroborated from the independently calibrated EBSP and the
mismatch distributions except for the A. armata complex. The data from the A. armata complex
indicate that a mitochondrial selective sweep has/is independently taking place based on it having a lower
nucleotide diversity than either of nuclear genes.



Wueringer, Barbara (University of Western Australia); Squire, Lyle (Cairns Marine, Stratford, Q,
Australia); Collin, Shaun P. (University of Western Australia, Crawley, Q, Australia)

Intraspecific interactions between sawfish

In Australia, freshwater sawfish Pristis microdon inhabit the upper reaches of rivers during their juvenile
life. In these turbid environments, they are known to move into shallow water, and anecdotal evidence
suggests that they may form groups or aggregations. However, the behavioural mechanisms behind such
aggregations have never been investigated. Bonnethead sharks Sphyrna tiburo form hierarchies within a
group, based on smaller specimens giving way to larger ones when swimming on a course that would
cause a collision. Our behavioural analyses of juvenile freshwater sawfish in their first months in captivity
found that in 58 % of cases that may lead to a potential collision, both approaching are sawfish equally
likely to move out of the way, while in only 26% of cases a smaller sawfish would give way to let a larger
animal pass. This indicates that sawfish may use other strategies to establish hierarchies that avoid
potential collisions with their toothed rostra. One such strategy will be described in detail, based on
findings that sawfish touch each other on various parts of the body with their rostra. Moreover, analyses
of interactions in feeding sawfish clearly indicate the dominance of larger individuals, which use
behaviours of varying aggression to steal food from smaller individuals. Larger sawfish succeeded in
stealing food from smaller conspecifics in 60% of their attempts, while smaller sawfish never succeeded
in stealing food from a larger animal. During such interactions, sawfish may use their rostrum to pin the
rostrum of another sawfish onto the substrate, which results in the pinned animal moving backwards to
escape and the loss of its prey in the process. The present study indicates that removal of the rostrum of
a live sawfish (which seems to become more common in countries where sawfish are protected but
interact with recreational fishermen) may not only affect its ability to sense and manipulate prey but also
to successfully interact with conspecifics. If adult sawfish interact with each other in ways similar to
juveniles, removing the rostrum may also effectively remove them from the reproductive pool.



Wüster, Wolfgang (Bangor University); Hall, Cara; Barlow, Axel (Bangor University, Bangor, United
Kingdom)

Comparative phylogeography of widespread African snakes: is there a pattern?

Comparative phylogeographic studies of co-distributed species or species complexes are potentially
powerful tools in identifying common causes for observed distribution patterns. Here we use a
combination of sequences from two mitochondrial genes and two independent nuclear markers to infer
the phylogeographic history of eight species or species complexes of widespread African elapid and
viperid snakes (genera Naja , Dendroaspis , Bitis ). Our results reveal that most of the widespread
species complexes, both from forests and open formations, originated in the latest Miocene. Forest
species display congruent phylogeographic patterns (Guinea forests, (Congo forests, East Coast)), and



                                                                                                         795
most divergences across the Dahomey Gap are dated to the latest Miocene, highlighting the importance
and antiquity of this habitat break. Open-formation species display largely incongruent phylogeographic
patterns, although most have distinct southern African mitochondrial haplotype clades. The results
highlight the likely importance of the expansion of grasslands habitats in the latest Miocene in either
causing speciation through forest fragmentation or allowing the radiation of open-formation species. The
combination of mitochondrial and nuclear markers also provides strong evidence for substantial cryptic
species diversity in several widespread taxa.



Wyffels, Jennifer (Daemen College); McLaughlin, Donna; Morrissey, John (Sweet Briar College,
Canada)

Scyliorhinus retifer egg jelly liquefaction

Upon oviposition, the eggs of oviparous elasmobranchs are enveloped in three layers of egg white or
jelly, liquid, mucoid and solid. Proximal to the ovum is a liquid jelly contained within the chalaziferous
chamber. This chamber is surrounded by a viscous mucoid jelly. The matrix transitions from mucoid to
solid with increasing distance from the yolk mass. The solid jelly occludes respiratory slits, openings in
the egg case that allow seawater circulation. During embryonic development, the chalaziferous chamber
is compromised as the mucoid jelly surrounding it liquefies. Liquefaction continues radially from the
mucoid to solid jelly until eclosion, when seawater flows freely through the respiratory slits. The
mechanism of liquefaction is not understood but may be the result of secretions from an embryonic
hatching gland. Embryonic development for Scyliorhinus retifer was divided into 6 broad stages using
egg jelly condition and total protein concentration of the liquid jelly. Protein concentration and volume of
liquid jelly present within the egg case increased concomitantly during liquefaction. Liquid egg jelly
begins as a clear fluid that turns yellow and increases in color intensity before becoming cloudy near
eclosion. Liquid jelly samples have less than 1 mg/ml of total protein at oviposition. At or near the time of
eclosion the liquid jelly has more than 6 mg/ml of total protein. Protein and glycoprotein profiles for each
stage of development were compared using SDS-PAGE. A bioassay revealed activity in the liquid jelly
during stages 3, 4 and 5. A range of 0.3-2 mg of protein was liberated per mg of solid jelly liquefied. The
ability of 11 enzymes, lysozyme, proteinase k, alpha amylase, trypsin, hyaluronidase, pepsin, papain,
collagenase, elastase, alcalase and amyloglucosidase, to liquefy solid egg jelly was tested. Papain
successfully liquefied solid egg jelly. Minor protein and glycoprotein fragments were liberated using the
other enzymes.



Xuereb, Amanda (Queen's University); Lougheed, Stephen (Queen's University, Canada)

Landscape and Conservation Genetics of the Eastern Hog-nosed Snake in Ontario

Habitat fragmentation may impose barriers to dispersal and gene flow ultimately affecting the genetic
structure of populations of species. Reptiles are especially vulnerable to anthropogenic features such as
roads as they attempt to cross them while searching for food and mates during the active season, often
with little success. We aim to investigate the effects of landscape features on the genetic structure of a
threatened snake species in Ontario. The Eastern hog-nosed snake (Heterodon platirhinos) is one of the
most mobile snakes in Ontario with dispersal distances throughout an active season exceeding those of
other local reptiles making them particularly susceptible to barriers imposed by a heterogeneous
landscape. It is widespread in eastern North America but Ontario contains about 10% of its entire global
range, restricted to two geographically isolated regional populations (Eastern Georgian Bay and



                                                                                                         796
Southwestern Ontario). Blood and tissue samples were collected from 160 individuals (including roadkill)
captured throughout their distribution in Ontario. Using 454 high throughput DNA sequencing, we
identified more than 100 potential microsatellite markers. We have so far optimized PCR conditions for 13
microsatellite markers and successfully genotyped 110 individuals at these loci. We continue to work on
optimizing conditions for additional primers to obtain a total of 15-20 microsatellite loci for publication.
Preliminary Bayesian assignment analyses using a subset of the dataset revealed 3 genetic clusters for
Eastern hog-nosed snakes. We will also incorporate GIS-based spatial maps and perform minimum
resistance analyses to determine the relative ―cost‖ of movement through various habitat types on a
heterogeneous landscape. Superimposing the genetic clusters onto a spatial map will allow us to infer
landscape features that may act as corridors or barriers to gene flow. At present, there are no genetic
data on eastern hog-nosed snakes available to assess fine-scale population structure of the species and
little is known about factors that impinge on dispersal and subsequent gene flow in this species. As a
result, all populations encompassing the two regional populations in Ontario are managed under a single
conservation unit. Results obtained from this project will justify the appropriateness of this designation
and will allow management authorities to make informed decisions concerning the conservation of this
species.



Yagi, Katharine (Redpath Museum, McGill University); Litzgus, Jacqueline (Laurentian University,
Canada)

Thermoregulation of Spotted Turtles (Clemmys guttata) in a Beaver-flooded bog in Southern
Ontario

Body temperature has a major influence on the physiological processes, growth, reproductive output, and
overall survival of ectotherms. When a habitat is altered as a result of natural or anthropogenic
influences, the available temperatures in the habitat can change, thus affecting an animal‘s ability to
thermoregulate. We studied thermoregulation in response to habitat change in a population of Spotted
Turtles ( Clemmys guttata ) in Southern Ontario, Canada . The study site was historically mined for peat
such that drains were the only habitat containing surface water; historically, turtles were found primarily in
the drains. Following colonization by Beavers ( Castor canadensis ) in late 2005, dam building caused
increased water levels and potentially created new thermoregulatory opportunities for Spotted Turtles.
From 18 March 2009 to 11 October 2009, 19 Spotted Turtles were outfitted with radio transmitters and
iButtons to estimate body temperatures (T b ) continuously throughout the active season. Fifty artificial
turtle models outfitted with iButtons were deployed in the nine available habitat types to collect
environmental temperatures (T e ). Thirteen Spotted Turtles were tested in a thermal gradient under
laboratory conditions to determine the population target body temperature range (T set ). The T set for
the population ranged from 20ºC to 26ºC. In the field, T b was within the T set range 28% of the time
from March to October, and 67% of the time from July to August. Effectiveness of thermoregulation (E)
was calculated to be highest in July and August. The habitat type with the highest thermal quality was the
shallow flooded zone created by Beaver flooding (mean deviation from T set = 1.79ºC), and the habitat
with the lowest thermal quality was the drain bottom, the only aquatic habitat available prior to beaver
flooding (d e = 5.31ºC). This study confirms that Beaver flooding provided a wide variety of preferable
thermal opportunities for Spotted Turtles. Further investigation is needed to determine whether there are
seasonal shifts in T set , and more detailed analyses of Spotted Turtle thermoregulation during nesting
and hibernation are needed.




                                                                                                          797
Yang, Lei (Saint Louis University); Mayden, Richard (Saint Louis University, Canada)

Molecular dating and biogeography of the oldworld cyprind fish tribe Labeonini (Teleostei:
Cypriniformes)

The cyprinid tribe Labeonini ( sensu Rainboth, 1991) is a large group of freshwater fishes characterized
by their amazing diversity of modifications in lips and associated structures. This tribe is widely distributed
in the freshwaters of tropical Africa and Asia. In this study, a total of 34 genera and 144 species of
putative members of this tribe, which represent most of the generic diversity and more than one third of
the species diversity of this group of fishes, were sampled. All major distribution ranges of this tribe are
well represented and make it possible for an extensive biogeographic analysis be conducted. Four
nuclear genes and five mitochondrial genes (totally 9,465 bp) were sequenced. Partitioned maximum
likelihood analyses were performed based on the nuclear dataset, mitochondrial dataset, combined
dataset, and the dataset for each gene. Statistical dispersal–vicariance analysis (S-DIVA) was performed
to infer the ancestral distribution ranges of the tribe Labeonini and the four subtribes included. Molecular
dating was conducted using Bayesian Evolutionary Analysis Sampling Trees (BEAST). Multiple hard
minimum bounds and soft maximum bounds were employed as calibration priors. Our preliminary
analysis suggested that the tribe Labeonini might originate from Southeast Asia.



Yang, Weizhao (Chengdu Institute of Biology); Fu, Jinzhong (University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada)

The genetic basis of adaptive evolution of high elevation amphibians

The rapid and dramatic topological change of the Tibet Plateau in the last 10 MY has generated not only
a large number of endemic species, but also a suite of traits that are adaptive to high elevation
environments. Using the next generation sequencing technology, we are seeking genetic changes that
may facilitate the adaptation to high elevation environments. Our study system includes two sister species
of frogs, low elevational Rana chensinensis and high elevational R. kukunoris . Rana kukunoris was
descended from a common ancestor inhabiting low elevations shared with R. chensinensis , through
colonizing and adapting to high elevation habitats. By comparing their transcriptomes, we have identified
more than 130 genes that bear the signature of recent positive selection. Among them, several involve in
response to UV or hypoxia, and metabolic change. These genes have likely contributed to the adaption of
high elevation life. Interestingly, no hemoglobin related genes are under positive selection, which
suggests that amphibians respond to hypoxia using different mechanisms comparing to mammals. We
are currently examining population level variations of these candidate genes and expanding to other
amphibian groups. With such cross-species examination, we hope to find useful diagnostic markers for
monitoring the genetic impact of abrupt climate change to high elevation vertebrate communities.



Yasumiba, Kiyomi (James Cook University); Bell, Sara; Alford, Ross (James Cook University,
Townsville, Australia)

Density of symbiotic bacteria alters their effects on growth of the chytrid fungus,
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis

Bacterial symbionts on frog skin can inhibit the growth of the chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium
dendrobatidis ( Bd ). Substantial amounts of research are underway with the goal of discovering bacteria
that may be effective at increasing the resistance of amphibians to chytridiomycosis through
bioaugmentation. Bacterial isolates can be screened for production of metabolites that inhibit Bd by



                                                                                                           798
exposing Bd cultures in vitro to either live bacterial cultures or cell-free supernatants. However, in both
techniques the density of bacteria is not known. Bacterial density can affect metabolite production via
quorum sensing. It is therefore important to understand cell density effects when evaluating bacteria as
possible candidates for bioaugmentation. The aim of our study was to provide the first evaluation of how
the density of symbiotic bacteria affects their inhibition of Bd growth in vitro. We sampled cutaneous
bacterial isolates from three frog species in tropical rainforests of Northern Queensland, Australia and
selected ten isolates found to be inhibitory from pilot trials. We sub-sampled each isolate at intervals
during the first 48 hours growth of the bacterial culture, measuring absorbance values, bacterial cell
counts and inhibitory activity of cell-free supernatants at each time point. The challenge assay results
clearly demonstrated that the inhibitory effects of most isolates were density dependent, with relatively
low variation among isolates in the minimum cell density needed to inhibit Bd growth. Inhibition
increased gradually with density in a few isolates, but in most it increased abruptly as density passed a
threshold, suggesting that metabolite production had been initiated through quorum sensing. These
results suggest that the density of bacterial symbionts on frog skin could affect the vulnerability of
individual frogs to chytridiomycosis, and that in selecting bacteria for bioaugmentation it may be important
to consider the density responses of candidate isolates.



Yopak, Kara (University of Western Australia); McMeans, Bailey (University of Windsor, Canada);
Kovacs, Kit; Lydersen, Christian (Norwegian Polar Institute, Canada); Fisk, Aaron (University of Windsor,
Canada)

Can we infer function from elasmobranch brain morphology? A study of Somniosidae

Broad variability has been documented within cartilaginous fishes regarding the size and complexity of
the brain and its major components (olfactory bulbs, telencephalon, diencephalon, mesencephalon,
cerebellum and medulla) . This variability is often associated with habitat or specific behavior patterns,
even in phylogenetically unrelated species that share certain lifestyle characteristics. However, few
studies to date have examined neural specialization in closely related species that vary in their lifestyle
and primary habitat. Somniosidae is a member of the Order Squaliformes, which comprises 7 genera and
17 species. They are benthopelagic fishes that range greatly in size, distribution, and depth preference
(occurring as deep as 2200m). However, few studies have quantified interspecific brain size
(encephalization) or the relative development of major brain areas and discrete subsections of these brain
structures that receive direct sensory input (e.g. optic tectum and the dorsal and medial octavolateral
nuclei) within this group. This study examined the brain of two large-bodied somniosids that are known to
occupy extremely cold waters of the High Arctic, S. pacificus and S. microcephalus, in comparison to
the brain morphology of closely related, deep-dwelling species from more southerly latitudes, such as
Centroselachus crepidater , Centroscymnus owstonii , and Proscymnodon plunketi . Brain patterns
were analyzed in relation to both phylogeny and ecology. In general, members of Somniosidae had
smaller than expected brains for their body mass. Although closely related, the relative development of
major brain areas did not track phylogenetic groupings. In particular, development of brain regions that
receive visual input were relatively reduced in S. microcephalus , while the olfactory regions of the brain
were greatly enlarged. This species occurs at great depths and is heavily colonized by parasitic
copepods that attach to the shark's cornea; its brain morphology might reflect a reduced reliance on
vision for survival. Although this study was not a functional analysis, we suggest brain morphology may
serve as a tool to make predictions about the behavioral ecology, sensory specialization, and predatory
habits in cartilaginous fishes.




                                                                                                        799
York, Joshua (University of Central Oklahoma); Baird, Troy (University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond,
OK, United States)

Do tail displays in juvenile collared lizards function as pursuit-deterrence signals?

Although prey behavior is shaped strongly by the necessity of escaping predators, selection may also
promote behavior patterns that balance risk against other fitness requirements. One possible mechanism
involves signals that are proposed to communicate to predators that prey are in a position to evade an
impending attack. Such pursuit-deterrence signals may be advantageous to both prey and predator. Prey
avoid the potential costs associated with fleeing and taking refuge, whereas predators avoid futile pursuit.
Some lizards are good models for testing predictions of this hypothesis because they use their tails to
display when humans approach. Nonetheless, evidence for pursuit-deterrence signals remains equivocal.
We tested whether or not tail displays by juvenile collared lizards function as pursuit-deterrence signals
using experiments where we slowly and steadily approached subject lizards until they reacted, at which
point we stopped and recorded their behavior. We manipulated the intensity with which our approach
threatened subjects by varying the angle of approach relative to lizard body-axis orientation on the perch.
We also examined lizard body condition in relation to their propensity to signal, because more robust prey
are hypothesized to be better equipped to escape. For trials conducted during the first 1.5 months of their
activity, juveniles performed tail displays in response to simulated-predator approaches, but both latency
to display and display frequency were independent of body condition. Subjects were more likely to flee,
then stop and give tail displays while remaining emergent when we approached head-on while they were
partially hidden on a perch sloping away from the approach. By contrast, when approached from the side
such that they were completely exposed, subjects were more likely to flee and hide in a crevice without
displaying. Tail displays in response to approaches ceased later in the season when juveniles were
longer and heavier. Tail displays when prey were more shielded from a threat is consistent with a pursuit-
deterrence signal because less exposed prey should be in a better position to escape. The use of pursuit-
deterrence signals may decrease when juveniles have grown larger because survival over-winter
increases with size, perhaps diminishing the cost of interrupting foraging when hiding.



York, Joshua (University of Central Oklahoma); Haynie, Michelle; Creecy, James; Baird, Troy (University
of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, OK, United States)

Genetic determination of reproductive success in male collared lizards displaying alternative
social tactics

Strong intra-sexual selection may result in high reproductive success for a subset of males through social
monopolization of space, resources, and females. By contrast, males having lower resource holding
power may be selected to adopt alternative social tactics (ART) that are hypothesized to yield lower
reproductive success. Predicting patterns of reproductive success based on social behavior may be
problematic because females may mate with multiple males even though they appear to pair with only
one male socially, and because parentage may be influenced by post-copulatory mechanisms. However,
coupling genetic parentage analyses with observations of behavior provides a more certain determination
of the distribution of reproductive success. We are conducting such a study on collared lizards in central
Oklahoma. In our population, males in their second season acquire and defend reproductive territories
using high rates of patrol and display, and within which they enter into prolonged courtship interactions
with female residents. Although sexually mature, first-year males employ stealthy subordinate social
tactics and attempt to sneak copulations. Females are usually overlapped spatially by more than one
territorial male and as many as four first-year males. We are combining records of the spatial distribution
and social behavior of adult collard lizards with genetic determination of paternity of hatchlings to test



                                                                                                        800
whether or not females mate with males other than those that appear to monopolize them socially, some
extra-pair copulations are with non-territorial males, and insemination by multiple males occurs both
within and among clutches produced by individual females. Thus far, paternity assignment for all offspring
(N = 10) on a small habitat patch occupied by four adult females and three mature males reveals a
pattern of reproductive success inconsistent with that predicted by mating system theory. Three of the
four females produced a single clutch of eggs, with two clutches showing multiple paternity. Two of the
three males present, both of which were non-territorial first-year males, sired all ten offspring, whereas the
only territorial male present did not sire any offspring. We are expanding our paternity analyses to include
the entire population (N = 45 potential parents, 89 offspring) from the 2007 season, to further test the
extent to which the sneaking tactics of non-territorial males are successful, and the generality of multiple
paternity.



Young, Bruce (University of Massachusetts Lowell); Colayori, Samantha (University of Rochester,
Rochester, Canada); Duong, Taihung (University of Rochester, Rochester, United States); Kohl, Tobias;
Westhoff, Guido (University of Bonn, Bonn, MB, Germany); Bakken, George (Indiana State University,
Terre Haute, United States)

Combined modeling and experimental analyses reveal directional asymmetry and an adaptive
radiation of the pitviper infrared sensory system

The facial pit of pitviper is a pinhole-like sensory organ which detects thermal radiation. The thermal
radiation reaching the suspended pit membrane will depend not only on the exact source of the emitter,
but also on the spatial relationship between the pit membrane and the surface topography of the snake
(the external pit anatomy, which has marked interspecific variation). The spatial relationship between the
pit membrane and the surface topography of the snake was quantified through x-ray tomography
sections. A combination of optical and heat transfer physics was then applied to create point spread
functions, which model the distribution of radiation energy over the pit membrane for any given emitter
location. In every species examined the point spread functions revealed that the pit membrane had
directional asymmetry, meaning that the same thermal radiation would elicit a differential response
depending on where the source was located relative to the surface of the snake‘s head. The theoretical
analysis of the Western Diamondback rattlesnake, Crotalus atrox, suggested that its greatest thermal
sensitivity was located 30° in front of and 10-20° above the midpoint of the facial pit. We tested this
prediction by measuring the neural responses of the sensory membrane (recorded from the Trigeminal
nerve) to controlled thermal radiation stimuli produced by an Infra-red emitter that was presented to the
sensory membrane over a range of vertical and horizontal angles. The experimental results clearly
demonstrate directional asymmetry in the membrane sensitivity with peak sensitivity located at 20° in
front of and 12° degrees above the midpoint of the facial pit. The interspecific variation in the point spread
functions suggest an adaptive radiation within this sensory system. In terrestrial pit vipers peak sensitivity
is generally above the head, while in arboreal forms it is below the head; some species have overlapping
(stereoptic) sensory fields; and the overall size of the area of peak sensitivity varies considerably
suggesting a potential tradeoff between sensitivity and image resolution.




                                                                                                          801
Young, Bruce (University of Massachusetts Lowell);

Transitional tails of tetrapods: How can a tail be semi-aquatic?

The phylogeny of tetrapods includes numerous taxa that have become semi-aquatic or secondarily
aquatic by way of a semi-aquatic evolutionary stage. Most of these taxa appear to have swum using axial
undulation. In most forms of axial undulation the amplitude of the undulatory wave increases caudally. An
aquatic or semi-aquatic species can ―harness‖ the increased amplitude of the caudal undulations by
increasing the lateral projected area of the tail (especially the tail tip) which would increase the propulsive
force of swimming. While moving over land, a tail with increased lateral projected area would increase
drag, predation risk, and potential for tangling the tail in physical features of the environment. Semi-
aquatic and secondarily aquatic taxa are particularly prevalent within the evolutionary radiations
characterized by monitor lizards, mosasaurs, and snakes. The tail of these taxa may have a ―modularity‖
that facilitates localized morphological adapatation, such as increased projected surface area. To explore
the modularity of the tail, and its potential role in aquatic locomotion, the mechanics of swimming were
study in the water monitor (Varanus salvator) which is taken as a representative semi-aquatic taxa. The
results suggested functional modularity within the tail in that the proximal base of the tail produces the
vast majority of the force of propulsion; the distal end of the tail may actual impede propulsion. To test this
further a series of experiments were conducted in which the distal 60% of the tail of Varanus salvator was
ablated. The animals (both before and after ablation) were fitted with prosthetic tails modeled after the tail
of the highly aquatic mosasaur Plotosaurus. Comparisons of the swimming performance of the monitors
both before and after tail ablation, and with the different forms of tail prosthesis support a modular
interpretation of the tail, and suggest that there are two primary routes of modifying a terrestrial tail to
enhance aquatic locomotion.



Young, Kevin (University of Houston-Clear Lake); Richart, Casey (San Diego State University, Canada);
Stringer, Angela (Fire Mountain Consulting LLC, Canada); Hayes, Marc (Washington Department of Fish
and Wildlife, Habitat Program, Canada)

A preliminary analysis of diet in post-metamorphic northwestern salamanders (ambystoma
gracile)

Understanding species‘ diet is fundamental to elucidating ecological processes and energy flow within
ecosystems. The diet of terrestrial life stages can provide unique insights into taxa like amphibians, with
complex migratory patterns between terrestrial and aquatic habitats. This preliminary study addresses the
Northwestern Salamander ( Ambystoma gracile ), an endemic to the Pacific Northwest (PNW). We
selected 50 post-metamorphic A. gracile , randomly stratified by 14 5-mm size classes, from pitfall trap
collections made during the PNW Old-growth Forest study in the fall of each of 1984 and 1985. We
removed and opened entire gastrointestinal tracts and identified their contents to the lowest level possible
without extraordinary means. We recorded a total of 14 higher-level prey taxa for analysis (Acari,
Araneae, Chilopoda, Coleoptera, Collembola, Diplopoda, Diptera, Hemiptera, Hymenoptera, Lepidoptera,
Orthoptera, Phalangida (Opiliones), Pseudoscorpionida, Stylommatophora). The three most frequently
recorded higher-level taxa were Coleoptera, Stylommatophora, and Phalangida. We found no difference
in numbers of prey among salamander body size or gender categories. The only effect of body size on
diet was its positive relationship with the numbers of millipede prey; small sample size limits
understanding of how important this pattern may be. Based on Jaccard‘s coefficient of four body size
categories, intermediate-sized animals (71-85 mm Snout-vent-length) took the greatest variety of prey.
This may reflect the ability of intermediate-sized animals to take the larger prey available to the largest
salamander size class and still regularly take prey typically taken by smaller size classes, but ignored by



                                                                                                           802
the largest salamanders. Importantly, this study provides only a perspective on potential A. gracile prey
because the 4-7 day frequency of trap checks leaves ambiguous what prey were captured before or after
falling into traps.



Youngquist, Melissa (Miami University); Boone, Michelle (Miami University, Canada)

Habitat preference and movement by juvenile bullfrogs (Rana catesbeiana) and cricket frogs (acris
blanchardi) in a semi-agricultural landscape

Despite playing a disproportionate role in population growth and persistence (juveniles survival strongly
influences population growth and they are likely the dispersing stage) little is known about the terrestrial
habits of juvenile amphibians. It is, therefore, vital that we understand how different land uses influence
juvenile behavior, particularly in areas with high rates of habitat alteration. In this study we examined
habitat preference by bullfrogs ( Rana catesbeiana) and Blanchard‘s cricket frog ( Acris blanchardi ). In
the first part of the study we released frogs into 3 x 3 m enclosures to determine how environmental
factors influence habitat choice.     We experimentally manipulated ground cover (with or without cover
boards), shade (with or without shade cloth), or soil moisture (high or low). For each manipulation, we
determined night and daytime preference.           We found that during nighttime, both species showed
preference for no cover, no preference for shade, and a preference for high soil moisture.               During
daytime, bullfrogs preferred to be on the side of the pen with cover, shade, and high moisture. During
the day, cricket frogs had no preference for presence of cover but did prefer shade and high moisture.
In the second part of the study, we released individuals at habitat edge to examine short term habitat
choice and movement patters. Edge habitats tested were: corn-forest, corn-grass, or grass-forest. We
tracked overnight movements using fluorescent powder. We found bullfrogs had random orientation at
all habitat edges while cricket frogs oriented away from forest. Bullfrogs showed no overall habitat
choice, but did seem to prefer to remain in the edge between habitats. Cricket frogs did not show a
preference for corn or grass, but did choose not to travel through forest habitat. Given a preference for
high soil moisture at all time periods, these data suggest that if the majority of dispersing individuals travel
on wet nights then conversion to agriculture may not be detrimental to the dispersal of bullfrogs and
crickets frogs.    These data also support bullfrogs as habitat generalist and suggests that they benefit
from human modified habitats and creation of edge habitat for dispersal.           Finally, these data suggest
that the succession of forest may be detrimental to cricket frog dispersal while preservation of grasslands
may enhance population connectivity.



Yu, Shuangying (Texas Tech University); Wages, Mike (Texas Tech University, Canada); Cobb, George
(Baylor University, Canada); Maul, Jonathan (Texas Tech University, Canada)

Acute Toxicity of Chlorothalonil to African Clawed Frogs Xenopus Laevis

Chlorothalonil is a broad spectrum, non-systemic fungicide that is widely used in agriculture to protect
crops and is also used to control mold, mildew, microbes, algae, insects, mites, and ticks. Although
studies have suggested that chlorothalonil is highly toxic to fish and invertebrates, little is known about the
impact of chlorothalonil on amphibians. Therefore, we evaluated the acute toxicity of chlorothalonil on two
developmental stages of African clawed frog ( Xenopus laevis ; NF stage 8-11 embryos and stage 45-46
larvae). Embryos are less sensitive to chlorothalonil compared to larvae, with 96-h LC50s of 42.14 μg/L
(95%CI: 39.67-44.94 μg/L) for embryos and 11.65 μg/L (95%CI: 10.43-12.67 μg/L) for larvae. Growth was
inhibited at concentrations of 21.6 μg/L and 10.24 μg/L for embryos and larvae, respectively. Embryos



                                                                                                            803
exposed to 36 μg/L chlorothalonil showed abnormal gut coiling. Because it is difficult to identify gut
structures at later developmental stage, larvae were not examined for gut malformations. However,
irregular gut shape was observed in larvae exposed to all concentrations of chlorothalonil. Interestingly,
chlorothalonil caused tail shortening in larvae, and the tail to total length ratios for all chlorothalonil
treatments were reduced compared to control and tadpoles collected from the same clutches prior to the
experiment (P &lt; 0.05). Our results indicate that chlorothalonil could be highly toxic to X. laevis
embryos and larvae, and exposure in the larval stage may lead to lethal and developmental effects.
Disruption of tail development in later developmental stages is likely to impair swimming, feeding, and
predator avoidance, and may have significant consequences on larval survival. Future studies on the
mechanism of tail shortening caused by chlorothalonil and evaluation of chlorothalonil toxicity in North
American amphibians are recommended.



Zamudio, Kelly (Cornell University);

Diversification and conservation of reptiles and amphibians: genomes, populations, and
landscapes.

Microevolution focuses on the processes that lead to divergence and diversification of species and
lineages. These same processes are commonly interrupted or reversed when populations are disrupted
in anthropogenically-modified landscapes. My goal in this talk is to use examples from amphibian and
reptile species I have worked on, to demonstrate how quantifying evolutionary processes contributes to
our understanding of the origin and maintenance of biodiversity. I will review three conservation
genetic/genomic studies focused on an individual taxon, populations within communities, and entire
lineages, to exemplify the application of evolution-based conservation measures in cases of threatened
herpetofauna.



Zancolli, Giulia (Department of Animal Ecology and Tropical Biology, Biocenter, University of Würzburg);
Steffan-Dewenter, Ingolf (Department of Animal Ecology and Tropical Biology, Biocenter, University of
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany); Rödel, Mark-Oliver (Museum für Naturkunde, Leibniz Institute for
Research on Evolution and Biodiversity at the Humboldt University Berlin, Berlin, Germany)

Altitudinal distribution of amphibian diversity on tropical mountains: a perspective from the roof
of Africa

Mount Kilimanjaro is the tallest freestanding mountain in the world and thus it encompasses several
ecological life zones including hot dry savanna, submontane and montane tropical rain forests, subalpine
heathlands and alpine cushion vegetation. It has been designed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site and
included in the Eastern Afromontane Hotspot of Biodiversity. Nevertheless, most of the herpetological
surveys in Tanzania are conducted on the Eastern Arc Mountains and adjoining coastal lowlands,
whereas the herpetofauna of Mount Kilimanjaro has never been intensively explored. In this study, we
aimed to assess the amphibian species richness of the Kilimanjaro area and to investigate diversity
patterns and distribution along an altitudinal gradient. Additionally, we investigated the effects of
anthropogenic disturbance on species richness and community composition. We surveyed the southern
slope of the mountain from the foothill to 4000 m by means of time constrained visual and acoustic
encounter surveys. To prevent underestimating the true species richness we performed additional
opportunistic searches, especially in the forest within the National Park. Here we present the results and




                                                                                                       804
elucidate the picture we have gained so far concerning the pattern of amphibian diversity on Kilimanjaro
and compare it to older mountain blocks in the Eastern Arcs.



Zani, Peter (Pomona College); Archie, James (California State University, Long Beach, Long Beach, CA,
United States)

The evolution and phylogenetic distribution of autotomy

The ability to self amputate the tail (caudal autotomy) appears to be widespread among certain reptile
groups.       It occurs very broadly throughout the Squamata as well as in the Rhynchocephalia.
Furthermore, based on the presence of fracture planes in the vertebrae of certain fossils, caudal
autotomy appears to have been possible in several earlier reptile groups.            While autotomy is likely
ancestral for lizards, numerous species have evolved restricted sites for autotomy or even lost the ability
to autotomize altogether. We review the evolutionary distribution of tail loss in lizards and consider the
macroevolutionary trends of this trait in light of recent higher-level phylogenetic hypotheses. In addition,
we examine the microevolutionary trends of caudal autotomy within species using western fence lizards,
Sceloporus occidentalis , as a case study. We attempt to test the hypothesis that caudal autotomy is
related to predation environment by measuring tail loss frequency of multiple populations across this
species‘ range in a phylogenetic context.



Zani, Peter (Pomona College);

The shift from income to capital breeding with age in female side-blotched lizards

Do animals rely on energy stored from previous seasons (capital) to reproduce or do they rely only on
energy available during the breeding season (income), and does their breeding strategy change with
age? To answer this question, I studied the reproductive strategies of female side-blotched lizards ( Uta
stansburiana ) in eastern Oregon, where lizards can live to be seven years old. Data from nine years of
study indicate that during their initial growing season following hatching, juveniles must allocate energy to
both growth and storage. Previous research on this species has suggested that liver glycogen stores,
not fat bodies, are consumed during winter, but that fat bodies are critical for yolk formation during
reproduction. Thus, energy stores may be classified as earmarked for overwintering or for subsequent
reproduction.      Larger, older females reproduce earlier than smaller, younger females in any given
breeding season even though younger females may enter the breeding season at or above maturation
size. A female‘s reproductive timing advances with age relative to the total population up to about age
three when they reach asymptotic body size. That is, once females cease growing energy can be more
fully allocated to storage for reproduction the following year. This allows larger females to enter the
breeding season ready to reproduce using stored capital while smaller females must acquire additional
energy income before breeding. Thus, due to the added energetic demands of growth, it appears that
female side-blotched lizards can be classified as income breeders during their first breeding season, but
progressively shift to become capital breeders as they age.




                                                                                                         805
Zimmermann, Sigfrido A. (California State University, Northridge); Dickson, Matthew M.; Liwanag,
Heather E. M. (California State University, Northridge, Canada); Espinoza, Robert E. (California State
University, Northridge, Northridge, CA, United States)

Comparative Physiology of an Invasive Reptile: Have Mediterranean House Geckos Adapted to
their Local Niches?

Adaptation is essential for organisms to persist in changing environments. Physiological adaptations are
especially important for ectotherms, which are closely coupled to their abiotic environments. Introduced
species might be more likely to evolutionarily adapt to local climates because of strong selective
pressures in their new environments and small founder populations. To test these ideas, we compared
temperature-dependent rates of evaporative water loss (EWL) and thermal tolerances (critical thermal
minimum, CT min and panting threshold, T pant ) of Mediterranean House Geckos ( Hemidactylus
turcicus ). These familiar ―porch light‖ geckos have been widely introduced throughout North America over
the past century. Introduced geckos were collected from regions representing three climates: Palm
Springs, California (desert: hot–cold/dry), Los Angeles, California (Mediterranean: warm/dry), and
Lafayette and Hammond, Louisiana (semitropical: hot/humid). We hypothesized that geckos from these
three climates would exhibit differences in EWL and temperature tolerances that are consistent with
adaptation to their local climates. Geckos from Palm Springs and Los Angeles had lower rates of EWL at
high temperatures compared to geckos from Louisiana, suggesting adaptive evolution of this trait. Geckos
from Palm Springs and Los Angeles also had lower T pant than geckos from Louisiana. This may be
because the Louisiana populations have higher rates of EWL, which allows them cool without panting at
higher body temperatures. Preliminary data suggest there are no differences in CT min among
populations, perhaps because the unique microniches they occupy buffer them from extreme winter lows.
Future studies will include temperature-dependent metabolism. Ultimately our data will be used in
mechanistic climatic niche models, which can be used to predict the future range expansion of this
species in North America. More generally, developing an understanding of how species that have been
forced (via introduction) into new climates adapt to their new abiotic environment may help us understand
how other species will cope with predicted changes in climate.



Znari, Mohammed (Cadi Ayyad University, Marrakech); Naimi, Mohamed; Aitbaamrane, Moulay
Abdeljalil; El Hajjy, Mustapha; Namous, Salwa; Hichami, Nawal (Cadi Ayyad University, Marrakech,
Canada)

Conservation and restoration potentials of the Souss Valley Tortoise, Testudo graeca soussensis
Pieh, 2001 (Testudines: Testudinidae) in an arid area of West central Moroccos

The Moorish tortoise, Testudo graeca L., 1758, is the unique tortoise in Morocco. It includes three
subspecies two of which are endemic to the country: T. g. marokkensis and T. g. soussensis. It is also
among the Morocco‘s most threatened reptile species as a result of destruction and loss of its natural
habitat, overgrazing, illegal harvest for pet trade and climate change. These threats are more serious in
the case of T. g. soussensis in arid areas of west central Morocco where the chronic drought of the last
ten years, accelerated the population decline as a consequence of a reduced food availability and water
stress. To address this issue, and in order to conserve et restore the tortoise populations and their natural
habitat in arid and overgrazed ares in the central Jbilet mountains, a study of the conservation and
restoration potentials has been carried out. This comprises an experimental captive breeding essay
including a survey of reproduction, natural and artificial incubations of eggs and rearing of young tortoises
born in captivity. The maintenance conditions (housing, feeding, care, etc.) are described. Newly hatched
tortoises, collected in the natural habitat, are also hand reared in the framework of a Head Starting



                                                                                                         806
operation, and will be, as the captive-born tortoises, released in the wild at un age of 5-6 years for the
reinforcement of remnant populations or rehabilitation of the habitats where the species disappeared.
Furthermore, actions of habitat restoration or rehabilitation are proposed and consist, according to the
level of environment deterioration, of an improved resource management or the reintroduction of the
jujube shrub and tortoises which depend on. Finally, the creation of a tortoise sanctuary in the central
Jbilet is proposed and its design described. The conservation and restoration potentials of T. g.
soussensis and its habitat in arid areas of west central Morocco, revealed great opportunities of
measures and actions to be carried out in favor of the safeguard of one of the most remarquable and
threatened species of Morocco.



Znari, Mohammed (Cadi Ayyad University, Marrakech); Hichami, Nawal; El Hamidy, Mohamed; Namous,
Salwa; Naimi, Mohamed (Cadi Ayyad University, Marrakech, Canada)

Osmotic responses of the Souss valley tortoises (Testudo graeca soussensis) to the effects of
chronic drought in an arid area of West central Morocco

The Souss Valley tortoises, Testudo graeca soussensis , occupies various habitats in west central
Morocco, including arid environments where they are frequently confronted to unpredictable chronic
droughts. These can affect their water and osmotic balances due to the lack of water and high salt
concentrations in food plants. Seasonal patterns of osmoregulation were investigated during different
periods between 2002 and 2012 in an arid area of West central Morocco. From April 2011 to March 2012,
plasma osmolality in free ranging tortoises remained relatively constant across seasons, but not urine
osmolality which showed significant seasonal changes due to variation in water availability related to
chronic drought and occurrence of rainfall events. Dehydrated adult tortoises (9 males and 8 females)
which experienced 6-8 weeks of drought during 2008, were captured, weighed, bleeded (100 to 300 µl)
and, occasionally, their voided urinary fluid collected. They were then kept in captivity and rehydrated
while provided with a mixture of fresh vegetables and lucerne and water ad libitum for two weeks. They
were then reweighed, rebleeded, and voided urinary fluids taken 24h before and after an acute KCl
overloading. The plasma and urinary fluid osmolalities, electrolytes‘ (sodium, potassium and chlorine) and
total nitrogen concentrations were measured. The urinary fluid/plasma osmolality ratio, approaching
isotonicity, in both dehydrated and potassium overloaded tortoises was much higher than in rehydrated
ones (respectively 0.80 and 0.86 vs. 0.24). These were indicative of an advanced dehydration condition
in free-living tortoises the urinary electrolytes‘ concentrations of which were relatively higher and
comparable to those in potassium overloaded tortoises. These showed a relatively higher urine total
nitrogen concentration. Implications for conservation are discussed with respect of the PEP (Potential
Excretion of Potassium) hypothesis (Oftedal, 2002) according to which plants high in water and/or
proteins, but low in potassium should be selected in favorable periods.




                                                                                                      807
