
functioning as a foraging base tor those sharks captured. While detailed age and growth information were not
collected, comparisons to length distributions in the literature indicated that the fishery appears to be impacting the
summer nursery grounds of sharks in the northern Gulf of Mexico.

   376                         09:00 Monday                                  CE6                               OVC
Length-at-birth of the sandbar shark, Carcharhinus plumbeus, in Delaware Bay. R.R. Merson. Department of
Biological Sciences, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, Rl 02881, USA; H.L. Praft(Jr.), National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, National Marine Fisheries Service, Northeast Rsheries Science Center, 28 Tarzwell Dr.,
Narragansett, Rl 02882-1199, USA.
Young-of-the-year sandbar sharks grow in length before their umbilical scars are healed. This study takes that into
account by separating umbilical scar healing stages and produces a more accurate length-at-birth than studies which
report the tenths of sandbar sharks with open umbilical scars. We examined 798 sandbar sharks captured by gill
net or longline in Delaware Bay between 1995 and 1997. Six distinct umbilical scar healing stages were termed cord­
remains, open-fresh, partly-healed, mostly-healed, well-healed and none. Sharks with the three earliest umbilical
healing stages did not differ in length, thus represented the length-at-birth. The mean length-at-birth is 49.3 cm ±0.3
cm fork length (95% confidence interval, n=238) with a range of 40 to 55 cm fork length in Delaware Bay. Our
results are comparable to published reports of sandbar length-at-birth along the US east coast and therefore do not
support the hypothesis that sandbar sharks are bom 'somewhat' smaller in the northern pupping range.




   377                         .09:15 Monday                                .CE6                          .    OVC
History and management of the dogfish fishery of British Columbia, Canada. R. Bonfil. Fisheries Centre, UBC,
2204 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4.
The fishery for dogfish (Squalus acanthias} of British Columbia is one of the oldest shark fisheries in the world. This
paper describes the main features in the long evolution of this fishery. It also analyses the current situation and the
management system of the fishery. Presently, this is a small fishery characterized by strong market limitations.
Although there is a reasonably modem management system for the fishery, the apparent success to keep the
dogfish stocte at healthy levels for the major part of the 125+ years of the fishery is more a product of the lack of
strong demand for dogfish which has offered a fortuitous protection to the stock. Some suggestions for
improvements to the stock assessment and possible ways to develop the fishery are given.




 . 378                         09:30 Monday                                 CE6      ,                        OVC
Catch and effort data of whale sharks In the Philippines. A.A.S.P. Yaptinchay, Kabang Kalikasan ng Pilipinas
(WWF-Philippines), No. 32-A Maalindog St. UP Village, Diliman, Quezon City 1101, Philippines; R. Uy, Mantangale-
Alibuag Resort, Balingoan, Misamis Oriental; M.N.R. Alava. Marine Laboratory, Silliman University, Dumaguete City
6200, Philippines.
Catch volume and trade of the whale shark fishery for the 1997-1998 season was monitored by WWF-Philippines
and Silliman University. Methods of data collection include site-visits to coastal villages involved in whale shark and
manta fishery, market surveys, fishers’ intenriews and daily landing-site enumeration. Eight fishery sites were
identified in the 1997 season, tha major landing sites of which were in Pamilacan, Bohol and Talisayan, Misamis
Oriental. A fishery site in Sorsogon, Luzon is recently operational for the 1998 season. Fishery profiles and changes
in activity patterns related to whale shark fishery in these sites are presented. Increasing fishing effort, due to
increasing demand, and decreasing catch per unit effort characterized the fishery. Management strategies employing
Integrated Conservation and Development-projects protecting both whale sharks and the fishing population
dependent on them was recommended in the previous year. This recommendation is being evaluated against a
government directive on total ban on whale shark fishery and trade.




   382                       , 11:00 Monday                                 CA11                              THN
Reproductive success in the bullfrog, Rana catesbelana.            J.C. MacDonald and R.J. Brooks, Department of
Zoology, University of Guelph, Ontario, N1G 2W1.

We studied mating behavior and reproductive success in a wild, northern population of bullfrogs (Rana
catesbelana}. The predominant selective mechanism in this system was female choice. Male bullfrogs gathered
annually at traditional chorusing sites where they competed aggressively or employed alternate mating strategies in
an attempt to acquire mates. Females entered the choruses briefly to select a mate, engage in amplexus, and
deposit eggs. Compared with males that were unsuccessful in obtaining mates, reproductively successful males
were larger, had longer tenures in the choruses, spent more of their tenure calling, and had previous chorusing
experience. Male size was related to reproductive effort with larger males losing proportionately more weight over
the chorusing season. In females, dutch volume was positively related to body size with large females depositing
egg masses up to three times larger than those of small females. There was no evidence of assortative mating by
body size. We also postulated that, because of a low population density, this system may best be described as a lek
in contrast to the resource-defense system described previously for this species .. 375                         08:45 Monday .            .   ..              CE6                               QVC
 Local occurrence of basking sharks (Cetorhinus maximus Gunnerus) In relation to spatio-temporal patterns
 of zooplankton abundance. T.J, Thom. M.J. O'Connell, M.C. Lucas and L. Joplin, Department of Biological
Sciences, University of Durham, DH1 3LE, England, UK; A. Downie, Scottish Natural Heritage, Maritime Group 2
Anderson Place, Edinburh, EH6 5NP,Scotland, UK.
The distribution of basking sharks (Cetorhinus maximus} around the Isle of Arran in the Clyde sea area on the west
coast of Scotland, UK was investigated during July 1997. A network of shore based volunteers conducted visual
searches between 06-00 and 22-00 from seven vantage points for a total of 1538 hours over 20 days between July 6
and 28. Twenty-nine sightings were recorded. A plankton sampling programme was carried out in the same area
and over the same time period. The majority of shark sightings occurred in the afternoon and evening corresponding
to an Increase in zooplankton abundance during this period. Three peaks in shark sightings occurred over the study
period i^ii^ followed peaks in zooplankton abundance with a lag of one to three days. The spatial distribution of
shark sightings was also associated with the distribution of zooplankton in the area. Increases in the number of
sharks occurred when zooplankton dry weights were at the maximum normally found in the area. This study, has
shown, therefore, that fine-scale spatio-temporal variability in the distribution of basking sharks can be explained in
terms of patchiness in the distribution and abundance of zooplankton.




   379                       09.45 Monday.                         CE6                         OVC
 Sharks associated with the gulf menhaden Brevoortia patronua fishery and their relevance to shark
 gopulations of the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico. J.A. de Silva. Department of Oceanography and Coastal
  ciences, Louisiana State University, 153 Howe-Russell Geoscience, Baton Rouge LA 70803. USA; R.E. Condrey
 and BA Thompson, Department of Oceanography and Coastal Sciences, Coastal Fisheries Institute, CCEER,
 Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge LA 70803-7503. USA.
Wo describe the shark bycatch in the U.S. gulf menhaden fishery; their species composition, fates, distribution and
estimate the annual number of sharks caught by the fishery. Ten species of sharks were identified, with blacktip
sharks Carcharhinus limbatus accounting for 50% of those observed. Approximately 75% of the sharks encountered
died, 12% were released disoriented and 8% were released healthy. Using loglinear and logit models we detemiined
spatial and temporal patterns in the shark bycatch. Contrasts revealed the odds of observing a fishing set with shark
bycatch was significantly greater in June-August than September-October. The odds of observing shark bycatch
during April-May was also signifioantly different from September-October. However,' these differences were only
apparent east of 93 degrees W (central Louisiana). For the 1994 and 1995 fishing seasons we estimated an annual
take of approximately 30,000 sharks. Stomach analyses on sharks indicated that the menhaden schools were
functioning as a foraging base for those sharks captured. While detailed ago and growth information were not
collected, comparisons to length distributions in the literature indicated that the fishery appears to be impacting the
summer nursery grounds of sharks in the northern Gulf of Mexico.




   380                          10:30 Monday                                CA11                                THN
Density effects of oophagous tadpoles of Chirbtaius elffingeri, (AnuraiRhacophoridae): Importance of
material brood care. Y.-C. Kam and Y.F. Tsai, Department of Biology, National Changhua University of
Education, Taiwan; C.F. Lin and Y.S. Un, Dept of Zook, National Taiwan University, Taiwan.
  We studied the density-dependent aspects of growth, development, and survivorship of arboreal tadpoles of
 Chirixaius eifUngeri in bamboo forests at the Experimental Forest of the National Taiwan University at Chitou,
Taiwan, from May-Septeinber 1995. Newly hatched tadpoles were randomly assigned to one of the three
treatments: low (LD), medium (MD), and high density (HD) (six, 18, and 54 tadpoies/bamboo stump, respectively),
and each treatment consisted of 15 replicates. Tadpoles are obligatorily oophagous; thus, growth, development, and
survivorship of tadpoles are totally dependent upon trophic egg availability. Tadpoles in all treatments increased in
mass during development, but LD and MD tadpoles grew faster and weighed signifioantly heavier than HD tadpoles
by week 5. During the first 5 weeks of development, the biomass increase of tadpoles (BMI) in successful nests was
substantially greater than zero and was significantly different between treatments, indicating that female frogs are
capable of increasing the supply of trophic eggs as the tadpole number increased in MD and HD treatments. Body
size at metamorphosis was density-dependent but the time required to reach metamorphosis was not, which was
different from earlier studies on pond breeders. This discrepancy is probably due to the different feeding habits (i.e.,
herbivory versus oophagy) and size-selective feeding behavior. Results suggest that the energetic reserves of
female frogs for brooding strongly affect the growth, development, and survivorship of tadpoles.




   381                      ,   10:45 Monday                                CAII                               THN
Contributions to the life history of the redback salamander: preliminary evidence for kin recognition. D.C.
Fgreslgr and C.L. Anders, Biological Sciences, Towson University, Towson, MD 21252 USA.
We tested two questions critical to the reproductive life history of the redback salamander (Pielhodon cinereus): (1)
Do females recognize and preferentially brood their own eggs during pair-wise discrimination trials? (2) Are
hatchlings able to recognize their mother using substrate-bome chemical cues, and if so, is this ability innate or
learned? To address the first question, we tested brooding females collected from the field within a few days of
oviposifion. They were given a choice of their own eggs and those of a conspecific female, and their association
monitored over a 24 h period. To address the second question we cottected 60 females within 24 h post-oviposition,
and divided thern into two groups. The eggs of group 1 were raised by their mothers until they hatched. The eggs
of group 2 were isolated on filter paper throughout development. Beginning at 2 weeks post-hatching, each juvenile
was tested twice (24 h each) in pair-wise trials contrasting unmarked filter paper with filter paper scented with
matema odors. Our results confinn maternal egg recognition in P. cinereus, and we present preliminary data
suggesting that juveniles chemically imprint on their mother during the prolonged maternal brooding period.

    378                          09:30 Monday                               ,    CE6                             ovc
 Catch and effort data of whale sharks in the Philippines. A.A.S.P. Yapfinchay, Kabang Kalikasan ng Pilipinas
 (WWF-Philippines), No. 32-A Maalindog St. UP Village, Dillman, Quezon City 1101, Philippines; R. Uy, Mantangale-
 Alibuag Resort, Balingoan, Misamis Oriental; M.N.R. Alava. Marine Laboratory, Silliman University, Dumaquete City
 6200, Philippines.
 Catch volume and trade of the whale shark fishery for the 1997-1998 season was monitored by WWF-Philippines
 and Silliman University. Methods of data collection include site-visits to coastal villages involved in whale shark and
 manta fishery, market sunreys, fishers' interviews and daily landing-site enumeration. Eight fishery sites were
 identified in the 1997 season, tha major landing sites of which were in Pamilacan, Bohol and Talisayan, Misamis
 Orien^. A fishery site in Sorsogon, Luzon is recently operational for the 1998 season. Fishery profiles and changes
 in activity patterns related to whale shark fishery in these sites are presented. Increasing fishing effort, due to
 increasing demand, and decreasing catch per unit effort characterized the fishery. Management strategies employing
 Integrated Conservation and Development projects protecting both whale sharks and the fishing population
 dependent on them was recommended in the previous year. This recommendation is being evaluated against a
 government directive on total ban on whale shark fishery and trade.




    382                         11:00 Monday                                 CA11                          'THN
 Reryoductive success in the bullfrog, Rana catesbeiana.             J.C. MacDonald and R.J. Brooks, Department of
 Zoology, University of Guelph, Ontario, NIG 2W1.

We studied mating behavior and reproductive success in a wild, northern population of bullfrogs (Rana
catesbeiana}. The predominant selective mechanism in this system was female choice. Malo bullfrogs gathered
annually at traditional chonjsing sites where they competed aggressively or employed alternate mating strategies in
an attempt to acquire mates. Females entered the choruses briefly to select a mate, engage in amplexus, and
deposit eggs. Compared with males that were unsuccessful in obtaining mates, reproductively successful males
were larger, had longer tenures in the choaises, spent more of their tenure calling, and had previous chorusing
experience. Male size was related to reproductive effort with larger males losing proportionately more weight over
the chonjsing season. Iri females, clutch volume was positively related to body size with large females depositing
egg masses up to three times larger than those of small females. There was no evidence of assortative mating by
body size. We also postulated that, because of a low population densify, this system may best be described as a lek
in contrast to the resource-defense system described previously for this species




   383                          11:15 Monday                            .       CAII                            THN
Maternal care and tadpole survival in Dendrobates pumilicr. Are food and shelter really enough? M Maple
School of Biological Sciences, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506 USA.
I conducted field studies to determine the influence of female Dendrobates pumilio on offspring survival through two
forms of maternal care; rearing site selection and nutritional provisioning. Female D. pumilio transport tadpoles from
hatching sifes to water-filled leaf axils where they are tended until metamorphosis. I assessed availability and
variability of rearing axils (pH. temperature, water volume, height, cover), female choice of rearing sites, and effects
of site characters on tadpole sunrival. Rearing sites are abundant and highly variable. While female choice is best
predicted by a combination of low height and pH. tadpole sunrival is best predicted by variance in axil temperature.
These results suggest that although females deposit their tadpoles non-randomly, rearing site selection does not
influence tadpole fitness. Females return to tadpole rearing sites to provide eggs for their tadpoles to eat throughout
development. I observed females tending tadpoles to determine the influence of provisioning on tadpole fitness.
Provisioning behaviors such as time to first feeding, frequency of feedings, and number of eggs per feeding are
highly variable. Although there is substantial variation in provisioning, preliminary analyses indicate that predation
teSor                      provisioning on tadpole survival, limiting the potential for further evolution of provisioning




   384                       .. 11:30Monday               .                     CAII                            THN
 Reproductive trade-offs In the red-backed salamander, Plethodon cinereus: The effects of parental care. K.
Warging, J.C. Maerz and D.M. Madison. Department of Biological Sciences, Binghamton University (SUNY),
Binghamton, New York, 13902-6000 USA.                                                                                 '
Iteroparous animals that have substantial investment in parental care should invest energy differentially into growth
     repnxlurtion according to size and age. Smaller, younger animats should invest more energy in growth for
future reproductive benefits, while larger, older animals should invest more energy in reproduction and parental
care. In this study, 22 gravid female red-backed salamanders {Plethodon dnereu^ were induced to oviposit in the
                      brooding behavior was recorded for salamanders with body sizes ranging from 34 mm to 53
mm SVL Female body size was positively correlated with clutch size. Females that oviposited atypically and/or
terminated parental care by oophagy were significantly smaller than females who reared their clutches normily.
 inese results suggest that smaller females may forego reproduction to invest in growth, while larger females should
always invest in reproduction.   385                          08:00 Monday                                  :GS1                               MCN
Female preferences for multiple male traits in the advertisement calls of the neotropical hylld Smilisca
phaeota. N.A. Guda. Dept, of Zoology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Males of the hylld Smilisca phaeota have complex advertisement calls which show an large amount of variation in
several frequency related traits. Two of these traits were found to be negatively correlated with each other in the
natural population studied. Female preferences for male calls were tested in and around the correlation of these two
traits. Initial results demonstrated that females have directional preferences for both traits when measured
Independently.
Females were found to have preferences which exert a stabilizing effect on the correlation in the two trait space. As
a result of these preferences, the directionality of preference for any one trait taken independently can change
depending on the relation of that trait to a sceond trait.




 . 386 .                        08:15 Moiiday                                 GS1                                MCN
Biparental care In a neotropical bromeliad-breeding tree frog, Osteocephalus planiceps.                    L-F- Haugen,
University of Oklahoma, Department of Zoology, Norman, Oklahoma 73019 USA.
The reproductive behaviors of a bromeliad-breeding tree frog, Osteocephalus planiceps (Hylidae) were studied in
Amazonian Peru. Pairs of this species form where males defend oviposition terntoiies (i.e. bromeliads), and females
return periodically to amplex with the males to lay fertilized trophic eggs" for their developing tadpoles. To
determine the extent of biparental care and how biparental care and resource defense affect the mating system, I
relocated bromeliads within a 1-ha study area into clumped versus isolated oviposition sites. In addition, 12 artificial
bromeliads were provided so that egg deposition and tadpole survival could be monitored at those sites. All matings
in the study site were recorded for a five-month period, and the number of metamorphs produced in the artificial
bromeliads was used to evaluate individual reproductive success. Although males and females fomn monogamous
pairs due to site-fidelity, several ecological factors seem to maintain a rather fluid mating system. Limited oviposition
sites, relative proximity of oviposition sites (one male's territory may include more than one oviposition site and,
therefore, can potentially accommodate more than one female), and high predation pressure all contribute to
continuous changes in the mating system.




   387                         08:30 Monday                                  GS1                             .   MCN
Diversifying selection due to female preferences and males that respond appropriately in the neotropical
hylid Smilisca phaeota. N.A. Guda. Dept, of Zoology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Females of the hylid Smilisca phaeota were found to have significantly different preferences for rnale advertisment
calls under different simulated chorusing behaviors. Male Smilisca phaeota often try to overlap their calls with those
of another male. This behavior is common but not ubiquitous. Females presented with a pair of test calls given in an
overlapping sequence that was controlled for lead calling. Females preference was found to be significant and
opposite that of females given the same pair of test calls in an alternating sequence.
Male chorusing behavior was found to reflect the apparent diversifying selection from female preferences. Male­
male interactions were recorded in the field using males of noticably different call types. Males which had a lower
dominant frequency correspond to the male type chosen by females when test calls were given alternately. Males
with a higher dominant frequency correspond with the test calls that were chosen by females in the overlapping test.
Interactions of male-male pairs in the field have shown that males behave in a way that would be expected by the
female choice.




   39.1                  ..     09:3G'.McFday.        .__________________ . 'GSl_________          .             MCN
Pr^crtion and int^rMMIon of the abundance of alligators in lentic environments. J.D. EverPA. ’Department
of Zoology Univeraty o Ronda Gainesville, Florida,, USA 32611; ‘’US Geological Survey- Biological Resources
Division,, Gainesville, Florida, USA 32653.
Previous analyses indicated that American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis] population densities in 60 Florida
lakes were significantly correlated with parameters historically used to evaluate system trophic state (total
P.U                          walef column chlorophyll a, and water transparency). Recent examination of these and
other data have begun to reveal some interesting patterns regarding environmental factors and the abundance of
this crocodili^. Wligator density was uncorrelated with limnetic zone fish biomass and only slightly correlated with
littoral zone fish biomass, but was strongly correlated with whole-lake fish biomass (r® = 0.45, p < 0.0001), Other
S’JIlEn”'® J      factors which were found to covary with alligator population size were lake color (r® = 0.37 p <
                           coverage (r® = 0.28, p = 0.0015); those whicn were inversely related were mean lake depth
(r' = 0.49, p < 0.0001) arid percentage of human-developed shoreline (r® = 0.38, p < 0.0001). Finally, while as
much as 55% of the variation in alligator population densities among lakes could be accounted for by total
phosphoojs (p < 0.0001), multiple linear regressions using other parameters (plant coverage, water transparency,
      fish biornass) could account for up to 78% of the variation in abundance (p < 0.0001). These models are
discussed with respect to ecological processes present in lakes and their usefulness to game managers and to
scientists who attempt to detect human impacts on populations.

   388                         08:45 Monday                                  GS1                             MCN
Mating system of the green anaconda (Eunectes murinus') in the Venezuelan Llanos.             J.A. Rivas. University of
Tennesse, Dept of FEB. Knoxville TN 37996-0900.
Sexual selection and mating system theories predict that individuals will be more selective the higher the mating
investment they make. Hence, animals that do not make a high reproductive investment will increase their fitness by
increasing number of matings, while animals that have a high investment per mating will be “choosy”. While studying
the mating system of the anaconda, we opportunistically collected 45 breeding aggregations for six years. Femies
lie apparently passive in shallow wafer while the males coil around her (males number from 1 to 17, with a mean of
3.8). No fights or ritualized displays were seen among the males. Each female is attractive to males for about four
weeks throughout the breeding season, which lasts from mid-February to mid-May. Longer males were found with
heavier females (r= 0.48; p= 0.008) and the latter were courted by a greater number of males {r= 0.44; p= 0.02 ).
This suggests that males prefer to court females with higher fecundity and breeding status, since random mating
would not produce this tendencies. Due to the short time that the breeding season lasts (in respect to the duration
of the breeding ball), and the fact that receptive females are not clumped together, it is unlikely that one male can
find many females in one season. Although a lot remains to be studied, it appears that the mating system of the
anacondas is polyandric; where males select the more fecund females.




   389                         09:00 Monday                                 GS1                                MCN
Diet and reproduction of the Common Death Adder (Acanthophis antarcticus} from Papua New Guinea: Lack
of ecological convergence with vipers? C.L. Spencer. Dept, of Herpetology, California Academy of Sciences,
Golden Gate Park, San Francisco, CA 94110-4599.
Common death adders (Elapidae) from Australia have convergent reproductive and dietary adaptations with vipers.
They reproduce biannually, show ontogenetic shifts from endothermic to ectothermic prey, and are ambush
predators. I examined 208 Acanthophis antarcticus from the collections of the California Academy of Sciences.
Morphometric data, sex, age, seasonal reproductive status, size of eggs or follicles, and stomach and hindgut
contents were determined. Preliminary results suggest that approximately 30% of snakes had hindgut or stomach
contents. Some examples of hindgut and stomach contents included lizard eggs, insect legs, a skink jaw,
unidentified bone fragments, and possibly fur. Therefore these death adders appear to prey mostly on ectotherms.
Sizes of adult Australian Acanthophis antarcticus from previous studies were on average 30% larger than the Papua
New Guinea specimens examined. Initial results show that the majority of females from Papua New Guinea were
gravid in December, implying annual reproductivity. Thus these smaller snakes are not displaying convergent
ecological characteristics with vipers like their Australian counterparts.




   390                        ..09:15 Monday                                 GS1                               MCN
Ecomorphological evolution of the feeding biology of crotaphytid lizards.                A.K. Lappin. Department of
Integrative Biology and Museum of Vertebrate Zoology,, 3060 VLSB„ University of California,, Berkeley, CA 94720-
3140 USA.

Crotaphytid lizards exhibit a morphological trend in several musculo-skeletal characteristics of the trophic apparatus
that are correlated with ecological and behavioral attributes, particularly concerning saurophagy and durophagy.
Quantification of bite-force performance of taxa representing the primary crotaphytid morphotypes, with respect to
trophic apparatus structure, provides performance parameters that relate trophic apparatus structure to dietary
ecology and feeding behavior. Data on trophic apparatus musculo-skeletal structure, bite-force performarice, feeding
behavior, and dietary ecology permit the generation of testable predictions of ecomoqjhological relationships for
other crotaphytid taxa. Examination of crotaphytid feeding biology within a comparative phylogenetic framework
reveals that crotaphytids exhibit concordant evolution among trophic apparatus morphology and performance, dietary
ecology, and feeding behavior. In addition, increased saurophagy, together with correlated specializations at several
levels, appears to have evolved convergently within the Crofaphytidae.




   ■394                         10:45 Monday.                                GSl                               MCN
                                                 structural complexity on predator inspection behavior in coral
Are ; Am Arb^.^TrtS^OMl'lS USA^’“'^ Resources & Environment; University of Michigan; 430 East University

 Predator inspection behavior was invesUgated in three sympatric species of coral reef fish that differed in body
 morphology, and in two habitats that differed in structure complexity. If was hypothesized that the deep-bodied
 species would exhibit the riskiest behavior during predator inspections due to their protection from gape-limited
 predators, and that the shallow-bodied species would be risk-averse. It was also expected that the riskiest
 inspection behavior would occur in the most complex habitat, due to the presence of prey refuges. Bluehead
wras^, the species most at risk due to the slender body morphology, inspected the predator at greater distances
than the other speaes (ocean surgeonfish, foureye butterflyfish). The percentage of inspections tended to increase
with increased body depth across species, indicating risk-averse behavior by the wrasse. Inspection distances
decreased in complex habitats tor wrasse and surgeonfish, but not butterflyfish, the species with the greatest body
depth. Similariy the percentage of inspections fended to increase in the complex habitat for wrasse and
surgeonfish, but not butterflyfish These data suggest that individuals assessed their overall predation risk related to
body morphology and adjusted their inspection behavior, whereas habitat complexity differences played a minor role
in predator inspection behavior.                                                   ’                 ’hemales or the hylid Smilisca phaeota were found to have significantly different preferences for male advertisment
calls under different simulated chorusing behaviors. Male Smilisca phaeota often try to overlap their calls with those
of another male. This behavior is common but not ubiquitous. Females presented with a pair of test calls given in an
overlapping sequence that was controlled for lead calling. Females preference was found to be significant and
opposite that of females given the same pair of test calls in an alternating sequence.
Male chorusing behavior was found to reflect the apparent diversifying selection from female preferences. Male­
male interactions were recorded in the field using males of noticably different call types. Males which had a lower
dominant frequency correspond to the male type chosen by females when test calls were given alternately. Males
with a higher dominant frequency correspond with the test calls that were chosen by females in the overlapping test.
Interactions of male-male pairs in the field have shown that males behave in a way that would be expected by the
female choice.




   •391, .                  .  . <39-30 Monday                           GS1                    .        MCN
Prediction and Interpretation of the abundance of alligators In lentic environments. J.D. Everf-r*. "Department
of Zoology, University of Rorlda, Gainesville, Rorlda, , USA 32611; **US Geological Survey- Biological Resources
Division,, Gainesville, Florida, USA 32653.

Previous analyses indicated that American alligator (Alliaator mississippiensis) population densities in 60 Rorida
lakes were significantly correlated with parameters historically used to evaluate system trophic state (total
phosphorus, total nitrogen, water column chlorophyll a, and water transparency). Recent examination of these and
other data have begun to reveal some interesting patterns regarding environmental factors and the abundance of
this crocodilian. Alligator density was uncorrelated with limnetic zone fish biomass and only slightly correlated with
littoral zona fish biomass, but was strongly correlated with whole-lake fish biomass (r® = 0.45, p < 0.0001). Other
environmental factors which were found to covary with alligator population size were lake color (r® = 0.37, p <
0.0001) and macrophyte coverage (r® = 0.28, p = 0.0015); those which were inversely related were mean lake depth
(r®= 0.49, p < 0.0001) and percentage of human-developed shoreline (r® = 0.38, p < 0.0001). Finally, while as
much as 55% of the variation in alligator population densities among lakes could be accounted for by total
phosphorus (p < 0.0001), multiple linear regressions using other parameters (plant coverage, water transparency,
and fish biomass) could account for up to 78% of the variation in abundance (p < 0.0001). These models are
discussed with respect to ecological processes present in lakes and their usefulness to game managers and to
scientists who attempt to detect human impacts on populations.




   392                         09:45 Monday                                  GS1                               MCN
Environmental variation and socioecology. J.C. Maerz. Department of Biological Sciences, Binghamton, NY
13902-6000 USA.
 Animal dispersion patterns are influenced by the distribution and abundance of resources and other individuals, both
of which are features of the local environment. A previous study indicates that moisture determines the extent to
which food and mates are limited for red-backed salamanders (Plethodon cinereus}, so predictable differences in
moisture levels between populations may result in different dispersion patterns. I monitored shelter use and
cohabitation at two sites (wetter vs. drier) using mark-recapture to determine whether shelter fidelity and incidence of
cohabitation differ between sites. Both males and females at the wetter site demonstrated lower fidelity, but only
females at the wetter site exhibited greater incidence of intrasexual cohabitation. Welter site males showed low
occurrences of intrasexual cohabitation, as did drier site males and females. These results indicate that
salamanders in wetter habitats may not hold fixed territories, probably in response to increased food availability.
Low fidelity arid low intrasexual cohabitation by wetter site males may indicate the existence of ephemeral mating
territories. Differences in spacing patterns in response to local environmental conditions may have important
repercussions for salamander population dynamics and sexual selection.




   393                          10:30 Monday                                 GS1                               MCN.
Spatial and temporal components of fishes In Ohio River embayments. P.O. Cray. Ohio Cooperative Rsh &
Wildlife Research Unit, B & Z Bldg., 1735 Columbus Ohio USA 43210.
The United States has approximately 55 x 10® km of rivers. From this total only 1.9% are considered worthy of
Federal protection (< 100,000 km), due primarily to human induced changes on ths landscape. The Ohio River
exhibits anthropogenic scars, as do the embayments associated with the river. Between Parkersburg, WV and
Cincinnati, OH I sampled six embayments with different geomorphology, upstream landuse, and habitat conditions.
Fishes were collected from these habitats using both gill nets and electrofishing equipment from April through
October 1997. I examined habitat use patterns over different spatial scales and found variable patterns in both
micro- and macro-scale habitat use. For example, sunfish (Lepomis sp.) used near shore areas in all embayments.
Gizzard shad {Dorosoma cepedianum) were collected everywhere in shallow embayments and only in open water
areas in deep embayments. On a landscape level fish densities changed as a result of up- mid- or downstream
location within an embayment. Integrating information on landuse, physical characteristics, and fish assemblages
over different spatial ^d temporal scales will result in a more complete understanding of the factors influencing
these patterns. This information has the potential to inspire better conservation and restoration efforts for these
unique habitats along the Ohio River.

Crotaphytid lizards exhibit a morphological trend in several musculo-skeletal characteristics of the trophic apparatus
that are comelated with ecological and behavioral attributes, particularly concerning saurophagy and durophagy.
Quantification of bite-force performance of taxa representing the primary crotaphytid morphotypes, with respect to
trophic apparatus structure, provides performance parameters that relate trophic apparatus structure to dietary
ecology and feeding behavior. Data on trophic apparatus musculo-skeletal structure, bite-force performance, feeding
behavior, and dietary ecology permit the generation of testable predictions of ecomorphological relationships for
other crotaphytid taxa. Examination of crotaphytid feeding biolc^y within a comparative phylogenetic framework
reveals that crotaphytids exhibit concordant evolution among trophic apparatus morphology and performance, dietary
ecology, and feeding behavior. In addition, increased saurophagy, together with correlated specializations at several
levels, appears to have evolved convergently within the Crotaphytidae.




   394           .            10:45 Monday                            GS1                              MCN
Tbe effect of body morphology and habitat atructural complexity on predator inspection behavior In coral
reef fishes. C. Gerstner. School of Natural Resources & Environment; University of Michioan: 430 East University
Ave.; Ann Arbor, Ml 46109-1115 USA.

 Predator inspection behavior was investigated in three sympatric species of coral reef fish that differed in body
morphology, and in two habitats that differed in structural complexity. It was hypothesized that the deep-bodied
species would exhibit the riskiest behavior during predator inspections due to their protection from gape-limited
predators, and that the shallow-bodied species would be risk-averse. It was also expected that the riskiest
inspection behavior would occur in the most complex habitat, due to the presence of prey refuges. Bluehead
wrasse, the species most at risk due to the slender body morphology, inspected the predator at greater distances
than the other species (ocean surgeonfish, foureye butterflyfish). The percentage of inspections tended to increase
with increased body depth across species, indicating risk-averse behavior by the wrasse. Inspection distances
decreased in complex habitats for wrasse and suigeonfish, but not butterflyfish, the species with the greatest body
depth. Similarly, the percentage of inspections tended to increase in the complex habitat for wrasse and
suroeonfish, but not butterflyfish. These data suggest that individuals assessed their overall predation risk related to
body morphology and adjusted their inspection behavior, whereas habitat complexity differences played a minor role
in predator inspection behavior.




   395                           11:00 Monday                                 GS1..                             MCN
Spatial isolation in drainage lakes ; implications for community ecology of fishes.                 J.D. Olden. Dept of
Zoology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 365.
Although lakes are often Inter-connected waterbodies, few studies have examined isolation among lakes as a
determiiiant of fish species diversity and/or community composition. In this study I examine the fish species
composition and spatial arrangement of 52 lakes located within two south-central Ontario watersheds, and assess
the degree of spatial isolation between lakes. Measures of lake isolation incorporated watercourse distance, lake
elevation, upstream watercourse distance, and waterbodies as fish "stepping stones". Many of these isolation
measures were based on ecological considerations, i.e. the "challenges" a fish faces in moving between lakes, as
compared to the straight-line distance between sampling locations which is.often used in studies of this nature. Eight
isolation measures were examined for their degree of association with patterns in fish species composition. The
results indicated that conventional straight-line distance between lakes does not accurately portray the degree of
isolation. This study illustrates the Importance of examining alternative measures of lake isolation when exploring
patterns in fish species distributions, since the isolaflon of waterbodies increase the rate of local extinotion.
Therefore, interconnected lakes could potentially provide a "rescue effect" for lakes with threatened aquatic fauna.




   396                          11:15 Monday                                  GSI                               MCN
Mechanisms influencing sizes and survival of age-0 fathead minnows [PImephales promelas} In two different
nutrient regimes. S.C.H. Kiesling. University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E9.

Factors that affect growth rate (e.g. food supply) should affect Juvenile survival and thus year-class strength since the
principle sources of mortality for young fish-predation and starvation-are size dependent. In 1996, experimental
ponds (area=360 m®/pond) were used to study the effects of nutrient addition on production, growth and survival of
age-0 fathead minriows. Each pond was divided in half; one side was treated regularly with inorganic fertilizers (P,
N) to maintain nutrient concentrations at levels three times higher than control sides. Chi a was measured to be 7
fold gi^eater in treated versus untreated pond sides. Number of eggs hatched and end-of-season age-0 fish survival
and sizes were also greater in the treated pond sides. We analyzed otolith microstructure to investigate the
ntechanisms behind the observed contrasts in age-0 lengths and survival in the different nutrient regimes. Hatching
distributions and back-calculated age-0 fish lengths were compared with those observed throughout the season.
Surprisingly, preliminary results suggest age-0 fish survival was not directly influenced by size-selective mortality.
Instead, treatment survivors hatched over the entire spawning season; control sunrivors hatched primarily in the
second half of the spawning season. These results suggest that conditions during early periods of growth can
influence lengths and survival of age-0 fish. Since over-winter mortality (examined during a 1995-96 experiment)
was found to be strongly size-selective, it follows that mechanisms acting In the first few weeks after hatching can
ultimately affect the number of fish recruited to the next spawning season.   397                          11:30 Monday                                  GSI                               MCN
Life history of the flavin shiner, Pteronotropls signipinnis, from a Mississippi blackwater stream.                B. W.
Albanese. Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Southern Mississippi. Hattiesburg, MS 39406-5018.
The life history of the flagfin shiner, Pteronotropis signipinnis, was described from a population occurring in a second-
order blackwater stream in southeast Mississippi. Analysis of length frequency histograms indicated a life span of
one to two years. Females were reproductive from April to mid-August. Sex ratio was not significantly different from a
1:1 ratio. Adult males were larger and more heavily pigmented near the abdomen than females. All females reached
sexual maturity by 27 mm SL and produced multiple clutches of ova. Clutch size ranged from 12 to 101 ova and was
significantly correlated with SL. Mean mature oocyte diameter was 0.88 mm (range 0.76 to 0.96).




   398                         11:45 Monday                                  GSI                               MCN
Revisiting a "textbook example" of natural selection in the wild: a field test of threat display convergence In
threespine sticklebacks. R.J. Scott. Bioibgy. Clark University. Worcester. MA 01610. USA.

Freshwater populations of threespine stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) exhibit a tremendous amount of adaptive
variation in a number of traits. One classic example is male nuptial colouration in populations from the Chehalis
River drainage basin in Washington State. Males in these populations assume a jet-black nuptial colouration,
rather than the red underside and blue-green dorsum that is typical of the species. A widely cited, yet poorly tested,
hypothesis to account for the evolution of the black nuptial colouration in these populations is the threat display
convergence hypothesis. The hypothesis contends that the black nuptial colouration evolved in response to
competition for nesting territories with the co-distributed Olympic mudminnow (Novumbra hubbsi), which is also
black, territorial for nest sites and breeds at the same time of year as stickleback. The hypothesis produces the
prediction that mudminnows have a greater impact on the reproductive success of typical, red male sticklebacks
than on that of black male sticklebacks.         I tested this prediction by manipulating the presence/absence of
mudminnows and the colour type of stickleback present in screened exclosures in several wetland areas (typical
nesting habitat for both species). Also, I condurrted several field surveys of nesting sticklebacks to determine (i) the
frequency and outcome of interactions between nesting sticklebacks and mudminnows and (ii) the temporal
development of black nuptial coloration.




   399                        .08:00 Monday                                 GS4                                 AXL
A molecular phylogenetic analysis of the relationships among the Iguanid lizard genus Liolaemus: testing
alternative biogeographic hypotheses. J.A. Schulte(ll). Washington University Campus Box 1137 St. Louis, MO
63130-4899 USA.
Liolaemus is a large genus of lizards in the family Iguanidae with greater than 160 species distributed throughout the
southern half of South America on either side of the Andes. Relationships among Liolaennjs species remain
unresolved. Approximately 1800 bases of aligned mitochondrial DNA sequence data were obtained from regions
encoding the ND1, ND2, COI, and eight transfer RNA genes. A phylogenetic hypothesis is generated for 55 ingroup
species and four outgroup species. Four alternative biogeographic hypotheses are suggested for the early
diversification of Liolaemus. The most parsimonious tree is highly suggestive of an east-west vicariant split due to
the uplift of the Andes at least 10-15 million years ago.




   403                          C3.00.Monday                    .            GS4                                 AXL
A reinterpretation of the rostral element of Peltophryne (Anura: Bufonidae) and Its utilization as support for
the moiio^yly of the group. J,P, Prgmuk, Division of Herpetology, Natural History Museum and Biodiversity
Research Center, and Department of Systematics and Ecology, The University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-

 The nine species of Peltophryne are endemic to the islands of the Caribbean, ranging from Cuba to the Virgin
Islands. Pregill (1981) presented three synapomorphies to support the monophyty of Peltophryne (with the exception
of P. nuviatica): tn© maxillao extend anteriorty to meet in front of the premaxillae; the zygomatic ramus of the
squamosa! extends ventrally to abut the maxilla; and the zygomatic and ventral rami of the squamosa! are connected
by a flange. These characters are redescribed and their phyiogenetic utility is discussed; In particular, the "rostral*
element is reinterpreted and presented as support for the monophyly of the entire group. Based on crania!
morphology arid geographic proximity, Bufo granulosus has been proposed as the sister taxon to Peltophryne;
compansons of the morphology of the these taxa are made. A preliminary analysis of the phylogenetic relationships
of the nine species of Peltophryne was conducted using characters from osteology and external morphology; tne
results of this analysis are presented.

   400                           08:15 Monday                                 GS4                                 AXL
 Mt DNA phylogeography of the sagebrush lizard, Sceloporus graciosus, in California. L.J. Frabotta and J.W.
Archie, Department of Biological Sciences, California Slate University, Long Beach. Long Beach CA 90840-3702

We surveyed tnitoohondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequence variation in the sagebrush lizard (Sceloponjs graciosus) from
throughout California, as well as populations from Oregon. Utah. New Mexico, and Baja California, including all three
currently recognized subspecies. We used these data to estimate the intraspecific phylogeny and to develop a
biogeographic scenario to account for the geographic structure of this species. We sequenced -900 bp of the
mtDNA ND4 gene and adjacent tRNAs from 26 populations of S. graciosus (including S. arenicolus) and five putative
outgroups (S. scalaris, S. jarrovii, S. ciarkii, S. occidentaiis, and S. variabiiis). The phylogenetic hypotheses best
supported by the data do not support the currently recognized subspecies as evolutionary units. The present
distribution of S. graciosus in California is represented by four distinct clades: southern Great Basin (including S.
arenicoius), eastern + southwestern Siema, northern California + Coast Ranges, and Peninsular Ranges. A scenario
for the historic biogeography of S. graciosus is consistent with current views of the geologic and climatic changes in
California during the past 20 million years.




   401                          08:30'Monday .                                GS4                                AXL
Comparative osteology and phylogenetic relationships of the pelobatid frogs (Anura: Pelobatidae). A.M.
Maglia, Division of Herpetology. Natural History Museum and Biodiversity Research Center, and Department of
Systematics and Ecology, The University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-2454, USA. Lawrence, KS 66045-2454,
USA.
Among archaeobatrachians, the largest and most poorly known group is the Pelobatoidea. Within this group, the
morphology and relationships of frogs in the genera Peiobates, Scaphiopus, and Spea remain poorly understood. I
compared the osteology of these taxa using cleared and double-stained and dry-skeletal preparations. Spea and
Sc^hiopus share several morphologies, including absence of quadralojugals, presence of palatine processes of the
facial processes of the maxillae, long vomerine postchoanal processes, and completely cartilaginous sternums.
Spea is characterized by poorly developed maxillary processes of the nasals and the lack of well-developed
posteromedial processes of the parasphenoid. I reassessed the phylogenetic relationships of these frogs using
osteological characters sampled from all recognized taxa of Peiobates, Scaphiopus, and Spea, and one species
each of Megophrys, Leptobrachium, Pelodytes, Rhinophrynus, Xenopus, Limnodynastes, and Discoglossus as
outgoup taxa. Preliminary results support Peiobates as the sister group to Scaphiopus. This may ba an artifact of
convergences in skull morphology relating to the degree of hyperossifioation of these taxa or may indicate an
evolutionary history of these frogs that disagrees with the currently accepted phylogeny.




 ■ 402                          08:45 Monday               .                 GS4                                 AXL
Freeze avoidance and terrestrial overwintering in the northern cricket frog, Acris crepitans.                 J.T. Irwin.
Department of Zoology, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio 45056 USA.
Anurans inhabiting northern locales survive the winter by avoiding cold through aquatic hibernation or burrowing, or
by tolerating freezing of their tissues. This study describes the ovenwintering strategy of the most aquatic of the North
American hylids, the northern cricket frog (Acris crepitans). Laboratory choice tests indicated that cricket frogs
choose terrestrial hibernacula, especially under leaf litter in shallow depressions, when faced with decreasing
temperatures. However, unlike Bufo and some Pseudacris, cricket frogs did not burrow when air temperatures
dropped, even when faced with desiccating conditions. Surprisingly, cricket frogs are not freeze tolerant like most
other nearctic hylids that hibernate in terteslrial sites. Given these data, field searches were conducted and cricket
frogs were found hibernating in crayfish burrows and other cavities along the pond's edge - sites which provide full
protection from freezing. In conclusion, cricket frogs can neither burrow nor sunrive freezing, and therefore require
pre-existing subterranean sites to successfully overwinter. Thus, I suggest that habitat quality and winter severity be
explored as possible causes of this species' decline in the northern portion of its range.




   406                   .     09:45 Moraay                                  gS4
Patterns of pa^morphrais and metamorphosis In the striped newt (Notophthalmus perstriatus) at a north
Florida Mndhills prmd. S.A. Johnson, Department of Wildlife Ecology and Consenmtion, Univereity of, Rorida 303
Newins-Ziegler Hall, Gainesville, FL 32611-0430 USA.

A population of striped newts was monitored during three consecutive years to determine patterns of
p^domorphosis and metanwrphosis. The study site, Ono Shot Pond, is a temporary pond located on the Katharine
Ordway Preserve-Carl Swisher Memorial Sanctuary, Putnam Co., Rorida. Newts were sampled monthly via dip net
thr^ghout the study period and a continuous drift fence was erected around the pond during the second halt of the
stu^ pen^. In ^e first year, very few newts undenivent metamorphosis; the vast majority of lanrae appeared to
mature and breed as paedomoqihs. Few aquatic adults contributed to reproductive output in year one In contrast
me year two cohort was characterized by a large percentage of metamoqjhosis as well as paedomorohosis. Over
1,200 newts left the pond as efts in the fall of year two. Like year one though, few aquatic adults contributed to
reproductive oi^ut in year two. In years one and two. paedomorphic individuals underwent metamorphosis during
me following Spnng/Summer. Very few lanrae were encountered in year three. As a result, relatively few efts
emigrated in the fall of year three. However, there was a large immigration of individuals (>2,000) from the
surrounding uplands. Although paedomorphosis occurred, the vast majority of reproductive newts were aquatic
adults rn year three.A molecular phylogenetic analysis of the relationships among the Iguanid lizard genus Llolaemus: testing
alternative biogeographic hypotheses. J.A. SchuHeflll. Washington University Campus Box 1137 St. Louis, MO
63130-4899 USA. .
Uolaemus is a large genus of lizards in the family Iguanidae with greater than 160 species distributed throughout the
southern half of South America on either side of the Andes. Relationships among Uolaemus species retnain
unresolved. Approximately 1800 bases of aligned mitochondrial DNA sequence data were obtained from regions
encoding the ND1, ND2, COI, and eight transfer RNA genes. A phylogenebc hypothesis is generated for 55 ingroup
species and four outgroup species. Four alternative biogeographic hypotheses are suggested for the early
diversification of Uolaemus. The most parsimonious free is highly suggestive of an east-west vicariant split due to
the uplift of the Andes at least 10-15 million years ago.




   403        ... ...          09.00 Monday                                 GS4                                AXL
A reinterpretation of the rostral element of Peltophryne (Anura; Bufonldae) and Its utilization as support Im
the monophyly of the group. J.B. Pramuk. Division of Herpetology, Natural History Museum and Biodiversity
Research Center, and Department of Systematics and Ecology, The University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-
2454, USA.
 The nine species of Peltophryne are endemic to the islands of the Caribbean, ranging from Cuba to the Virgin
Islands. Prepill (1981) presented three synapomorphies to support the monophyly of Peltophryne (with the exception
of P. fluviatica): the maxillae extend anteriorly to meet In front of the premaxillae; the zygomatic ramus of the
squamosal extends ventrally to abut the maxilla; and the zygomatic and ventral rami of the squamosal are connected
by a flange. These characters are redescribed and their phylogenetic utility is discussed; in particular, the "rostral*
element is reinterpreted and presented as support for the monophyly of the entire group. Based on cranial
morphology and geographic proximity, Bufo granulosus has been proposed as the sister taxon to Peltophryne;
comparisons of the morpholow of the these taxa are mads. A preliminary analysis of the phylogenetic relationships
of the nine species of Peltophryne was conducted using characters from osteology and external morphology; the
results of this analysis are presented.




   404                         09:15 Monday                                 GS4                                AXL
Adaptation to life in estuarine environments In the northern water snake (Nerodla sipedori). P.L. Martin and
W.M. Roosenburg, Ohio University, Dept. Bio Soi., Irvine Hall, Athens, Ohio 45701 USA.
The purpose of this investigation was to identify differences in resource allocation strategies between freshwater and
brackish water populations of the Northern Water Snake, Nerodia sipedon. Vfe also sought evidence that
populations of the Northern Water Snake ate adapting to estuarine environments. Gravid females were collected
from two brackish and two freshwater sites. The snakes' reproductive outputs were estimated using relative clutch
mass, adjusted for female condition. Neonates from each erivironment were raised in both freshwater and 25% sea
wafer to determine the environmental effects on growth, metabolism, and survival. Freshwater snakes allocated
40% more energy to reproduction than estuarine snakes. The growth rates of both groups were reduced in 25% sea
water. However, the freshwater neonates raised in 25% sea water became bloated and suffered 40% mortality. The
metabolic rates of estuarine snakes was significantly higher in both environments, llie results indicate that
freshwater snakes allocate a greater proportion of their energy to growth and reproduction, while estuarine snakes
incur a higher maintenance cost. Sufficient physiological and behavioral differentiation has occurred between these
ecologically distinct populations such that freshwater snakes suffer a substantially reduced fitness in estuarine
environments.




   405                         09:30 Monday                             .... GS4                               AXL
Kinematic analysis of prey ingestion behavior in the scleroglossan lizard, Cnemidophorus lemnlscatus
(Telidae). L.P. McBrayer. Dept, of Biological Sciences. Ohio University. Athens. OH. 45701 USA.

Although models for gape cycle evolution in primitive tetrapods have been proposed, little data exists on the feeding
kinematics in lizards. Of those studies published in this area, very few have described prey ingestion in
scleroglossan lizards. Ths goal of the present study is to investigate feeding kinematics in the rainbow whiptail
(Cnemidophorus lemnlscatus; Telidae) In relation to existing models of prey ingestion in primitive tetrapods. Feeding
behavior in the rainbow whiptail was studied using high-speed video with gape cycle kinematics quantified by the
construction of kinematic profiles from digitized landmark data of lizards ingesting crickets, in all feerfing bouts
observed. C. lemnlscatus used oral prehension as the sole means of prey capture. During prey ingestion, the tongue
is used extensively to manipulate and swallow prey items. Patterns of gape kinematics in this species will be
discussed in light of existing models of kinematic evolution and used to refine current ideas and questions regarding
prey ingestion in lizards.

Freeze avoidance and terrestrial overwintering In the northern cricket frog, Acris crepitans.                 J.T. Irwin.
Department of Zoology, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio 45056 USA.
Anurans inhabiting northern locales survive the winter by avoiding cold through aquatic hibernation or burrowing, or
by tolerating freeang of their tissues. This study describes the overwintering strategy of the most aquatic of the North
American hylids, the northern cricket frog (Acris crepitans). Laboratory choice tests indicated that cricket frogs
choose terrestrial hibernacula, especially under leaf litter In shallow depressions, when faced with decreasing
temperatures. However, unlike Bufo and some Pseudacris, cricket frogs did not burrow when air temperatures
dropped, even when faced with desiccating conditions. Surprisingly, cricket frogs are not freeze tolerant like most
other nearctic hylids that hibernate in terrestrial sites. Given these data, field searches were conducted and cricket
frogs were found hibernating In crayfish burrows and other cavities along the pond's edge - sites which provide full
protection from freezing. In conclusion, cricket frogs can neither burrow nor survive freezing, and therefore require
pre-existing subterranean sites to successfully overwinter. Thus, I suggest that habitat quality and winter severity be
explored as possible causes of this species' decline in the northern portion of its range.




   406                           09;45 Monday                                  GS4               ..               AXL
Patterns of paedomorphosis and metamorphosis In ths striped newt INotopMhalmus perstrlatus) at a north
Florida sandhills pond. S.A. Johnson. Department of Wildlife Ecology and Conservation, University of, Florida, 303
Newins-Ziegler Hall, Gainesville, FL 32611-0430 USA.
A population of striped newts was monitored during three consecutive years to determine patterns of
paedomorphosis and metamorphosis. The study site. One Shot Pond, is a temporary pond located on the l^tharine
Ordway Preserve-Carl Swisher Memorial Sanctuary, Putnam Co., Florida. Newts were sampled monthly via dip net
throughout the study period and a continuous drift fence was erected around the pond during the second half of the
study period. In the first year, very few newts undenwent metamorphosis; the vast majority of larvae appeared to
mature and breed as paedomorphs. Few aquatic adults contributed to reproductive output in year one. In contrast,
the year two cohort was characterized by a large percentage of metamorphosis as well as paedomorphosis. Over
1,200 newts left the pond as efts in the fall of year two. Like year one friough, few aquatic adults contributed to
reproductiyo output in year two. In years one and two, paedomorphic individuals underwent metamorphosis during
the following Spring/Summer. Very few larvae were encountered in year three. As a result, relatively few efts
emigrated in the fall of year three. However, there was a large immigration of individuals (>2,000) from the
surrounding uplands. Although paedomorphosis occurred, the vast majority of reproductive newts were aquatic
adults in year three.




    407                          13:00 Monday                                CR11                                THN
Variation In reproduction and its association with the maternal phenotype within a population of the
Galapagos lava lizard (Microlophus delanonis). M.A. Jordan. Department of Biology, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.
Physical aspects of the maternal phenotype are recently recognized as important covariates of the nature of
reproduction (ie size vs. number of eggs). We document variation in reproductive phenology, total clutch mass,
clutch size and egg mass' among seasons and years within a natur^ population of Galpagos lava lizards
[Microlophus (=Tropidunjs) delanonis). Maternal size correlates with total clutch mass, clutch size, and egg mass
but does not affect the pattern of variation in these traits among time periods. We estimated maternal condition (a
measure of energy reserve) and found that it has a significant, positive relationship with each component of
reproduction. However, the differences among time periods remained after controlling for this factor. We did not
find the expected negative relationship between clutch size and egg mass after controlling for both maternal size and
condition. All variables were positively correlated with rain that fell one month prior to opposition. While maternal
characteristics explain some seasonal and annual variation In components of reproduction, we propose that
remaining temporal variation may be a response to differences between seasons In direct selection on eqqs and/or
hatchlings.




   408                         .13:15 Monday                                 CR1.1.                              THN
The impact of female fecundity on parturition date In the rattlesnake. SIstrurus miliarius. T.M. Farrell and P.G.
May’*’. "Biology Department. Stetson University. DeLand, FL 32720 USA; "Biology Department, Stetson University,
DeLand. FL 32720 USA.
In many birds, clutch size is positively correlated with breeding date. Price el al. (1988) presented a model that
suggested this is due to differences in female nutritional condition. A similar phenomena occurs in S. miliarius. We
collected data on parturition date and litter size for 153 gravid females collected over a six-year period in central
Rorida. There are consistently strong correlations between total litter mass or litter size and parturition date in these
snakes. Annual variation in meaii parturition date appears to be driven by annual variation in clutch mass, not in
annual variation in climatic conditions. The correlation between parturition date and litter size is not due to
enhanced thermoregulatory abilities for larger snakes since snake size is only weakly correlated to parturition date.
The relationship between litter mass and parturition date also occurs in several other species of snakes. Ironically,
the model developed by Price et al. appears to work better for snakes and other capital breeders than It does for
birds and other Investment breeders.  .409           _ _________ 13:30 Monday         ..             .          CR11
Patterns of reproduction In leaf-litter lizards of Costa Rica.       J.H Waddle and M.A. Donnelly, Department of
Biological Sciences. Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199 USA.
Little is known about seasonal patterns in the reproductive phenology of many species of tropical reptiles. Seve^
reseamherTha^ demonstrated how reproductive patterns are related to seasonal and annual cycles.^Sfa*es «
the reoroduction of tropical lizards have suggested that wet and dry seasons play a role in the timing of      action
and reSuiS of Ses Lizard specimens collected from Costa Rica oyer a two-year period have been
examined for reproductive condition. This collection offers an ideal data set for the study of rep^uctive patterns in
a diverse q^pPof Neotropical leaf-lifter lizards. Gonad length in males and the number and length of ovdu^i eggs
Fn Ses^re reoordeif. Spatial and temporal analysis of these data provides informabon on the
reproductive phenology. Results will be presented for several species of lizards including Sphenomoiphus chemei
and Nofops limifrons.




                                13:45 Monday                                 CR11                               THN
   410
Reproductive characteristics of the arboreal lizard Urosaurus
mavIaa & Ramfr^zoBautista Instituto de Biologia, UNAM, Departamento de Zoologia, CP 70-153 C.U, Ar 04biu,
Mexico 2^ Distrito®Federd; LJ. Vitt, 2Oklahoma Museum of Natural History and Department of Zoology, University
of OWahorna, Norman, OK 73019, USA.
The reproductive cycle is described for females and males of Urosaurus bicarinatus sidled from 1988 to 19901 near
rhamela Jalisco Mexico. Male reached sexual maturity at 38.0 mm snout-vent length (SVL) at an age 8 mo, white
females reached sexual maturity at 40.0 mm SVL at an age of 9 m. Testes of adult males began to 'h^ease irisize
in early April, maximal testes mass occurred in June-August, and testes begati to d^rease in
minimut^ize in October Maximal testicular growth was associated with icreasing photoperi^ arid temperature, bid
not wrth^precipitation. Erilarged vitellogenic follicles first appeared during mid-May in fernales. ^®'"^®®
oviductal eaas from June to^September. Vitellogenesis, follicular growth, and egg production were associated with
tocreastoq P?MStion Nine sampled females (15%) had evidence of two clutches, and 5 fema es (85«/^ ted
Sddence^ofone clutch; data on marked lizards showed evidence that some fernales lay up ’o *hree_du^s. ^Ctech
^MbSerJ on ovidudal eggs was 5.4 ± 1.1 (4-8). Clutch size was positively correlated withfem^e.SVL.
 Reprodurdive potential for females that laid two dutches was 10-11 eggs, and tor females with three ^^es
 rprwoductive DOtential may be as high as 15 eggs. Temperature, photopenod, and precipitation were the proximate
Si^f^mSwSe^of ^es Ind femalel%production. Reproductive charaderistics of t/rosaurvs bi^nnatus
 from Chamela are similar to those of many other temperate and subtropical lizard species living in seasonal
 environments.



                                                                              CR11                              THN
    411 .                        14:00 Monday
 Geographic variation and environmental determinants of reprodurrtive output in the desert tortdse.
 I mJch US Geolooioal Surrey Department of Biology, University of California, Riverside, P.A. Medioa, U.S.
 Geologic^ Survey, Las Vegas Reid Station; H.W. Avery, U.S. Geological Survey, Department of Biology, University
 of California, Riverside.
 Three study sites were established in California in the spring of 11997 «^pariId a muJti-^ar
 uarifltinn in rporoductlve outDut of desert tortoises: Joshua Tree National Park (JiHtt), Mojave Naxionai rreserve
 (MOIAVE) and an area of land leased by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) for wind ene^y' productran near
 Palm Springs (MESA). At MESA, 9 out of 10 monitored females produced a total of ®99®,:,9!Jf’SXh
 nroduced second clutches and one produced a third clutch. Clutch size ranged from 2-8 eggs. M^^

 considered, a significantly positive relationship was detected (R2=0.26, P-0-04) The ^riiest gate or egg layi g
 occuired between April 18-23. The last clutch was oviposited sometime after July 3. At ^REE, onfy 1 of 8 females



  rainfall and associated production of annual food plants.




  Locomotor performance and reproductive success using DNA fingerprinting In male Eastern Fence Lizards,
  Sceloporus undulatus. G.J. Haenel and H.B. John-Alder, Cook College, Rutgers University, 84 Lipman Drive, New
  Brunswick, NJ 08901-8525, USA; LC. Seitz, Laboratoire d'Ecologie, CNRS URA 258, Universite Pierre et Marie
  Curie, 7 quai St. Bernard, Case 237, F-75252 Paris Cedex 05, France .
  Variatiori in locomotor performance may have important implications for fitness. Endurance can vary greatly (>10X)
  among lizards within a single population. We are using DNA fingerprinting in a natural population of the Eastern
  Fence Lizard, Sceloporus undulatus, to investigate the relationship of endurance to reproductive success. We
  studied a population of Eastern Fence Lizards in the New Jersey Pine Barrens to determine characteristics such as
  homerange, body size, and survivorship. Endurance was measured by running lizards on a treadmill at constant
  speed. Maternity was determined by having females lay their eggs in the lab. We established paternity by comparing
  minisatellite DNA fingerprint profiles of offspring hatched in the lab to the DNA fingeqjifnt profiles of their mothers
  and all potential fathers found on the field site. Reproductive success was measured as the number of clutches sired
  by each male. DNA fingerprinting data reveals a significant positive correlation between endurance and reproductive
  success. Male-female homerange overlap is a poor indicator of paternity in this population, and larger males tended
  to mate with larger females. Because endurance Is variable and positively related to reproductive success, selection,
  at least at the phenotypic level, can operate on endurance in this population.

                                                                            CR11                                THN 1
  412                          14:15 Monday
An analysis of clutch frequency using three separate methodologies Iti the yellow-blotched map
Graptemys flavimaculata. B.D. Home. M.J. Coulombe-Moore, R.A. Seigel and R.J. Brauman, Southeastern
Louisiana University, Hammond, LA 70402 USA; J.A. Shelby and M.T. Mendonca, Auburn University, USA.
Assessing population viability requires accurate determination of reproductive rates and demographic yariable^ In
1993, Seigel and Brauman used a population viability analysis (PVA) to predict the                                 J
threatened yellow-blotched map turtle, Graptemys flavimaculata. Their prelimina^                 Soi               inr
flavimaculata was declining rapidly, partially due to a diAch frequency toat        _mud^i lower           di5d?es per
most other species of map turtles (1.1 clutches per year in G. flavimaculata ^paied to three or more dirtr^es per
year in other^Graptemys). However, Seigel and Brauman calculated dutch frequency using a ^mbination Jhark
recapture and X-ray analysis, and inherent problems were apparent, especially relatively few
and the inability of X-rays to determine the presence of enlarged follicles. Examination of fem
condition via dissection was not possible due to the threatened status of the species, but historical data suggested
the possibility of up to three clutches per year in this population. In 1997, we delermmed c uteh ^'equericy by   use
of ultrasonography. Of 97 females examined 8.2% were barren (no visible follicular growth earlyjn the nesting
 season) and^ 91.7% had visible enlarged follicles and/or shelled eggs. Of the females w^
 13.4% had multiple size classes of follicles, indicating a maximum clutch frequency of 1.2 el^<^s                 P®
 year Thus measurements of dutch frequency using X-ray analysis and mark recapture were very rrom^rable to
 data from ultrasonography. In addition, our data suggest that some females might not be reproductively active each
 year. The conservation implications of these data will be discussed.



                                14:30 Monday                              .. CR11                                THN •!
   413
Seasonal fluctuations in the reproductive hormones in male and female ydlow blotched map turtles
/Graotemvs flavimaculata). J.A. Shelby and M.T. Mendonca, 331 Funchess Hall, Dept, of Zoology and VVildife
Auburn University, AL 36849, USA; B.D. Home and R.A. Seigle, Dept, of Biological Saences, Southeast Louisiana
University, SLU 814, Hammond, LA 70402, USA.
Clutch frequency has been found to be low (1 / season) in female yellow blotched map turtles. Graptemys
ffavimaculata in comparison to other closely related map turtles (3-6 f season). To deteimine if exposure to
Dollutanfs in their habitat is affecting reproduction, blood samples were collected and analyzed for sex steroid levels
by rStemunoa“^e levels^ reproductive hormones were assessed from Apri to October for m^s and
females In a multiple clutching species, one would expect to see elevated levels of estradiol (E) in the plasma of
females during vitellogenesis. Our data indicate that E levels are low throughout the season fiS ±4.6 pg/ml) nsing
siqnificantly in^May ^.8 ± 8 pg/ml). Males exhibited a normal seasonal cycle of testosterone (T). T levels were low
in%e spring and increased gradually over the summer months, and then peaked in September and October, with the
maximum levels in September (10.5 ± 3.3 ng/ml).




                                 14:45 Monday                                 CR11                               THN
    .414
 Spatio-temporal aspects of timber rattlesnake {Crotalus horridus) mating tehavlor.            E.M, M^owan ato DM
 Madson Department of Biological Sciences, Binghamton University (SUNY), Binghamton, New York, 13902-6000
 USA.
 The spatial distribution and timing of sexual receptivity of female snakes are important detenrinants ofsriake iteling
 svstems. Vie examined spatio-temporal aspects of timber rattlesnake mating behavior through radiotetem^no
 rXtnitnrinn of female snakes The onset of mating activity, indicated by the the arrival of courting mal^, was
 synchronized within a four day period in late July, despite females being 1-5 km apart. Most
 t^urred during the first three weeks of August. Females enhanced their spatial predictabi ity by becoming attractive
 to males during shedding at discrete rock outcrops, and by moving between spatially distent otAcrops "hen
 receptive. Our Endings suggest female rattlesnakes increase male competition, and hence the quality of mates,
 through active advertisement of sexual receptivity at low personal cost.




    ■418                         .13:00 Monday____________                    CF13_________ ,            CHM
  Molecular systematics of the darter subgenus Nothonotus.               R.M. Wood and M.E. Raley, Department of
  Biological Sciences, Saint Louis University, 3507 Laclede, St. Louis, MO 63103-2010 USA.

 The darter subgenus Nothonotus is a monophyletic assemblage of 20 species that are united by a suite of
 morphological characters. The most recent investigation info systematic relationships among fishes in this clade
 (Wood, 1996) was based primarily on allozyme date and addressed relationships among only 16 of 20 described
 species in the subgenus. The present stud/represents the first phylogenetic analysis of the entire subgenus and is
 also the first attempt at elucidating the evolutionary history of these fishes with a molecular data set. A phylogeny for
 members of Nothonotus based on cytochrome b sequences will be presented and compared with the allozyme
 based phylogeny. Implications of the molecular free with respect to morphological evolution within the subgenus and
 biogeography of the central highlands physiographic province will be discussed.of California, Riverside.
Three study sites were established in California in the spring of 1997 as part of a multi-year study to examine
variation in reproductive output of desert tortoises: Joshua Tree National Park (JTREE), Mojave National Preserve
(MOJAVE), and an area of land leased by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) for wind energy production near
Palm Springs (MESA). At MESA, 9 out of 10 monitored females produced a total of 72 eggs. Of these females, 6
produced second clutches and one produced a third clutch. Clutch size ranged from 2-8 eggs. Modal clutch size was
4 eggs. Mean clutch sizes were 4.33 and 5.00 eggs for first and second clutches, respectively. First clutch size was
positively correlated with carapace length fR2=0.29) but not significantly (P=0.14). When all clutches were
considered, a significantly positive relationship was detected (R2=0.26, P=0.04) The earliest date of egg laying
occurred between April 18-23. The last clutch was oviposited sometime after July 3. At JTREE, only 1 of 8 females
produced a single clutch (5 eggs). At MOJAVE, 12 of 18 monitored tortoises •produced 43 eggs in 12 single clutches
with no subsequent clutches. Clutch size ranged from 1-7 eggs with modal clutch size of 3-4 eggs. Mean clutch size
was 3.58 eggs. Larger females produced larger clutches and the relationship between the two variables was almost
significant (Ri2=0.32, P=0.055). Most of the variation observed appears to be related to differences among sites in
rainfall and associated production of annual food plants.




  415                       15:30 Monday                             CH11                              THN
Locomotor performance and reproductive success using DNA fingerprinting In male Eastern Fence Lizards,
Sce/oporus undulatus. G.J. Haenel and H.B. John-Alder, Cook College, Rutgers University, 84 Lipman Drive, New
Brunswick, NJ 08901-8525, USA; L.C. Seitz, Laboratoirs d'Ecologie, CNRS URA 258, Universite Pierre ef Marie
Curia, 7 qua! St. Bernard, Case 237, F-75252 Paris Cedex 05, France .
Variation in locomotor performance may have important implications for fitness. Endurance can vary greatly (>10X)
among lizards within a single population. We are using DNA fingerprinting in a natural population of the Eastern
Fence Lizard, Scelopoius undulatus, to investigate the relationship of endurance to reproductive success. We
studied a population of Eastern Fence Lizards in the New Jersey Pine Barrens to determine characteristics such as
homerange, body size, and survivorship. Endurance was measured by running lizards on a treadmill at constant
speed. Maternity was determined by having females lay their eggs in the lab. We established paternity by comparing
minisatellite DNA fingerprint profiles of offspring hatched in the lab to the DNA fingerprint profiles of their mothers
and all potential tethers found on the field site. Reproductive success was measured as ths number of clutches sired
by each male. DNA fingerprinting data reveals a significant positive correlation between endurance and reproductive
success. Male-female homerange overlap Is a poor indicator of paternity in this population, and larger males tended
to mate with larger females. Because endurance Is variable and positively related to reproductive success, selection,
at least at the phenotypic level, can operate on endurance in this population.




   416                      . ..   15:45 Monday                             CR11                               THN
Embryonic development of Sceloporus lizards: do cold climates favor rapid development? R.M. Andrews, T.
Mathies, C.P. Qualls and F.J. Qualls, Department of Biology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University,
Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.
Rapid embryonic development is a potential adaptation to cold climates. We tested this hypothesis for nine species
of Sceloporus lizards from four species groups and one species of Urosaurus, an outgroup, using observations
corrected for incubation temperature and hatchling size. Phylogenetioally based comparisons indicated that relatively
rapid development is characteristic of the scalaris species group and relatively slow development is characteristic of
the undulatus species group. Comparisons within these lineages were therefore used to determine if developmental
rate was related to climate, as judged by elevation and latitude. Within the scalaris species group, the
developmental rates of cool climate populations of S. aeneus and S. scalaris were not faster than that of a warm
climate population of S. scalaris. Within the undulatus species group, the developmental rate of a cool climate
populations or species were faster than that of a warm climate population or species for only one of five comparisons
(S. undulatus hyadnthinus from both Missouri and Virginia had tester development than S. wood! from Florida). In
general; developmental rates of Sceloponjs are lineage specific and do not appear to be adapted to local climates.




   417                             T 6:00 Monday                           CRH                                 THN.
Developmental arrest determines embryonic stage at ovlpositlon In the lizard, Urosaurus omatus. T. Mathies
and R.M. Andrews, Department of Biology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA.
Determinants of embryonic stage at oviposition in the oviparous lizard, Urosaurus omatus were investigated to gain
insight into the reason(s) that most squamate reptiles oviposit when embryos reach stage 30. Eggs experimentally
retained in utero past the normal time of oviposition were compared with control eggs that were obtained at the
normal time of oviposition and incubated in incubation medium. Retention resulted in developmental arrest of
embryos at embryo stages 30.0-30.5. Embryogenesis could be re-initiated at any time up to at least 29 days pqst the
normal time of oviposition by removing eggs from the oviducts and incubating them in incubation medium.
Developmental arrest per se, did not affect the time it took eggs to hatch once eggs were removed from the oviducts.
Hatching success of these eggs was high (87%). Snout-vent length, hydration of body tissue, and locomotor
performance of hatchlings, were negative^ related to the time spent in developmental arrest. Retention of eggs had
no apparent adverse efrects on females. Developmental arrest, if widespread among squamates, would account for
the obsenred distribution of embryo stages at oviposition and may constitute a major constraint on the evolution of
viviparity.

The spatial distribution and timing of sexual receptivity of female snakes are important determinants of snake mating
systems. We examined spatio-temporal aspects of timber rattlesnake mating behavior through radiotelemetric
monitoring of female snakes. The onset of mating activity, indicated by the the arrival of courting males, was
synchronized within a four day period in late July, despite females being 1-5 km apart. Most pairings (7 of 9)
occurred during the first three weeks of August. Females enhanced their spatial predictability by becoming attractive
to males during shedding at discrete rock outcrops, and by moving between spatially distant outcrops when
receptive. Our findings suggest female rattlesnakes increase male competition, and hence the quality of mates,
through active advertisement of sexual receptivity at low personal cost.




   418                          13:00Monday        .                   ., CF13           . . .
Molecular systematics of the darter subgenus Nothonotus. R.M. Wood and M.E. Raley, Department of
Biological Sciences, Saint Louis University, 3507 Laclede, St. Louis, MO 63103-2010 USA.

The darter subgenus Nothonotus is a monophyletic assemblage of 20 species that are united by a suite of
morphological characters. The most recent Investigation into systematic relationships among fishes in this clade
(Wood, 1996) was based primarily on allozyme data and addressed relationships among only 16 of 20 described
species In the subgenus. The present study represents the first phylogenetic analysis of the entire subgenus and is
also the first attempt at elucidating the evolutionary history of these fishes with a molecular data set. A phylogeny for
members of Nothonotus based on cytochrome b sequences will be presented and compared with the alozyme
based phylogeny. Implications of the molecular tree with respect to morphological evolution within the subgenus and
biogeography of the central highlands physiographic province will be discussed.




   419                         13:15 Monday                                 CF13                                CHM
Molecular systematics of the darter subgenus Ozarka (Teleostei; Percldae): with reference to placement of
the monotypic subgenus Psychromaster. T.B. Sullivan and R.M. Wood, Dept, of Biology, Saint Louis University,
3507 Laclede Avenue, SL Louis, MO 63103-2010, USA.
The subgenus Ozarka is composed of Etheostoma boschungl, E. craginl, E. pallididorsum, E. punctulatum, and E.
Irisella. While the first four species are morphologically similar to one another, the fifth species, E. trisella was
placed in this subgenus primarily on the basis of life history parameters presumed to be synapomorphic for ths
subgenus. The Inclusion of E. trisella in subgenus Ozarka left subgenus Psychromaster monotypic (containing only
E. tuscumbla] and of uncertain evolutionary placement with respect to remaining darter taxa. The purpose of this
research is to evaluate the monophyly of subgenus Ozarka and develop a phylogenetic hypothesis for relationships
among the component species. Additionally, placement of subgenus Ozarka with respect to the sole member of the
subgenus Psy^romaster will be discussed. DNA sequences derived from the cytochrome b gene, of the
mitochondrial genome, form the data set for these analyses. Sequences were collected from all members of the two
ingroup subgenera and several outgroup taxa. These data were then subjected to maximum parsimony analysis
using the PAUP computer program in order to evaluate monophyly and find the most parsimonious evolutionary
reconstruction for members of the group.




   .420..                       13:30 Monday                                 CF13                               CHM
Evolutionary relationships of the broadtail madtom (Noturus sp.).               J.M. Gradv. Department of Biological
Sciences, Unviersity of New Orleans,, New Orleans, LA 70148 USA; R.Q. Bennetts and J.M. Quattro, Department of
Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina USA; F.C. Rhode, North Carolina Division of Marine Fisheries
USA.
The broadtail madtom (Noturus sp.) was first reported from Atlantic Coastal drainages in North and South Carolina.
Subsequent surveys revealed a broader geogr^hic distribution, including a morphologically divergent population in
Lake Waccamaw. We used mitochondrial rDNA sequences to test the monophyly of the broadtail madtom and Its
hypothesized sister-group relationship with the speckled madtom (Al. leptacanthus). Parsimony and maximum
likelihood analyses or 596 bp from 12S and 16S rDNA indicated that broadtails are polyphyletlc and closely related to
the margined madtom (AZ. insignis}. Also, ribosomal DNA sequences did not support monophyly of the subgenus
Schllbeodes. VJe surveyed vanation in two additional mitochondrial genes, cytochrome b and ND2, to test polyphyly
of the broadtail madtom and to reconstruct relationships among broadtail populations, with emphasis on the
morphologically divergent Lake Waccamaw broadtail. Variation in 546 bp from cytochrome b and ND2 confirmed
polyphyly of broadtails; Cape Fear R. broadtails are genetically divergent and sister to a AZ. insignis and Pee Dee R.
broadtail lineage. The morphologically distinct Lake Waccamaw broadtail is not monophyletic. While formation of
Lake Waccamaw has apparently contributed to peripatric speciation in other lineages, morphological divergence of
lake broadtails appears to be ecophenotypic variation.  421                           13:45 Monday                              ..CF13                            .CHM
Geometric morphometries as cladistic characters; evaluation using armored catfishes.                     S. Schaefer,
Department of Ichthyology, American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street, New York, NY
10024-5192, U.S.A.
Zelditch and Rnk have argued that the method of thin-plate splines decomposed by its partial warps can yield
phylogenetically informative characters, which can be subjected to the same tests of homology and character
independence as are applied to conventional morphological characters. Suitability of the method for cladistics has
been challenged on both theoretical and empirical grounds. The hypoptopomatine lorioariids were used to evaluate
the method by examining the extent to which geometric morphometric characters thus identified are congnient with
respect to the generic-level phylogeny for the group established on the basis of independent morphological
characters. Of 15 partial warps describing head shape derived from 18 homologous landmarks, six yielded
potentially infomiative contrasts between six ingroup and two outgroup taxa. Two contrasts were congruent with the
phylogeny, three were incongnrent, and one was autapomorphio. Two incongnient characters mapped identically
onto me cladogram, suggesting non-independence. Partial warp homology and the extent to which the method
converged upon stable definitions of characters were examined via empirical simulations involving permutation of
key parameters.




   422                           14:00 Monday                     .        CF13
Revision of the loricarild catfish genus Cochliodon and the evolution of wood-eating.              J,W- Armbruster,
Division of Ashes, Smithsonian Institution. Washington, DC 20560, USA.
In fishes, only two distantly related groups of suckermoufh armored catfishes (Loricariidae) are known to eat wood:
Panaque and the Hypostomus cochliodon species group. The two groups share several modifications to the skull for
increasing muscle attachment sites and have large, spoon-shaped teeth set in highly angled Jaws which they use to
remove small shavings from submerged logs. Studying the morphological evolution of wood-eating in Panaque is
made difficult because Panaque is part of a larger group of fishes which share many of the modifications necessary
for wood-eating but which do not eat wood. The H. cochliodon group, on the other hand, appears to have been
derived from strictly algivorous species; thus, the transition to wood-eating can be better examined. The H.
cochliodon group was found to contain several undescribed species including several that appear to have teeth
intemiediate between the long, thin teeth used lor algivory in most Hypostomus and the short, spoon-shaped teeth
used for xylophagy in the H. cochliodon group. In this study, the H. cochliodon group was revised and a phylogeny
was produced containing most of the species groups of Hypostomus to assess the evolution of the morphology
associated with xylophagy.




   423                           14:15 Monday                         .    CF13                .     .        CHM
Phylogenetic relationships of the suckermouth minnows, genus Phenacoblus, inferred from parsimony
analyses of nucleotide sequence, allozymic and morphological data (Cyprinidae: Cypriniformes). W.W..
Dimmick. University of Kansas, Museum of Natural History, Lawrence. KS 66045; B.M. Burr, Department of Zoology,
Southern Illinois University al Carbondale, IL 62901, U.S A
We investigated the phylogenetic relationships among the five species of the genus Phenacoblus (Cyprinidae;
Cypriniformes) using a combined analysis of molecular and morphological characters. The nucleotide characters
were comprised of 208 potentially infomiative sites among a total 1773 aligried base pairs from several segments of
mitochondrial genes encoding the large and small RNA subunits, the valine transfer RNA, and the ND2 protein
coding gene. Allozyme products from 23 polymorphic loci and 9 morphological characters that were taken from the
literature were also included in the total evidence analysis. Third position codon sites were demonstrated to be
saturated for transitional changes and unsuitable for phylogeny reconstroefion among the species studied here. The
total evidence phylogeny is isomorphic with Mayden's (1989) morphological hypothesis. Phenacoblus mirabilis was
found to be basal, followed in ascending order by P. teretulus, P. catostomus, P. crassilabrum and P. uranops.




    427                    ..    ..15:45 Monday                             CF13                              CHM
 Description of a rock-dweling dchlid (Teleostel; Clchlidae) of the Pseudotropheus wllllamsl complex from
 Lake Malawi, Malawi, Africa. J.R. Stauffer Jr. School of Forest Resources, Penn State University, University Park,
 PA 16802 USA; K.A. Kellogg, University of Massachusets, Amherst, Massachusets USA.
A new species of the cichlid fish genus Pseudotropheus Regan (Teleostel: Cichlidae) from Lake Malawi is
described. The new species is a member of the Pseudotropheus williamsi (Gunther) complex. Pseudotroheus
williamsi is the type species of the genus. Pseudotropheus, which is a polyphyletic grouping of several species of
rock-dwelling dchlids from Lake Malawi. Recently, those members of Pseudotropheus that possessed a moderately
sloped ethmo-vomerine block and a swollen rostral tip were placed in the genus Metriadima Stauffer, Bowers,
Kellogg and McKaye. In addition to the P. williamsi complex, Pseudotropheus now contains species belonging to the
Pseudotropheus timheops Regan, Pseudotropheus elongatus Fryer, and Pseudotropheus aggressive complexes,
as well a group of miscellaneous forms such as Pseudotropheus fainzilberi Staeck. We are now restricting
Pseudotropheus to only those forms that are sister species of P. williamsi. Because of this restriction, all former
members, with the exception of Metriadima are without a generic name, we propose that they be placed in
Ctenochromis Pfeffer. Since the group is polyphyletic any generic placement is regarded only as a nomenclatural
action and does not suggest phyletrc affinities.

                                                                                                                            J


  424                           14:30 Monday                                CF13                                CHM
Two new species of Dermogenys (Hemiramphidae) from Brunei (northwestern Borneo), including their
phylogenetic relationships. A. Downino-Meisner. Division of Ashes, Reid Musuem of Natural History, Roosevelt
Road at Lake Shore Drive, Chicago, IL 60605 USA.
The biogeographic realm of southeast Asia has long interested biogeographers partly because it contains many large
islands, such as Borneo, that are both biological and geologic composites. The species of the halfbeak genera
Dermogenys and Nomortiamphus, restricted to southeast Asia, have the potential to elucidate some of the complex
area relationships of this region. Within the genus Dermogenys, taxonomic problems have lead to the widespread
use of the name D. pusilia in both museum collections and throughout the aquarium literature, underestimating the
diversity of this genus. As part of an ongoing revision of these genera, several undescribed species have beeri
discovered. Two of these species are described from material taken in recent collecting surveys to Brunei
(northwestern Borneo). For one species, Bnmei represents the westernmost part of its range which includes
Sarawak, Sumatra, and the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula. This species has its closest relatives distributed
throughout mainland Asia and Java. The other species, endemic to Brunei, has distinctly different phylc^enetic
affinities, within a clade including species from Sabah, southern Kalimantan, several southwestern Philippine islands,
and the southwestern arm of Sulawesi. These distribution patterns are discussed and diagnostic characters for
Dermogenys and each of the new species are presented.




   425                          14:45 Monday                                 CF13                         .     CHM
A new species of sculpin (Cottidae: Cottus) from the mid-Atlantic region of the eastern United States. A.P.
Kinziaer and R.L. Raesly, Department of Biology, Frostburg State University, Frostburg MD USA 21532; D.A. Neely.
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alabama. Tuscaloosa AL USA 35487.
The blue ridge from of Cottus bairdi is elevated to species status. This new species is distributed in eight mid­
Atlantic slope drainages (Susquehanna, Bush, Patapsco, Patuxent Potomac, Rappahannock, James, and Roanoke)
and the Nanticoke River drainage on the Delmarva Peninsula. It is distinguished from the closely related C. bairdi by
the absence of a basicaudal notch and an unique electrophoretic mobility at the CK-A locus. Although C. bairdi and
the new species are largely allopatric, syntopic populations occur in Wills Creek, Potomac River drainage, as a result
of stream piracy. Allozyme and morphological data from Wills Creek indicate incomplete reproductive isolation within
a narrow zone of hybridization occuring between the new species and C. bairdi. Phylogentic relationships generated
by BIOSYS-1 and PAUP of 15 allozyme loci are discussed.




   426                          15:30 Monday                                 CF13                              CHM
Three new Brycon species with comments on their relationships.                  A.M. Zanata, Museu de Zoologia da
Universidade de Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.
Several generic names have been proposed in the past for some species or groups of species currently included in
Brycon, such as Megalobrycon, Chalcinopsis, Bryconexodon, Catabasis, Othonophanes, Triurobrycon and
Holobrycon. Holobrycon was proposed by Eigenmann to include Brycon pesu, based on the absence of fontanels
and was recently synonymized with the genus Brycon. Ongoing studies about the relationships of Brycon species
have revealed that Brycon pesu and three new species of Brycon present several derived characters that could
justify the separation or these species in a distinct genus, such as the total absence of fontanels, supraoccipifal spine
covered by scales, nasal bones with well developed laminar processes, ventral portion of anterior ceratohial
relatively straight, and urohial with lateral wings pointed. Brycon pesu was originally described for the Essequibo
and Mazaruni rivers, Guiana. The new species are reported from the brazilian Amazon drainage, such as Rios
Negro, Tocantins, Xingu, and Tapajos. These species can be distinguished from each other on the basis of
osteological characters, and external morphological features such as shape and color of the adipose, anal, and
caudal fins. Phylogenetic analysis including S. pesu and the three new species suggests that they are closely
related to Chalceus, Brydnus and Alestes.




   430                           16:30 Monday                                CF13                               CHM
  Phylogenetic relationships of labrid fishes: analysis of morphological characters.                    M.W. Westneat.
Department of Zoology, Reid Museum of Natural History, Chicago, IL 60605 USA.

The Labridae is a diverse, circumtropioal family of marine fishes composed of over 700 species in over 80 genera.
Relationships among labrid genera, among the labrid subgroups cunently recognized, and affinities between the
Labridae and other perciform families are poorly understood. In this study, a character survey of labrid osteology,
musculature, connective tissues, neuroanatomy, and internal organs is presented. Taxa examined included
members of all labrid tribes, as well as scarid and odacid fishes that are nested within the Labridae. Outgroups
examined include cichlids, pomacentrids, embiotocids, gerreids, sparids and other perciform taxa. New osteological
features include morpholo^ of the neurocranium, axial skeleton, and pterygiophores. Phylogenetically Informative
characters were discovered in the abductor musdes of the pectoral fins, the inclinator muscles of the dorsal fin,
caudal musculature, and the shape of the myomeres. Useful characters of internal anatomy include the coiling
Eattems of the gut and neuroanatomical features. Brain structure is particularly character-rich. Conclusions: The
  abridae are clearly monophyletic based on numerous new characters. Weak support continues for labroid
monophyly. Most previous labrid tribes and subfamilies are not natural groups. Scarids and odacids are labrids.
Morphology yields high resolution power for labrid and labroid relationships.Phylogenetic relationships of the suckermouth minnows, genus Phenacobius, Inferred from parsimony
analyses of nucleotide sequence, allozymic and morphological data (Cyprinidae: Cypriniformes). W.W.
Dimmiek. University of Kansas, Museum of Natural History. Lawrence, KS 66045; B.M. Burr, Department of Zoology.
Southern Illinois University at Carbondale. IL 62901. U.S.A.
We investigated the phylogenetic relationships among the five species of the genus Phenacobius (Cyprinidae:
Cypriniformes) using a combined analysis of molecular and morphological characters. The nucleotide characters
were comprised of 208 potentially informative sites among a total 1773 aligned base pairs from several segments of
mitochondrial genes encoding the large and small RNA subunits, the valine transfer RNA. and the ND2 protein
coding gene. Allozyrne products from 23 polymorphic loci and 9 morphological characters that were taken from the
literature were also included in the total evidence analysis. Third position codon sites were demonstrated to be
saturated for transitional changes and unsuitable for phylogeny reconstruction among the species studied here. The
total evidence phylogeny is isomorphic with Mayden's (1989) morphological hypothesis. Phenacobius mirabiiis was
found to be basal, followed in ascending order by P. teretuius, P. catostomus, P. crassiiabrum and P. uranops.




  427                        15.45 Monday                               CFIS                              CHM
Description of a rock-dwelling ctehlld (Teleostel: CIchlidae) of the Pseudotropheus willlamal complex from
Lake Malawi, Malawi, Africa. J.R. Stauffer Jr. School of Forest Resources, Penn State University, University Park,
PA 16802 USA; K.A. Kellogg, University of Massachusets, Amherst, Massac^usets USA.
A new species of the cichlid fish genus Pseudotropheus Regan (Teleostel; Cichlidae) from Lake Malawi is
described. The new species is a member of the Pseudotropheus wittiamsi (Gunther) complex. Pseudotroheus
wiiiiamsi is ths type species of the genus. Pseudotropheus, vmich is a polyphyletic grouping of several species of
rock-dwelling cichlids from Lake Malawi. Recently, those members of Pseudotropheus that possessed a moderately
sloped ethmo-vomerine block and a swollen rostral tip were placed in the genus Metriadima Stauffer, Bowers,
Kellogg and McKaye. In addition to the P. wiiiiamsi complex, Pseudotropheus now contains species belonging to the
Pseudotropheus tropheops Regan, Pseudotropheus elongatus Fryer, and Pseudotropheus aggressive complexes,
as well a group of miscellaneous fonns such as Pseudotropheus fainzilberi Staeck. We are now restricting
Pseudotropheus to only those forms that are sister species of P. wiiiiamsi. Because of this restriction, all former
members, with the exception of Metriadima are without a generic name, we propose that they be placed in
Ctenochromis Pfeffer. Since the group is polyphyletic any generic placement is regarded only as a nomenclatural
action and does not suggest phyletic affinities.




   428                         16:00 Monday                                 CF13                               CHM
A new species of the family Percophidae from the Philippines with comments on Indo-Pacific Bembrops.
B.A. Thompson. Coastal Fisheries Institute, Wetland Resources Building, Louisiana State University.Baton Rouge,
Louisiana 70803-7503 USA; R.D. Suttkus, Tulane University Museum of Natural History, Belle Chasse, Louisiana.
There are currently six spedes of the genus Bembrops recognized from the Indo-Padfio: B. caudimacula, B.
platyrhynchus, B. filifera, B. nematopterus, B. curvatura, and B. morelandi. Recently, a distinctive from of Bembrops
charaderized by a series of narrow dorsal saddles from the naps to the caudal peduncle and a darkly -pigmented
spinous dorsal nn has been recognized from ths Philippines Islands. Similar to several spedes of Bembrops, there
is sexual dimorphism in genital papilla size (males large, females small) and caudal fin spot (present females, absent
males). The new species has 28 vertebrae (9 precaudal, 19 caudal) similar to all Indo-PacIfic Bembrops. This
differs from Atlantic forms that, as a group, varies from 27 to 30. The suborbital branch of the cephalic canal system
is very abbreviated in the new species, with only 3 pores; several other Indo-Pacific species have a more fully-
developed suborbital canal with as many as 12 pores. The new form lacks elongate spines in the dorsal fin,
distinctive from B. filifera and B. nematopterus. A review of museum materials suggests that one or more forms
relegated to synonymy may be valid or additional undescribed spedes are present in the Indo-Padfic.




   429                          16:15 Monday                                 CF13                         CHM
Molecular systematic assessment of the status of Carpiodes forbesi Hubbs.          H.L. Bart Jr. and K.R. Piller.
Tulane University Museum of Natural History, Belle Chasse, LA 70037, USA; D.L. Hurley, Tulane University, Dept, of
Cell and Molecular Biology, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA.
Suckers of the genus Carpiodes (carp suckers) are widely distributed across the eastern United States, southern
Canada, and northern Mexico. Three species of Carpiodes are currently recognized: C. carpio, C. cyprinus, and C.
velifer. However, the ranges of eacii of these species are believed to contain additonal undescribed and
unrecognized forms. In a landmark paper on Catostomidae published in 1930, Carl Hubbs commented on the
distinctiveness of the large bodied, short-quilled, elongate form of qulllback from the Illinois River, which Forbes and
Richardson had earlier (1908) referred to as C. thompsoni. Hubbs renamed the species C. forbesi, but cast doubt on
Its validity, stating that it may be a hybrid between C. cyprinus and C. carpio. In Fishes of South Dakota, Bailey and
Anum (1962), citing Hubbs doubts and Trautman's suggestion that shape variation in some Ohio C. cyprinus was
ecophenotypic, relegated C. forbesi to the synonomy of C. cyprinus. We used partial sequences from the
cytochrome-b gene to reassess the distinctiveness of C. forbesi. Sequences were generated from mtDNA extracted
from Wisconsin River (Upper Mississippi River) and Lake Ponohartrain populations of C. velifer and C. cyprinus and
'C. forbesf like specimens of C. cypnnus from the Wisconsin River. Sequence data was subjected to maximum
parsimony analysis using PAUP 3.1. Phylogenetic implications of this analysis will be presented, along with a
discussion of ths taxonomic status of C. forbesi.

Three new Brvcon species with comments on their reiationships^A^M^anata^Musei^^ZoolQgi^da
Universidade de Sao Paulo. SP. Brazil.
Several generic names have been proposed in the past for some species or groups of species currently included in
Brycon, such as Megaiobiycon, Chaidnopsis, Bryconexodon, Catabasis, Othonophanes, Triurobrycon and
Hoiobrycon. Hoiobrycon was proposed by Eigenmann to include Brycon pesu, based on the absence of fontanels
and was recently synonymized with the genus Brycon. Ongoing studies about the relationships of Brycon species
have revealed that Brycon pesu and three new species of Brycon present several derived characters that could
justify the separation of these species in a distinct genus, such as the total absence of fontanels, supraoccipital spine
covered by scales, nasal bones with well developed laminar processes, ventral portion of anterior ceratohial
relatively straight, and urohial with lateral wings pointed. Brycon pesu was originally described for the Essequibo
and Mazaruni rivers. Guiana. The new species are reported from the brazilian Amazon drainage, such as Rios
Negro. Tocantins, Xingu, and Tapajos. These species can be distinguished from each other on the basis of
osteological characters, and external morphological features such as shape and color of the adipose, anal, and
caudal fins. Phylogenetic analysis including B. pesu and the three new species suggests toat they are closely
related to Chalceus, Brydnus and Aiestes.




   430                      16:30 Monday                        CF13                                           CHM
  Phylosenetlc relationships of labrid fishes: analysis of morphological charactera.                     M.W. Westneat.
Department of Zoology, Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, IL 60605 USA.
The Labridae is a diverse, circumtropical family of marine fishes composed of over 700 species in over 80 genera.
Relationships among labrid genera, among the labrid subgroups currently recognized, and affinities between the
Labridae and other perdform families are poorly understood. In this study, a character sunrey of labrid osteology,
musculature, connective tissues, neuroanatomy, and internal organs is presented. Taxa examined induded
members of all labrid tribes, as well as scarid and odadd fishes that are nested within the Labridae. Outgroups
examined include cichlids, pomacentrids, embiotocids, gerreids, sparids and other perdform taxa. New osteological
features indude morpholo^ of the neurocranium, axial skeleton, and pterygiophores. Phylogenetically informative
characters were discovered in ths abductor musdes of the pectoral fins, the inclinator musdes of the dorsal fin,
caudal musculature, and the shape of the myomeres. Useful characters of internal anatomy indude the coiling
patterns of the gut and neuroanatomical features. Brain structure is particularly character-rirm. Condusions: The
Labridae are clearly monophyletic based on numerous new characters. Weak support continues for labroid
monophyly. Most previous labrid tribes and subfamilies are not natural groups. Scarids and odacids are labrids.
Morphology yields nigh resolution power for labrid and labroid relationships.




   431                           16:45 Monday                                 CF13                                CHM
Progress report on the monophyly of the Rhombosoleidae (Pisces; Pleuronectiformes) with notes on
Psammodiscus ocellalus and Oncopterus darwinii. A.-C. Guibord and F. Chapleau, University of Ottawa,
Department of Biology, 30 Marie-Curie, Ottawa, Ontario KIN 6N5; J.M. Diaz de Astarloa, Departamento de Ciendas
Marinas, FacuKad de Ciendas Exadas y Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata, Funes 3350, 7600 Mar
del Plata, Argentina.
The family Rhombosoleidae is composed of nine genera distributed in Australia, New Zealand and South America.
We have examined the phylogenetic status of two genera: the Indo-Paoilic Psammodicus and the South American
Oncopterus. The former genus shows a caudal skeleton that is typical of what is observed in the Samaridae while
the latter has a series seconded canals perpendicular to the lateral line which resembles the series found in the
South American achirines (Achindae). A complete osteological sunrey of all rhombosoleid species and outgroups
combined with a review of the morphological characters used in past studies will be used to clarify the phylogentic
status of these two genera and examine the monophyletic status of the family Rhombosoleidae.




   432                          13:00 Monday                                  .CA3                               ..AXL
Effects of the presence of fish on the suitability of breeding sites to Ambystoma maculatum. D. Cunnington,
R.J. Brooks and J. Edmonds. University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, NIG 2W1.
The presence of predatory fish is thought to restrict successful breeding by many amphibians, including Ambystoma
maculatum (the spotted salamander), to temporary ponds. Evidence is accumulating, however, that A. maculatum
sometimes breeds successfully in the presence of fish. I investigated the co-occurrence of breeding A. maculatum
and fish in 11 lakes in Algonquin Park, Ontario. Stepwise multiple regression was used to determine the relative
importance of the effects of the presence/absence of fish, pH, Secchi depth, lake area, and the forest type
surrounding the lakes on the density of egg masses in lakes. Variation in egg mass density among the lakes was
significantly related to the presence/absence of fish (excluding Salvelinus fontinalis}, but was not related to any of the
other habitat variables. The lanrae were palatable to fishes, but lanrae successfully reached metamorphosis in at
least one lake despite the presence of fish. Although presence of fish was the most important factor in the suitability
of a breeding site to A. matxrlatum, fish did not completely exclude A. maculatum. The use of refuges, spatially
complex habitats, and a bet-hedging life history, are potential ways in which A. maculatum can reproduce despite the
presence of fish.  433                         .13:15 Monday                               CA3                           .     AXL
Diel activity patterns of the sympatric Poison Dart frogs Dendrobates auratus and D. pumilio in Costa Rica.
B.M. Graves. Department of Biology, Northern Michigan University, Marquette, Ml 49855.
Activity of Dendrobates auratus and D. pumilio in Northeastern Costa Rica was monitored at 45 min intervals
throughout daylight hours on nine days in late-June and eariy-July 1997. Activity of D. pumilio peaked early m the
morning, declined steadily to mid-day, then remained at relatively low levels through the afternoon. A<*vity of p.
auratus peaked later in the day, and was more consistent throughout the day than was activity of p. pumilio.
Dendrobates auratus was usually found on the ground, and no association was found between percent of individuals
on elevated perches and observation time. In contrast, there was a clear peak in use of elevated perches by D.
pumilio which occurred shortly after sunrise. A significant positive relationship between rainfall and activity was
evident for D. pumilio, but not for D. auratus. These data demonstrate differences in activity patterns between these
congeners, in spite of many ecological similarities




   434                         13:30 Monday                                 CA3            .                 JA^
A telemetric study of the home ranges and movement patterns of the mountain yellow-legged frra Rana
muscosa in Dusy Basin. Kings Canyon National Park. K.M. MaHhews. K.L. Pope''’ and D.B. Court, 'US Forest
Service Pacific Southwest Research Station, P.O. Box 245, Berkeley, CA 94701, USA; California Polytechnic State
University, San Luis Obispo, Department of Biology, San Luis Obispo, CA 93407, USA.
Rana muscosa was once common throughout high elevation areas of the Sierra Nevada but has declined pnmarily
due to widespread stocking of non-native trout. To understand Rana muscosa habitat needs, we initiated a
telemetric study in 1997 to determine home ranges and movement patterns during the summer and fall when their
high elevation habitats (>3000 m) are accessible. We used radio transmitters and GPS to map the ocations of 24
frogs in Dusy Basin. During the summer frogs were distributed throughout the basin in a variety of lakes, m August
12 tagged frogs showed no movement away from the small lakes where they were originally captured and tagged,
and their home ranges were small (within 50 m). In September 8 of 9 frogs moved up to 200 m away from their
original capture lakes. By October, when lakes began freezing, frogs were found in only two lakes along the
shoreline in deep crevices or under rock ledges. This initial telemetry study of Rana muscosa indicates they are
more widely distributed during the summer, and become more restricted in their distribution as the lakes freeze.
Future restoration strategies should ensure their access to their summer and winter habitats.




   435                         13:45 Monday                                CA3                        ...      AXL
Mountain yellow-legged frog habitat use and movement patterns In a high elevation basin in Kings Canyon
National Park: a mark-recapture study. K.L. Pope*’*’ and K.R. Matthews, “US Forest Service Pacific Southwest
Research Station, P.O. Box 245, Berkeley, Ca 94701, USA; ‘■California Polytechnic State University, San Luis
Obispo, Department of Biology, San Luis Obispo, CA 93407, USA.
We are studying the movement patterns of Rana muscosa to determine seasonal habitat use relied to
hibernation, breeding activity and feeding. Passive integrated transponders (PIT tags) were inserted into 471 adult
froqs in Dusy Basin, Kings Canyon National Park (elevation 3470m) during the summer of 1997. Recapture surveys
were conducted between August and October when the activity cycle ended and lakes began to freeze. Throughout
August all recaptured frogs remained in the same water body where they were originally fagged. Frogs were
observed feeding and sunning in daylight hours during this period. By mid September, a high percentage of frc^s
were recaptured in different water bodies than where they were originally tagged. Frogs moved froni the 12 water
bodies ttiey were found during the summer feeding period to only 2 lakes in the basin. One of the lakes was small
and shallow (<.2 ha, <2 m deep) while the other was the largest lake in the basin (4.3 ha, 9 m deep). Above-water
activitv greatly declined after this movement period. This study will be continued in 1998 to gain information about
movement between overwintering habitats and breeding sites and movement between brewing and feeding sites.
Because Rana muscosa has declined throughout the Sierra Nevada, understanding their habitat requirements will be
crucial in managing remaining populations.




   •439                         14:4iS Mangay .                             CAS                                AXL
 Herpetological communities in four watersheds under different silvicultural management in the Ouachita
 llflountains, Arkansas, USA. P.A. Shipman*-*’ and S.F. Fox, “Department of Zoology, 430 LSW, Oklahoma Slate
 University, Stillwater, OK 74078 U.S.A; ‘■Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, U.S. Geological Survey
 Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078 U.S.A; R. Thill, Wildlife Habitat and Silvicultural Lab, Nation^
 Forest Service, Nacogdoches, TX 75962 U.S.A; P. Tappe, School of Forest Resources, University of Arkansas -
 Monticello, Monticello, AR 71656 U.S.A.
We summarize preliminary results of the mid-point data collection for a large- scale, long-term field study of herp
communities and the influence of habitat and landscape environmental variables in the Ouachita Mountains of west­
central Arkansas, USA.. This study is one component of Phase III of the Ouachita Mountains Ecosystem
Management Research Project and is a cooperative effort involving the Ouachita National Forest, Weyerhaeuser
Coiraany, the National Couricil of the Paper Industry for Air and Stream Improvement, Oklahoma Stale University,
the Oklahoma Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, the University of Arkansas Monticello, and the Souftem
Forest Experiment Station of the National Forest Service. The primary objective is to strengthen our knowledge of
habitat relationships of amphibians and reptiles at both the stand and landscape level using four 1500 to 3800 ha
watersheds with different histories of silviculture and intensity of timber management. Thus far, the most intensively
managed watershed is lower in diversity per plot (a - diversity) for both amphibians and reptiles, whereas ordination
indicates that this watershed is greater in diversity among plots (p - diversity) tor both taxa.

  436                          14:00 Monday                                CA3                   ..           AXL
Use of discarded aluminum beverage cans by selected North American amphibians and leptiles.                     M-R.
Jennings*-^. ®U.S. Geological Survey, Biological Resources Division, , 39913 Sharon, Avenue, Davis, CA 95616,
USA; “Research Associate, Dept, of Herpetology, California Academy of Sciences, Golden Gate Park, San
Francisco, CA 94118, USA.
Over the past 35 years, discarded aluminum beverage cans have become a common item of litter in niar^ parts of
North America. Although the shape, volume, and opening of these caris have changed many times over the years,
there use as shelter by selected invertebrates, fishes, amphibians, reptiles, and small mammals indicates that these
anthropogenic items may provide suitable hiding places In otherwise desolate habitats. Over the p^t 2 years, I
have collected over 10,000 discarded aluminum beverage cans under a wide variety of conditions in California,
Nevada, Oregon, and Washington. Although a significant number of cans contained dead invertebrates, most were
found to be devoid of amphibians and reptiles. However, a small number of cans were found to house Pacific
treefrogs (Hyta regilia}, southern alligator lizards {Elgan'a multicarinata}, western skinks {Eumeces skinonianu^,
western fence lizards {Sceloponjs cxxidentalis}, and side-blotched lizards (Uta stansbunana). Some of the lizards
observed in these cans were found to be in various stages of decomposition. The individual preferences of
amphibians and reptiles for selected beer and soft drink cans will be discussed.




   437                         14:15 Monday                                CA3                   .            AXL
Abundance and age distribution of three species of Ranid amphibians in Algonquin Provincial Park,
Canada. R.J. Brooks. K.A. Judge and J.C. MacDonald, University of Guelph, Department of Zoology, Guelph,
Ontario, NIG 2W1; L.J. Shirose, Canada Centre for Inland Waters, P.O. Box 5050, Burlington, Ontario, L7R 4A6.
There has recently been concern that amphibians are declining in abundance and diversity on a global scale &nce
1985, the population dynamics of three species of Ranid amphibians (Rana catesbeiana, Rana clamitans and Rana
septe’ntrionalis) have been investigated using intensive mark-recapture techniques. The focus of this long-term study
is to test whether these species are experiencing declines in the relatively pristine environment of the Wildlife
Research Area of Algonquin Provincial Park, Ontario. To date, the study indicates that population sizes of all three
species of Ranids fluctuate from year to year. However, there is no evidence of significant decreases in abundance
or mean body size, or of shifts in the age distribution over the 10-year sampling period. This suggests that over the
time scale of our study, broad environmental factors such as increased ultraviolet radiation or global warming, are
not important determinants of amphibian abundance in this region.




   438                         14:30 Monday                                 CA3 .                              AXL
Overwintering habitats of radio-impianted green frogs, Rana clamitans. V.S. Lamoureux and D.M. Madison,
Department of Biological Sciences, Binghamton, N.Y. 13902-6000 USA.
Winter's freezing temperatures exert a major selective force on temperate frogs and toads. The selection of an
overwintering site that provides protection from freezing is critical forthose species without freeze tolerance. Many
freeze intolerant frogs, such as the green frog (Rana clamitans}, are commonly assumed to overwinter at the bottom
of shallow, eutrophic, breeding ponds. Although anurans overwintering in pond bottoms would avoid freezing, these
environments are highly anoxic for the majority of winter. Since adult ranids cannot tolerate anoxia for even limited
periods of time, it is unlikely that pond bottoms would be suitable overwintering sites. Anurans may need to undergo
extensive movements in search of suitable overwintering sites that remain unfrozen and provide adequate oxygen for
survival We used radio implants to determine overwintering habitats of the green frog in southern New York state.
In late fall, green frogs moved 80-480 m from their summer breeding ponds to streams and seeps that remained
flowing and unfrozen throughout winter. We suggest that these sites are chosen because they remain unfrozen and
remain well oxygenated.




   442 ..      ..              13:30 Monday                                GS1                               MCN
How vsnom-conductlng fangs are formed. K, Jackson, Museum of Comparative Zoology. Harvard University
Cambndge,, MA 02138, U.S.A.

Venom-delivery systems occur in at least four families of snakes. In viperids, elapids, and atractaspidids, the venom-
aehvery system is front-fanged, and consists of a hollow fang and a venom gland associated with compressor
muscles, which squeeze venom into a duct, which cam’es it to the proximal end of the fang, where it enters the
wnom canal. In venomous colubrids the fang is grooved rather than hollow, and positioned at the posterior end of
me maxilla. It is not known how many times the venom-delivery system has been independently derived in snakes.
This study was initially undertaken to determine how venom-conducting fangs form during development in differerit