and three Osteopilus ). All of these
species are endemic to the island and occupy large areas of the mid and low lands (below 1500 meters
above sea level on average). The deforestation and degradation of natural environments, as in many
other places, has meant that amphibian populations are highly fragmented and extant in many localities.
Among the species that this study considers, two are Endangered and one is Vulnerable, according to
IUCN criteria.

We describe the larvae of Osteopilus dominicensis (n = 222) , O. pulchrilineatus (n= 219) , O. vastus
(n= 371) and Hybsiboas heilprini (n=83) based on a total representative sample of 895 specimens
reared from egg masses collected in Cibao Central region in the Dominican Republic (constituting 80% of
Gosner stages). Tadpoles were maintained in laboratory conditions for almost four months, some were
reared through metamorphosis until froglet emergence to confirm their identity. We used 13
morphological measurements and 15 traits for the identification, comparison and description of the larvae.
The use of a statistical approach including simple linear regression permitted comparisons among
species. These tadpoles show stream adaptation through a robust body with strong tail musculature,
small to medium fins, relatively enlarged oral disc, increased number of labial tooth rows, and complete
marginal papillae. A wide variation of larval tooth row number is compiled. Marked ontogenetic changes in
body form and coloration characterize the first and post-metamorphic stages. The high similarities shown
by the tadpoles of the species studied are interesting despite one of them not being closely related
(Hypsiboas ).Our results highlight the importance of tadpoles ontogeny research as relevant to testing
phylogenetic hypothesis. We present a field guide including a taxonomic key to distinguish among the
tadpoles of Hispaniola hylids and present information on their ontogenetic development, photographs and
illustrations.



Gandara, Anthony J. (University of Northern Colorado); Broughton, Brianne; Traverse, Madeleine J.
(University of Northern Colorado, Canada); Bryson Jr., Robert W. (University of Nevada, Las Vegas,
Canada); Mackessy, Stephen P. (University of Northern Colorado, Canada)

Intraspecific variation in the venom of the Ridge-nosed Rattlesnake (Crotalus willardi).

Rattlesnake venoms commonly vary in composition as a function of several factors, including phylogeny,
age and population. Little is known about the biology of Mexican mountain rattlesnakes, and information
regarding their venom composition is even scarcer. Herein we report the characterization of venom from
the Ridge-nosed Rattlesnake ( Crotalus willardi ), along with an analysis of geographical variation in



                                                                                                           233
venom composition. Venom samples from four of five recognized subspecies were used in this study.
Venom profiles were created using SDS-PAGE and individual venom chromatographs were constructed
using reverse-phase HPLC. The activity of six common rattlesnake venom enzymes were measured and
analyzed between populations. Coagulation time and fibrinogen digest assays were performed to
investigate effects on hemostasis, and venoms were also assayed for lethality towards mice, lizards, and
crickets. Finally, cytotoxicity assays towards MCF-7 breast cancer cells were completed to screen for
compounds with possible anti-proliferative activity. Electrophoretic analyses revealed that venoms
commonly contained 20-23 proteins, including L-amino acid oxidase, serine proteases, PI and PIII
metalloproteases, and phospholipases. Protein composition was consistent between individuals and did
not vary between subspecies, an observation corroborated by comparative HPLC. Enzyme activities and
coagulation time did not differ significantly between subspecies. Venom toxicity also did not differ
significantly between subspecies. Cytotoxicity assays revealed that all venoms contained significant
inhibitory effects on MCF-7 breast cancer cell proliferation. Currently we are purifying select proteins to
evaluate their utility in drug development. Many studies evaluating intraspecific venom variation have
shown differences between populations, and the lack of pronounced variation in the venom of the
subspecies of Ridge-nosed Rattlesnakes raises interesting questions. Differences in diet, and the
evolutionary arms race between predator and prey, have long been thought of as the main driving force
behind venom evolution, but detailed information on diet is available for only one population of C. willardi
obscurus . A study looking at the comparative toxicity of venom to natural prey species could help explain
the lack of subspecies level variation in venom composition in the Ridge-nosed Rattlesnake.



Garcia, Gerardo (Chester Zoo, North of England Zoological Society);

Using volunteers in ex situ and in situ conservation programmes

Large amounts of resources are necessary for the long term support of ex-situ and in-situ conservation
programmes. However, funding is always limited. Despite the fact that many species or habitat restoration
programmes require long-term commitments to achieve their aims, funding is often only available in short-
term tranches. There are examples of funding made available by statutory and non-government bodies to
start new programmes. However, salaries, which form the highest proportion of costs, are difficult to
secure because in many cases personnel costs are not supported (directly or indirectly) by many funding
organisations. In some cases, the only possibility of starting and even maintaining vitally important
conservation projects is by engaging networks of volunteers. These networks can provide many hours of
work, which, if coupled with the collection of good quality scientific data can provide very important
practical results. To achieve this, adequate training and tutoring of the volunteers is vital.

A summary of the key components that have produced effective conservation programmes using
volunteers is presented with particular reference to potential new programmes. We present costs of a
number of conservation programmes and the contributions -in monetary as well as in time investment
terms – made by volunteers. The working relationship between volunteers and the host institutions is
vital, and we discuss how this can be managed smoothly. Because in many cases, the survival of a
species is fully dependent on the enthusiasm and dedication of volunteers, ensuring that volunteer
networks work efficiently and sustainably is a clear aim for those institutions relying on them.




                                                                                                        234
García-Castillo, Mirna G. (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México); Parra-Olea, Gabriela
(Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico)

Molecular phylogeny of the genus Chiropterotriton

The use of molecular tools in recent research has shown that the diversity of amphibians in Mexico is
highly underestimated, containing a large number of cryptic species. The genus Chiropterotriton, is
endemic to Mexico with a geographical distribution along the Sierra Madre Oriental, the Transverse
Volcanic Belt and Sierra de Juarez. It has the peculiarity of having a rich morphological and ecological
diversification that is atypical in a group clearly marked by morphological stasis. Chiropterotriton has 12
described species with terrestrial, arboreal and cave dweller species. In this study, 190 individuals were
collected, and amplified for mitochondrial (16S, 12S) and nuclear (POMC and RAG1) genes. A
preliminary phylogeny detected up to 15 undescribed species increasing considerably the number of
species in this genus.



García-de-León, FJ (CIBNOR); Claudia, Silva-Segundo (Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas del
Noroeste, La Paz. BCS, Mexico); Eric, Iwamoto (National Marine Fisheries Service, Northwest Fisheries
Service Center, Conservation Biology Division, WA, United States); Paola, Acuña-Gómez (Fundación
CEQUA, Punta Arenas, Chile, Chile)

Population genetic structure revealed by microsatellite loci in Merluccius productus (Pisces:
Merlucciidae) in the Northeastern and Central Pacific

Three hake morph-species: Merluccius productus, M. angustimanus, M. hernandezi have been described
from the Northeastern and Central Pacific. Only the first two have been considered as valid species,
however, Silva-Segundo et al. (2011) recently established that only M. productus exists in this geographic
area. In the northeastern Pacific four stocks have described: two located in partially isolated waters
(Puget Sound and the Strait of Georgia), another called "coastal" is genetically homogeneous and highly
migratory along the coasts of the northeast Pacific, and a stock called "dwarf" is known from southern
Baja California. The aim of this study was to investigate the population genetic structure of Pacific hake in
the northeast and central Pacific, using mitochondrial and microsatellite markers. The sampling sites
were: five along the U.S. Pacific coast (Puget Sound, Washington, Oregon, Eureka and San Francisco),
three off the coast of Mexico (Gulf of California, Bahía S. Vizcaíno and the southern part of Baja
California Sur) and one in Costa Rica. We analyzed sequences of three mitochondrial genes
(Cytochrome b, Cytochrome Oxidase Subunit I and 16S ribosomal DNA) and ten microsatellite loci. High
levels of genetic differentiation were observed between hakes living in partially isolated waters (the Puget
Sound and the Upper Gulf of California) and hake present in the open waters of the Eastern and Central
Pacific. In prior studies, significant genetic differences had not been noted between coastal populations
separated by several miles. However, microsatellite loci did detect isolation by distance structure related
to the migration pattern of the species. The origin of genetic isolation observed among the coastal
populations and the Upper Gulf of California coincides with a potential population expansion and
reduction of gene flow. This probably occurred during the closure of an inter-peninsula corridor in the
region of La Paz, Baja California Sur that connected the Pacific Ocean with the Gulf of California during
the Late Pleistocene. Neutrality tests and mismatch analysis of mitochondrial genes suggest that these
populations have recently undergone a sudden population expansion during the last period of glaciation.
In particular, the hake of the Upper Gulf of California is characterized by a high number of unique
haplotypes (excess low-frequency polymorphisms), supporting the idea that the area should be
considered as refuge and therefore a priority area for conservation.




                                                                                                         235
Gardiner, Jayne (Mote Marine Laboratory); Atema, Jelle (Boston University, Boston, MA, United States);
Hueter, Robert (Mote Marine Laboratory, Sarasota, FL, United States); Motta, Philip (University of South
Florida, Tampa, FL, United States)

Multimodal Integration and Sensory Plasticity in Shark Feeding Behavior

Multimodal sensory input directs simple and complex behaviors in animals, but most research to date has
focused on individual senses. We investigated three species of sharks from different ecological niches:
benthic, suction-feeding nurse sharks hunt nocturnally for fish; ram-biting bonnethead scoop crustaceans
off the bottom of seagrass beds; and ram-feeding blacktip sharks rapidly chase down midwater teleost
prey. We deprived animals of information from the senses (olfaction, vision, mechanoreception, and
electroreception), alone and in combination, to elucidate their complementary and alternative roles in
detecting, tracking, orienting to, striking at, and capturing live prey. This work revealed similarities and
differences among species in the use of the senses for particular behaviors. In most cases, multiple
senses can be used for the same behavioral task. Thus, sharks are capable of successfully capturing
prey, even when the optimal sensory cues are unavailable, by switching to alternative sensory modalities.
This indicates that feeding behavior is plastic. Nurse sharks rely on olfaction for detection, and track
using olfaction combined with vision, the lateral line, or touch. They orient to prey using the lateral line,
vision, or electroreception, but will not ingest food if olfaction is blocked. Capture is mediated by
electrosensory or tactile cues. Bonnetheads normally detect prey using olfaction, use olfaction combined
with vision or the lateral line to track, vision to line up a strike, and electroreception for capture. They can
detect, orient, and strike visually in the absence of olfactory cues. Blacktip sharks can also detect prey
using olfaction or vision. They use olfaction combined with vision or the lateral line to track. Long-distance
orientation and striking is visually mediated but strikes are fine-tuned just prior to capture using the lateral
line. Short-range orientation and striking can occur in the absence of vision using lateral line cues.
Capture is mediated by electrosensory or tactile cues. The blacktip shark shows the greatest amount of
modulation in capture kinematics, followed by the nurse shark. Little to no modulation was observed in
the bonnethead. These results suggest that capture is less plastic in elasmobranchs than in bony fishes
and that modulatory ability varies by species.



Gardiner, Laura (University of Regina and Royal Saskatchewan Museum); Somers, Christopher
(University of Regina, Regina, SK, Canada); Poulin, Ray (Royal Saskatchewan Museum, Regina, SK,
Canada)

Snakes on a Plain: Community ecology of 3 sympatric snake species in southwestern
Saskatchewan, Canada

The grasslands of southwestern Saskatchewan are home to a variety of snake species at the northern
extreme of their geographic range in North America, including the (Threatened) eastern yellow-bellied
racer ( Coluber constrictor flaviventris ), the (Data Deficient) bullsnake ( Pituophis catenifer sayi ), and
prairie rattlesnakes ( Crotalus viridis ), which are considered high priority for conservation status
assessment over the next few years. Lack of data about habitat use by these species is limiting the ability
of responsible jurisdictions to properly assess and develop comprehensive conservation plans for these
species. To address this knowledge gap, we used radio-telemetry and GIS to identify and compare
habitat use by racers (n=33), bullsnakes (n=16), and rattlesnakes (n=23) in and around Grasslands
National Park, Saskatchewan, Canada. Used and available macrohabitat sites were compared in order to
quantify habitat use by these species. We found that although all species hibernate in communal den
sites, during the active season they disperse into different macrohabitats across the landscape. As a




                                                                                                            236
result, home ranges were dumbbell-shaped with activity centres near hibernacula and in well-defined
summer grounds, and these centres of activity were connected by narrow corridors. Racers were found to
strongly select for riparian areas, bullsnakes tended to inhabit valley grassland habitats, and rattlesnakes
tended to be associated with prairie dog colonies. Some rattlesnakes were found to travel great distances
(over 11 km) from the dens compared to the other species (bullsnakes = 4 km; racers = 5 km), which may
be a result of their selected macrohabitat being more patchily distributed in the landscape. Our findings
will be useful in aiding designation of critical habitat for the eastern yellow-bellied racer and contribute to
assessment of bullsnakes and prairie rattlesnakes in Canada.



Gardner, James (Royal Tyrrell Museum of Palaeontology); DeMar, David (University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, United States)

Mesozoic and early Cenozoic lissamphibians in the North American Western Interior

The Mesozoic and Paleogene record of lissamphibians in North America is confined largely to the
Western Interior, from localities in southern Alberta and Saskatchewan, Canada, southwards through the
USA and into northern Mexico.           Other limitations of this fossil record include: it samples only lowland
environments (mainly floodplain and fluvial, with some swamp and lacustrine deposits); specimens
consist largely of isolated and associated bones, although some spectacular skeletons are available; it is
temporally discontinuous, especially in the Jurassic and Early Cretaceous intervals; and some
assemblages remain poorly sampled or documented.                 Nevertheless, the Western Interior contains a
number of richly fossiliferous localities that have yielded fossils that are critical for documenting and
interpreting the evolutionary history of lissamphibians, at both a continental and a global scale.           The
oldest known anuran (i.e., crown frog) and gymnophionan (i.e., stem + crown caecilians) from anywhere
date from the Early Jurassic of Arizona.         Upper Jurassic deposits in Utah and Wyoming yield a
moderate diversity of anurans and caudates (i.e., stem + crown salamanders), with one of the latter
interpreted as a basal salamandroid. Although the basal Cretaceous record is virtually absent, from the
late Aptian through the Cretaceous/Tertiary (K/T) boundary numerous occurrences are distributed
throughout the Western Interior. This represents the most stratigraphically continuous Cretaceous and
earliest Paleocene record on the planet for lissamphibians, and it contains a diversity of anurans,
urodeles (i.e., crown salamanders), and the salamander-like albanerpetontids. Most of the anurans are
of uncertain familial affinities, but the urodeles contain a mixture of extinct families that dominated through
the Cretaceous into the early Paleogene along with the earliest appearances of several extant families,
such as sirenids in the Santonian and amphiumids in the late Maastrichtian.                Several geographically
restricted areas in Montana and North Dakota contain stratigraphically and temporally constrained
dense sequences of fossiliferous localities that cross the K/T boundary.                      Ongoing work on
lissamphibians from these localities is yielding new insights into patterns of diversity, extinction, and
recovery during the ca. 3 million year interval bracketing the boundary. By the terminal Paleocene some
groups (e.g., albanerpetontids, scapherpetontid salamanders) that had been ubiquitous components of
earlier assemblages disappear, while several families with extant members (e.g., dicamptodontid,
cryptobranchid, and proteid salamanders) make their first unequivocal appearances.                From the early
Eocene onwards into the Neogene, lissamphibian assemblages become increasingly modernized with
appearances of additional salamandroids and the first unequivocal neobatrachians.




                                                                                                             237
Garner, Jocelyn (Thompson Rivers University); Larsen, Karl (Thompson Rivers University, Canada);
Packham, Roger (BC Ministry of Natural Resource Operations, Canada)

Once a spadefoot always a spadefoot? Movement and habitat-use of the Great Basin spadefoot
(Spea intermontana) at its northern range limit

The Great Basin spadefoot ( Spea intermontana ) ranges from Arizona to British Columbia (BC) in
western North America, being typically associated with arid environments. However, at the northern limit
of the species (south-central BC; 51°18'11'' N, 121°23'51'' W), the ecosystem contains only small patches
of grassland interspersed within a forested landscape, and the climate is relatively cool and wet. Due to
the threatened status of spadefoots in this region, breeding ponds have been identified, but effective
management will require broader data on habitat use away from these bodies of water. Using telemetry,
we examined movement patterns and determined habitat characteristics for these animals surrounding
diurnal retreat sites. Despite the rarity of these animals, over two years we were able to track 19
spadefoots for varying lengths of time. The telemetered spadefoots showed periodic, eruptive
movements, where single or multiple retreat sites were utilized for a period of time, prior to larger
movements that took the animal to another area (with another set of retreat sites). Often retreat sites
were used repeatedly; individuals would emerge to forage, travel to breeding ponds, and/or utilize other
sites, sometimes retracing their movement patterns over large distances. The average maximum distance
from breeding ponds was 140 m, although some individuals ventured up to 370 m from aquatic habitat.
Spadefoots selected for retreat sites with higher proportions of bare ground and rock, suggesting that
spadefoots at this location are, like conspecifics further south, still tied to habitat characteristics of arid
environments. Management strategies should account for these habitat preferences within a protected
terrestrial zone of at least 140 m from aquatic habitat.



Garner, Trenton (Institute of Zoology, ZSL); Fisher, Matthew (Imperial College, Canada); Bosch, Jaime
(Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales, CSIC, Canada); Bielby, Jon (Institute of Zoology, ZSL, Canada)

The Baby or the Bathwater: Are invasive parasites really more dangerous than unstable
host/parasite environments?

Amphibian parasites are accepted as primary causes of population declines, local extirpations and, in a
few cases, probable host extinction. Two prevailing arguments are used to explain this: 1) in an
increasingly globalized world, parasite introduction and forcing of infection cause naïve hosts to rapidly
decline, and; 2) environmental perturbations radically destabilize previously benign host/parasite
interactions. The general sentiment is that introduction is the most worrisome and possible to control, a
sentiment that guides much of how we respond to infectious diseases as conservation issues. I will argue
that the more worrying problem is the instability of host/parasite dynamics that climate change has and
will continue to provoke. While there is no denying that hosts are being exposed to novel parasites and
sharp host declines are a result, a persistently unstable environment should mean strong host genotype X
environment interactions are ubiquitous. The result will be that the rank order of host genotypes will
change along with the environmental conditions. This has clear implications for disease dynamics, and
research has shown repeatedly that optimal host genotypes do not exist. If we accept that disease
introductions are a fact of a globalized world and that quarantine of wild populations of amphibians is
predominantly impossible, conservation efforts may better spent managing infectious disease ecologically
when threatening disease emergence is detected rather than attempting to prevent disease incursion.




                                                                                                           238
Gauthier, Jacques (Yale University); Kearney, Maureen (USA National Science Foundation, Arlington,
VA, United States); Maisano, Jessica (University of Texas, Austin, Austin, TX, United States); Rieppel,
Olivier (Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, IL, United States); Behlke, Adam (Yale University,
New Haven, United States)

Assembling the Squamate Tree of Life : Perspectives from the Phenotype and the Fossil Record

We assembled a dataset consisting of 192 carefully selected species - 51 extinct and 141 extant - and
976 apomorphies distributed among 610 phenotypic characters to investigate the phylogeny of Squamata
(= ―lizards‖, including snakes and amphisbaenians). These data enabled us to infer a tree much like those
derived from previous morphological analyses, but with better support for some key clades. There are
also a number of novel elements, some of which pose striking departures from traditional ideas about
lizard evolution (e.g., that mosasaurs and polyglyphanodontians are on the scleroglossan stem, rather
than being parts of the crown, and related to varanoids and teiids, respectively). Long-bodied, limb-
reduced, ‗snake-like‘ fossorial lizards – most notably dibamids, amphisbaenians, and snakes - have been
and continue to be the chief source of character conflict in squamate morphological phylogenetics.
Carnivorous lizards - especially snakes, mosasaurs and varanoids - have proven a close second. Genetic
data - presumably less burdened by the potential for adaptive convergence related to fossoriality - were
expected to resolve these conflicts. Although recent gene phylogenies appear to do so, they also differ
radically from any phylogeny based on the phenotype, especially for the most ancient crown squamate
divergences that occured during the latter half of the Mesozoic. This result was all the more surprising as
we anticipated that heavily burdened phenotypic characters and intermediate fossils would be especially
useful for insights into deep-time phylogenetic events. Our study relied upon traditionally-prepared
specimens as well as high resolution CT scans that afforded unprecendented access to the cranial
anatomy of Squamata. This, along with the inclusion of stem fossils, provided an unparalleled sample of
the phenotype enabling us to more fully explore the extreme incongruences between molecular and
morphological topologies for the squamate Tree of Life. Despite this extensive new database, we were
unable to find morphological support for the major rearrangement of the deep divergences in Squamata
proposed by recent molecular studies. Instead, our data strongly support the same fundamental topology
suggested by most previous morphological studies - an Iguania-Scleroglossa basal split, a sister-group
relationship between Gekkota and Autarchoglossa, and the divergence between Anguimorpha and
Scincomorpha - and documents the extreme degree of morphological homoplasy required by those
molecular topologies.



Gedraite, Leonardo (UNESP); Martins, Itamar Alves (UNITAU, Taubaté - SP, Brazil)

The Role of Environmental Descriptors in Structuring a Neotropical Tadpole Assemblage

Amphibians assemblages are sensitive to environmental factors, showing a strong response to some
gradients like hydroperiod or canopy cover. Yet for many assemblages we don't know the exact effect of
some environmental descriptors in the structure of the assemblage and this knowledge is essential for
conservation programs and wildlife management. Trying to solve this question we examine the effects of
8 environmental descriptors in: i) the structure of a Neotropical Tadpole Assemblage and ii) the
abundance of each species in this assemblage. The data were collected in 20 temporary ponds randomly
selected at Grande Sertão Veredas National Park (the second biggest national park in the Brazilian
Hotspot Cerrado). In each of these ponds 10 points were haphazardly selected and surveyed for tadpoles
with the pipe sampling method. The environmental descriptors analyzed were: Margin depth (Depth),
Maximum Depth (MDepth), Perimeter of pond (Per), pH, Water Conductivity (Cond), Dissolved oxygen
(O2) and Water temperature (Temp). The data were collected during the 2010-2011 wet season, and only



                                                                                                       239
the month with the peak richness (December) was used in the analysis. To analyze influence of the
variables in the assemblage we used a CCA, tested for significance, and the influence of the
environmental descriptors in each species abundance was analyzed with a hierarchical partitioning. We
found 10 species of anurans of 4 families (Hylidae (5), Leiuperidae (2), Leptodactylidae (1) and
Mycrohylidae (2)) forming 3 groups in relation to the environment, manly organized by the variables Per,
pH and O2.. However, the proportion of variance in the tadpoles assemblage explained by the
environmental variables was low (22%) indicating that other mechanisms may be acting to shape the
assemblage, like predation, competition or neutral dynamics. Only two species abundance were
unrelated to environmental variables, besides that all the environmental variables have effect in at least
one of the other species, with some of the variables explaining until 56% of the variance in the species
abundance. The results of this work demonstrate that despite the environment little influence over the
assemblage, it affects each species abundance. In this sense, for conservation and management
practices is important to maintain a diverse array of habitats, with several environmental descriptors
forming an net of ponds where each species have an optimal place with high abundance.



Geheber, Aaron (University of Oklahoma); McMahan, Caleb (Louisiana State University, Canada)

Assessment of Phylogenetic Structure in Neotropical Cichlid Communities

Factors contributing to community organization (i.e. biotic and environmental interactions) have received
much attention in the past, however the potential underlying role that phylogenetic relatedness plays in
such interactions has often been overlooked. The aim of this study was to assess how genetic
relatedness influences community assembly of Central American Cichlids. These communities are
especially interesting due to the potential for interspecific interactions at small geographic scales (i.e.
Cichlid species richness is high at small spatial scales). Because of this high concentration of closely
related species, competition is a plausible expectation. Using collections from across the Usumacinta
Drainage, Central America, we assessed phylogenetic relatedness within and between Cichlid
communities. A maximum likelihood phylogeny based on two nuclear and three mitochondrial genes was
generated for the regional species pool of the family Cichlidae. We used Phylocom version 4.2 to
calculate mean phylogenetic distance (MPD) and mean nearest phylogenetic taxon distance (MNTD)
within all samples, and MPD and MNTD between samples. These were then compared with null model
distributions to test for significance. Additionally, local abundance data were incorporated which allowed
weighting of overly abundant species in local communities. Our results suggest that communities are non-
randomly distributed with respect to ancestral relationships. Implications for community organization and
the roles of competition and environmental filtering will be further discussed.



Geheber, Aaron (University of Oklahoma); Barkstedt, Judith; Marsh-Matthews, Edie; Matthews, Bill
(University of Oklahoma, Canada); Moody, Raymond (Tinker Air Force Base, Canada)

Effects of Urbanization on Fish Assemblage Structure in Midwest Prairie Streams

Urbanization can negatively impact aquatic ecosystems by altering fish assemblage structure and species
richness. Poor land use practices in urban areas may lead to increased erosion, introduction of pollutants,
destruction of riparian areas, and alteration of flow regimes; all of which may have detrimental effects on
stream fishes. Although the effects of urbanization on aquatic systems have often been documented,
effects on prairie stream fishes have received little attention. We examined the influence of urbanization
on fish assemblage structure in Midwest prairie streams. Within the Crutcho Creek drainage basin



                                                                                                        240
(Central Oklahoma), we collected fishes from 15 urbanized sites, including 9 sites located on Tinker Air
Force Base. Ten sites located in surrounding tributaries (i.e. less impacted by development) were
sampled for comparison. Samples were collected between November 2009 and November 2011. A total
of 24 species was collected from all sites across the study period. Overall, urban sites were generally
characterized by lower rarefied species richness. Multivariate techniques, including non-metric
multidimensional scaling and hierarchical cluster analysis, revealed distinct groupings of community
structure across sites.    Specifically, we recovered a significant difference in assemblage structure of
multiple streams within the urban area. These results indicate that the effects of urbanization may be
localized, and may differentially impact streams within developed areas. The implications of these results
will be further discussed.



Gelsleichter, Jim (University of North Florida); Grubbs, Dean (Florida State University Coastal and
Marine Laboratory, Canada); Heithaus, Michael (Florida International University, Canada); Leary,
Arianne; Piercy, Andrew (University of North Florida, Canada)

Effects of the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill on deepwater shark populations from the northeast Gulf
of Mexico.

As the largest oil spill in history in U.S.-controlled waters, the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill resulted in
extensive contamination of Gulf of Mexico waters. This poses significant health risks to numerous marine
wildlife populations, especially deepwater species residing in offshore waters within and/or adjacent to the
primary contamination zone.          Given the population-level impacts that have occurred in some wildlife
species as a result of chronic exposure to oil constituents from prior oil spills (e.g., Exxon Valdez oil spill),
it is critical to monitor the health of the Gulf‘s deepwater fauna to assess the full impacts of the Deepwater
Horizon Oil Spill on these animals.         Therefore, to address this problem, the goal of this study was to
determine if deepwater fish assemblages in the northeast Gulf of Mexico are being exposed to and are
experiencing effects of exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), the most toxic constituents
of oil.        To accomplish this, we examined 4 biomarkers of PAH exposure and effects in multiple
deepwater elasmobranch species collected from areas impacted by the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill: 1)
activity of the PAH-metabolizing Phase I biotransformation enzyme, cytochrome P450 1a1 (Cyp1a1); 2)
biliary concentrations of PAH metabolites; 3) the occurrence of covalent associations between PAH
metabolites and DNA; and 4) chromosomal abnormalities. PAH biomarkers were compared with those
measured in deepwater sharks collected from unimpacted reference locations on the west Florida shelf.
Cyp1a1 activity was significantly greater in sharks from oil-impacted locations compared with those from
reference sites, suggesting that deepwater sharks are exhibiting physiological effects of oil exposure.
However, evidence for cell- and organ-level effects was minimal, perhaps indicating that heighted oil
exposure and metabolism is still below the threshold necessary to elicit higher level responses.




                                                                                                             241
Geraghty, Pascal (Macquarie University); Macbeth, William (NSW Department of Primary Industries,
Sydney, N, Australia); Williamson, Jane (Macquarie University, Sydney, N, Australia); Wintner, Sabine
(KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board, Umhlanga, South Africa); Johnson, Grant (Department of Resources,
Darwin, NT, Australia); Ovenden, Jennifer (Molecular Fisheries Laboratory, Brisbane, Q, Australia);
Gillings, Michael (Macquarie University, Sydney, N, Australia)

Contrasting population structures suggest different evolutionary histories for three large, coastal
shark species off eastern Australia

Commercial catches of large sharks in eastern Australian waters are dominated by three species:
Carcharhinus plumbeus (sandbar shark), C. obscurus (dusky shark) and C. brevipinna (spinner shark).
Life-history traits render these species highly vulnerable to over-exploitation. Despite significant
management and conservation concerns currently surrounding the targeting of these sharks, very little is
known of their biology in local waters. This study examined the genetic diversity and population structure
of these three species off the east coast of Australia, as well as over a broader spatial scale for C.
brevipinna, using a mitochondrial gene marker [857 base pairs of NADH dehydrogenase subunit 4
(ND4)]. Sequence data for 442 C. plumbeus, 428 C. obscurus and 430 C. brevipinna revealed contrasting
haplotype networks, suggesting that present-day populations of these species off eastern Australia have
been shaped by dramatically different evolutionary histories. Spatial genetic-homogeneity was observed
for both C. plumbeus and C. obscurus populations despite the presence of distinct clades. We
hypothesise that discrete, closely-related lineages, having evolved in isolation following a temporary
barrier to gene-flow within a previously mixed population, have subsequently become re-integrated within
the study area. In contrast, C. brevipinna appears to have undergone a significant population expansion
event, and exhibits evidence for restricted maternal gene-flow over both intermediate and broad spatial
scales. Such differing population structures suggest that sustainable management requires assessment
at a species level.



Germano, Jennifer M. (Institute for Conservation Research, San Diego Zoo Global); Field, Kimberleigh
(US Fish and Wildlife Service, Reno, NV, United States); Walsh, Allyson (Insitute for Conservation
Research, San Diego Zoo Global, Escondido, CA, United States); Sheppard, James (Institute for
Conservation Research, San Diego Zoo Global, Escondido, CA, United States); Madill, Simon (N/A, Las
Vegas, NV, United States); Swaisgood, Ron (Institute for Conservation Research, San Diego Zoo Global,
Escondido, CA, United States)

Differences in release area habitat affect post-translocation movement: a case study on desert
tortoises (Gopherus agassizii)

The Mojave desert tortoise ( Gopherus agassizii ) occupies a variety of habitats, within which soil burrows
and caves are used as shelter. In particular, caliche caves, which are found in higher densities within
desert wash systems, are an easily mapped, long-lasting habitat feature that provide refuge from
predators and thermal extremes. Tortoises that occupy flats and sloping bajadas commonly rely on more
ephemeral soil burrows, both pre-existing or newly constructed. The goal of this study was to determine if
releasing tortoises into washes with high densities of caliche caves would influence the movement of
these repatriated tortoises. Eighteen tortoises were released into washes and 18 were released into flats
located 1-1.5 km away. Movements were monitored using radio telemetry over the following year. No
significant difference was found between animals released in washes versus flats in total distance moved
during the first ten days or in distance between the location of the tortoises on day 10 and the release
site. After five weeks post-translocation however, tortoises released in washes were found significantly
closer to their release site than those released on the flats. This trend continued and over the 9 months
post-release, wash-released tortoise remained significantly closer to their release sites than flat-released



                                                                                                        242
animals. Space use (100% MCP) estimated for flat-released tortoises was significantly greater than wash-
released animals during the first 9 months post-release. Area used by wash-released animals was not
significantly different from residents. Survival also appears to be higher in animals living in and near
deeply incised washes containing caliche caves than those living on the flats and utilizing soil burrows.



Germano, Jennifer M. (Memphis Zoo); Arregui, Lucia (Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain);
Kouba, Andy (Memphis zoo, Memphis, TN, United States)

Effect of aeration and antibiotic on short-term storage of amphibian sperm

The importance of developing assisted reproductive technologies (ART) for captive assurance colonies of
threatened amphibians is increasing as ex situ management of amphibians has been challenged due to
low reproductive output. One hurdle to developing ART in amphibians is the short-term storage of
gametes for in vitro fertilization. We aimed to test whether the addition of antibacterial solutions to, or
aeration of, spermic urine would improve the longevity and quality of non-invasively collected sperm
samples using hormone therapy. Spermic urine samples were collected non-invasively from Fowler‘s
toads (Bufo fowleri) and either left alone, aerated for 30 minutes a day, or treated with penicillin-
streptomycin. All samples were refrigerated at 4 C. Sperm motility declined within each treatment group
over time; however, aerated samples retained greater motility (70%) during the first 24 hours after
collection than samples in both the control (57%) and antibacterial group (51%; p = 0.036). The addition
of penicillin-streptomycin solution to spermic urine had a negative effect on viability, with significantly
fewer sperm still alive 2-4 days post collection (p < 0.05). Sperm viability was highly correlated with
motility on all days and with forward progression 1-4 days post collection. Our results show that aerating
amphibian spermic urine samples may provide a simple and low-cost method to improve sperm storage
that could be used for in vitro fertilization and ex situ management of threatened amphibians. Antibiotics
appeared to have a negative effect on sperm viability, suggesting that further research on bacterial
contamination and antibiotics and doses is necessary.



Gerson, Marina (California State University, Stanislaus); Reeves IV, Garrison (California State
University, Stanislaus, Turlock, California, United States)

Design, construction, programming, and use of an affordable camera system for surveying
burrows

Because underground habitats are difficult to study, fossorial species are little understood. Furthermore,
the biodiversity represented by fossorial communities is not well documented. Some fossorial taxa take
advantage of burrow systems created by other organisms, and these burrow systems present an
interface through which researchers can more easily survey the world below the surface. Technological
advances have led to flexible fiber optic systems being used in the surveying of burrows, but
commercially available versions can be beyond the means of researchers with severe budgetary
constraints. We present the design, method of construction, and programming that we used to build a
very inexpensive fiber optic-like camera system for use in the survey of burrow communities. All supplies
used are readily available through reliable online retailers. Our design is waterproof and rugged, with field
applications in mind. With a combination or infrared and white light-emitting diodes (LEDs), our design
provides the ability to switch on-the-fly between minimal disturbance infrared or greater illumination with
white light when needed. Humidity and temperature probes are incorporated with the camera, in order to
link microhabitat data directly to the video recordings stored for each geographic locality (geographic



                                                                                                         243
positioning system points are recorded). We programmed a custom user interface (in C and C++) to
operate the camera and collect field data. The software (available by request, free of charge) can be run
on any computer runing Windows XP and meeting the minimum hardware requirements (i.e., 1.6Ghz
CPU, 1 GB RAM, 4 GB hard drive, and USB 2.0). Finally, we present the results of our field testing, which
document the abilities and limitations of our system. Our system‘s strengths for field use included: a
rugged, waterproof design, the ability to switch easily between infrared and visible illumination,
incorporation of temperature and humidity data, and ease of video capture sufficient to identify most taxa
encountered. Limitations included: relatively short focal range, limited ability to navigate very convoluted
burrows, and relatively low resolution of image capture. Overall, this is an extremely affordable,
adaptable, and serviceable system with wide application for below ground surveys.



Gharzi, Ahmad (Lorestan University); Feili, Nasrin (Lorestan University, Canada); Rastegar-pouyani,
Eskandar (Sabzevar University, Canada)

Genetic variation in keeled rock gecko Cyrtopodion scabrum in Iranian plateau

Cyrtopodion scabrum is a gecko that is widely distributed in south west of Asia and northern Africa . In
Iran, this species is frequently found in most of the country and commonly known as the house lizard. In
this study we aimed to see whether there is any variation between different distinct populations of this
taxon in terms of mitochondrial cytochrome b gene. To evaluate this, we collected 35 specimens of this
taxon from six different geographically separated provinces of the country. DNA was extracted from heart,
liver and muscle tissues, then processed for electrophoresis and after developing a primer the PCR and
sequencing was performed. The data were analyzed using Mega 5 software to determine genetic
distances among specimens and phylogenetic relations were provided by PAUP software. Our results
showed that different populations of this taxon display a homology in respect to mitochondrial cytochrome
b gene, so that the average variation among these specimens was negligible, ranged from 0 to 0.6%.
That is an interesting finding indicating a recent anthropogenic introduction of the clade in Iran and
having a strong gene flow among various populations of this taxon in this country.



Ghedotti, Michael (Regis University); Davis, Matthew (The Field Museum of Natural History, Canada)

Cephalic sensory variation within the deep sea ipnopid fishes (Teleostei, Aulopiformes).

The family Ipnopidae (Teleostei, Aulopiformes) includes the deep-sea grideye fishes, tripodfishes, and
spiderfishes in the genera Ipnops, Bathymicrops, Bathytyphlops, and Bathypterois. All are or are
assumed to be sit-and-wait benthic predators with distributions from 250m to 5900m, however little is still
known regarding their feeding strategies and life history. Ipnopids have either reduced or greatly modified
eyes and likely rely upon senses other than sight to identify potential prey. The species of Bathypterois
(the tripodfishes and spiderfishes) vary in their position with respect to the substrate based on the length
of the anterior pelvic-fin rays and the ventral caudal-fin lobe, which support the fish above the substrate
and in some species may be longer than the standard length. In this study we investigate the morphology
of cephalic sensory structures within the family Ipnopidae using gross anatomical and histological
techniques. We compare the morphology of the cranial sensory system with the depth of occurrence,
and their position in the water column where they are presumed to be feeding. We find that the
development of free surface lateralis neuromasts varies substantially within the family Ipnopidae and may
play a significant role in their life history.




                                                                                                        244
Gholamifard, Ali (Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Razi University); Rastegar-Pouyani,
Nasrullah (Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Razi University, Kermanshah, Iran)

Herpetodiversity and its conservation in Iran

Iran is considered as a center for the origin of numerous species. The wide ranges of geographical and
geological conditions coupled with the climatologically diverse environments provide this enormous
diversity. The northern and western Iran is considered as a part of the Irano-Anatolian biodiversity hot
spot which contains centers of local endemism. This paper presents diversity of the Iranian reptiles,
including endemics, the threats for this diversity and the status of reptile conservation in Iran. This paper
has been compiled from examination of herpetological collections in Iran and Sweden as well as
extensive field expeditions from 1990-2011. The herpetofauna of Iran comprise of about 239 reptile
species belonging to 86 genera, 24 families and           three orders found in 13 different physiographic
regions. Among them, the Squamata with 218 species in 76 genera and 17 families is the most
specious order in Iran encompassing about 95 percent of the Herpetofauna. The most diverse family is
the Colubridae with 44 species, followed by the Lacertidae and the Gekkonidae with 43 and 40
species, respectively. Fourteen families have between 2-18 species and seven other families each with
one species. Thirty-six endemic species in 7 families and 17 genera are listed here.              At present,
numerous factors, including habitat destruction via increased agricultural use of the natural habitats as
well as firing, climate changes and increasing risks of desertification have made an intensive impact on
various ecosystems. Further, introduction of exotic species, increasing trend to use of reptiles and their
natural parts and products in traditional medicine and food webs, pollutions, as well as inadequate
conservation policies are affecting this diversity. Establishment of protected areas, participation of
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in conservation programs and research on endemic reptiles are
the major efforts towards the reptile conservation in Iran. In summary, due to having a special
zoogeographic status, Iran is a country highly rich in herpetodiversity with high level of endemicity and a
part of biodiversity hot spot, hence its biodiversity conservation is highly recommended.



Ghosh Dastidar, Dalia (University of Northern Colorado); Mackessy, Stephen (University of Northern
Colorado, Greeley, CO, United States)

Body condition of overwintering Prairie Rattlesnakes (Crotalus viridis viridis) in northeastern
Colorado inferred from a 9-year field study

The Crotalus viridis species complex has been the subject of many behavioral and ecological studies, in
part because it is broadly distributed throughout much of the Great Plains and western half of the United
States and because it shows a proclivity for denning communally, whereby large numbers of snakes can
be collected during spring and fall near the entrances to hibernacula. However, temporal variation in
phenotypic attributes of Prairie Rattlesnakes based on long-term mark-recapture studies is poorly
understood. From 2002-2011, in spring and fall, we captured Prairie Rattlesnakes from a communal
hibernaculum in Weld Co., Colorado; snakes were extracted of venom, PIT tagged, measured and
weighed before release at the den. Body condition (mass, adjusted for snout-vent length) was examined
using an ANCOVA model to determine if differences in relative mass exist between sexes following
hibernation. The total number of snakes captured over 9 years was 1080, but the current analysis is
conducted on 805 captures and does not include recaptures or gravid females. In this data set, 52.3%
were males and 47.7% were females. Captured snakes ranged in snout-vent length (SVL) from 225 to
1160 mm (x=573.6, SD=209.0) and in mass from 6.9 to 1255 g (x=170.7, SD=156.0). Log-transformed
values of mass and SVL were used in statistical analyses. The results showed that 81.9% of the variance
in mass was explained by sex and season (holding SVL constant). The geometric mean for male mass



                                                                                                         245
was found to be 127.1 g, whereas for females it was 95.3 g. Season was found to be a significant factor
influencing body condition (F (1,707) = 13.54, P<0.01) and sex was also significant (F (1,707) = 32.76,
P<0.01). The capture data showed skewness, as 30.6% were considered as juveniles and sub-adults
(mass less than 50 g, SVL 225-400 mm). Therefore we expanded the analysis to a generalized linear
model using a negative binomial distribution. We found this could be a more suitable model due to the
statistical distribution of the counts of snakes being generally skewed, with an over-dispersion of the
variance. The results of ANOVA showed that there was a general decline in body condition following
hibernation for both the sexes, and females showed a lower decline than did the males. Reasons for the
observed sex bias are unclear, but better body condition at egress could contribute to greater
reproductive success for female snakes. Relative body mass may be an important index to understand
better the cost of reproduction and growth in C. v. viridis, and long-term studies will significantly contribute
towards further insight into population dynamics and conservation of this species.



Gielens, Andrea (Oregon Spotted Frog Recovery Team); Govindarajulu, Purnima (Ministry of
Environment, Canada); Pallen, Wendy; Kissel, Amanda (SFU, Canada); McKibbin, Rene; Bishop,
Christine (Canadian Wildlife Service, Canada)

Influence of Densiy and Feeing Regime on Rearing Success of Oregon Spotted Frogs (Rana
pretiosa) for Population Recovery

The Oregon Spotted Frog has been reduced to three isolated populations of approximately 50 breeding
females each in the Fraser Valley British Columbia, Canada. To conserve this species the BC Recovery
Team uses head-starting, the captive rearing of wild eggs to juvenile frogs for release, to supplement
existing populations and to create new populations, increasing the number of distinct sites where this
species is found.

The goals of the rearing program are to maximize survival of the wild collected eggs, to decrease time to
metamorphosis and release, and to increase size at release of the juvenile frogs, all of which have been
shown to have positive effects on post-metamorphic survival and population growth rates.          Our study
addresses the need for optimization of the rearing strategy by evaluating the effects of density and diet on
survival and weight/length at release of captive reared individuals. The study was conducted over two
years in 1100 litre tanks that served as mesocosms. In 2008, three density treatments (50, 100, 150
tadpoles per tank) was crossed with two diet treatments (high protein vs. standard vegetable diet) and
each treatment replicated five times. In 2009, there were two densities, 50 and 75 tadpoles per tank and
all tanks received the high protein diet. Survival to release, proportion of the

tadpoles that did not complete metamorphosis at the time of release, and size (weight and length) at
release were measured. Temperature and water quality was monitored in all tanks. Results were similar
across both years. Higher density tanks in general had lower survival and smaller post-metamorphic frogs
at time of release. High densities also resulted in a larger proportion of the tadpoles not completing
metamorphosis by the time for release. In 2008, counter to expectation increased protein in the diet did
not increase survival or size at release, although this might be because the protein supplementation may
have been started too late in the developmental trajectory and may have been too little supplementation
for the number of tadpoles per tank. Comparing across years, a larger proportion of the tadpoles
completed metamorphosis earlier in the season in 2009 compared to 2008. However, we cannot
determine if this effects are due to slightly warmer seasonal temperature in 2009 compared to 2008,
lower densities per tank, or due to increase protein supplementation. Rearing density seemed to be the
largest contributing factor to overall optimization of the rearing program.   As a result of this study we




                                                                                                            246
have determined that rearing frogs at a density of below 50 tadpoles/tank results in over 90% survival,
early metamorphosis and larger size, with a small decrease in all these factors up to about 75 tadpoles
per tank. Densities over 80 tadpoles per tank resulted in decreased survival, larger proportion of tadpoles
not completing metamorphosis and smaller sizes of juvenile frogs. Density around 60 tadpoles per tank
should produce frogs of approximately 4.5g and 32mm in length with an expected average survival of 70-
85%. Increasing the amount of protein-enriched diet in future will be needed to further address the
implications of diet type in the head-starting process.



Gienger, Chris (Austin Peay State University); Tracy, Christopher (University of Melbourne, Canada);
Brien, Matthew; Manolis, Charlie; Webb, Grahame (Wildlife Management International and Crocodylus
Park, Canada); Seymour, Roger (University of Adelaide, Canada); Christian, Keith (Charles Darwin
University, Canada)

Resting Metabolism of Really Big Reptiles: Comparison of Standard Metabolic Rate in
Crocodilians

The energetic requirements of exceptionally large reptiles are largely unknown. Because of the
considerable logistics involved, measurements of large reptile metabolism have been primarily limited to
individuals with a body mass of ~10 kg or less. Here we report on the resting metabolism (oxygen
consumption) of adults of three species of large crocodilians; Crocodylus porosus , Crocodylus johnsoni,
and Alligator mississippiensis . We also compare rates of resting metabolism across the ontogenetic
range of body sizes for both species of Crocodylus , and discuss differences in the allometric scaling of
resting metabolism with body size.



Giermakowski, J Tomasz (University of New Mexico); Nowak, Erika (Northern Arizona University,
Flagstaff, AZ, United States)

Future Ranges of ocal Reptiles in the Southwestern United States.

Downscaled models of climate forecast substantial changes in temperature and precipitation in
southwestern USA and these changes are likely to affect distributions of many reptiles. To provide
spatially-explicit products useful for conservation and management at coarse scales, we built models that
predict current and future extents of occurrence for several species of reptiles. To model current
distributions, for each species we identified variables that serve as proxies for demographic variables.
Using the maximum entropy algorithm, we then related values of these variables to localities where each
species has been confirmed present. Data on presence were gathered from a variety of sources,
including natural history museums, state wildlife agencies, and federal monitoring efforts. Using
downscaled global circulation models of future climates, we then projected species‘ ranges at different
time intervals, as far as year 2099. For most species our results indicate considerable changes in future
distributions, regardless of assumptions about dispersal capacities. Given that species responses vary
spatially, management and conservation must be based on detailed understanding of changes in
distribution and it is especially important in the US Southwest because of the region‘s high reptile
diversity.




                                                                                                       247
Gifford, Matthew (University of Arkansas at Little Rock); Clay, Timothy (University of Arkansas at Little
Rock, Canada); Peterman, Bill (University of Missouri, Canada)

Temperature and activity influence the scaling of metabolic rate in a lungless salamander

The scaling of metabolic rate with body mass holds substantial predictive power as many biological
processes depend on energy.           A significant body of theory has been developed based on the
assumption that metabolic rate scales with body mass as a power function with an exponent of 0.75, and
that this scaling relationship is independent of temperature. Here we test this hypothesis at the
intraspecific level in a lungless salamander using data on both standard and maximal metabolic rates.
We also address a recently proposed alternative explanation that predicts systematic variation in this
mass-scaling exponent, the metabolic level boundaries hypothesis (MLB). Contrary to predictions of the
metabolic theory of ecology the mass-scaling of standard and maximal metabolic rates were variable and
dependent on temperature. Further, our data provide mixed support for MLB. Mass-scaling exponents
for maximal metabolic rate generally exceed those for standard metabolic rate; however, we find that the
mass-scaling of standard metabolic rate is positively related to temperature, contrary to predictions of
MLB. We conclude that there is no universal mass-scaling exponent and that this exponent is dependent
on temperature and activity.      In addition, we explore possible implications of our findings for studies
integrating metabolic theories into ecological modeling.



Gillis, Gary (Mount Holyoke College); Kuo, Chi-Yun; Irschick, Duncan (University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, Amherst, MA, United States)

The impact of tail loss on locomotor stability during jumping

 Tails are functionally versatile appendages serving in roles ranging from display to locomotion. Thus it is
intriguing to consider the case of caudal autotomy in many lizards, where tails, or parts of tails, are shed
voluntarily by an animal, presumably leading to some subsequent loss of function. We have been
studying functional consequences of tail loss in the context of jumping in the green anole, Anolis
carolinensis . Manipulative experiments demonstrate the importance of tails in this species for in-air
stability during jumping. For example, lizards, on average, exhibit significantly more posterior rotation
(pitch) during jumping after loss of 75% of the tail, although individual variation is prominent (and
intriguing). Indeed, very recent work from another lab with agamid lizards, as well as a tailed robot,
confirm the importance of the tail in pitch control during in-flight behaviors. Our work on this issue has
been continuing along two fronts. First, we are studying the relationship between the degree of tail loss
and in-air instabilities. Preliminary data suggest that green anoles must lose 50% of their tail or more to
incur notable consequences for pitch control during jumping. We are following up these studies with
experiments exploring the tail‘s role in controlling in-air yaw and long-axis rotation. Second, we are
examining how long deficits in mid-air stability last and whether animals with more experience jumping
after caudal autotomy improve performance faster than animals lacking such experience. We saw no
improvement in pitch control in animals given more opportunities to jump after autotomy. These findings
suggest that loss of substantial portions of the tail can lead to long-term impairment of locomotor stability
in the context of jumping in green anoles. Field studies of natural populations will help inform this work,
and could elucidate behavioral mechanisms that help animals compensate for such impairments (e.g.,
animals with missing tails may jump less).




                                                                                                         248
Girard, Philippe (Université de Montréal); Parrott, Lael (Université de Montréal, Montreal, PQ, Canada);
Green, David M. (McGill University, Montreal, PQ, Canada)

The contribution of pattern-based modelling for hybrid ecological models: the example of stream
salamanders viability in changing hydrological regimes

During the last decade, hybrid ecological models (HEM) combining individual-based models (IBM) and
landscape processes-based models have emerged as powerful tools in conservation, management and
planning. By considering individual variations, entire life cycles, interactions among individuals and those
between individuals and their immediate environment, a proper HEM allows accurate predictions about
local viability of species in response to land use change or modification of landscape-scale environmental
processes. However, this potential comes with the cost of complexity; IBM need wide and precise
biological knowledge about individual behaviours and life cycles that remains often insufficient for several
biological taxa. Nevertheless, if biological patterns are available, a pattern-based modelling approach can
be used to build IBM that will capture the essence of a species' ecology and result in accurate viability
predictions even if precise biological knowledge is lacking.

In this presentation, we present an IBM of stream salamanders that was developed to explore the effects
of changing hydrological regimes on population viability. The problem of data lacking is especially
relevant for amphibians in general and salamanders in particular, for which knowledge about their
complex life cycle and general behaviours in nature is often anecdotal or incomplete. Nonetheless, using
a pattern-based approach, we were able to build an IBM realistic enough to reproduce the life cycle, the
demographic dynamics and the distribution patterns of stream salamanders given the availability of
landscape temperature and hydrological data. This model provides a good example of the contribution of
pattern-based modelling for HEM to improve both our understanding and our predictions of the viability of
endangered and not well-known species over landscapes subject to complex, cross-scale disturbances.



Giresi, Melissa (Texas A&M University); Renshaw, Mark; Portnoy, David; Gold, John (Texas A&M
University, Canada)

Molecular Identification of Smooth-hound Sharks in the Gulf of Mexico

The morphological similarity of sharks in the family Triakidae (the smooth-hound sharks) has led to
considerable taxonomic confusion and problems in species identification. The lack of clear and accurate
identification methods for smooth-hound sharks prevents reliable species-specific landing estimates and
obscures the ability to accurately assess species composition. Within the Gulf of Mexico, there are four
nominal species in the genus Mustelus: M. canis, M. higmani, M. norrisi, and M. sinusmexicanus. While
there are a multitude of studies that utilize microsatellites to elucidate population structure of a single
species, the fact that microsatellites often amplify in closely related species is under-utilized. In this study,
multiplex microsatellite PCR reactions are presented, which can be utilized to reliably distinguish between
the four Mustelus species inhabiting the Gulf of Mexico. Elucidating the spatial distribution patterns of
smooth-hound shark resources in the Gulf of Mexico is a critical first step to species management.




                                                                                                             249
Godwin, James (Environmental Institute);

Return of the Eastern Indigo Snake (Drymarchon couperi) to Alabama: Initial Success through
Partnership and Collaboration

Return of the Eastern Indigo Snake (Drymarchon couperi) to Alabama: Initial Success through
Partnership and Collaboration James Godwin1, Craig Guyer1, Mark Sasser2, Chris Jenkins3, and Brad
Lock4 1Auburn University 2Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources 3The Orianne
Society 4Zoo Atlanta The eastern indigo snake (Drymarchon couperi), inhabits the longleaf pine
ecosystem of the SE US, and has been extirpated from Alabama for approximately 6 decades. Habitat
loss, alteration, and fragmentation of the longleaf pine ecosystem coupled with range-wide decline of the
gopher tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus) are thought to be underlying factors leading to extirpations of the
snake. A reintroduction of the eastern indigo snake in Alabama was attempted during the mid-1970s to
80s. Surveys of the release sites from 2004-2006 found no evidence of indigo snakes suggesting these
releases were failures. In 2006 ADCNR approached Auburn University (AU) regarding a second
reintroduction of the eastern indigo snake. To date 3 State Wildlife Grants have funded the reintroduction
project, an initial feasibility study and two grants for implementation. With the second State Wildlife Grant
The Orianne Society (TOS) joined ADCNR-AU as a third partner, bringing private funds and expertise into
the project. D. couperi is a federally threatened species with lead responsibility and recovery for the
residing in the Jackson, MS office. The Daphne, AL office works closely with ADCNR on in-state SWG
projects. During the feasibility study Conecuh National Forest was deemed the best location for the
release of snakes, thus bringing the US Forest Service into the project as a second federal collaborator.
Snakes used for releases have come from southeastern Georgia as permitted by the Georgia Department
of Natural Resources. Young are hatched in captivity and reared for approximately 2 years to attain a
size sufficient for radio transmitter implantation. The first snake cohort (2008) remained at Auburn, but
subsequent cohorts (2009-2011) have been reared at Zoo Atlanta. A minimum of one snake from each
clutch has been deposited at TOS‘s Orianne Center for Indigo Conservation. These snakes, upon
reaching maturity, will serve as brood stock to supply young snakes for release efforts post-2012. A 10-
year life span of the project has been planned with an average of 30 snakes/year to be released. To date
3 releases have taken place and snakes and funding are available for two additional releases.



Goetz, Scott (Auburn University); Romagosa, Christina (Auburn University, Canada); Snow, Ray
(National Park Service, Canada); Guyer, Craig (Auburn University, Canada)

Response to the chemical cues of a nonnative anuran (Cuban treefrog; Osteopilus
septentrionalis) by a native anuran eating snake (eastern garter snake; Thamnophis sirtalis
sirtalis)

The success of invasive species establishment and dispersal may be aided by a variety of factors
including predator nativity and novel serous products. The Cuban treefrog ( Osteopilus septentrionalis )
is an abundant nonnative species in Florida. The noxious secretions of this treefrog have been suggested
to function primarily as a defense against mammalian predation. However, evidence for this assertion is
lacking beyond the painful reaction caused by contact with human eyes, lips and nasal membranes. It
has also been suggested that Cuban treefrog secretions serve to dissuade Ophidian predators. In
Florida, native snakes have been anecdotally reported to consume Cuban treefrogs, and may represent a
greater predation risk to the invasive treefrogs than mammals. We examined the chemosensory response
of eastern garter snakes ( Thamnophis sirtalis sirtalis ), a native anuran eating snake, to the chemical
cues of Cuban treefrogs to determine if prey novelty or noxious secretions reduced response strength.




                                                                                                         250
Garter snakes from areas both sympatric and allopatric to the established invasive range of the treefrogs
were compared to determine if experience or genetic differences among populations affected response.
Palatability was also examined to determine if the secretions of the Cuban treefrogs resulted in post-strike
rejection by snakes. The Cuban treefrog has continuously expanded its range since its introduction to
mainland Florida and is now found throughout much of the peninsula. Reduced predatory response by
Ophidian predators may increase the Cuban treefrog abundance in established areas and facilitate
colonization of new areas.



Goldberg, Caren (University of Idaho); Pilliod, David (USGS, Boise, ID, United States); Arkle, Robert
(USGS, Canada); Waits, Lisette (University of Idaho, Moscow, ID, United States)

Detection of stream-breeding amphibians using environmental DNA

Detection of aquatic vertebrates using environmental DNA (eDNA) in water samples is a promising new
method for documenting the presence of native and invasive species. This method had been recently
proven effective in wetland and canal systems, but it was unknown whether eDNA would be detectable
from vertebrates in fast-moving streams.         To test the efficacy of this method for detecting stream
vertebrates, we designed molecular (PCR) assays for two low-density, lotic amphibians (Idaho Giant
Salamanders, Dicamptodon aterrimus ; Rocky Mountain Tailed Frogs, Ascaphus montanus ) in north-
central Idaho. In the field, we first filtered 5 -10 L of stream water from five streams over two seasons
and estimated density for the target species using kick-sampling. After protocol testing and development,
we successfully detected both species from these filter samples in streams with densities as low as 0.01
and 0.10 individuals per m 2 for salamanders and frogs, respectively. Detection probability was lower for
Rocky Mountain Tailed Frogs in spring than in early fall and was unrelated to field-measured densities.
We found gains in efficiency of eDNA over field methods to be 20x for Idaho Giant Salamanders and 11x
for Rocky Mountain Tailed Frogs. In follow-up work, we found that sampling 1 L of stream water led to
far lower detection probabilities than sampling 5 L. Additionally, we found that our original conventional
PCR methods occasionally produced spurious results that were indistinguishable from the real product for
both species. We therefore converted our protocols to apply quantitative PCR, which uses a probe that
provides additional specificity. Along with other collaborators at the University of Idaho, we are continuing
to develop multi-species eDNA tests and methodology for monitoring amphibians and fishes across
systems. More work is required to test the limitations of eDNA applications; however, this technique has
the potential to be a highly sensitive and cost-efficient tool for the detection and monitoring of both native
and invasive species across aquatic systems.



Goldenberg, Julianne (San Diego State University); Reeder, Tod (San Diego State University, Canada)

Phylogenetic Inference and Species Delimitation Within the Crotalus viridis Species Complex
using Multilocus Data

Rattlesnakes ( Crotalus and Sistrurus : Viperidae) are a group of New World pit vipers named for the
unifying presence of a caudal rattle. The rattlesnakes of the Crotalus viridis complex have the most
extensive distribution of any venomous snake in North America, ranging from southern Canada to
northern Mexico and from the mid-western United States to the Pacific Coast. Presently, three species
and nine subspecies are recognized within this extremely polytypic species complex. Attempts to resolve
phylogenetic relationships among recognized taxa using morphological and/or mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) data have resulted in controversial taxonomic recommendations, and a well-supported



                                                                                                          251
phylogeny of the group is still needed. Three mtDNA-based studies are currently cited as the authoritative
representations of the species-level phylogeny of this complex. This is problematic because the
matrilineal history of the mitochondrion may differ from the history of a species as a whole, and because a
single-locus gene tree can be dramatically discordant from the underlying species tree of a group. The
objectives of our study are to use multiple independent nuclear loci and coalescent-based methods to
concomitantly resolve species limits and infer the species tree for the C. viridis complex. Using genetic
data from five introns of independent nuclear loci, we infer the species tree of the C. viridis complex
under multiple competing hypotheses of species delimitation within a coalescent-based Bayesian
framework, and we compare the fit of each of these hypotheses to the data using Bayes factor analysis.
Though the results of our study are at present preliminary, we are finding significant statistical evidence
that the Arizona Black rattlesnake ( C. cerberus ) may be nested within C. oreganus , and that the
currently recognized taxonomy of the C. viridis complex may be an overrepresentation of its true
species-level diversity.



Gomes, Fernando (USP - Universidade de São Paulo);

Immunological responses in anurans: implications to bioenergetics and biogeography

Most of the anurans are seasonal breeders, with males presenting circulating peaks of testosterone (T)
and corticosterone (CORT) during the breeding season. Although the maintenance of high levels of T and
CORT are necessary to express and maintain calling behavior, these steroid hormones have
immunosuppressive effects. In this way, during the breeding season, there may be an important tradeoff
between reproductive effort and resistance to parasite infection. Data from our laboratory has shown that
intensity of different parasites correlates with several aspects of anuran behavior and physiology during
the mating season. In tree frogs (Hypsiboas prasinus), dynamic properties of calling behavior are
associated to individual variation in parasite intensity, with males that call at higher rates showing lower
total and small intestine parasite intensity. Additionally, males of H. prasinus displaying longer calls have
lower small intestine parasite intensity during summer. Male toads (Rhinella icterica) with higher total
intensity of parasites show lower standard metabolic rates, while the intensity of lung parasites correlates
negatively with locomotor performance. Males of R. icterica with higher intensity of intestinal parasites
also show lower total leucocytes counts, with more neutrophils and a higher ratio between neutrophils
and lymphocytes. When males of R. icterica are exposed to a standardized stress protocol during the
reproductive season, they show elevated CORT levels and concomitant decreased plasma bactericidal
capacity. We have also shown that T and CORT plasma levels, leucocyte counts and profile, and the
relationship between these variables vary drastically in male anurans along three different periods: (1) dry
season, when males are aestivating or foraging, (2) during rainfall, when males are calling, and (3) the
period between rainfalls, when the males are foraging within the reproductive season. Finally, the
relationship between basal and post-stress CORT plasma levels, as well as between basal plasma CORT
levels and bactericidal capacity during the breeding season also vary between species of toads. This
interspecific variation may be associated to differences in broadness of geographical distribution and
sensitivity to environmental changes.




                                                                                                         252
Gomez Trejo Perez, Raúl (UNAM);

Importance and symbolisms of amphibians and reptiles in Mexican pre-Hispanic cultures

The beginnings of the Mexican pre-Hispanic cultures started during the archaic period (7,000-2,000
b.C.) When nomad groups of hunters and gatherers from North America arrived to Mexico. The great
amount of resources and the fertility of the lands helped them to eventually learn to cultivate plants
animals and settle in Mexican territory.

By the end of the archaic period and beginnings or the pre-classic, this groups of people started having a
more complex and mature social organization with religious cults, forming the bases for the future
cultures. Some of the principle cultures that developed like this in México where the Olmec (1800 b.C.-
200b.C), the Maya (600b.C-1500a.C), the Toltec (800-1200a.C), the Teotihuacana (200b.C-1200a.C) and
the Aztec (1250-1521a.C). In all this cultures, the animals had a special place in the magic religious
symbolisms, stimulating the imagination of this people for having caracteristics men did not have. This
created a very close link between men and nature, especially with reptiles and amphibians. This
enigmatic animals fascinated the people of this cultures and where of great importance for them. Inspiring
to create deities and temples, others were used to create musical instruments, tools, or where consumed
as food. Images of these animals can be seen in ancient ceramics, architecture, drawings, codes and
other works of art. And they can often be seen as gods or accompanying priests. They also symbolized
parts of the human body, the sky, the world, diseases, hope, death, agriculture, fire etcetera. Surprisingly,
some animals had exactly the same symbolic meaning in different cultures, like fertility or greatness.

This work looked to identify all the utilitarian and ideological aspects in which amphibians and reptiles
intervened     in a significant way in some cultures dispersed in the Mexican territory. Making an
iconographic analysis of the evidences, with the purpose of understanding the origin of the reptilian
symbols and following their stylistic evolution through pre-Hispanic history.



Gomez-Mestre, Ivan (EBD-CSIC); Pyron, Alexander (The George Washington University, Canada);
Wiens, John (Stony Brook University, Canada)

Phylogenetic analysis of the evolution of reproductive modes in frogs

Anurans (frogs and toads) are often thought of as having a complex life cycle, with aquatic early life
stages (eggs, larvae) that transform into terrestrial juveniles after metamorphosis. However, anurans
exhibit a remarkable diversity of reproductive modes that is unique among terrestrial vertebrates,
including species with direct development (terrestrial egg, no larvae) and those with placement of eggs
and larvae in a bewildering diversity of locations.      Although there are many hypotheses about the
evolutionary relationships among these diverse modes (and their life history and climatic correlates),
these hypotheses have yet to be tested in broad-scale phylogenetic context. We analyzed the evolution
of reproductive modes in anurans, applying a phylogeny and matched life-history database for 720
species that includes most families and modes. We confirmed that the ancestral estate for anurans is
that of aquatic eggs with exotrophic larvae (feeding outside the egg), and tested hypotheses about the
sequence of evolution of derived reproductive modes (such as direct development). As expected, modes
with terrestrial eggs and aquatic larvae often preceded the evolution of direct development (terrestrial
egg, no tadpole stage), but surprisingly, direct development evolved directly from aquatic breeding nearly
as often. Surprisingly, modes with primitive exotrophic larvae frequently gave rise to direct developers,
whereas those with seemingly intermediate, non-feeding larvae (endotrophic) did not. Similarly, modes
with eggs and larvae placed in locations protected from aquatic predators evolve frequently but rarely



                                                                                                         253
give rise to direct developers. Thus, frogs frequently bypass many seemingly intermediate stages in the
evolution of direct development.     We also tested for relationships (and possible trade-offs) between
female size, egg diameter, and clutch size, using phylogenetic comparative methods.           We found
significant associations between terrestrial reproduction and reduced clutch size, larger egg size, and
reduced adult size.       Moreover, we found strong associations between terrestrial reproduction and
parental care and occurrence in regions with wetter and warmer climates.        These associations and
trade-offs may help explain the widespread retention of aquatic eggs and larvae, and the overall diversity
of anuran reproductive modes.



Gómez-Rodríguez, Jessica (Universidad Michoacana de San Nicolás de Hidalgo); Huacuz-Elías,
Dolores del Carmen; Pérez-Arteaga, Jorge Alejandro (Universidad Michoacana de San Nicolás de
Hidalgo, Morelia, Mexico)

State of Conservation from Ambystoma andersoni in Zacapu Lake Michoacán

The latest studies performed with the genus Ambystoma, in various lines of research how breeding,
feeding, population dynamics, physiology, biochemistry, taxonomy and systematics, population genetics
among others, and work to determine the state of conservation of species of the genus Ambystoma are
scarce and even more for endemic species as Ambystoma andersoni, who only lives in the Laguna de
Zacapu located north of Michoacan state, Mexico, makes it more susceptible to factors affecting decline
of amphibians, this leads us to develop a work designed to show its current condition. We reviewed 134
individuals of Ambystoma andersoni collected from May 2011 to January 2012, we measured them; a)
weight, b) length muzzle-cloaca, c) long tail, d) length of forelegs, e) subsequent f) gills , and we took a
blood sample for blood smears. The results we obtained through a qualitative analysis showed that
72.57% have a good physical condition (the individual is observed in good general condition and not
presente signs of disease or parasites), 13.27% present in regular (individual shows signs of disease ,
parasites or is maimed) and 14.16% in unfavorable condition (seen deterioration in the individual to such
a degree that threatens their physical integrity, or dead), fluctuating asymmetry was determined and
found no statistically significant differences, the Index of body condition showed positive values denoting
a good body condition and are being reviewed to see some smear singuíneos hematological parameters
of the species that allow for a background to know the health of these individuals. Ambystoma andersoni
is one of the two larger species of Mexicans Ambystoma, has been exploited for therapeutic purposes
and for food since prehispanic times to the present what is depleting the population and is considered
critically endangered (CR) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.



Gonçalo, M. Rosa (Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology); Laurentino, Telma (Centro de Biologia
Ambiental, Departamento de Biologia Animal, FCUL, Canada); Bosch, Jaime (Museo Nacional de
Ciencias Naturales, CSIC, Canada); Griffiths, Richard (Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology,
Canada); Duarte, Ana; Tavares, Luis (Centro de Investigação Interdisciplinar em Sanidade Animal,
Canada); Rebelo, Rui (Centro de Biologia Ambiental, Departamento de Biologia Animal, FCUL, Canada)

Influence of the Ranavirus on the age structure of Bosca's newts

Ranavirus is one of five genera of viruses within the family Iridoviridae, and have been implicated as a
contributing factor in extinctions and global decline of amphibian populations. Its impact has been
compared to the chytrid fungus. Amphibians of different life stages may vary in their susceptibility to
Ranavirus infections and this knowledge is particularly poor among the urodeles.




                                                                                                        254
Recently in Serra da Estrela (Portugal) an outbreak of Ranavirus was recorded in adult Bosca‘s newts
(Lissotriton boscai). To assess the prevalence of Ranavirus across the different age classes of L. boscai,
we used skeletochronological analysis to estimate individual age in two populations of this newt and
expect to find a relation between age and infection that helps to better understand the dynamics of the
disease.



Gonzalez, Paulette (University of Kansas Biodiversity Institute); Diesmos, Arvin (National Museum of the
Philippines, Manila, Philippines, Canada); Brown, Rafe (University of Kansas Biodiversity Institute,
Lawrence, KS, United States)

Common mechanisms of diversification in codistributed tree frogs (genus Rhacophorus) of the
eastern Philippines?

We studied phylogeography, patterns of geographical structure, timing of divergence, and historical
demography of two codistributed tree frog lineages ( Rhacophorus appendiculatus and R. bimaculatus )
spanning five hypothesized barriers to dispersal and gene flow along the eastern arc of the Philippine
archipelago. Results of phylogenetic, population genetic, and coalescent analyses differ between the two
species, as do divergence time estimation results—suggesting that each has responded to the
geographic template in a unique manner. Our study joins a nascent body of work emphasizing lineage-
specific, dispersal-driven, patterns of diversification in this complex island archipelago.



Gonzalez-Jurado, Dom (UCLA);

Anatomical, Histological, and Molecular Characterization of the Venom of Squalus acanthias and
Heterodontus francisci

Chondrichthyian fishes are now known to include many venomous taxa, but most of what is known about
the venom molecules and delivery apparatuses in this group comes from studies of the batoids. The
distribution pattern and content of venoms found in either the chimaeras or sharks have never been
documented and remains poorly understood. Within sharks the taxonomic families Squalidae,
Etmopteridae, and Heterodontidae are known to possess fin spines that could be potentially venomous.
Here, histological examination of fin spine tissues and basic biochemical and toxicological analyses of fin
spine extracts from several specimens of Squalus acanthias and Heterodontus francisci are used to
both confirm the presence of and provide a basic description of the venom in these groups.



Goode, Matt (University of Arizona); Parker, Mickey; Albert, Kristin (University of Arizona, Canada)

Effects of Urban Development on Tiger Rattlesnake Spatial Ecology: A 10-Year Study

We used radiotelemetry to examine potential effects of urban development on the spatial ecology of Tiger
Rattlesnakes ( Crotalus tigris ) near Tucson, Arizona, USA. We located 34 male and 38 female Tiger
Rattlesnakes over 8,200 times. We radiotracked the majority of snakes for several years, including two
individuals for the entire 10-year study. The long-term nature of our data set allowed for quantification of
changes in movement patterns and home range size as the surrounding development continued to
expand. We documented shifts in home range locations that likely resulted from anthropogenic changes
to the environment.        Some snakes continued to use their original pre-development home ranges,



                                                                                                        255
concentrating their activities in undeveloped habitat patches.         Other snakes expanded their original
home ranges to include previously unoccupied habitat. A small number of snakes shifted their winter
shelter sites to avoid newly constructed houses and roads. Interestingly, Tiger Rattlesnakes in general
appeared to increase their reproductive output in response to increased prey availability, which was
apparently brought on by an increase in productivity resulting from a huge input of water, in the form of
irrigated vegetation in yards and along a golf course. However, we also documented increased mortality
compared to natural sites where we have studied populations of Tiger Rattlesnakes. It will require an
even longer-term data set to determine if increased productivity can offset elevated levels of mortality.
From an ecological standpoint, our goal is to use this unique situation to gain a better understanding of
the mechanisms leading to increased reproduction and apparent rapid changes in life history traits, such
as body size and growth. From a conservation perspective, our goal is to better understand factors
leading to coexistence of snakes and humans and to use this information in a management context.
Ultimately, we plan to continue to use what we‘ve learned in an effort to educate a diverse audience,
including local residents, students of all levels, land and wildlife managers, and developers.



Goodman, Brett (University of Adelaide); Seymour, Roger (University of Adelaide, Canada)

Going underground: a comparison of the energetics of limbed versus limbless locomotion in
fossorial lizards

Animals with a fossorial (burrowing) life-style face many functional and physiological challenges, in
particular, the need for locomotion through variable fluid media. In reptiles, the evolution of a fossorial life-
style has occurred in nearly all Squamate lineages world-wide, and is typically associated with the
evolutionary reduction or complete loss of limbs and an increase in body length. Thus, an unexplored
question in the evolution of fossorial lizards is whether limb-reduction and body elongation per se
provides an adaptive benefit via a functional, and / or, energetic advantage for fossorial locomotion.
Moreover, while most fossorial lizards display a reduction in limb length and an increase in body length, a
small number of species have retained the ancestral terrestrial lizard body-form and possess well-
developed limbs and typical terrestrial lizard short body from. These species provide a rare opportunity to
examine the putative adaptive benefits of limb reduction and body elongation for fossorial locomotion.
This paper quantifies the energetics of burrowing and terrestrial locomotion, and sprint and endurance
locomotion using representatives of both limbed and limbless fossorial lizards. The results of this work are
discussed with reference to the repeated evolution of fossoriality in lizards of the family Scincidae.



Gorsuch, John (University of Cincinnati); Owen, Patrick (University of Cincinnati, Blue Ash, OH, United
States)

Palatability and vulnerability of an invasive earthworm to the Seal Salamander

The present study examines the palatability and vulnerability of a destructive, non-indigenous
megascoelecid earthworm ( Amynthas agrestis ) to the Seal Salamander ( Desmognathus monticola ). A
series of choice and no-choice laboratory feeding trials were conducted to determine whether the unique
defensive repertoire of A. agrestis provides it a competitive advantage over lumbricid earthworms in
escaping predation by D. monticola . Results from no-choice trials indicated that A. agrestis escaped
attacks by D. monticola significantly more often than did lumbricid earthworms through a variety of
defensive mechanisms, including thrashing, distaste, defensive secretions, and autotomization. Results
from choice trials suggested that D. monticola was unable to differentiate between megascoelecid and



                                                                                                             256
lumbricid prey before striking, and showed that the salamanders were significantly more likely to attack an
arthropod prey item than an earthworm when given the choice. Both sets of data support the hypothesis
that predation by D. monticola is unlikely to meaningfully counter the expansion of A. agrestis along
invasion fronts, and that A. agrestis is unlikely to serve as a suitable replacement for the invertebrate
prey species that it may outcompete in forest food webs. Should these competitive advantages extend to
escaping from other native herpetofaunal predators, such adaptations could positively contribute to the
long-term success of A. agrestis populations in North America.



Gosling, Jessica (Thompson Rivers University); Larsen, Karl (Thompson Rivers University, Canada)

Multi-scale thermal influences on summer habitat use by Northern Pacific Rattlesnakes (Crotalus
oreganus oreganus) in British Columbia

Understanding habitat selection on multiple scales is fundamental in the conservation and management
of wildlife species. Selection of habitat based on thermal attributes may be of particular importance for
ectothermic species, including snakes. In British Columbia, Northern Pacific Rattlesnakes (Crotalus
oreganus oreganus) range from the US border to Kamloops. While commonly associated with low-
elevation grassland and open Ponderosa pine habitats, recent studies on these snakes have uncovered
use of higher-elevation Interior Douglas-fir forest. A potential driver of alternative habitat selection
(especially at their northern range periphery) is the thermoregulatory requirements of the animals. The
goal of our research was to understand the prevalence of this habitat use and how it affects
thermoregulation on multiple scales and to produce a thermal-landscape Geographic-Information-
Systems (GIS) model with which to predict rattlesnake migrations using solar insolation. Over two years,
we radio-tracked 35 snakes from 10 hibernacula during summer migrations. Habitat and thermal data on
multiple-scales were collected enabling a hierarchical analysis of resource selection. Thermoregulatory
‗profiles‘ were created for each snake based on body temperatures measured with implanted iButtons™,
and thermoregulatory behaviour patterns. The use of IDF habitat was present at 60% of dens. Straight-
line one-way migrations ranged from 373 m to 3.9 km, and ―forest‖ snakes travelled significantly further
than snakes using open habitats. On a landscape scale, snakes from 6 of the 10 hibernacula utilized
habitat significantly warmer than the other available areas, generally higher-elevation slopes with south-
western exposure. Threshold thermal values were determined and used to create maps of thermally
preferable habitat. Our study suggests that ―forest‖ snakes appear to have a fitness advantage, despite
lengthier migrations, potentially due to having more time for non-thermoregulatory aspects of life history,
reflected in the snakes‘ observed thermoregulatory behaviour. Knowledge of behavioural differences
between neighbouring rattlesnake populations will allow managers to tailor management strategies to
specific dens. Not only that, these local and landscape scale patterns have obvious repercussions for
snakes using forest habitats in the event of shifting ecosystem boundaries and thermal regimes under
various climate change scenarios.




                                                                                                       257
Gottscho, Andrew (San Diego State University); Jennings, Bryan (Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Museu Nacional, Departamento de Vertebrados, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil); Marks, Sharyn
(Humboldt State University, Arcata, CA, United States)

Statistical phylogeography of fringe-toed lizards (Uma): inferring modes of speciation from multi-
locus data

Analyzing multiple nuclear loci with coalescent-based models is a statistically powerful method to test
hypotheses regarding the timing and mode of speciation and subsequent demographic history. This
approach was used to infer the evolutionary history of the Mojave Fringe-toed Lizard, Uma scoparia, a
sand dune specialist endemic to the deserts of southwestern North America. We analyzed fifteen nuclear
loci representing 24 localities of U. scoparia and the U. notata species complex, its southern sister
lineage. We found that U. scoparia has low genetic diversity relative to U. notata, among the lowest yet
measured in vertebrates; within U. scoparia, the southernmost population has the highest genetic
diversity. Clustering analyses (Geneland, Structurama) did not find distinct populations within U. scoparia.
Using an Isolation-with-Migration model, we estimated that U. scoparia and U. notata diverged in the
Pleistocene epoch without post-divergence gene flow, estimates that are robust to violations of the no-
recombination assumption. Estimates of the splitting parameter suggest that < 1% of the ancestral
population founded U. scoparia. These results corroborate earlier hypotheses that U. scoparia originated
when a small number of individuals from the ancestral U. notata complex dispersed north along the
Colorado River to colonize the Mojave Desert, and that northern populations in the Mojave and Amargosa
River basins are the result of a late Pleistocene/Holocene range expansion from a southern refuge. We
will also present preliminary results regarding speciation within the U. notata species complex in the U.S.
and Mexico, including the endangered Coachella Valley Fringe-toed Lizard.



Govender, Yogani (Center for Applied Tropical Ecology and Conservation, University of Puerto Rico,);
Puente-Rolón, Alberto R. (Universidad Interamericana en Arecibo, Arecibo, PR, United States); Muñoz,
Marcia C.; Ramirez Camejo, Luis A. (Department of Biology, Univeisity of Puerto Rico, Canada); Cuevas,
Elvira (Center for Applied Tropical Ecology and Conservation, University of Puerto Rico, Canada);
Sternberg, Leonard (Department of Biology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, Canada)

An isotopic study of diet and muscles of the Green Iguana (Iguana iguana) in Puerto Rico

The non-native green iguana, Iguana iguana over the years in Puerto Rico has increased in population
numbers and has proliferated throughout the island. Reports on the diet in their native habitat indicate
exclusive herbivoroy but contradicting observations on their diet in their non native habitat have been
reported by several authors. The aim of our study was to determine the diet and establish trophic position
of I. iguana in its new range of distribution, using gut content and isotopic analysis of (tongue and leg)
muscle tissue. We found significant differences in the isotopic signature of muscles tissue which may be
due to how I. iguana allocates nutrients during muscle formation. Although we found the physical
evidence of snails and crabs in gut content, the isotopic analysis of δ15 N and δ13C showed little
enrichment of both muscle tissues from that of their diet, therefore we conclude that I. iguana is a
herbivore. The δ13C values of muscle tissues indicate plants eaten are C3 plants and gut content
showed diet consisted of primarily black mangrove, Avicennia germinans leaves. The impact of
defoliation on this species warrants further investigation. Another plant species of interest found in the gut
is Brazilian pepper, S. terebinthifolius. We suspect that I.iguana maybe the disperser of this highly
aggressive invasive plant in Puerto Rico.Our study of both gut content and isotopic analysis of muscle
tissue, the first to be carried out for I. iguana, indicates that I. iguana impacts the native flora and fauna in




                                                                                                             258
Puerto Rico, and their ecological role in their new found habitats warrants further investigation for more
stringent management.



Govindarajulu, Purnima (BC Ministry of Environment);

Insights from standardized threat assessments for herpetofauna in British Columbia, Canada

In British Columbia, 55% of native amphibian species (11/20) and 66% of native reptile species (8/12) are
of conservation concern at the provincial or national level, or both. The threat classification system
developed by the World Conservation Union and Conservation Measures Partnership (IUCN-CMP)
provides a standardized way of classifying threats facing these species. Threats are classified into 11
categories, such as urban and residential development, transportation corridors, and climate change. The
impact of each threat is estimated by the interaction between the scope (proportion of the species
expected to be affected by the threat within 10 years), and the severity of the threat within the scope
(degree of population reduction in 10 years or three generations). Impact is measured as a proportion of
total population reduction within the range. When the IUCN-CMP threat classification system is applied to
amphibians of conservation concern in B.C., invasive species have a high or very high impact (40% -75%
declines) on 5/11 species, transportation corridors have a medium to high impact (15% - 40% declines)
on 8/11 species, and agriculture, biological resource use (logging), pollution, and climate change have a
medium impact (15% declines) on greater than half of the species. The very high impact of invasive
species is due to the potentially catastrophic effects of chytridiomycosis infection. While Bd presence in
pervasive in B.C., factors that lead to mortality from chytridiomycosis are not well understood. The threat
assessment highlights this significant knowledge gap in the management and conservation of amphibians
in B.C. When the standardized threat classification is applied to the reptiles of conservation concern in B.
C., transportation corridors have a high to medium impact (15% - 40% declines) on 7/9 species, followed
by residential and agricultural developments which have a medium impact (15%) on greater than half the
listed species. Again the threat assessment highlights a significant knowledge gap as methods for
mitigation of road mortality on herpetofauna are not well understood and have not been widely tested for
effectiveness. The IUCN-CMP threat classification while useful should be applied with caution as much of
the quantification of impact is based on expert opinion and not on scientifically collected population trend
data. The lack of basic population information, quantification of threat impacts, and monitoring of
conservation actions remain significant barriers to the effective management of herpetofauna in B.C.



Govindarajulu, Purnima (BC Ministry of Environment); Bishop, Christine; McKibbin, Rene (Canadian
Wildlife Service, Canada); Welstead, Kym (Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations,
Canada); Kissel, Amanda; Palen, Wendy (Simon Fraser University, Canada); Gielens, Andrea (Royal
Roads University, Canada); Thoney, Dennis (Vancouver Aquarium, Canada); Houston, Barb (Fish and
Wildlife Compensation Program, Canada); Beaucher, Marc-Andre (Creston Valley Wildlife Management
Area, Canada); Adama, Doug (BC Hydro, Canada)

Successful captive rearing and reintroduction efforts for two Ranid Frogs in British Columbia: The
Oregon Spotted Frog and the Northern Leopard Frog

In British Columbia, the Oregon Spotted Frog has been reduced to four isolated populations of less than
150 breeding females in total, and the Northern Leopard Frog has been reduced to one isolated
population of less than 15 breeding females. Captive breeding and rearing have been used to augment
extant populations and to establish new populations to prevent extirpation.




                                                                                                        259
Since 2001, a "Head-Start" program that rears wild collected eggs for release as post-metamorphic
juvenile frogs has been used to augment two populations of Oregon Spotted Frogs. Although one of
these augmented populations has declined below detection levels, the other population persists at stable
levels. The extent to which augmentation contributed to population persistence remains unclear. Juvenile
frogs from the "Head-Start" program were also used to establish a new population of Oregon Spotted
Frog at a restored site within migration distance of an extant population (Maria Slough). Although a few
egg masses have been observed at this site in some years, the persistence of this population is currently
unclear. A captive assurance population was established for the Oregon Spotted Frog in 2008. In 2010, a
few of these two year old frogs bred for the first time in captivity. Many more egg masses were produced
in 2011 and nearly 3000 captive bred hatchling tadpoles were released into the wild. Captive bred
tadpoles retained in field enclosures had similar survival and growth to metamorphosis as wild collected
tadpoles in similar enclosures. We will continue releasing captive bred tadpoles at this site in 2012 and
2013. The results of these release efforts will not be known until 2013 when the frogs from the first
release are expected to reach breeding condition.

Between 2000 and 2005, a Head Start program was also carried out for the only remaining population of
Northern Leopard Frogs. This population remains at less than 10 egg masses in most years even with
these augmentation efforts. Frogs from the Head-Start program were also released at a historic site in
Bummers Flats about 100 km from the extant site. This introduction has been successful in establishing a
small breeding population and small numbers of juveniles frogs have been detected at this site since
2010. A captive assurance population was established for the Northern Leopard Frogs in 2010, and we
expect these animals to come into breeding condition in 2012. If successful these captive bred tadpoles
will be released to augment the incipient population at Bummers Flats.

Captive rearing and captive breeding remains an important and ongoing part of population recovery
efforts for these two species in British Columbia.



Grafe, Ulmar (Universiti Brunei Darussalam); Konopik, Oliver (University of Wurzburg, Wurzburg,
Germany); Ahmad, Norhayati (Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Gadong, Malaysia); Art, Borkent (Royal
British Columbia Museum, Victoria, BC, Canada)

Calling in the face of eavesdroppers: selective pressures on anuran advertisement calling in the
presence of frog-biting midges

The advertisement calls of anurans are subject to eavesdropping by illegitimate receivers such as
competitors, predators, and parasites. Here we report on the selective pressures that act on anuran
advertisement calls and calling behaviour from frog-biting midges (Diptera: Corethrellidae) from northern
Borneo. Flies were present on males of twenty species of frogs rom six families (Bufonidae,
Ceratobatrachidae, Dicroglossidae, Megophryidae,          Microhylidae, Ranidae, and Rhacophoridae).
Traps broadcasting frog advertisement calls and pure tones were used as lures to capture flies in lowland
dipterocarp rainforest and peatswamp forest in Brunei Darussalam and Sarawak, Malaysia. We identified
eight different species of frog-biting midges. Attraction to sound was not specific to host species,
suggesting that additional short range cues induce biting. However, host specificity was high when
sampling midges that had obtained a blood meal on their frog host. Frog-biting midges were attracted
only to acoustic lures below 4 kHz with peak sensitivity to 2 kHz. Surveys of parasite prevalence on 28
frog species revealed that no species with advertisement calls above 4 kHz was parasitised, suggesting a
significant selective pressure on male frogs to call below 4 kHz. In addition, 100ms tone bursts were more
attractive to frog-biting midges than continuous sound. Furthermore, heavily parasitised species such as




                                                                                                      260
Hylarana baramica and H. glandulosa start calling in the early evening when frog-biting midges are
inactive, suggesting that these species may have shifted their pattern of calling to avoid being parasitised.



Graham, Sean (Penn State); Freidenfelds, Nicole (Rice University, Houston, TX, United States);
McCormick, Gail; Langkilde, Tracy (Penn State, University Park, PA, United States)

The impacts of invaders: Basal and acute stress glucocorticoid profiles and immune function in
native lizards threatened by invasive ants.

As anthropogenic stressors multiply exponentially in the coming decades, native vertebrates will likely
face increasing threats from these novel challenges. The success or failure of the primary physiological
mediator of these stressors—the HPA axis—will likely involve numerous and chaotic outcomes. Among
the most challenging of these new threats are invasive species. These have the capacity to
simultaneously challenge the HPA axis and the immune system since they are often associated with, or
the cause of, emerging infectious diseases, and energetic tradeoffs with the HPA response can have
immunosuppressive effects. To determine the effects of invasive species on the vertebrate GC response
to a novel stressor and immunity, we examined the effects of invasive fire ants on native fence lizards,
comparing lizards from sites with long histories with fire ants to those outside the invasion zone. We
demonstrated higher baseline and acute stress (captive restraint) CORT levels in lizards from within fire
ant invaded areas; females are more strongly affected than males, suggesting context-specific effects of
invasion. We found no effect of fire ant invasion on the immune parameters we measured (complement
bacterial lysis, antibody hemagglutination) with the exception of ectoparasite infestation. Mites were far
less prevalent on lizards within fire ant invaded sites, suggesting fire ants may actually benefit lizards in
this regard. This study suggests that invasive species may impose physiological stress on native
vertebrates, but that the consequences of this stress may be complicated and unpredictable.



Grammer, Paul O. (University of Southern Mississippi); Mickle, Paul F.; Havrylkoff, Jeanne-Marie
(University of Southern Mississippi, Canada); Slack, William T. (US Army ERDC, Canada); Peterson,
Mark S. (University of Southern Mississippi, Canada)

Investigating migratory cues and movement patterns of Gulf sturgeon (Acipenser oxyrinchus
desotoi) in the lower Pascagoula River

Recent work in the Pascagoula River, MS has helped elucidate patterns in the movements of threatened
Gulf sturgeon, Acipenser oxyrinchus desotoi during their fall outmigration to the Mississippi Sound and
the northern Gulf of Mexico. There is a general understanding of the cues that initiate the downstream
fall migration within the coastal drainages throughout their range in the northern Gulf of Mexico. Work by
Heise et al. (2005) in the Pascagoula River showed Gulf sturgeon migration was initiated by decreasing
day length and decreasing temperatures, coupled with increases in river discharge. During periods of low
river discharge, sturgeon were shown to spend time between rkm 24 and 38 after beginning their
downstream migrations. Our latest work took place in an area within this portion of the river, between rkm
30 and 34 which serves as our fall census site. Gulf sturgeon were collected in the fall of 2010 (Oct.-Nov.)
and 2011 (Sept.-Nov.), after presumably beginning their migration downstream. Sturgeon catch data were
compiled with physical water quality data, time of day, lunar phase, barometric pressure, river discharge
and tidal stage in order to identify specific periods of increased Gulf sturgeon movement. Movement was
assumed to have increased when fish were captured in anchored gillnets set in our fall census sampling
site. At the fall census site extensive fishing efforts were made during day and night under relatively low



                                                                                                         261
flow conditions. Initial analysis using Akaike information criterion (AIC c ) to test model strength indicated
lunar phase had a significant influence on the movement of Gulf sturgeon along with other secondary
factors such as time of day and barometric pressure. Principle component analysis is also employed to
more thoroughly explore which metrics were correlated with increased movements of Gulf sturgeon
during the fall migration period. Expanding on our current examination of sturgeon movements as they
leave the river, we plan to further explore patterns of Gulf sturgeon movement as they enter the
Pascagoula River estuary using acoustically tagged fish with a multi-receiver fixed acoustic array.



Grande, Terry (Loyola University Chicago); Borden, Calvin (Loyola University Chicago, Canada); Wilson,
Mark (University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada)

Osteology and myology of the suspensorium in basal Neoteleostei

Among the results from the NSF-funded Euteleost Tree of Life (EToL) project is a revised phylogeny of
basal acanthomorphs and their close relatives among primitive neoteleosts. The revised phylogenetic tree
allows us to ask novel questions concerning the evolution of the bones and muscles of the suspensorium
(the functional unit of the fish skull that includes the palatine, ectopterygoid, endopterygoid,
metapterygoid, quadrate, symplectic, hyomandibular, and preopercular bones) and to generate new
hypotheses and evaluate existing ones concerning jaw mechanics in these fishes. Osteological
descriptions are based on new observations of cleared and stained specimens, while myological
descriptions are based on original dissections. Building on earlier studies of basal euteleosts by authors
such as Diogo, Sanford, and Williams, we describe the osteology and myology of the suspensorium in
members of the Stomiiformes, Aulopiformes, Myctophiformes, Polymixiiformes, Paracanthopterygii,
Lampriformes, Beryciformes, and Percomorpha. Results allow tests of earlier ideas, such as those of
Rosen and Patterson about the evolution of jaws and suspensoria, in light of our revised understanding of
the membership and relationships of major groups of Neoteleostei. Based on examination of Recent
fishes, we make predictions about the morphology and possible function of early fossil neoteleosts and
test those ideas by direct observation of well-preserved fossil forms.



Grant, Evan (USGS - ARMI);

Using Monitoring Data to make Decisions about Amphibian Conservation

Concern for natural resources, especially in protected areas like National Parks in the United States, have
resulted in a general call for monitoring data on the status of animal populations at broad scales. More
rarely are these monitoring programs designed to directly inform resource management decisions. In
contrast to many natural resource monitoring programs, explicit in the goals of the ARMI program is to
provide information useful to improve US protected areas management. The development of a monitoring
program is a key step in assessing the current status of species‘ occurrences and distributions, examining
population trends over time, and identifying suitable targets for management to halt or reverse declining
trends. One monitoring program detected declining trends in occupancy of a community of wetland-
breeding amphibian populations in one US National Park. This triggered a need to identify suitable
management actions to halt or reverse the decline. I demonstrate how monitoring data may be used in a
formal decision analysis through the following steps: 1) Collect monitoring data; 2) Fit model to data,
including estimation of trend and covariate effects; 3) Identify management alternatives; 4) Identify
optimal management strategies.




                                                                                                          262
Grant, Tandora (San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research); Burton, Frederic (Blue Iguana
Recovery Program, Canada)

Studbook and Population Management Analysis Software Applied to Reintroduction Programs for
Caribbean Iguanas

Rock iguanas are the largest native land vertebrate endemic to islands in the Greater Antilles. They are
among the world‘s most endangered lizards primarily because most of their habitat has been severely
degraded by human development and invasive alien species. The populations of Jamaican, Anegada,
and Grand Cayman iguanas became critically low in the 1990s with fewer than 100 animals estimated to
remain in the wild. Headstarting began as a key recovery strategy for these species, by collecting
hatchlings upon emergence from the nest and raising them in captive facilities in situ until large enough to
deter predation by feral cats and mongoose. In Grand Cayman, captive breeding was also employed to
generate large numbers of iguanas for release. To manage this aspect, an electronic studbook was
created from disjunct records at the National Trust for the Cayman Islands and US zoos, where a limited
amount of breeding had occurred with wild-caught and F1 individuals.                Since then, breeding
recommendations have been generated every year using population management analysis software
designed for fostering sustainability within cooperatively managed zoo captive populations.

Breeding pairs of Grand Cayman iguanas are formed with two objectives: to preserve the proximity to the
founder genotype for as long as possible in captivity, and secondarily to generate large numbers of
variable and diverse offspring for release. Iguanas are paired based on their mean kinship within the total
captive and three released populations, with the aim of increasing the contribution from under-
represented founders in all release locations. Ideally, linking rare and common lineages is avoided,
however individual iguana health and behavior has affected mate choices throughout the years of the
program. Initially iguanas are released in large numbers of similar aged juveniles to instigate a rapid
growth rate that promotes wild mating closer to random, minimizes inbreeding, and loss of genetic
diversity over time.

Future work intends to compare the assumptions, models, and outcomes of using a pedigree-based
management strategy with DNA analysis, which can potentially refine the knowledge of the population‘s
composition and guide future management decisions.



Grant, Taran (Universidade de São Paulo); Rada, Marco (Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio
Grande do Sul, Canada); Rueda, Vicente (Colombia en Hechos, Canada)

A trans-Andean test of the monophyly of Anomaloglossus (Dendrobatoidea: Aromobatidae)

Grant et al. (1997) discovered the median lingual process (MLP) in a several dendrobatoid frogs from
northern South America. Insofar as an MLP also occurs in several groups of Old World ranoids, including
the potential dendrobatoid sister groups Phrynobatrachidae and Petropedetidae (e.g., Ford and
Cannatella, 1993), Grant et al. (1997) considered the structures to be homologous and the occurrence in
dendrobatoids to be symplesiomorphic. Later, Frost et al. (2006) provided decisive evidence that
dendrobatoids are not closely related to any MLP-possessing ranoids and Grant et al. (2006) found that
all MLP-possessing dendrobatoids that were analyzed formed an exclusive clade. To recognize the
monophyly of this MLP-possessing group, Grant et al. (2006) proposed the genus name Anomaloglossus
within the family Aromobatidae. Since 1997 the number of dendrobatoid species known to have the MLP
has grown to 24, all of which are currently referred to Anomaloglossus. Most species occur on the
Guayana Shield north of the Amazon, but three species occur west of the Andes, including A. confusus



                                                                                                        263
from northwestern Ecuador and A. atopoglossus and A. lacrimosus from western Colombia. The 20 cis-
Andean species exhibit remarkable diversity for such a small group, including phytotelm breeders with
oophagous tadpoles and maternal provisioning (Bourne et al., 2001; Grant et al. 2006), endotrophic
larvae with reduced mouth parts, with or without dorsal transport (Juncá et al., 1994; Lescure and Marty,
2000), and distributions at elevations as low as 50 m in the Amazon (A. stepheni) are as high as 2700 m
atop tepuis (A. roraima). Grant et al. (2006) also included representatives from across this diversity,
further strengthening the test of Anomalogossus monophyly. Nevertheless, due to lack of material Grant
et al. (2006) did not include any of the trans-Andean species in their phylogenetic analysis, and they
placed those species in Anomalogossus based solely on the shared occurrence of the MLP. As such,
several persistent questions remain to be addressed: (1) Are the trans-Andean species part of
Anomaloglossus or do they represent an independent radiation? (2) Is the MLP of the cis- and trans-
Andean taxa homologous or did the MLP evolve multiple times within dendrobatoids, as it did among
anurans generally? (3) If Anomaloglossus is indeed monophyletic, do the robust, extensively webbed
species from both sides of the Andes form a clade, or are these morphologies independently derived?
Recently collected material of an undescribed species allows these questions to be addressed.



Grant, Tyler (Iowa State University); David, Otis; Rolf, Koford (Iowa Cooperative Fish and Wildlife
Research Unit, Ames, IA, United States)

Evaluating Amphibian Response to Missouri River Flooding Using Novel Occupancy Modeling

Restoration of the Missouri River ecosystem has been ongoing since the Water Resources Development
Act of 1986. We began in 2009 an assessment of the ecological functionality of mitigation properties in
Iowa using the anuran community as ecological indicators. In 2011, the Missouri River experienced
record flooding. Annual runoff was 75 km3, substantially more than the next highest estimated runoff of
61.7 km3 in 1881. The mitigation properties were inundated with >4 meters of water for over a month in
July and August. Some breeding ponds were >1 kilometer away from the flood boundary. The 2011
flood offered a unique opportunity to assess the response and resiliency of anuran species to extensive
flooding at 125 sample sites distributed along a 19 km floodplain corridor. We used a novel occupancy
model that relaxed the closure assumption to demonstrate that anuran species rapidly colonized new
shallow wetlands as the river stage rose. The probability of occupancy at sites with 30 cm of water was
nearly 100% for Pseudacris maculata, Lithobates pipiens, and L. blairi, but decreased to 0% with
increasing depths. Phenologically, L. pipiens, Anaxyrus woodhousii, Hyla versicolor/chrysocelis, and P.
maculata began metamorphosing at dates comparable to 2010. Conversely, L. blairi, L. catesbeianus,
and Acris blanchardi metmorphosed 3-5 weeks later than in 2010. These three species breed later than
other species and flooding likely hindered reproduction. L. pipiens and A. woodhousii appeared to have
successful reproduction despite the flooding, judging from the number of observed metamorphs at 81
post-flood survey points. H. versicolor/chrysocelis complex and P. maculata produced a moderate
number of tadpoles. L. blairi and A. blanchardi produced few metamorphs. The data indicate that
species that breed later in the season metamorphosed later and in smaller numbers. We will present
data from the spring and summer of 2012 to document longer-term response of these species to the
flooding, including rates of recolonization of flooded areas. The resiliency of these species and the
habitat on which they depend may prove important under future climate change scenarios which predict
more climate extremes. We suggest that a elevational gradient of habitats is necessary to provide
useable habitat over a wide range of potential river stages.




                                                                                                      264
Grassmann, Michael (aquarium of the bay); Natanson, Lisa (NOAA Fisheries, Narragansett, RI, United
States); Slager, Christina; Herbert, Keith (Aquarium of the Bay, San Francisco, CA, United States)

Observations of Growth and Demography in Captive-Born Pacific Angel Sharks (Squatina
californica), at Aquarium of the Bay

In May of 2009, seven Pacific angel shark ( Squatina californica ) pups were born in the Aquarium of the
Bay in San Francisco, California. This is the first reported case of successful captive-breeding for the
species. The data collected on these specimens offer a unique opportunity to closely observe the early
stages of age-related growth in Pacific angel sharks. Over two and a half years data were regularly
collected on each shark‘s length, weight, average consumption, and the percentage body weight
consumed.        Based on these length data, three variations of von Bertalanffy were generated. Small
sample size and rapid early growth in the population produced highly variable data with low confidence
values in the first two trials. The third trial incorporated additional data from wild adult Pacific angel
sharks that were previously tagged or collected by Aquarium of the Bay. This growth curve was
compared to the previous trials and showed juvenile growth falling on approximately the same curve as
adults. The parameters obtained in the final trial were also consistent with those derived from previously
published data on the growth of Pacific angel sharks, despite the differences in some life history traits and
highly variable growth rates of this specific population.    Continued observation will help determine if
these parameters change with further development, and if the initial variation in life history characteristics
will influence other traits as the sharks reach maturity.



Gray, Teagen (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA and Guy Harvey Research Institute, Nova
Southeastern University, FL USA 33004); Bernard, Andrea (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA and Guy
Harvey Research Institute, Nova Southeastern University, FL USA 33004, Canada); Clarke, S. (Oceanic
Fisheries Programme, Secretariat of the Pacific Community, BPD5 CEDEX, Noumea 98848, New
Caledonia, Canada); Chapman, D. (School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, Stony Brook University,
NY, USA, Canada); McAuley, R. (Department of Fisheries, Government of Western Australia, Hillarys,
WA, Australia, Canada); Shivji, M.S. (Save Our Seas Shark Center USA and Guy Harvey Research
Institute, Nova Southeastern University, FL USA 33004, Canada)

Global phylogeography of the dusky shark (Carcharinus obscurus) based on nuclear
microsatellite DNA analysis: delineation of genetic stocks and the geographic sourcing of shark
fins from commercial markets.

The dusky shark, Carcharinus obscurus , is a globally distributed, coastal- pelagic species subject to an