nities were not.

Although plantation habitats do support large numbers of breeding amphibians, abundance-based
estimates fail to show the fundamental differences in species composition between the two habitat types.
Those found dominating the plantations were mostly least concern species, frequently found in other
disturbed habitats. We conclude that under current management regimes oil palm plantations do not
serve as a refuge or alternative habitat for forest dwelling amphibians.




                                                                                                     204
Feldman, Chris (University of Nevada, Reno); Brodie, Jr., Edmund (Utah State University, Canada);
Brodie, III, Edmund (University of Virginia, Canada); Pfrender, Michael (University of Notre Dame,
Canada)

Constraint shapes convergence in tetrodotoxin resistant sodium channels of snakes

Natural selection often produces convergent changes in unrelated lineages, but the degree to which such
adaptations occur via predictable genetic paths is unknown. If only a limited subset of possible mutations
are fixed in independent lineages, then it is clear that constraint in the production or function of molecular
variants is an important determinant of adaptation.             We demonstrate remarkably constrained
convergence during the evolution of resistance to the lethal poison tetrodotoxin (TTX) in six snake
species representing three distinct lineages from around the globe. Resistance conferring amino acid
substitutions in a voltage-gated sodium channel (Na v 1.4) are clustered in just two regions of the protein
and a majority of the replacements are confined to the same three positions. The observed changes
represent only a small fraction of the experimentally validated mutations known to increase Na v 1.4
resistance to TTX. These results suggest that constraints due to functional tradeoffs between ion channel
function and toxin resistance lead to predictable patterns of evolutionary convergence at the molecular
level.    Our data are consistent with theoretical predictions and recent microcosm work that suggest a
predictable path is followed during an adaptive walk along a mutational landscape, and that natural
selection may be frequently constrained to produce similar genetic outcomes even when operating on
independent lineages.



Fellers, Gary (U.S. Geological Survey); Kleeman, Patrick (U.S. Geological Survey, Point Reyes Station,
CA, United States); Miller, David (U.S. Geological Survey, Laurel, MD, United States); Halstead, Brian
(U.S. Geological Survey, Dixon, CA, United States)

Amphibian population trends in Yosemite National Park: What do we know from long-term
monitoring?

In 2000, the U.S. Geological Survey implemented the Amphibian Monitoring and Research Initiative
(ARMI) which is designed to provide data on amphibian population trends on federal lands throughout the
U.S. We implemented the ARMI program at Yosemite National Park, California (USA) using two different
approaches. One was a focused mark-recapture study of Rana sierrae at a single meadow complex, and
the other was a statistically-based design that used double surveys at 175 sites across 14 watershed
units to evaluate population trends in three anuran species (R. sierrae, Pseudacris regilla, Bufo canorus)
throughout the 3,081 km2 park. We tagged 757 individual R. sierrae from 2003 to 2011 and used mark-
recapture data based on 2,431 captures to model population trends related to precipitation, sex, and year.
The R. sierrae population fluctuated from 45 to 115 frogs over the nine years of our study, but there was
no clear up or downward trend. We conclude that this R. sierrae population at Yosemite NP is stable
over a relatively long period of time, even in the presence of Bd. The watershed research was initiated in
2004 and continues as an ongoing program. We use double survey protocol at each site (pond, lake or
meadow) to assess detectability for each species for each year. Detectability for the three anurans is
high, ranging from approximately 0.70 - 0.90. We have analyzed presence data along with 15 site and
survey covariates to evaluate population trends for each of the three study species. There are different
population trends for different species, and different trends in the two major river drainages within the
park. While population trends for Bufo and Rana are somewhat inconsistent, Pseudacris populations are
declining within each of the major drainages.




                                                                                                          205
Fenker Antunes, Jéssica (Universidade de Brasília); Gonçalves Tedeschi, Leonardo; de Campos
Nogueira, Cristiano (Universidade de Brasília, BRASÍLIA, Brazil)

Phylogenetic diversity, habitat loss and conservation priorities in Neotropical pitvipers

The biodiversity crisis requires the urgent need to evaluate in a more criterions distribution patterns and
threats to the species and the planet‘s biological wealth. However, few studies quantifying the effect of
habitat loss on patterns of phylogenetic diversity, an important measure of diversity that incorporates
information about relation between species. The aim of our study is understand this relation and test
widely used common metrics of biological diversity as surrogates for conserving evolutionary diversity in
well studied, wide ranging Neotropical endemic pitvipers. We compiled species occurrence records for the
40 terminal taxa in pitviper phylogeny. We then generated niche models for all terminal taxa and
calculated range sizes and percentage of habitat loss. We estimated ED and EDGE values, weighted with
data on habitat loss (EDHL) and threat status (EDGE). We tested the phylogenetic signal in range size,
percentage of habitat loss and IUCN threat status, and then regressed these values with ED scores. We
mapped areas of high richness and high phylogenetic diversity. Finally, we tested the performance of
widely used biodiversity measures for capturing phylogenetic distinctiveness of pitvipers faunas selected
according to endemism, richness, threat, presence in major biomes or biodiversity hotspots to random
values. Taxonomic priority ranks differed according to the metric of evolutionary diversity, with EDGE
categories wider differences found when. We found no phylogenetic signal in range size, threat and
habitat loss, and no significant regressions between ED values and range size, threat and habitat loss.
Usual methods like richness, endemism and threat are not good surrogates for preservation the history of
the group. The spatial distribution of phylogenetic diversity (PD) shows three areas of high levels of PD,
being generally coincident with spatial variations in richness. Pitviper faunas assembled according to
endemism, open and forest biomes and biodiversity hotspots were not significantly different from random.
However, the species subset included in the IUCN redlist showed significant phylogenetic clustering as
did the species subset found in the richest areas. An approach taking into account habitat loss and
phylogenetic diversity would be the best way to preserve the history of this group of Neotropical snakes,
and could aid in the conservation of other organisms for which phylogenetic or spatial data are not
available.



Fenolio, Danté (Atlanta Botanical Garden);

Conserving South Chile's Imperiled Amphibians

The Darwin‘s Frog Conservation Initiative (DFCI) is a collaboration between the Atlanta Botanical Garden
(ABG), the National Zoo of Chile, the Catholic University of Chile, and biologists from Northern Arizona
University and the University of Texas at Tyler. Goals of the initiative focus on (1) elucidating reasons
behind the declines of Darwin‘s Frogs and other amphibians endemic to Chile‘s temperate forests, (2)
developing captive assurance colonies with ex-situ breeding of endangered species, (3) monitoring
diseases in wild populations, and (4) educating the public regarding amphibian declines. We developed a
captive breeding facility on grounds of the National Zoo of Chile (Parque Metropolitano de Santiago). The
lab is modeled after facilities at ABG with one exception; we designed one of its walls made of glass so
that the visiting public could see into the laboratory, rendering the lab an attraction at the zoo. Key
features include ﬁltered water with a spare storage tank and a backup generator that activates when the
power grid goes down. Automated misting, light, and temperature systems maintain appropriate
environmental conditions. All of these features worked perfectly after the 2010 earthquake. An insect
culture facility exists on the ﬁrst ﬂoor, providing live food for the colony. A bilingual website featuring our




                                                                                                           206
project (www.savedarwinsfrogs.org) provides another public interface. We have emphasized education
for the personnel running the facility with training at ABG and at the Association of Zoos and Aquarium‘s
captive amphibian management program. Fieldwork has involved visiting historic localities where
Darwin‘s Frogs (Rhinoderma) have been reported as well potential sites, collecting skin swabs and
testing for the presence of amphibian chytrid fungus.

We are now working toward the conservation of additional species of southern Chile‘s most endangered
amphibians. The DFCI is expanding their amphibian conservation program within Chile to include four
new goals: (1) to implement a new, cost-effective, amphibian breeding laboratory made from two
repurposed cargo shipping containers; (2) to increase the capacity of the existing in-country project such
that assurance colonies of six more imperiled Chilean amphibian species can be accommodated; (3) to
work toward assurance colonies ranging from 50 to 65 individuals of each species; and (4) to train two
additional Chilean zoo staff members in captive amphibian management at the ABG.



Fernandez de Carvalho, Joana (Center of Marine Sciences (CCMAR)); Coelho, Rui (CCMAR, Faro,
Portugal); Neves dos Santos, Miguel (IPIMAR, Olhão, Portugal); Erzini, Karim (CCMAR, Faro, Portugal)

Life history of the bigeye thresher shark, Alopias superciliosus, in the Tropical Eastern Atlantic
Ocean

The bigeye thresher, Alopias supercilious, is commonly by-catch in pelagic longline fisheries targeting
tunas and swordfish. Still, very little information is available for this species‘ life history in the Atlantic
Ocean. As part of the EU Data Collection Regulation framework, Portuguese fishery observers have been
placed aboard fishing vessels collecting information on captures, size, sex, maturity stage, and biological
samples such as vertebrae. A total of 760 bigeye threshers were recorded between 2008 and February
2011, throughout the Atlantic. In the NE Atlantic, almost all size classes were observed and there was a
higher proportion of females (65.08%). In the SE Atlantic, larger specimens were found and the presence
of males (56.12%) was higher than females. Vertebrae of 356 bigeye threshers were collected and
analysed so far. These were collected along a wide geographical range (between 18ºN and 28ºS), mostly
along the East Atlantic, with size of specimens ranging from 101 to 265 cm fork length (FL). Preliminary
trials were carried out to determine the most efficient band enhancement technique for this species, in
which crystal violet section staining was found to be the best methodology. A linear relationship between
specimen size and vertebrae diameter was found and observed vertebrae showed 1 to 22 pairs of
opaque and hyaline bands. Preliminary growth models based on the Von Bertalanffy growth function
(VBGF) and the VBGF with fixed size at birth were calculated and the parameters are presented and
discussed. Maturity ogives were fitted for 402 specimens that had maturity data available, and size at first
maturity was estimated at 206.1 cm FL for females and 159.7 cm FL for males. The results presented in
this paper can be used and integrated in future ecological risk analysis and stock assessment models for
this species in the Atlantic Ocean.




                                                                                                           207
Ferreira, Luciana (UFRPE); Afonso, André (UFRPE, Recife, Brazil); Castilho, Pedro (UFRPE, Serra
Talhada, Brazil); Hazin, Fábio (UFRPE, Recife, Brazil)

Habitat use of the nurse shark, Ginglymostoma cirratum, off Recife, Northeast Brazil: a combined
survey with longline and acoustic telemetry

Despite the high abundance of nurse sharks Ginglymostomas cirratum in shallow waters, knowledge on
its ecology is still rather limited, with most studies restricted to the Caribbean and Florida coast. This
study presents results on the relative abundance, sex ratio, size distribution, seasonal fluctuations and
residency of the nurse shark, off Recife, northeast Brazil. Nurse sharks comprised 13.3% of the total
catch of 1033 bottom longline sets, done from 2004 to 2011, and ranged in size from 107 to 300 cm TL.
98 sharks were tagged with an 8% recapture rate. The overall sex ratio for nurse sharks was 1.3♀:1♂,
however, it showed a strong variation throughout the year. The monthly CPUE of male nurse sharks
showed a somewhat more seasonal trend than females. Male CPUE tended to be lower ( 0.02) from
October to April (except for December). Although female CPUE oscillated within a range similar to that of
males, it showed no clear seasonal pattern. Of 8 acoustically tagged sharks, 6 were detected by the array
of acoustic receivers. Most detection of males were recorded during the first semester of the year,
peaking in February and March with zero detection from May to September. Females, in turn, were
detected throughout the year, although most detection happened in the second semester, peaking in
September. The results indicate that nurse sharks have a year-round occurrence in the study area and
remain in the monitored area for variable periods of time. The strong seasonal shifts in the sex ratio of
catches and the patterns revealed by the acoustic detections also suggest a possible difference in habitat
usage or in seasonal movements between sexes, which hadn‘t been described so far for the Brazilian
coast and may have serious implications for the management and conservation of nurse sharks at
Northeast Brazil.



Ferry, Lara (Arizona State University West);

Elasmobranchs in Biological Research

Elasmobranchs get a lot of attention both within and beyond the scientific realm due to their fascinating,
and sometimes terrifying, habits. This high profile has, in many cases, overshadowed some of the most
amazing insights that have come from the study of this group. Such studies have taught us not only
about the cartilaginous fishes, but also have given us novel insights into the most important and difficult to
penetrate areas of biology. These advances could not have been made with the use of any other study
system. This presentation will highlight several recent advances that should serve as inspiration for
biologists interested in exploring fundamental biological questions. Among the exemplar projects that I
will highlight are what shark and ray brains have to tell us about the evolution and function central
nervous systems, what can be learned of sensory hierarchy from blacktip sharks, how stingrays crushing
hard prey has inspired new biomaterials, and how the shark immune system and is teaching us about our
inherent ability to recognize self and non-self.




                                                                                                          208
Fessler, Brandon (Central Washington University); Irwin, Jason; Beck, Daniel (Central Washington
University, Canada); Hayes, Marc (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Canada)

The Spatial Ecology and Behavior of Terrestrial Coastal Giant Salamanders (Dicamptodon
tenebrosus) Monitored by Radio-Telemetry and Remote Cameras

Coastal Giant Salamanders ( Dicamptodon tenebrosus ), largest of terrestrial urodeles, are one of four
extant species in the monotypic family Dicamptodontidae. Endemic to the Pacific Northwest of North
America, dicamptodontids share a similar life-cycle, with stream-type (reduced gills) aquatic larvae and
facultatively-paedomorphic adult forms. While larvae are common in mountain streams, post-
metamorphic individuals are rarely observed; hence little is known regarding terrestrial Dicamptodon
ecology. Few encounters of the terrestrial forms is thought to reflect a largely fossorial existence. Using
radio-telemetry we examined the movement, behavior and habitats of 12 post-metamorphs (35-167.4 g,
124-183 mm SVL) between June 2010-December 2011 at sites in the Wenatchee National Forest,
Washington State. Individuals were monitored an average of 348 ± 40 SE (151-536) days and located ca.
2-3 times per week May-November and once per month in winter/early spring. From May-November
2011, we used remote time-lapse cameras (2-min interval) to provide high-resolution observations of
salamander activity between telemetry sessions. Average recorded movement distance between
locations was 15.5 ± 1.8 SE m ( n = 267), with most being relatively short (84% <20 m), though six moves
were >100 m (max: 271 m). Most movements seen on camera were initiated between dusk and dawn
(98%). During both telemetry and camera monitoring, salamanders were often observed at the surface.
By day, salamanders typically used a crevice refuge (e.g., in rocks, decayed wood), emerging at night,
remaining partially in or near the shelter, then returning by dawn. All salamanders returned to one or more
previously occupied shelters, with large variation in the intervening times (6-381 days) and total distances
traveled (3-259 m). Most salamanders occupied both terrestrial and aquatic refuges. Although some
individuals traveled >150 m upland from streams, no salamander was observed >50 m from aquatic
habitat (e.g., stream, rivulet, or seep). Our study reveals the first accounts of terrestrial and aquatic refuge
site fidelity within adult Dicamptodontidae, and previously unreported regular terrestrial surface presence,
contrasting with former accounts of D. tenebrosus behavior. Further, these behaviors are rarely
documented among terrestrial urodeles, and we advocate the combined use of long-term and high-
resolution (e.g., remote imaging) monitoring for future investigations of such activity.



Ficetola, Gentile Francesco (Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca); Siesa, Matteo Elio; Manenti,
Raoul (Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy); Padoa-Schioppa, Emilio (Università degli Studi di
Milano-Bicocca, Milano, Italy); De Bernardi, Fiorenza (Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy);
Bottoni, Luciana (Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Milano, Italy)

Crayfish invasion alters the structure of amphibian communities through multiple processes

Invasive alien species can have complex effects on native ecosystems, and interact with multiple
components of food webs, making it difficult a comprehensive quantification of their direct and indirect
effects. The red swamp crayfish, Procambarus clarkii, is native of Eastern North America but has been
introduced worldwide. This crayfish may impact amphibians through multiple processes: 1) adult
amphibians avoid breeding in invaded wetlands; 2) the crayfish disrupts vegetation, making wetlands
unsuitable for amphibians; 3) direct predation of larvae; 4) alteration of the whole freshwater food web,
with modification of the abundance of native predators. We used multiple approaches to unravel the
ongoing processes. We surveyed about 150 wetlands in an area recently invaded in Northern Italy, and
recorded amphibian breeding attempts. In a subset of wetlands we also used pipe sampling to quantify
the abundance of the crayfish, amphibian larvae and their major predatory insects (dragonfly larvae,



                                                                                                            209
Ditiscidae and Notonectidae) in invaded and uninvaded ponds. We also assessed long-term community
changes determined by the crayfish in wetlands surveyed before the invasion, and 10 years after the
invasion onset. In terms of breeding attempts, only two amphibians (the newts Triturus carnifex and
Lissotriton vulgaris ) avoided invaded wetlands, while the other species attempted breeding in invaded
wetlands. However, larval abundance for all amphibian species was negatively associated with the alien
crayfish, suggesting poor fitness in invaded wetlands. Long term surveys indicated that newts can be
completely extirpated from invaded areas in about 10 years, while tree frogs ( Hyla intermedia ) and pool
frogs ( Pelophylax synkepton esculentus ) can survive. Quantitative estimates of the abundance of
larvae and predatory insects show that the crayfish had a negative, direct impact on both amphibian
communities and their predators. The negative direct effects of crayfish on amphibians were much
stronger than the overall predation by all native predatory insects. This crayfish impacts multiple levels of
food webs, disrupting natural prey-predator relationships and causing dramatic declines of most
amphibians.



Ficetola, Gentile Francesco (Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca); Soccini, Christiana (Centro Studi
Arcadia, Tarquinia, Canada); Bottoni, Luciana; Padoa-Schioppa, Emilio; Bonardi, Anna (Università degli
Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Milano, Italy); Manenti, Raoul (Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy);
Corbetta, Andrea (Stazione Sperimentale regionale per lo studio e la conservazione degli anfibi, Endine,
Italy); Ferri, Vincenzo (Stazione Sperimentale regionale per lo studio e la conservazione degli anfibi,
Tarquinia, Italy); Fiacchini, David (Pievebovigliana, Italy); Giovine, Giovanni (Stazione Sperimentale
regionale per lo studio e la conservazione degli anfibi, Endine, Italy); Macchi, Silvia (Varese, Italy);
Romanazzi, Enrico (Montebelluna, Italy)

Detecting large scale declines of toad populations using data collected by volunteers

Measuring a species decline is pivotal to evaluate their conservation status, but an accurate assessment
of demographic trends requires observations collected across broad spatial and temporal scales.
Volunteers can help to collect information over large scales, but their data may be heterogeneous for both
sampling efforts (which may change across years) and protocols (as different volunteer groups can have
different protocols). Differences in sampling efforts and protocols may influence detection probability. This
issue makes it complex inferring demographic trends from volunteer data. Here we show that data
collected by different volunteer groups can be integrated with measures of sampling effort to obtain
information on demographic trends over large spatial and temporal scales. We collected data on 33
common toad ( Bufo bufo ) populations across             Italy  for the period 1993–2010. We used two
approaches (meta-analysis; analysis of average change in population size) to evaluate the overall
demographic trend. We incorporated measures of volunteer sampling effort into analyses, to take into
account changes in detection probability. Toad abundance significantly declined in the last decade. From
2000 to 2010, 70% of populations showed a significant decline, while only 10% increased. Trends were
heterogeneous among populations, but taking into account sampling effort reduced heterogeneity by
40%. We detected a 76% cumulative average decline of toad populations, despite an increasing mean
sampling effort. The widespread toad decline rises concern for its future, also because the causes are not
completely understood. Urbanization, loss of habitat and increase of vehicular traffic are likely causes of
toad decline in several populations. Volunteer data can be extremely useful to identify large scale
population trends, but information on sampling effort is needed to adjust counts and obtain reliable
estimates of ongoing processes. Volunteers can also collect data on potential threatening factors
(samples for disease analysis, information on disturbance and habitat changes) that can allows to
understand processes determining demographic trends. A tight collaboration among scientists, managers
and volunteers can be extremely fruitful for amphibian conservation in human-dominated areas.




                                                                                                         210
Fichberg, Ilana (MZUSP);

Taxonomic revision of Spatuloricaria Schultz, 1944 (Siluriformes: Loricariidae: Loricariinae)

The genus Spatuloricaria Schultz, 1944 was created to allocate S. phelpsi Schultz, 1944. One year later,
Fowler described the genus Euacanthagenys to accommodate E. caquetae, but in 1979, Isbrücker
considered this genus a synonym of Spatuloricaria. In 1980, Isbrücker transferred seven other species to
Spatuloricaria, which then comprised Loricaria nudiventris Valenciennes, 1840, Loricaria evansii
Boulenger, 1892, L. fimbriata Eigenmann & Vance, 1912, L. gymnogaster Eigenmann & Vance, 1912, L.
puganensis Pearson, 1937, L. curvispina Dahl, 1942, and L. caquetae Fowler, 1943. Loricaria cirrhosa
Perugia, 1897 was considered as a senior synonym of L. evansii by Isbrücker, 1979, L. gymnogaster
lagoichthys Schultz, 1944 was transferred in 1979 by Isbrücker with a new nomenclatural combination:
Spatuloricaria lagoichthys. The last species described was Spatuloricaria atratoensis Schultz, 1944.
Recent collections in tributaries of the Amazon River in Brazil have revealed some undescribed species
and widely expanded the distribution of others. The aim of the present study is to present a
comprehensive taxonomic revision of Spatuloricaria. The genus is distinguished from all Loricariinae by
having two exclusive synapomorphies: a long papillae that can be branched over the rictal region,
between the upper and lower lips, directed to mouth cavity; a pair of digitiform papillae on the roof of
mouth cavity with variable length. Spatuloricaria shares with other Loricariinae caudal peduncle strongly
depressed, absence of adipose fin, and a conspicuous sexual dimorphism characterized by the
developed odontodes around the lateral region of head and over pectoral-fin and teeth thin and long in
mature males. To this study were taken 32 measurements and 10 counts from 461 specimens including
type series. Seven species are recognized as valid: Spatuloricaria curvispina is considered a junior
synonym of S. atratoensis, S. lagoichthys and S. phelpsi; S. caquetae is junior synonym of S.
euacanthagenys; S. evansii is junior synonym of S. cirrhosa; S. puganensis; S. gymnogaster.
Spatuloricaria fimbriata is transferred to Limatulichthys. Spatuloricaria nudiventris is considered a nomen
nudum because the holotype is damaged, its original description does not allow species recognition and
the type locality, São Francisco River, is probably incorrect. Two species are considered to be
undescribed, one of them from rio Purus and rio Juruá and the other from the rio Orinoco basin.



Field, Kimberleigh (US Fish and Wildlife Service); Averill-Murray, Roy (US Fish and Wildlife Service,
Reno, United States)

Policy and regulation of desert tortoise translocation in the Southwestern USA

The Mojave Desert Tortoise, Gopherus agassizii, is federally listed as threatened under the Endangered
Species Act. The recovery strategy for the species includes population augmentation, particularly through
translocations, primarily as a research-based, experimental means of evaluating the impact of threats or
the effects of threat-mitigation activities. Recently, the number of large-scale renewable energy
developments proposed in desert tortoise habitat has dramatically increased, thereby accelerating
pressures to translocate tortoises for the primary purpose of minimizing project impacts rather than for
recovery purposes. While translocation can be a useful tool, its misuse has the potential to cause great
damage. Numerous factors must be taken into consideration to minimize risk to the translocatees and
residents at both an individual and population level. We assessed the factors that need to be evaluated
when proposing to translocate desert tortoises and prepared guidance that addresses a breadth of issues
including site selection, assessment of individual and population health, release methods, monitoring, and
collection of data. Despite several decades of desert tortoise translocations, we still have much to learn.
Translocations of desert tortoises need to be conducted as experiments such that we learn from them




                                                                                                       211
and modify our techniques accordingly. Whether a translocation is conducted for conservation objectives
or for human-animal conflict reasons, the same scrutiny is needed.



Figueroa, Daniel (Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata); Barbini, Santiago; scenna, lorena; Delpiani,
Gabriela; Spath, Cecilia (UNMdP, CONICET, Mar del Plata, Argentina); Belleggia, Mauro (UNMdP,
INIDEP, CONICET, Mar del Plata, Argentina)

Antarctic history of the family Rajidae

Skates are a group of fish of an ancient lineage, a high specific diversity, a cosmopolitan distribution and
a non-migratory mode of life, given that they are benthic fishes all along their ontogeny, which starts from
the embryo stage in ovarian capsules with adhesive filaments. They constitute a valuable analytical tool
when associated to geological processes. In modern Antarctica, the family Rajidae is represented by two
cosmopolitan genera, Amblyraja with two species, and the most speciose genus in the world, Bathyraja,
with approximately seven species. Climate of the late Cretaceous and early Tertiary times in the
Antarctica was much more temperate than nowadays. Of coastal waters and extensive shelves, fossil
records reveal the presence of siluriform, gadiform, cupleoid, trichiurid and labrid fishes, all typical modern
exponents of the Buenos Aires District north of the Argentine continental shelf. This southwestern Atlantic
sector shows at world level one of the oddest overlapping of endemic genera of skates. The fossil rays
teeth found in the Eocene La Meseta Formation would probably belong to this group of skates instead of
to Bathyraja and Amblyraja, as stated by some other authors. Both these two genera of rays
accompanied by two families of bony fish (Zoarcidae and Liparidae), of sympatric distribution with these
genera of skates in the Northern Hemisphere, probably joined the opening of Drake Passage in the late
Tertiary, together with the incoming of the Pacific deep cold waters.



Fill, Jennifer (University of South Carolina Columbia); Waldron, Jayme; Martin, Michael; Welch, Shane;
Mousseau, Timothy (University of South Carolina Columbia, Canada)

Breeding and Reproductive Phenology of the Eastern Diamondback Rattlesnake

The eastern diamondback rattlesnake (Crotalus adamanteus; EDB) has become extremely rare across
much of its former range in the southeastern United States, and has recently been petitioned for listing
under the Endangered Species Act. Information about its breeding and reproductive phenology is critical
to effective conservation of this imperiled species. We summarized the phenology of EDB breeding and
reproduction using observations of free-ranging, radio-telemetered rattlesnakes in South Carolina from
1997-2011. To describe breeding phenology, we considered paired, copulating, or courting individuals as
breeding observations. We noted the earliest and latest dates on which breeding occurred for each
individual. If only one observation was available for a given individual, this was coded as the latest date.
If two individuals were breeding together, this observation was counted only once. To describe
reproductive phenology, we noted the earliest date on which a female was observed at a rookery, and the
earliest date on which she was observed with a litter. We converted all dates to Julian day (1-365). Mean
date of breeding activity was August 21 (range: March 18 to October 14). Mean date of female arrival at
a rookery site was August 15 (range: July 26 to August 28). Mean date on which a clutch was observed
was August 31 (range: August 10 to September 14). Our observations also included four observations of
female minimum clutch size (2, 4, 8, 11) and two observations of total clutch size (11, 13). We urge that
the breeding and reproductive phenology of this rattlesnake be strongly considered in the planning of
conservation activities.



                                                                                                           212
Filz, Katharina (Trier University); Wagner, Norman (Trier University, Trier, Germany)

Amphibians in the agrarian landscape: linking different phenologies to future cultivation practises
and climate change

The intensification of industrial farming and especially the increasing amount of pesticide entries have
caused growing habitat deterioration. Today they represent a constant threat to biodiversity. Due to global
warming, changes in future agrarian practices are currently debated including the cultivation of genetically
manipulated crops as well as seasonal shifts in plant growth and cultivation patterns. Climate change in
combination with climate-driven changes in cropping systems can lead to additional threats for species in
agrarian landscapes. We targeted amphibians in the temperate zone as they are globally declining at
alarming rates for multiple reasons. Two important reasons for the observed declines are habitat
destruction due to expanding agriculture and pesticide contamination. Especially, pesticides have been
shown to directly or indirectly affect amphibians in the agrarian landscape both on individual and
population levels. We link the exposure of amphibians in agrarian landscapes to risks of different
cultivation methods and herbicide application scenarios under climate change.

Amphibians are known to reflect climate change to some extent in the timing of their breeding behaviour.
We distinguished three groups of amphibian species by means of their reproductive modes being
differently affected by increasing winter and spring temperatures. Correlations between earlier breeding
activities and temperature increases were already observed in early and retarded breeders whereas
stable breeders might not be particular responsive to climate change. Unfavourable climatic conditions in
early spring leading to reduced growth and fitness of larvae are expected to threaten populations of
amphibians performing phenological changes. However, we argue that amphibians that show no changes
in their breeding behavior, depending on the cultivation method, might have to deal with an increasing
contamination risk of pesticides in agricultural landscapes as their reproductive activity phase might
match the time of herbicide application more often in the future. By linking future shifts in cropping
systems and pesticide applications to phenological changes in amphibian populations under climate
change, we want to contribute to the discussion on future agrarian practices and their potentially negative
effects on biodiversity and facilitate early and appropriate mitigation action.



Firth, Bruce (University of Adelaide); Belan, Ingrid (Flinders University, Adelaide, SA, Australia)

Effect of thermoperiodic acclimation on rhythms of thermal selection in lizards

It is well known that thermoregulatory parameters of reptiles can be modified by photothermal
acclimation. This study examines how long-term acclimation influences rhythms of thermal selection in
the scincid lizard, Tiliqua rugosa . These lizards undergo a daily voluntary hypothermia whereby they
seek out lower temperatures at night in an artificially imposed light cycle in a laboratory thermal gradient.
In the first experiment, we tested the hypothesis that acclimation to 6 h cold pulses of 15 C in an
otherwise 33 C environment and 12L:12D photocycle could influence the night-time hypothermia,
depending upon the phase relationship between the thermocycle and the photocycle. Groups of lizards
were subjected to a cold pulse around dawn, midday, dusk or midnight for 6-7 weeks in autumn after
which they were tested in a thermal gradient for 72 h in a 12L:12D photocycle. The daytime temperature
selected by all four groups was unaffected by the acclimation treatment, but the night-time temperature
varied depending upon the phase of the cold pulse. The highest temperature was with a pulse delivered
at dusk, the lowest with a pulse delivered at midnight, and the dawn and midday pulses having
intermediate effects. In a second experiment, we tested the effect of 6 h cold pulses in constant light (LL)
to determine whether the interaction of light and temperature cycles influenced the night-time selected



                                                                                                         213
temperature in experiment 1. Four groups of lizards were acclimated for 6-7 weeks in autumn to cold
pulses delivered at the same time as in the previous experiment, but in LL, and then tested for 72 h in a
thermal gradient in a 12L:12D photocycle. The night-time selected temperature did not differ significantly
among the four treatment groups. These experiments indicate that light and temperature cycles interact
with a circadian clock to affect seasonal changes in night-time body temperatures of these lizards.



Fisher, Robert (US Geological Survey); Niukula, Jone (The National Trust of Fiji Islands, Canada);
Thomas, Nunia (NatureFiji-MareqetiViti, Canada); Grismer, Jesse (University of Kansas, Canada);
Harlow, Peter (Taronga Conservation Society Australia, Canada)

Reassessment of the distribution and conservation priorities of Fijian iguanas based on recent
field work

The enigmatic monotypic iguanid genus Brachylophus was known monotypically from the south Pacific
for 170 years before there was suggestion of diversification in the genus. Over the last 40 years several
species were described and currently the iguanids from the south Pacific are now represented by two
genera and a total of five species, although two of the species are extinct. Recent published analysis of a
molecular and morphological dataset indicated that there were three clear species units within the
Brachylophus populations sampled, but many island populations were not represented in that study. The
living three endemic species of Brachylophus iguanas described from Fiji have been listed under CITES,
the US Endangered Species Act, and IUCN Red List for a very long time.             Additionally one invasive
iguana species ( Iguana iguana ) has become a threat in northern Fiji, on islands occupied by native
iguanas. Work has been initiated to control and/or eradicate that invasive from Fiji. For much of the last
decade conservation actions have generally focused on only one of these three species ( vitiensis ), and
the other two species ( bulabula, fasciatus ) remained poorly known. Field research on over 40 islands
over the last two years has greatly increased our knowledge base for these other two species and now
conservation priorities can be discussed.       This research has also shown that additional undescribed
species of iguanas still persist in Fiji and their descriptions are now a priority so that they are properly
recognized and conserved. We also found that many islands are now unsuitable for iguanas and the
populations are restricted to a smaller list then we expected. Additionally, significant new gaps in
knowledge of the distribution of all of these iguanas have been identified and are targeted for future
studies. This program is a model of how an international governmental collaboration, with an in country
NGO has made great knowledge strides over a relatively short period of time, with limited resources on a
priority taxa for conservation.



Fitzgerald, Lee (Texas A&M University); Ryberg, Wade; Hill, Michael (Texas A&M University, College
Station, United States); Painter, Charles (New Mexico Department of Game and Fish, Santa Fe, United
States)

Conservation of a Dune-Dwelling Lizard (Sceloporus arenicolus): From Neighborhoods to
Landscapes

A central question in conservation biology is ―What allows a species to persist across the landscape and
conversely, what causes it to disappear?‖ The answer to both sides of the question depends on the
species‘ life history and behavioral constraints, its role in ecological communities, and its sensitivity to
landscape change. Moreover, the species‘ place in the landscape is determined by the way individuals
select habitat within a hierarchy of spatial and temporal scales. Our research on the Dunes Sagebrush




                                                                                                        214
Lizard (Sceloporus arenicolus) is revealing how populations of these lizards are organized from local
neighborhoods of interacting individuals up to the distribution of the species across its geographic range.
Dunes Sagebrush Lizards are endemic to the Mescalero-Monahans shinnery oak sand dunes in
southeastern New Mexico and adjacent Texas. Within this ecosystem they are ecological specialists,
living and reproducing only in and around wind hollowed blowouts in shinnery oak dunes. High quality
habitat consists of many interconnected large blowouts; the quality and quantity of habitat are correlated.
Detailed demographic studies show that locally, dunes sagebrush lizards live together in
―neighborhoods‖. Large neighborhoods produce an excess of recruits that disperse across the
interconnected landscape. Moreover, neighborhood size is correlated with habitat quality; poor quality
habitat supports smaller neighborhoods, and recruitment does not balance mortality in the smallest
neighborhoods. However, dispersal among neighborhoods maintains the population at a regional scale.
At the landscape scale, the species‘ presence is associated with contiguous areas of shinnery oak dunes,
and its absence is associated with shinnery oak dunes infiltrated by patches of mesquite and other
vegetation. Landscape fragmentation disrupts both the geomorphologic processes that maintain shinnery
oak dunes and the quality of habitat needed to support thriving lizard neighborhoods. The Dunes
Sagebrush Lizard is proposed for listing as Endangered by the US Fish and Wildlife Service because of
perceived threats of habitat loss from shinnery oak removal and landscape fragmentation associated with
oil and gas development. To preserve the complex relationship between habitat quality, habitat area, and
the scaling of population dynamics, land use policies should explicitly recognize the scalar effects of
habitat fragmentation and degradation.



Fitzpatrick, Benjamin (University of Tennessee);

Hybridization, speciation, and amphibian diversity

Speciation is a gradual process and many lineages can maintain the ability to hybridize and exchange
genes for extended periods without halting or reversing divergence. Amphibians are well-known for
retaining hybridization potential for millions of years, facilitating gene exchange across divergent lineages.
I investigate the effects of interbreeding on the process of diversification and the nature of diversity by
reviewing the causes and consequences of hybridization in amphibians. I discuss the variety of barriers to
gene flow and rates at which they arise. I consider what is known about the fitness of hybrids and what
prevents hybridizing taxa from fusing. Finally, I consider the potential for hybridization to play a creative
role in diversification and the origin of novelty.



Flechas, Sandra (Universidad de los Andes); Sarmiento, Carolina; Cárdenas, Martha; Medina, Edgar;
Restrepo, Silvia; Amézquita, Adolfo (Universidad de los Andes, Canada)

Surviving chytridiomycosis: Differential anti-Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis activity in bacterial
isolates from three lowland species of Atelopus frogs

Chytridiomycosis, a disease caused by the pathogenic fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ( Bd ),
has been associated with dramatic declines and extinction of amphibian species worldwide. In the
neotropics, almost every species of the stream-dwelling harlequin toads of the genus Atelopus occurring
above 1000 m have experienced catastrophic declines. The persistence of lowland Atelopus could be
explained by the lower growth of Bd at temperatures above 25ºC. We tested the complementary
hypothesis that the toads‘ skin microbiota acts as a protective barrier against the pathogen, perhaps
delaying or impeding the symptomatic phase of chytridiomycosis. We isolated 130 cultivable bacterial



                                                                                                          215
strains from three lowland Atelopus speciesand quantified the anti- Bd activity through antagonism
assays. Twenty-seven percent (38 strains) of the bacteria inhibited Bd growth and less than 2% of them
were shared among toad species. Interestingly, the strongest anti- Bd action was measured in bacteria
isolated from A. elegans, the only species that tested positive for the pathogen. The cutaneous microbiota
is thus revealed as both an exaptation and adaptation against the selective pressure represented by Bd.
Our findings reveal enough bacterial strains to eventually develop local probiotic treatments against
chytridiomycosis and also shed a light the mechanisms behind the frog-bacteria-pathogen interaction.



Flecks, Morris (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig); Weinsheimer, Frank; Böhme,
Wolfgang (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Canada); Chenga, Jumapili (TRAFFIC
East/Southern Africa, Canada); Lötters, Stefan (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Herpetologie und
Terrarienkunde, Canada); Rödder, Dennis (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig,
Canada)

Watching extinction happen: the dramatic population decline of the critically endangered
Tanzanian Turquoise Dwarf Gecko, Lygodactylus williamsi

The Turquoise Dwarf Gecko ( Lygodactylus williamsi ) is endemic to two small forests in eastern
Tanzania, where it exclusively dwells on screwpines ( Pandanus rabaiensis ). To assess its population
status, we surveyed its habitats at the Kimboza Forest Reserve and (under different assumptions)
estimated the population size of the territorial L. williamsi based on habitat availability, using Pandanus
abundance as a proxy. Furthermore, threats to the species, especially the impact of the international pet
trade on the population, were studied. Our results suggest a severe population decline, as the observed
population size is one third smaller than its potential size based on habitat availability (i.e., Pandanus ).
We estimate that in a period of four and a half years, at least 15% of the potential population were
collected for the pet trade, making it a major threat to L. williamsi next to habitat degradation. The
species‘ extent of occurrence covers only 20 km² and suitable habitats are severely fragmented, leading
to an area of occupancy of less than 1 km². Based on our results, we consider this species to be
threatened with extinction (‗Critically Endangered‘ according to the IUCN Red List criteria).



Fleming, Trish (Murdoch University); Bateman, Bill (University of Pretoria, Canada)

Why grow a tail? Selective pressures acting on investment in lizard tails

Caudal autotomy is a common defence mechanism in lizards, where the animal may lose part or all of
their tail to escape entrapment. The degree of investment in a tail varies greatly across lizard species,
with some species having hardly any tail, and others a tail that may be up to three or four times body
length (snout-vent length; SVL). When these animals drop their tails, they may therefore undergo
markedly different changes in their overall body form and size. A number of intrinsic factors have been
proposed as influencing the incidence of tail autotomy across species, including body form, size and
robustness, specialisation of the tail, and physical and temporal niche. We were interested in how these
factors were related to proportional investment in the tail and therefore potential costs of losing the tail
through autotomy as well as the incidence of autotomy (evident as growing or regenerated tails) in natural
populations.

We examined museum specimens and field data bases to explore the relationship between the incidence
of caudal autotomy and these factors. Body form was assessed: [degree of leg development (legged,
reduced legs or legless), SVL, robustness (mass/total length), relative tail length tail length (tail as a



                                                                                                         216
proportion of SVL)], and we recorded specialisation of the tail, as well as physical (climbing or ground)
and temporal (nocturnal or diurnal) niche for the species.

More gracile species have relatively longer tails, as do legless, diurnal, terrestrial species that do not have
specialised tails. The incidence of caudal autotomy is not directly correlated with proportional tail length
for diurnal species, although it is positively correlated for nocturnal species.       The incidence of caudal
autotomy is also correlated with robustness and lack of a tail specialisation, and is highest for
intermediate sized lizards (lower for both small and large species).

The factors that are correlated with relatively longer tails would suggest that there is a selective
advantage to investing in the tail for legless, diurnal, terrestrial species that lack a tail specialisation.
The selective advantage of investing in a relatively longer tail may be due to locomotion mechanics, while
the effects of predation are also likely.



Flynn, Claire (Adelphi University); Jagnandan, Kevin; Sanford, Christopher (Hofstra University,
Hempstead, NY, United States); Ward, Andrea (Adelphi University, Garden City, NY, United States)

Kinematics and muscle activity patterns of two distinct escape behaviors in South American
lungfish

Most aquatic vertebrates perform a rapid response to escape from potential predators. The C-start is one
highly stereotyped response during which the animal bends into a tight C-shape and then swims away
from the stimulus. A second stereotypical startle response, head retraction, has been described for highly
elongate species. During head retraction, the head and tail move towards the center of mass
compressing the body like an accordion. Both responses are controlled by the Mauthner cells, an axon
bundle found in the hindbrain which controls involuntary behaviors. One of the major differences between
the responses is that the body has a single curve during a C-start and multiple curves during a head
retraction. Although several studies have examined escape behavior in aquatic vertebrates only the
South American lungfish ( Lepidosiren paradoxa ) is known to perform both responses. The goals of this
study were to describe the pattern of muscle activity during both behaviors in order to determine how a
single set of cells could control these two distinct responses. We filmed escape behaviors using high-
speed video to analyze movement patterns. Additionally, we recorded muscle activity patterns bilaterally
at three points along the body (0.25BL, 0.5BL, 0.75BL). During both behaviors there was bilateral muscle
activation. However, the relative timing and intensity of muscle contraction differed between the two
responses. These findings provide critical new information for understanding the neuromuscular control of
escape behaviors in aquatic vertebrates.



Folt, Brian (Auburn University); Reider, Kelsey (Florida International University, Canada)

The effect of individual tree species on amphibian and reptile assemblages in a Neotropical wet
forest environment

Herpetofaunal abundance is patchily distributed throughout La Selva Biological Station, and clumped
patches of leaf-litter may explain this. To better understand how individual tree species affect their
environment, we tested the hypothesis that tree species support unique herpetofaunal assemblages by
comparing frog and lizard species richness, density, and community assembly in three native tree species
plantations ( Pentaclethra macroloba , Virola koschnyi , Vochysia guatemalensis ) to primary forest at La




                                                                                                           217
Selva Biological Station in the Caribbean lowlands of northern Costa Rica. Primary forest and V.
guatemalensis supported more species-rich assemblages than P. macroloba and V. koschnyi .
Pentraclethra macroloba and V. guatemalensis supported significantly lower median densities of frogs
and lizards relative to primary forest. We compared community assembly with non-metric
multidimensional scaling (NMDS) and permutational multivariate analysis of variance using distance
matrices. Pentaclethra macroloba treatments supported significantly different assemblages of frogs and
lizards compared to primary forest. Using a RELATE analysis, changes in assemblage are positively
correlated to environmental variables across all plantation treatments. Our results suggest that because
individual tree species differ in functional traits and create unique habitats, tree species can support
unique herpetofaunal assemblages.



Fontenot, Clifford L (Southeastern Louisiana University); Pojman Sr., John A.; Pojman Jr., John A.
(Louisiana State University, Canada)

Extremely high biomass density in the aquatic salamander, Amphiuma tridactylum

Population biomass density of a given taxon can be an index of its relative energetic importance within an
ecological community. This density is a reflection of the efficiency of the species in converting
environmental energy into biomass. Reviews of animal biomass density suggest that invertebrates play a
primary role in this respect, on the order of 100 kg/ha. (Smil 2008), although amphibians and reptiles may
rival this density (Reagan and Waide, 1996). We addressed this in a common, large (max > 1kg) aquatic
salamander, by collecting body mass data on a population of Amphiuma tridactylum in a small ephemeral
pond in Baton Rouge Louisiana. Our data show a biomass density of 1000 kg/ha, in a pond that is dry for
approximately half of the year. Although this density occurs in pockets, as a small pond, it suggests that
aquatic salamanders like Amphiuma represent a substantial energetic component of its ecosystem, and
may represent the highest biomass density of any vertebrate.



Ford, David (University of Texas at Tyler);

Behavioral differences between adult and neonate Trinket Snakes, Coleognathus helena

Behavioral differences between adult and neonate Trinket Snakes, Coleognathus helena David Ford*
Snakes are particularly vulnerable to misrepresentation of their natural history traits due to the fact that
the data collectors (i.e. humans) are diurnal and terrestrial, often leading to assumptions based upon
those animals seen during the collecting period. In addition most studies of snake behavior in the wild
are based on observations of adults, and knowledge of neonatal behavior is limited to very few studies.
There is a dramatic difference between adult and neonate snake mass and lengths so we would expect
different behaviors and habitats to be accessed during ontogeny and laboratory investigations should give
insight into basic behavioral patterns for a species. Behavioral observations on the Sri Lanan Trinket
snakes in the wild are minimal. The activity of 15 adult Trinket snakes, Coleognathus helena, and 26
neonate C. helena was recorded in large cages for 72 hours, using both visual observations during the
day and infrared monitoring at night. The snakes were given three refuges: a subterranean, a terrestrial,
and an arboreal shelter. Almost all movements of both the neonates and the adults occurred during the
scotophase of the photoperiod. During the daylight hours, the neonates spent most of the time in the
arboreal shelters, while the adults moved from among the shelters. This seemed indicative of a prey
searching behavior. These results suggest that C. helena is a species that is both diurnal and nocturnal,
and that neonate C. helena utilize behaviors different from those they use once fully grown.



                                                                                                        218
Ford, Linda S. (Harvard University, MCZ);

Regulatory compliance and permits for US borders: Developing a framework to comprehend, cope
and comply

A steady and dramatic increase in regulatory responsibilities related to the collecting, transporting, and
storage of animals and animal products have greatly affected natural history museums and educational
institutions around the world. Ensuring compliance to the multitude of laws and regulations has become a
major obligation for these institutions. The seriousness of this responsibility, especially in the US, stems
from the broad application and potentially harsh legal consequences when these regulations are not
followed. Compliance broadly applies whether the animal material is whole or just DNA, whether it‘s
personally collected or an incoming/outgoing loan belonging to others, and whether the purpose is for
scientific research or commerce. In many countries including the US, there is an added complexity in that
regulations may involve multiple agencies within multiple governmental departments in both the sending
and receiving countries. In the US, consequences for noncompliance generally fall under the Lacey Act,
which can potentially include civil and/or criminal penalties for both the individual and institution. In
addition, the Lacey Act not only enforces US laws but, also, any relevant laws of foreign countries within
the borders of the US. With these various factors, scholars, who generally support regulations that serve
to protect and conserve species in the wild, domesticated livestock, and the health and safety of people,
frequently, find themselves at odds with these same laws. With a brief overview, a framework can be
developed to help manage the legal expectations involved with moving amphibians, reptiles, and fish
across the US borders.



Ford, Neil (University of Texas at Tyler); Pettingill, Kaitlyn (University of Texas at Tyler, Tyler, TX, United
States); Cates, Corey (University of Texas at Tyler, Tyler, United States); Bronikowski, Anne (Iowa State
University, Tyler, Canada)

Diet and compensatory growth in two species of snake that contrast in sexual dimorphism

Nutritional stress during natal periods has significant long-term consequences for adult characteristics
such as size at first reproduction. When subsequent improvement in prey availability allows, some
species compensate with rapid growth. However, this may require a trade-off in terms of increased
exposure to predation, increased metabolic rates, and shifts from acquired to innate immunity. For
snakes, there are contrasting paradigms for adult size, which creates different sexual size dimorphism
(male biased or female biased SSD). For species with male combat such as Corn snakes, (Panterophis
guttata) males are the larger sex. For other species such as Checkered garter snakes (Thamnophis
marcianus) the females have a fecundity advantage by being large but males have an advantage by
reaching reproduction sooner (smaller). We examined the growth trajectories of 30 males and 30
females of both these species on either a restricted or high diets early in life (4 months) and then for 4
months with both groups on ad libitum diets. The corn snakes from early dietary restricted groups
tended to show catch up growth when food availability increased. However, garter snakes in general did
not, although a few early food restricted females did show a trend to grow rapidly with the additional food.
In corns both sexes would receive an evolutionary advantage to compensatory growth and achieving a
large body size quickly. In garter snakes females might be expected to have more evolutionary pressure
to grow quickly to a large size than males.




                                                                                                           219
Ford, Ryan (University of North Florida); Gelsleichter, James (University of North Florida, Canada);
Frazier, Bryan (South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Canada); Belcher, Carolyn (Georgia
Department of Natural Resources, Canada); Piercy, Andrew (University of North Florida, Canada);
Grubbs, R. Dean (Florida State University Coastal Marine Lab, Canada)

Reproductive Periodicity of the Blacknose Shark (Carcharhinus acronotus) within its Atlantic
Range

The blacknose shark ( Carcharhinus acronotus ) is a common small coastal shark species found in
nearshore waters along the southeast coast of the United States, from North Carolina into the Gulf of
Mexico and extending further south into the Bahamas. There has been some debate in recent years over
the reproductive periodicity of C. acronotus in waters off the U.S. coast. Earlier studies have suggested
that Gulf C. acronotus reproduce on an annual basis whereas the Atlantic populations of this species
may reproduce biennially. The goal of the present study was to re-evaluate the reproductive periodicity of
the Atlantic populations of C. acronotus with the intent on clarifying these differences. This was
accomplished by examining male and female reproductive tracts in animals caught via fishery dependant
and fishery independent gillnet and longline surveys conducted throughout the Atlantic range of C.
acronotus. Based on these data, spermatogenesis appears to occur between late May to early July with
peak sperm production occurring in June and July. In females, follicular development is likely complete by
late June-early July with ovulation occurring shortly afterwards. Mating appears to occur between mid-
June and early July based on the presence of fresh mating scars on females captured during this time.
Current data suggests that gestation begins late July with parturition occurring late May to early June the
following year. As observed in earlier studies, reproductive periodicity appears to be largely biennial.
However, evidence for concurrent follicular development and pregnancy was observed in several
females, suggesting that at least a portion of the Atlantic population may reproduce on an annual basis.



Foster, Jim (Cristatus Ecology); Smith, Freya; Cunningham, Andrew (Institute of Zoology, London,
United Kingdom)

Working with volunteer surveyors to determine the distribution of chytrid fungus in the UK

A partnership approach, combining the strengths of research scientists and volunteers, was used to
determine the UK distribution of the amphibian chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis [―Bd‖].
Using similar methods, national Bd surveys were organised in 2008 and 2011. An authoritative national
co-ordinator was appointed at the Institute of Zoology, London. Volunteers were recruited to allow
sufficient sample sites for each UK region. Volunteers were trained in swabbing techniques and given a
survey protocol. Swabs were tested for Bd using PCR. The results demonstrate the remarkable capacity
for volunteers to contribute to large-scale surveys. In 2008 (figures for 2011 in parentheses), volunteers
contributed 5,833 (3,122) swabs for 127 (121) sites, from 9 (10) species. 54% of sites visited in 2008
were resurveyed in 2011. Full details of the Bd survey methods and results will be reported separately,
since this paper focuses on volunteer engagement; in summary, prevalence was 3% in 2008, with 20% of
sites infected. Volunteers spent approximately 3,200 person-hours undertaking fieldwork over the two
surveys. This represents a nominal value of GBP 92,000 (CAD 144,000) at typical commercial rates.
However, it would be remiss to describe the value of volunteer surveys solely in terms of financial
savings. Substantial mutual benefits can accrue from partnership projects, aside from achieving scientific
objectives cost effectively. In our case, the volunteers and their national supporting body appreciated
being involved in a cutting-edge research project. This improved survey skills, and in many cases acted
as a local focus for volunteer groups, enhancing group cohesion. The project also reinforced connections
between volunteers, researchers and government agencies, paving the way for future collaborations. The



                                                                                                       220
main potential disadvantages and limitations of a volunteer approach were a lack of control over the
scope and quality of fieldwork, notably some uncertainty about the number of sites eventually sampled,
and the risk of over-burdening volunteers. Mitigating measures helped to ensure they were not especially
problematic in this study. The following actions help in large-scale volunteer projects: clear instructions,
frequent feedback to demonstrate appreciation, and managing expectations about the announcement of
results.



Foufopoulos, Johannes (University of Michigan); Pafilis, Panayiotis; Valakos, Stratis (University of
Athens, Canada); Anthony, Nicola (University of New Orleans, Canada)

Interactive effects of predation, marine subsidies, overgrazing and parasitism on island lizards.

On islands worldwide, lizards are frequently the most important vertebrates, both in terms of aggregate
biomass and total population size. While some research has been done on the effects of predation on
lizard population size, little is known on the effects of marine nutrient subsidies or herbivory on lizard
population size. In this study we investigate the effects of seabird-delivered marine subsidies, herbivory
by introduced goats, and predation by native snakes on the populations of the Aegean Wall lizard
(Podarcis erhardii, Lacertidae, Reptilia) living on islands in the Aegean Sea (Greece).

Our results indicate that lizard population densities are determined by a hierarchical interplay between
predation on the one hand, and nutrient availability - mediated through goat browsing and seabird
subsidies- on the other. Predation by snakes significantly depresses lizard densities on those islands that
are big enough to support resident snake populations. On snake-free islands only, lizard numbers are
positively associated with breeding seabird populations, presumably because of seabird subsidies. Also
only on snake-free islands, lizard numbers are negatively associated with density of stocked goats.
Experimental goat removal and addition experiments lead to the same results. Goats appear to impact
lizard populations through the destruction of the vegetation and through the introduction of invasive
generalist ticks, that switch hosts from goats to parasitize lizards.



Fouquet, Antoine (CNRS Guyane); Noonan, Brice (Uni of Mississippi, _, MS, United States); Rodrigues,
Miguel (Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil); Pech, Nicolas; Gilles, Andre (Université Aix-
Marseille, IMEP, Evolution Génome Environnement,, Marseille, PR, France); Gemmell, Neil (Centre for
Reproduction and Genomics, Department of Anatomy uctural Biology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New
Zealand)

Multiple Quaternary Refugia in the Eastern               Guiana Shield      Revealed    by Comparative
Phylogeography of 12 Frog Species

The Guiana Shield (GS) is one of the most pristine regions of Amazonia and biologically one of the
richest areas on Earth. How and when this massive diversity arose remains the subject of considerable
debate. The prevailing hypothesis of Quaternary glacial refugia suggests that a part of the eastern GS,
among other areas in Amazonia, served as stable forested refugia during periods of aridity. However, the
recently proposed disturbance–vicariance hypothesis proposes that fluctuations in temperature on orbital
timescales, with some associated aridity, have driven Neotropical diversification. The expectations of the
temporal and spatial organization of biodiversity differ between these two hypotheses. Here, we compare
the genetic structure of 12 leaf-litter inhabiting frog species from the GS lowlands using a combination of
mitochondrial and nuclear sequences in an integrative analytical approach that includes phylogenetic
reconstructions, molecular dating, and Geographic Information System methods. This comparative and



                                                                                                        221
integrated approach overcomes the well-known limitations of phylogeographic inference based on single
species and single loci. All of the focal species exhibit distinct phylogeographic patterns highlighting
taxon-specific historical distributions, ecological tolerances to climatic disturbance, and dispersal abilities.
Nevertheless, all but one species exhibit a history of fragmentation/isolation within the eastern GS during
the Quaternary with spatial and temporal concordance among species. The signature of isolation in
northern French Guiana (FG) during the early Pleistocene is particularly clear. Approximate Bayesian
Computation supports the synchrony of the divergence between northern FG and other GS lineages.
Substructure observed throughout the GS suggests further Quaternary fragmentation and a role for
rivers. Our findings support fragmentation of moist tropical forest in the eastern GS during this period
when the refuge hypothesis would have the region serving as a contiguous wet-forest refuge



Fox, Alicia (University of South Florida); Schrey, Aaron; Mushinsky, Henry; McCoy, Earl (University of
South Florida, Canada)

Are roads a barrier to gene flow in a sand burrowing lizard, the Florida Sand Skink, Plestiodon
reynoldsi?

The scrub of peninsular Florida is a highly imperiled ecosystem and home to numerous federally listed
species. Effective conservation of these species will benefit from understanding how anthropogenic
habitat modification alters the genetic characteristics of populations. Roads are a common anthropogenic
habitat modification, and understanding their effect on local populations is important for management. Our
goal is to determine if Florida State Road 40 (SR40), which bisects the Florida scrub habitat of the Ocala
National Forest in northern peninsular Florida, is a barrier to gene flow in the threatened Florida Sand
Skink, Plestiodon reynoldsi . The fossorial Sand Skink requires fine, well-drained sand for locomotion;
thus, roads may have a direct impact on individual movement. Construction of SR40 began between 80
and 100 years ago, for which approximately 20-25 generations of the Florida Sand Skink have occurred
prior to sample collection. We collected individuals (n = 44) from sites north and south of SR40 and
screened them for allelic variation at 8 microsatellite DNA loci and mitochondrial DNA variation at the
cytochrome-b gene. Because we know the approximate time SR40 altered the habitat of the Florid Sand
Skink, we may be able to calibrate the time required for genetic characteristics of the local populations to
change. We will also compare our findings to those from recent studies of the Florida Sand Skink in the
southern extent of its range.



Fox, Alicia (University of South Florida); Schrey, Aaron; McCoy, Earl; Mushinsky, Henry (University of
South Florida, Canada)

Parentage Analysis of the Florida Sand Skink, Plestiodon reynoldsi, following relocation on the
Lake Wales Ridge in Central Florida

Little is known about the mating system in the threatened Florida Sand Skink, Plestiodon reynoldsi ,
which occurs in xeric habitat on the central ridges of Florida. Multiple forms of land development and
mining have occurred on these ridges and one of our study locations near Davenport, Florida on the Lake
Wales Ridge is scheduled to be mined for sand. As a result of the sand mining, all individuals captured at
this site were relocated in the spring and summer of 2007 to a site on the northern end of Lake Wales
Ridge. Individuals moved to the relocation site were placed in 20m X 20m enclosures that contained
multiple pitfall arrays and had various shade and ground cover treatments. Twenty individuals were
placed into each enclosure with recapture efforts beginning in 2008. While our relocation site provided



                                                                                                            222
opportunity for multiple studies, such as survivorship and habitat preference, the purpose of this study is
to examine reproductive success in P. reynoldsi . A total of 63 juveniles, resulting from mating presumed
to have occurred between 2008 and 2010, were captured from 13 enclosures. Genotypes were
determined at multiple microsatellite loci for all individuals originally captured at our Davenport location
and for all juveniles captured at the relocation site. A parentage analysis was done to determine parents
of juveniles in each enclosure and reproductive success of both males and females. This study is a first
step in understanding the genetic mating system of the Florida Sand Skink that can be used in the
conservation and management of this species.



Fox, Dewayne (Delaware State University); Armstrong, Jim (Mid Atlantic Fisheries Management Council,
Canada); Brown, Lori (Delaware State University, Canada); Wark, Kevin (Endeavor Fisheries Inc.,
Canada)

Cooperative Development and Testing of Sink Gillnet Modifications for Reducing Atlantic
Sturgeon Bycatch in the Monkfish Fishery

In 2012, five Distinct Population Segments of Atlantic sturgeon ( Acipenser oxyrinchus oxyrinchus ) were
listed as endangered or threatened under the Endangered Species Act. A preceding Status Review
concluded that bycatch in sink-gillnets was a significant hurdle to Atlantic sturgeon recovery. Over two
field seasons (2010, 2011), we worked collaboratively with commercial harvesters to modify sink gillnet
configurations to reduce Atlantic sturgeon bycatch while still achieving adequate catches of monkfish (
Lophius americanus ) and winter skate ( Leucoraja ocellata ) which were the primary target species. In
2010, we fished paired replicates of gillnets (12 meshes x 30.5cm stretch) with and without tie-downs and
although Atlantic sturgeon bycatch did not differ significantly, target species catches were reduced in nets
without tie-downs. In 2011, we subjected two different tie-down configurations (standard (12 meshes)
and low profile (6 meshes) to the same experimental protocol. Bycatch of Atlantic sturgeon was reduced
in the lower profile tie-down gillnets but landings of target species were minimally impacted. Our findings
suggest that the use of tie-downs is important for maintaining adequate catches of target species, and
that certain tie-down configurations can reduce Atlantic sturgeon bycatch. Additionally, experimental
testing of gear developed by harvesters allows for the identification of gear configurations that both
address conservation objectives and are realistic for use in commercial harvest. This model of
collaborative research may prove useful in the recovery of other imperiled sturgeons.



Fox, Stanley (Oklahoma State University); Baird, Troy (University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, United
States); Rodriguez, Felipe (Universidad Autonoma del Estado de Mexico, Toluca, Mexico); Acevedo,
Andrea (Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, United States)

Sexual selection in toddlers? Precocial sexual signaling in hatchling collared lizards (Crotaphytus
collaris)

Many animals show sexual dichromatism, but this is nearly universally reported only in sexually mature
adults, as expected theoretically via sexual selection. A good example is seen in adult collared lizards
(Crotaphytus collaris), who exhibit strong sexual dimorphism and dichromatism. Surprisingly, sexual
dichromatism is also seen in pre-reproductive hatchlings. Hatchling males display conspicuous
dorsolateral orange bars and previous research has shown that the signal value of these orange bars is
not directed toward adults as once hypothesized. We conducted field experiments with hatchling collared
lizards to determine the function of these orange bars. In the first experiment, we introduced a tethered




                                                                                                        223
male or female hatchling in random order to untethered resident male hatchlings and recorded the
behavior of the residents for 10 minutes. Residents were significantly more aggressive to male intruders
than to female ones. In order to determine if residents modulated their aggression because of the orange
bars of the male intruders or perhaps because of sex-specific chemical cues or behavior, we conducted a
second experiment. In this one, we used only male hatchlings as intruders; treatment intruders had their
orange bars emphasized with non-toxic orange paint, and control intruders had their orange bars
obscured by background-colored paint. Reflectance spectroscopy revealed that the paint treatments
closely matched natural coloration of hatchlings. Resident males were significantly more aggressive to
male intruders with the painted orange bars than to those who lacked them. We suggest that the orange
bars on territorial hatchling males function to identify the sex of the intruder to the resident male and
trigger aggressive behavior toward intruding males in order to repel them as future reproductive rivals,
and their absence identifies female intruders, who are tolerated and accepted as future potential mates.
This appears to be precocial sexual selection and may occur in other sexually selected, polygynous taxa
in which individuals are philopatric from an early age through reproduction.



Frable, Benjamin (Smithsonian Institution); Baldwin, Carole (Smithsonian Institution, Canada); Luther,
Brandon (Clemson University, Canada); Weigt, Lee (Smithsonian Institution, Canada)

A new species of western Atlantic lizardfish (Teleostei: Synodontidae: Synodus) and resurrection
of Synodus bondi Fowler, 1939, as a valid species from the Caribbean.

Western atlantic synodontid species were studied as part of an ongoing effort to reanalyze Caribbean
shorefish diversity. A neighbor-joining tree constructed from base-pair sequences of the mitochondrial
gene cytochrome c oxidase I (COI) revealed two highly divergent genetic lineages within both S.
intermedius and S. foetens . A new species is described for one of the S. intermedius lineages. The
new species and S. intermedius differ in number of lateral-line scales, caudal pigmentation, size of the
scapular blotch, and shape of the anterior-nostril flap. The new species and S. intermedius have
overlapping geographic and depth distributions, but the former generally inhabits deeper water (> 28 m)
than S. intermedius and is known only from coastal waters of the southeast United States and the Gulf
of Mexico as opposed to those areas and the Caribbean for S. intermedius. Synodus bondi Fowler,
1939, is resurrected from the synonymy of S. foetens for one of the S. foetens genetic lineages. The
two species differ in the length and shape of the snout, number of anal-fin rays, and shape of the anterior-
nostril flap. Synodus bondi and S. foetens co-occur in the central Caribbean, but S. bondi otherwise
has a more southerly distribution than S. foetens. Neotypes are designated for S. intermedius and S.
foetens . A revised key to western Atlantic Synodus species is presented. We also discuss preliminary
evidence of population structure within western Atlantic Synodus, Saruida and Trachinocephalus myops
and species-level genetic structure within Synodus poeyi .



Francis, Jennifer (The University of Western Australia); Roberts, J Dale (The University of Western
Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia)

Feeding ecology of tadpoles in the Australian tropics: complex trophic guilds in freshwater food
webs

Tadpoles are important components of freshwater food webs as they are seasonally abundant, consume
large quantities of food, transfer energy from aquatic to terrestrial environments and are important
resources for many predators. However, little is known about tadpole diets. Most discussions of tadpole



                                                                                                        224
diet are speculative and based on indirect inference. For instance, a long gut indicates herbivory, or, they
do not distinguish between ingested and assimilated material. We documented anuran habitat use and
resulting tadpole assemblages in north-western Australia where freshwater habitats are under threat from
invasion by toxic cane toads and alteration from agricultural expansion. Using natural isotope abundance
of δ13C and δ15N and gut-content analysis of tadpoles (nine Hylids and three Myobatrachids) from six
temporary wetlands, we tested the null hypotheses: i) tadpoles are strict herbivores; ii) they are non-
selective consumers and therefore feed across different carbon food chains (phytoplankton, algae,
detritus); iii) they feed opportunistically and do not show species-specific differentiation in food quality and
iv) their diet does not change through ontogeny. Tadpoles displayed selective assimilation and species-
specific feeding niche differentiation, consuming at multiple trophic levels: herbivory and predatory and
between trophic levels: omnivory. These results revealed complex trophic guilds in subtropical tadpoles
and reinforce the need to evaluate their ecological roles.



Franco, Francisco Luís (Francisco L Franco);

The Herpetological Collection of Butantan Institute, São Paulo, Brazil: past, present, and future

The Herpetological Collection Alphonse Richard Hoge of Butantan Institute, São Paulo, Brazil was the
biggest snake collection of the world, with more than 77.000 registered specimens and another 10.000 to
be registered. It had the most important type‘s collection of Brazilian snakes; about 150 species or
subspecies of snakes were included in this assemblage. This collection had world representativeness and
was utilized by several researchers along the years. It is hard to find a Neotropical snake paper without
the contribution of this collection. Tragically the fire on Saturday, May 15, 2010 destroyed about 80% of
the preserved snakes. Fortunately, nobody was injured. Despite budget to buy fire prevention equipment,
the fire happened few months before these acquisitions. The fire beginning about 07h00, and smoke
were detected around 07h30, while the fire already destroyed the collection. At this same time the
Engineering Department of the Butantan Institute (BI) began working in the maintenance of electric
network of the BI. The experts of Fire Department explain that the fire must have started by an electric
problem in a heating stone in a terrarium that was in the mezzanine beside the collection. In few hours
the collection was almost all destroyed. Immediately a big wave of solidarity was begun. In a few minutes
many people arrived at the IB to offer help. Brazilian and foreign people expressed solidarity in several
and different ways. Thousands of emails pop up inboxes. We are deeply grateful with all. The rescue of
the spared material began immediately and continued until June 04, when the procedures of demolition
and removal of debris finished. Many actions to help the restructuring the collection as well as
laboratories were made by individuals and private companies worldwide. Donations of books to
recompose lost library, donation of much material for rescue and save provisionally the rescued
specimens, rescue data of burned computer, creating Web sites offering support and solidarity, and
donation of specimens to recompose the collection, etc. Also, multiple instances of the State and federal
governments acted immediately to help the reconstruction of the collection of the BI and, even better, to
try to help other Brazilian collections to get structure to prevent tragedies such this. There are a brand
new build, safe and functional to BI collections, labs and offices. We must use this tragedy to prevent
recurrences. We must not forget it.



Frazier, Bryan (South Carolina Department of Natural Resources);

Age and Growth of the Bonnethead, Sphyrna tiburo, in the Coastal Atlantic Waters off the
Southeastern United States



                                                                                                            225
The bonnethead is a relatively small shark, reaching a maximum length of 150 cm.             It occurs in the
western Atlantic Ocean from North Carolina to Southern Brazil, including the Gulf of Mexico (Compagno
1984). The bonnethead is placentally viviparous and unique among coastal sharks in the region, as its
gestation period lasts for only five months and parturition occurs in the early fall. Life history
characteristics have been well studied in the Gulf of Mexico, where maximum ages for males and females
are 8+ and 12+ years, respectively (Parsons, 1993; Carlson and Parsons 1997). By contrast,
comparatively little is known about bonnetheads in the Atlantic waters off the southeastern United States,
although recent survey data suggests that their life history could differ from Gulf of Mexico bonnetheads.
In South Carolina, where the majority of specimens were collected, bonnetheads are seasonally present
and females primarily inhabit estuarine waters while males primarily inhabit shallow coastal waters. The
objectives of this study were to (i) validate the periodicity of vertebral band pair formation in the Atlantic
waters off the southeastern United States, (ii) characterize the age and growth of the bonnethead in the
region, and (iii) investigate whether clinal variations in growth exists. Data from previous works were
utilized to compare growth parameters determined during the current study with those conducted in other
areas. Within population variation between northern and southern Atlantic specimens were also
examined. A variety of growth models were fitted to age and size data and also compared against
observed individual growth from tag-recaptures in order to determine the model that best fit the
population. These data were used to generate regionally specific information on growth, maximum
observed age, theoretical maximum age, and theoretical maximum length. This study contributes to the
biological knowledge of this species and provides parameters that are essential for stock assessment
purposes.



Frazier, Julius (California Polytechnic State Univ.); Taylor, Emily (California Polytechnic State U, San
Luis Obispo, United States)

Snakes on the Juice: The role of Testosterone in Rattlesnake Spatial Ecology

Numerous studies on the spatial ecology of rattlesnakes have demonstrated that males inhabit larger
home ranges and move more frequently and over longer distances than females, presumably because
males search for widely distributed females. We tested the hypothesis that the steroid hormone
testosterone stimulates males to move more than females, leading to sex differences in home range. We
conducted a radiotelemetry study on a population of Northern Pacific Rattlesnakes ( Crotalus o.
oreganus) in central California and collected spatial data and blood samples for quantification of
testosterone. First, we predicted that naturally occurring levels of testosterone would be positively
correlated with home range size and distance moved. We found a significant, positive relationship
between testosterone concentrations and each of the following spatial variables: home range size (100%
MCP), mean distance per movement, and total distance moved. Next, we predicted that males with
experimentally elevated testosterone concentrations would exhibit larger home range sizes and longer
movements than control males. Testosterone implants successfully increased testosterone
concentrations during the summer, when levels dropped very low in control snakes. However, the
artificially elevated testosterone concentrations did not affect home range size, mean distance per
movement, total distance moved, and mean distance moved per day. It is possible that adding extra
testosterone failed to produce an effect because hormone binding proteins or receptors were saturated at
lower concentrations. Snout-vent length was not related to testosterone concentrations or to any spatial
variables. However, at our study site, large males emerge earlier from overwintering and began mate-
searching than small males, suggesting that temporal variation in spatial ecology may be important in
determining mating success.




                                                                                                          226
Frenette, Bryan (University of Oklahoma); Marsh-Matthews, Edie; Matthews, William; Barkstedt, Judith;
Geheber, Aaron (University of Oklahoma, Canada); Moody, Raymond (Tinker Air Force Base, Canada)

The fish community of an urbanized stream: perspectives over a quarter of a century.

The Crutcho Creek drainage in central Oklahoma (USA) has headwaters on Tinker Air Force Base, with
lower reaches flowing through highly urbanized to semi-rural areas near the confluence with the North
Canadian River. Fish communities in the lower reaches of the drainage were sampled in 1987 by
Matthews and Gelwick. From 2009 through 2011, sites throughout the drainage were collected, including
localities on Tinker Air Force Base. Here we compare historic and current collections from the lower
reaches and assay changes in the fish communities. Overall, 21 species were collected in both time
periods combined: Historic collections contained 17 species and current contained 18. Of the 3 species
present in historic, but not current, collections from the lower reaches, 2 were present in current
collections from upper reaches. Although Oreochromis aurea was present in large numbers at some sites
in historic collections, this species was absent in current collections. This suggests that this introduced
species has not become established in the watershed. Of the 4 species present in current, but not
historic, collections from the same locality, 3 were rare. The fourth, Micropterus salmoides, was caught
in significant numbers ranging from fingerling size to large adult. Matthews noted during the historical
collections that suitable habitat for M. salmoides was present at sites in the lower reaches of the Crutcho
drainage, but that the species was absent from collections. In both time frames, the community has been
dominated by Red Shiners ( Cyprinella lutrensis ), totaling >50% of individuals. Notropis stramineus also
was present in large numbers in both historic and current collections, making up 11% and 16% of the
community respectively. Overall, Spearman‘s Rank correlation of species abundances was significantly
positive (rho=0.624, p=0.003) and similarity of fish communities in the two time periods was greater than
75% (Percent similarity index=0.757).



Frishkoff, Luke (Stanford University); Hadly, Elizabeth (Stanford University, Canada)

Anthropogenic habitat modification and the reversal of ecological fortunes: deforestation both
enhances and disrupts geneflow of neotropical leaflitter frogs

Human domination has dramatically altered the ecological and evolutionary dynamics of life on Earth.
While many species are ill equipped to survive human impacts, others persist and even thrive amidst
anthropogenic change. Clearly the current ecologies of these two types of species differ, but how did
attributes that today permit species to survive in human-modified habitats influence their ecologies prior to
recent anthropogenic change? We explore this question by comparing the demographic history and
population connectivity of two species of neotropical leaf litter frogs with contrasting habitat affiliations in a
human-dominated landscape. Both Craugastor crassidigitus (restricted to native forest habitats) and C.
fitzingeri (human affiliated) are native to the study area in southern Costa Rica, broadly similar
ecologically, and closely related phylogenetically. The study region was largely covered by tropical moist
forest until the mid-20th century, when much of the native habitat was converted to agricultural lands.
Specifically, we asked:

i) What were the relative population sizes of these two species before widespread human modification of
the landscape? ii) How were ancient populations structured spatially? and iii) How has recent agricultural
expansion altered population structure? We sequenced 783 bp of mitochondrial cytochrome b from a total
of 529 individuals of both species across the landscape. In addition to revealing recent demographic
change, we uncovered patterns of older demographic history. We recovered 20 unique haplotypes in the
forest-restricted C. crassidigitus, all of which are closely related and spread throughout the landscape.



                                                                                                              227
However, smaller forest fragments possessed fewer haplotypes, signaling that genetic drift is already
altering evolutionary dynamics after 60 years of land conversion. In contrast, our sample of the human-
affiliated C. fitzingeri possesses only 10 haplotypes, segregated spatially across the landscape into two
distantly related groups, corresponding to either side of a prominent ridge. Such partitioning indicates
ancient barriers to dispersal—barriers not experienced by the forest-restricted species.

However, in deforested areas immediately along the ridge both haplotype groups are present within
single populations, suggesting that recent land conversion has connected these anciently divided clades.
Thus, depending on individual species‘ life history, anthropogenic modification can either disrupt or
enhance population connectivity. Such landscape conversion can lead to small populations at risk of
inbreeding depression, or newly connected populations exchanging genes between anciently diverged
lineages, with unpredictable microevolutionary consequences.



Funck, Sarah (Florida Gulf Coast University); Allman, Phil (Florida Gulf Coast University, Fort Myers, FL,
United States)

Feeding Ecology and Potential Impacts of an Introduced Iguanid (Ctenosaura similis)

The introduced Central American black spiny-tailed iguana (Ctenosaura similis) has disjunct populations
throughout southern Florida (Krysko, 2003; Townsend, 2003b), one residing on Keewaydin Island (KI) in
Collier County. Little information is known about the biology of this introduced population and how it may
influence its host environment. I investigated aspects of this population‘s feeding ecology to determine
which life history or environmental factors may contribute to variation in their diets and to determine some
potential ecological implications of their diets. Specimens were obtained over a year period using noose
poles, opportunistic hand captures and through donation from an environmental state agency. Stomach
contents were then identified as completely as possible and grouped into food resource categories.

A total of 54 iguanas in all age classes and sexes were captured in four sampling seasons. A total of 56
food resource categories were identified, most to the level of family. Results indicate that an ontogenetic
diet shift occurs in this population around 100 mm snout-vent length (SVL) with smaller juveniles feeding
on more animal prey items, then switching to primarily plant material as they grow, 87% by volume. Most
plant families consumed by adults included Fabaceae (i.e. legumes), Compositae (i.e. asters),
Bignonaceae (i.e. trumpet creepers), Myrtaceae (i.e. myrtles and guavas), Euphorbiaceae (i.e. spurges)
and Poaceae (i.e. grasses). Significant differences in diet also existed between seasons. This population
appears to be feeding similarly to C. similis in their native range, by exhibiting a broad diet with the
presence of a diet shift. C. similis as an introduced species, may exhibit diet plasticity and may feed
opportunistically, thus contributing to its success in a foreign environment.



Furumitsu, Keisuke (Nagasaki University); Kume, Gen; Yamaguchi, Atsuko (Nagasaki University,
Nagasaki, 3, Japan)

The importance of the innermost area of Ariake Bay, Japan as the nursery ground for
elasmobranchs

Coastal shallow areas such as estuaries and mangrove swamps have been widely recognized to function
as ideal nursery grounds for many elasmobranchs. The study area, Ariake Bay, is located in the west part
of Japan, next to East China Sea. The bay has a great tidal range (approx. 6 m) that creates the large
mudflats in the innermost area. Our latest research demonstrated that the innermost area of Ariake Bay is



                                                                                                        228
utilized for nursery grounds of many elasmobranchs. For example, hammerhead sharks, Sphyrna lewini
and S. zygaena, immigrate into the innermost areas of the bay for parturition during the summer season.
In Ariake Bay, genus Dasyatis is abundantly distributed and some of them are economically important.
We had confirmed that six Dasyatis species ( Dasyatis acutirostra , D. akajei, D. izuensis, D.
laevigata, D. zugei, D. sp.) inhabit in the bay. Except for D. izuensis, five species also give birth to
neonates mainly from June to August in the bay, which emerge in the innermost area including estuaries.
They feed mainly on gammarids, mysids, and small fish there. In addition to its high productivity, the
environmental conditions of the innermost area are characterized by highly turbid waters, which may
provide suitable feeding grounds and shelters against predatory sharks to their neonates.



Gafny, Sarig (School of Marine Sciences, Ruppin Academic Center); Malka, Yoram (Israel Nature and
Park Aouthority, Canada); Cohen, Orly (Zoology Department Tel Aviv University, Canada); Artzi, Yifat;
Milshtein, Dana (Israel Nature and Park Aouthority, Canada); Gafny, Sarig (School of Marine Sciences,
Ruppin Academic Center, Michmoret, Israel); Geffen, Eli (Zoology Department Tel Aviv University,
Canada)

The return of the lost frog - rediscovery of the Hula Painted Frog

The Hula Painted Frog Discoglossus nigriventer is one of the rarest amphibians known to science. The
species was first described in the early 1940s when two adults and two tadpoles were found in a in
marginal freshwater habitat at the eastern part of the Hula Valley. An additional single adult collected in
1955 during the drainage of the Hula valley wetlands was the last confirmed sighting (adult or tadpole)
of this species. In 1996 the Hula Painted Frog was the first amphibian species that was defined by the
IUCN as extinct. It was selected as one of the ―top ten‖ species during the " Search for Lost Frogs " and
became a poignant symbol for extinction in Israel.

The Hula Painted Frog is the only species of its family found at the eastern Mediterranean. So far all
records indicate that the species is endemic to the Hula Valley in northern Israel. Paleontological findings
show that this species populated northern Israel for over 1 million years. In 2000, it was claimed that the
species was allegedly seen in a marsh south of the Lebanese Beqaa Valley, however two expeditions
held in 2004 and 2005 could not confirm this report. Other searches for the species held by local and
international organizations revealed no positive results.

In October 2011, during a routine patrol of the Hula Nature Reserve, an adult male of D. nigriventer was
recorded. The specimen was recorded in mid-day, at a terrestrial habitat, about 10 m from a large water
body. Since the October rediscovery, we found eight more adult specimens (4 males 1 female and 3
juveniles) all within a restricted area of about 1.25 ha. Of the above, 6 individuals were located in
terrestrial habitat, barrowed underneath c.a. 20 cm layer of wet detritus, within a dense canopy of
Phragmites australis and Rubus sanguineus . The 2 other individuals were found while being preyed by
water birds (i.e. Halcyon smyrnensis).

Almost nothing is known on the life history of D. nigriventer . The limited data we have collected so far
indicate that the species differ from other species of its genus. The largest male among the 9 specimens
recorded (84 mm, 53 g) is also the largest individual Discoglossus ever reported. Preliminary mtDNA
analysis indicates that the species is basal to the genus. In the coming future we intend to widen our
knowledge on species life history and to collect more information that will help preserving the Hula
Painted Frog.




                                                                                                        229
Gaither, Michelle (California Academy of Sciences); Bowen, Brian (Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology,
Kaneohe, United States); Rocha, Luiz (California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, United States);
Craig, Matthew (University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez, United States)

Phylogeography of the reef fish Cephalopholus argus (Epinephelidae) indicates Pleistocene
isolation across the Indo-Pacific Barrier with contemporary overlap in the Coral Triangle

The Coral Triangle (CT), bounded by the Philippines, the Malay Peninsula, and New Guinea is the
epicenter of marine biodiversity. Hypotheses that explain the source of this rich biodiversity include 1) the
center of origin, 2) the center of accumulation, and 3) the region of overlap. Here we contribute to the
debate with a phylogeographic survey of a widely distributed reef fish, the Peacock Grouper
(Cephalopholis argus; Epinephelidae) at 21 locations (N = 550) using DNA sequence data from mtDNA
cytochrome b and two nuclear introns (gonadotropin-releasing hormone and S7 ribosomal protein).
Population structure was significant (ΦST = 0.297, P < 0.001; FST = 0.078, P < 0.001; FST = 0.099, P <
0.001, for the three loci respectively) among five regions: French Polynesia, the central-west Pacific (Line
Islands to northeastern Australia), Indo-Pacific boundary (Bali and Rowley Shoals), eastern Indian Ocean
(Cocos/Keeling and Christmas Island), and western Indian Ocean (Diego Garcia, Oman, Seychelles). A
strong signal of isolation by distance was detected in both mtDNA (r = 0.749, P = 0.001) and the
combined nuclear loci (r = 0.715, P < 0.001). We detected evidence of population expansion with
migration toward the CT. Two clusters of haplotypes were detected in the mtDNA data (d = 0.008),
corresponding to the Pacific and Indian Oceans, with a low level of introgression observed outside a
mixing zone at the Pacific-Indian boundary.We conclude that the Indo-Pacific Barrier, operating during
low sea level associated with glaciation, defines the primary phylogeographic pattern in this species.
These data support a scenario of isolation on the scale of 105 year glacial cycles, followed by population
expansion toward the CT, and overlap of divergent lineages at the Pacific-Indian boundary. This pattern
of isolation, divergence, and subsequent overlap likely contributes to species richness at the adjacent
Coral Triangle and is consistent with the region of overlap hypothesis.



Galindo Uribe, Diana María (Universidad de los Andes); Amézquita, Adolfo (Universidad de los Andes,
Canada)

Climate and physiology as diversification drivers in Neotropical poison frogs: a comparison of
macro- and micro-geographic scales

Disentangling the role of climatic variables on diversification patterns has been one of the greatest
questions for ecologists and evolutionary biologists. To achieve this goal, one should understand the
behavioral and physiological mechanisms linking ecology and evolution at the individual, population and
species scales. Amphibians are excellent models to evaluate this question because their ecological
performance strongly depends on climatic factors such as temperature and humidity. On the other hand,
predation, sexual selection and neutral processes have been evaluated as possible mechanisms
generating diversity. We evaluated the ecology-divergence link by studying the physiological and
behavioral responses to climatic variables at different spatial scales in Oophaga and Dendrobates frogs
(Dendrobatidae). At a broad scale, we used environmental niche models that correlate species
occurrence with biologically relevant climatic factors. Also, we measured evaporative water loss (EWL)
using a wind tunnel. We correlated niche divergence with differences in EWL to explain the current
distribution patterns of these frogs. At a finer spatial scale, we estimated frog abundance of O. histrionica
in a patchy environment and tested for correlation with microclimatic factors such as relative humidity and
local temperature. Lineage splitting was often correlated with niche divergence, but the latter did not
always predict present-day differences in EWL. At a local scale, microclimate predicted frog abundance.



                                                                                                         230
Altogether, our results suggest a contribution of climate heterogeneity to macro and micro geographic
discontinuities in frog distribution.



Gallagher, Austin (University of Miami);

Evolved for Extinction? The rise and fall of the hammerhead sharks

The hammerhead shark is arguably one of the most recognizable and mysterious species on the planet, a
fascinating example of biodiversity and evolution. The large hammerheads are apex predators and hold
significant ecological importance in structuring food web dynamics and function. Recent scientific
assessments of this Family of sharks suggest that they are among the most exploited globally. To
illustrate the drivers of such declines, we suggest that all hammerhead sharks have become victims of an
‗evolutionary trap.‘ Evolutionary traps occur when aspects of a species‘ selected biology and ecology
intersect with human disturbance factors to lead to maladaptive outcomes (i.e., mortality, fitness loss).
While these phenomena have been widely documented in terrestrial systems and has subsequently led to
increased conservation attention for certain species, similar evidence in marine systems is lacking. We
present novel insights and quantitative data on this issue by linking biological (life-history), evolutionary
(phylogeny), physiological (high stress response), behavioral (schooling and migrations), economic (high
economic value to the finning industry) and human/ social (irrational fear and disvalue) drivers of an
evolutionary trap specific to large hammerhead sharks. Finally, we discuss these findings in terms of risk
assessment and conservation triage.



Galland, Grantly (Scripps Institution of Oceanography); Hastings, Phil (Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, Canada)

Oceanographic and Ecological Factors regulating the Cryptobenthic Fish Community on Gulf of
California Rocky Reefs

The Gulf of California is an ocean basin characterized by a highly variable physical environment driven by
tidal and coastal upwelling, nearly daily changes to wind strength and direction, and the existence of a
North American seasonal monsoon. The Gulf is also characterized by a relatively high percentage of
endemic fishes (10%), even higher for cryptobenthic species on reefs (40%). Gulf reef species that are
more widely distributed along the tropical eastern Pacific generally have centers of distribution in southern
Mexico or Central America, implying that species rarely migrate out of the Gulf but often migrate in. We
ask whether or not these oceanographic and macroecological observations are related. Using data from
over 60 in situ temperature loggers and a series of quantitative cryptobenthic fish collections, we have
obtained both physical and ecological representations of the shallow rocky reef environment from several
sites, throughout the Gulf. Temperature logger data confirm the high oceanographic variability that these
small-bodied fishes experience at seasonal and daily scales and reveal incredible swings in temperature
(~8 degrees C) that can occur during a single tidal cycle. Interactions between solar heating and wind-
driven vertical mixing prove to be especially important in this hot, arid climate. Not surprisingly, sites
characterized by Gulf-like high frequency variability also have more Gulf-like fish communities, while
species with a more southern affinity are more successful at sites characterized by lower high frequency
variability. This perhaps implies some competitive advantage for more widely dispersed species in the
absence of high variability. However, why species that have long evolutionary histories under such
variable oceanographic conditions do not (or cannot) successfully emigrate from the Gulf to warmer, more
stable southern locations is equivocal. By ranking our sites using a previously published gradient of Gulf



                                                                                                         231
reef health (based on several ecological indicators), we can also address whether or not Gulf endemics or
more widely distributed species are more or less successful on reefs designated as degraded or healthy.
Interactions between these two axes (temperature variability and ecosystem status) may further explain
the ongoing interactions between these two broad groups of cryptobenthic reef fishes.



Galoyan, Eduard (Moscow State University); Tsellarius, Alexey (2A.N. Severtsov Institute of Ecology and
Evolution, Moscow, Russian Federation); Tsellarius, Elena (2A.N. Severtsov Institute of Ecology and
Evolution, Moscow, Canada)

Social interrelations as the main factor of differences in population density of bisexual (Darevskia
brauneri) and parthenogenetic (D. armeniaca) Rock lizards

During 1997-2009, we studied the spacing pattern and social interactions of individually marked Rock
lizards Darevskia brauneri and D. armeniaca . Both species are small diurnal insectivorous lizards,
similar in ecological preferences and inhabiting rather similar biotopes. However, the population density in
D. armeniaca may reach a much higher level. Range structures of unisexual and gonochoristic females
are the same and include Sally zone, Home Range (30-100 m2) (HR), Core area (2-9 m2) (CA) and
Basking centres (1-1.7 m2) (BC). In bisexual D. brauneri , stable female groups exist. Each group consist
of adult dominant female and several satellites, generally subadults. The Satellites use CA of dominant
female, their CA are overlapped too, but BC of each member of a group are monopolized, and the highest
level of monopolization was recorded in dominants. Aggressiveness between members of a group was
less then towards female intruders. Maximal aggressiveness was recorded in dominant females stably
associated with territorial males. Territorial males regulary visited female‘s BC and, thereby, defended
females from ―sexual harassment‖ of non-territorial males. Each territorial male was able to keep up a
stable association with only one adult female. Females of parthenogenetic D. armeniaca never formed
stable groups, and their BC often broadly overlapped among large numbers of individuals (up to 20-30).
Aggressiveness in this species is comparatively low and rarely expressed as direct attack. In addition, D.
armeniaca regularly displays intrasexual affiliative behaviour never recorded in intrasexual interactions of
females of D. brauneri . Obviously, these features ensure high level of population density in
parthenogenetic Rock lizards. We suppose that there is a necessity of bisexual females to compete for
defence from nonterritorial males, and that is the main factor determining behavioural differences of
studied species and, as a result, differences in spatial structures of populations.



Galván-Tirado, Carolina (Posgrado en Ciencias del Mar y Limnología - UNAM); Díaz-Jaimes, Píndaro
(Instituto de Ciencias del Mar y Limnología - UNAM, Mexico, Mexico); García de León, Francisco Javier
(Laboratorio de Genética para la Conservación, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas del Noroeste
(CIBNOR), La Paz, Mexico); Galván-Magaña, Felipe (Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas
(CICIMAR), La Paz, Mexico); Uribe-Alcocer, Manuel (Instituto de Ciencias del Mar y Limnología - UNAM,
Mexico, Mexico)

Genetic differentiation of silky shark (Carcharhinus falciformis) populations in the Pacific Ocean

The population genetic structure of the silky shark Carcharhinus falciformis in the Pacific Ocean was
studied using analysis of the mtDNA control region. A 732 bp fragment was sequenced in 353 silky shark
individuals; analysis provided 14 haplotypes. Mean haplotype (0.48 ± 0.03) and nucleotide diversity
(0.0009 ± 0.00008) were unusually low for pelagic species. The AMOVA analysis comparing Western and
Eastern regions was at a low but significant level of variance associated with differences between groups
(ΦCT = 0.0199, P = 0.008). We present the first population genetic study of the silky shark in the Pacific



                                                                                                        232
and provide evidence that there are Eastern and Western Pacific populations. Even thought, the
significance on the levels of population subdivision found, it is hard definitively to reject the hypothesis of
panmixia because of the small differences registered owing to the low levels of mtDNA genetic variation.
Based on our results and on the levels of population exploitation, we suggest evaluating the adoption of a
two-stock management strategy to sustain the long-term use of this resource.



Galvis, Pedro (Pueblo Viejo Dominicana Corporation); Gil, José (Pueblo Viejo Dominicana Corporation -
Consultant, Canada); Rada, Marco (2. Lab. de Sistemática de Vertebrados, Pontifícia Universidade
Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, Canada)

Hylid tadpoles of Hispaniola: Ontogeny, description and external comparative morphology

The island of Hispaniola (Dominican Republic and Haiti) is the second largest island in the Caribbean
region, and has four species of tree frogs (one Hypsiboas genus and three Osteopilus ). All of these
species are endemic to the island and occupy large areas of the mid and low lands (below 1500 meters
above sea level on average). The deforestation and degradation of natural environments, as in many
other places, has meant that amphibian populations are highly fragmented and extant in many localities.
Among the species that this study considers, two are Endangered and one is Vulnerable, according to
IUCN criteria.

We describe the larvae of Osteopilus dominicensis (n = 222) , O. pulchrilineatus (n= 219) , O. vastus
(n= 371) and Hybsiboas heilprini (n=83) based on a total representative sample of 895 specimens
reared from egg masses collected in Cibao Central region in the Dominican Republic (constituting 80% of
Gosner stages). Tadpoles were maintained in laboratory conditions for almost four months, some were
reared through metamorphosis until froglet emergence to confirm their identity. We used 13
morphological measurements and 15 traits for the identification, comparison and description of the larvae.
The use of a statistical approach including simple linear regression permitted comparisons among
species. These tadpoles show stream adaptation through a robust body with strong tail musculature,
small to medium fins, relatively enlarged oral disc, increased number of labial tooth rows, and complete
marginal papillae. A wide variation of larval tooth row number is compiled. Marked ontogenetic changes in
body form and coloration characterize the first and post-metamorphic stages. The high similarities shown
by the tadpoles of the species studied are interesting despite one of them not being closely related
(Hypsiboas ).Our results highlight the importance of tadpoles ontogeny research as relevant to testing
phylogenetic hypothesis. We present a field guide including a taxonomic key to distinguish among the
tadpoles of Hispaniola hylids and present information on their ontogenetic development, photographs and
illustrations.



Gandara, Anthony J. (University of Northern Colorado); Broughton, Brianne; Traverse, Madeleine J.
(University of Northern Colorado, Canada); Bryson Jr., Robert W. (University of Nevada, Las Vegas,
Canada); Mackessy, Stephen P. (University of Northern Colorado, Canada)

Intraspecific variation in the venom of the Ridge-nosed Rattlesnake (Crotalus willardi).

Rattlesnake venoms commonly vary in composition as a function of several factors, including phylogeny,
age and population. Little is known about the biology of Mexican mountain rattlesnakes, and information
regarding their venom composition is even scarcer. Herein we report the characterization of venom from
the Ridge-nosed Rattlesnake ( Crotalus willardi ), along with an analysis of geographical variation in



                                                                                                           233
venom composition. Venom samples from four of five recognized subspecies were used in this study.
Venom profiles were created using SDS-PAGE and individual venom chromatographs were constructed
using reverse-phase HPLC. The activity of six common rattlesnake venom enzymes were measured and
analyzed between populations. Coagulation time and fibrinogen digest assays were performed to
investigate effects on hemostasis, and venoms were also assayed for lethality towards mice, lizards, and
crickets. Finally, cytotoxicity assays towards MCF-7 breast cancer cells were completed to screen for
compounds with possible anti-proliferative activity. Electrophoretic analyses revealed that venoms
commonly contained 20-23 proteins, including L-amino acid oxidase, serine proteases, PI and PIII
metalloproteases, and phospholipases. Protein composition was consistent between individuals and did
not vary between subspecies, an observation corroborated by comparative HPLC. Enzyme activities and
coagulation time did not differ significantly between subspecies. Venom toxicity also did not differ
significantly between subspecies. Cytotoxicity assays revealed that all venoms contained significant
inhibitory effects on MCF-7 breast cancer cell proliferation. Currently we are purifying select proteins to
evaluate their utility in drug development. Many studies evaluating intraspecific venom variation have
shown differences between populations, and the lack of pronounced variation in the venom of the
subspecies of Ridge-nosed Rattlesnakes raises interesting questions. Differences in diet, and the
evolutionary arms race between predator and prey, have long been thought of as the main driving force
behind venom evolution, but detailed information on diet is available for only one population of C. willardi
obscurus . A study looking at the comparative toxicity of venom to natural prey species could help explain
the lack of subspecies level variation in venom composition in the Ridge-nosed Rattlesnake.



Garcia, Gerardo (Chester Zoo, North of England Zoological Society);

Using volunteers in ex situ and in situ conservation programmes

Large amounts of resources are necessary for the long term support of ex-situ and in-situ conservation
programmes. However, funding is always limited. Despite the fact that many species or habitat restoration
programmes require long-term commitments to achieve their aims, funding is often only available in short-
term tranches. There are examples of funding made available by statutory and non-government bodies to
start new programmes. However, salaries, which form the highest proportion of costs, are difficult to
secure because in many cases personnel costs are not supported (directly or indirectly) by many funding
organisations. In some cases, the only possibility of starting and even maintaining vitally important
conservation projects is by engaging networks of volunteers. These networks can provide many hours of
work, which, if coupled with the collection of good quality scientific data can provide very important
practical results. To achieve this, adequate training and tutoring of the volunteers is vital.

A summary of the key components that have produced effective conservation programmes using
volunteers is presented with particular reference to potential new programmes. We present costs of a
number of conservation programmes and the contributions -in monetary as well as in time investment
terms – made by volunteers. The working relationship between volunteers and the host institutions is
vital, and we discuss how this can be managed smoothly. Because in many cases, the survival of a
species is fully dependent on the enthusiasm and dedication of volunteers, ensuring that volunteer
networks work efficiently and sustainably is a clear aim for those institutions relying on them.




                                                                                                        234
García-Castillo, Mirna G. (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México); Parra-Olea, Gabriela
(Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico)

Molecular phylogeny of the genus Chiropterotriton

The use of molecular tools in recent research has shown that the diversity of amphibians in Mexico is
highly underestimated, containing a large number of cryptic species. The genus Chiropterotriton, is
endemic to Mexico with a geographical distribution along the Sierra Madre Oriental, the Transverse
Volcanic Belt and Sierra de Juarez. It has the peculiarity of having a rich morphological and ecological
diversification that is atypical in a group clearly marked by morphological stasis. Chiropterotriton has 12
described species with terrestrial, arboreal and cave dweller species. In this study, 190 individuals were
collected, and amplified for mitochondrial (16S, 12S) and nuclear (POMC and RAG1) genes. A
preliminary phylogeny detected up to 15 undescribed species increasing considerably the number of
species in this genus.



García-de-León, FJ (CIBNOR); Claudia, Silva-Segundo (Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas del
Noroeste, La Paz. BCS, Mexico); Eric, Iwamoto (National Marine Fisheries Service, Northwest Fisheries
Service Center, Conservation Biology Division, WA, United States); Paola, Acuña-Gómez (Fundación
CEQUA, Punta Arenas, Chile, Chile)

Population genetic structure revealed by microsatellite loci in Merluccius productus (Pisces:
Merlucciidae) in the Northeastern and Central Pacific

Three hake morph-species: Merluccius productus, M. angustimanus, M. hernandezi have been described
from the Northeastern and Central Pacific. Only the first two have been considered as valid species,
however, Silva-Segundo et al. (2011) recently established that only M. productus exists in this geographic
area. In the northeastern Pacific four stocks have described: two located in partially isolated waters
(Puget Sound and the Strait of Georgia), another called "coastal" is genetically homogeneous and highly
migratory along the coasts of the northeast Pacific, and a stock called "dwarf" is known from southern
Baja California. The aim of this study was to investigate the population genetic structure of Pacific hake in
the northeast and central Pacific, using mitochondrial and microsatellite markers. The sampling sites
were: five along the U.S. Pacific coast (Puget Sound, Washington, Oregon, Eureka and San Francisco),
three off the coast of Mexico (Gulf of California, Bahía S. Vizcaíno and the southern part of Baja
California Sur) and one in Costa Rica. We analyzed sequences of three mitochondrial genes
(Cytochrome b, Cytochrome Oxidase Subunit I and 16S ribosomal DNA) and ten microsatellite loci. High
levels of genetic differentiation were observed between hakes living in partially isolated waters (the Puget
Sound and the Upper Gulf of California) and hake present in the open waters of the Eastern and Central
Pacific. In prior studies, significant genetic differences had not been noted between coastal populations
separated by several miles. However, microsatellite loci did detect isolation by distance structure related
to the migration pattern of the species. The origin of genetic isolation observed among the coastal
populations and the Upper Gulf of California coincides with a potential population expansion and
reduction of gene flow. This probably occurred during the closure of an inter-peninsula corridor in the
region of La Paz, Baja California Sur that connected the Pacific Ocean with the Gulf of California during
the Late Pleistocene. Neutrality tests and mismatch analysis of mitochondrial genes suggest that these
populations have recently undergone a sudden population expansion during the last period of glaciation.
In particular, the hake of the Upper Gulf of California is characterized by a high number of unique
haplotypes (excess low-frequency polymorphisms), supporting the idea that the area should be
considered as refuge and therefore a priority area for conservation.




                                                                                                         235
Gardiner, Jayne (Mote Marine Laboratory); Atema, Jelle (Boston University, Boston, MA, United States);
Hueter, Robert (Mote Marine Laboratory, Sarasota, FL, United States); Motta, Philip (University of South
Florida, Tampa, FL, United States)

Multimodal Integration and Sensory Plasticity in Shark Feeding Behavior

Multimodal sensory input directs simple and complex behaviors in animals, but most research to date has
focused on individual senses. We investigated three species of sharks from different ecological niches:
benthic, suction-feeding nurse sharks hunt nocturnally for fish; ram-biting bonnethead scoop crustaceans
off the bottom of seagrass beds; and ram-feeding blacktip sharks rapidly chase down midwater teleost
prey. We deprived animals of information from the senses (olfaction, vision, mechanoreception, and
electroreception), alone and in combination, to elucidate their complementary and alternative roles in
detecting, tracking, orienting to, striking at, and capturing live prey. This work revealed similarities and
differences among species in the use of the senses for particular behaviors. In most cases, multiple
senses can be used for the same behavioral task. Thus, sharks are capable of successfully capturing
prey, even when the optimal sensory cues are unavailable, by switching to alternative sensory modalities.
This indicates that feeding behavior is plastic. Nurse sharks rely on olfaction for detection, and track
using olfaction combined with vision, the lateral line, or touch. They orient to prey using the lateral line,
vision, or electroreception, but will not ingest food if olfaction is blocked. Capture is mediated by
electrosensory or tactile cues. Bonnetheads normally detect prey using olfaction, use olfaction combined
with vision or the lateral line to track, vision to line up a strike, and electroreception for capture. They can
detect, orient, and strike visually in the absence of olfactory cues. Blacktip sharks can also detect prey
using olfaction or vision. They use olfaction combined with vision or the lateral line to track. Long-distance
orientation and striking is visually mediated but strikes are fine-tuned just prior to capture using the lateral
line. Short-range orientation and striking can occur in the absence of vision using lateral line cues.
Capture is mediated by electrosensory or tactile cues. The blacktip shark shows the greatest amount of
modulation in capture kinematics, followed by the nurse shark. Little to no modulation was observed in
the bonnethead. These results suggest that capture is less plastic in elasmobranchs than in bony fishes
and that modulatory ability varies by species.



Gardiner, Laura (University of Regina and Royal Saskatchewan Museum); Somers, Christopher
(University of Regina, Regina, SK, Canada); Poulin, Ray (Royal Saskatchewan Museum, Regina, SK,
Canada)

Snakes on a Plain: Community ecology of 3 sympatric snake species in southwestern
Saskatchewan, Canada

The grasslands of southwestern Saskatchewan are home to a variety of snake species at the northern
extreme of their geographic range in North America, including the (Threatened) eastern yellow-bellied
racer ( Coluber constrictor flaviventris ), the (Data Deficient) bullsnake ( Pituophis catenifer sayi ), and
prairie rattlesnakes ( Crotalus viridis ), which are considered high priority for conservation status
assessment over the next few years. Lack of data about habitat use by these species is limiting the ability
of responsible jurisdictions to properly assess and develop comprehensive conservation plans for these
species. To address this knowledge gap, we used radio-telemetry and GIS to identify and compare
habitat use by racers (n=33), bullsnakes (n=16), and rattlesnakes (n=23) in and around Grasslands
National Park, Saskatchewan, Canada. Used and available macrohabitat sites were compared in order to
quantify habitat use by these species. We found that although all species hibernate in communal den