erine (Colby College);

Physiological correlates of calling behavior in anurans with different calling strategies

The advertisement call of male frogs is a familiar secondary sexual characteristic, and one of the most
energetically expensive behaviors to produce. Different species exhibit extraordinary variation in seasonal
and nightly patterns of calling activity. Males of some species call in choruses over prolonged periods and
persist for weeks or months, while others form choruses more opportunistically, for only a few days or
less. Males of some species may call for many hours over a 24 h period, while other species call only
briefly at night. I will draw on results from my research, and compare with those of colleagues, to show
how these patterns of behavioral variation are influenced by physiological characteristics of the males,
especially of the muscles that contribute to call production. For example, males able to call over longer
periods of time, on either a daily or seasonal basis, have a greater potential to attract and mate with a
female. However, males may be constrained over the calling period by the levels of energy substrates,
such as glycogen and lipid, available to fuel call production. Nightly and seasonal patterns of calling



                                                                                                          59
behavior may also be influenced by levels of corticosterone produced in response to the physiological
stress of this high level of activity. On a more immediate scale, female preference for a male is often
based on the dynamic properties of the male‘s call, such as call rate, and females of many species prefer
males that produce more energetically expensive calls. Call rate, call intensity, and call complexity, for
example, are traits influenced by the aerobic capacity of muscles used in call production, and vary
dramatically both within and among species. Interestingly, many of these correlated patterns transcend
phylogenetic relationships, and these physiological characters serve as a strong selective force on
behavioral capacity.



Bezerra, Karla (Universidade Federal do Piauí-TROPEN); Oliveira, Rômulo (Universidade Federal do
Piauí-Departmento de Biologia-CNN, Canada); Conceição, Esmeralda (Universidade Estadual do
Maranhão-Centro de Estudos Superiores de Caxias (CESC/UEMA), Canada); Lopes, João (Universidade
Federal do Piauí-TROPEN, Canada); Fraga, Elmary; Barros, Maria (Universidade Estadual do Maranhão-
CESC/Genbimol, Canada); Barros, Roseli (Universidade Federal do Piauí-TROPEN, Teresina, Brazil)

Molecular identification of Phyllomedusae (Anura, Hylidae) using COI DNA barcode in an area of
the Cerrado biome, in the state of Maranhão, northeast of Brazil

Hylidae has three subfamilies, among them Phyllomedusinae (Günther, 1858) have been investigated as
to their use as sources of drugs in tradicional folk medicine and modern medical science. Phyllomedusa
is the most diverse genus having a total of 32 species, 23 of these occurs in Brazil. However, there is
much discussion as to its taxonomic character. For the State of Maranhão records are scarce. The
objective of this study is to report the occurrence of two species of the genus by molecular data in a
Conservation Unit in the east of the State, city of Caxias. The Area of Environmental Protection
"Inhamum" (04 0 53' S and 43 0 24' W) has approximately 4,500 ha, in the Cerrado biome. From
March 2011 to March 2012 the specimens were obtained by active search at night in ponds and cerrado
sensu strictu phytophysiognomie between 18 and 23 hours by four collectors in a sampling effortof 180
hours /observers in three of the five breeding sites sampled. DNA was isolated using the protocol of
phenol-chloroform extraction. The amplification of the Cytochrome Oxidase Subunit I were performed by
PCR using specific primers. The products of PCRs were sequenced using the method didesoxiterminal in
3500 Genetic Analyzer (Life Techonologies). Sequences were aligned using Bioedit program and for
identification The Barcode of Life Data Systems (BOLD). A fragment of 600 bp of the COI gene was
obtained in 23 specimens of Phyllomedusa. It was possible to identify distinct species by 5S and COI
genes. Identification through the BOLD systems revealed the status specific of the specimens. According
to Frost ( 2011 ), P. hypochondrialis and P. bicolor occurs in the region. However, Bruschi et al. (2010)
using cytogenetic and molecular data suggests the occurrence of P. azurea in the savanna areas of the
State. Using morphological characters we suggest the classification of P. azurea and P. sp. for the
Conservation Unit. The molecular information obtained allowed the construction of a database, DNA
barcoding, for the species of Phyllomedusa from the area and may be useful for the definition of
taxonomic questions revealing an unambiguous identification of the Phyllomedusa species.




                                                                                                       60
Bickford, David (National University of Singapore);

Forest Fragment and Breeding Habitat Characteristics Explain Frog Diversity and Abundance in
Singapore

Habitat loss and fragmentation can have severe negative and irreversible effects on biodiversity. We
investigated the effects of forest fragmentation on frog diversity in Singapore because of its high rates of
deforestation and the demonstration that frogs are some of the most sensitive species to habitat
degradation. We surveyed frog species in 12 forest fragments varying from 11 to 935 ha. We compared
differences in species richness, abundance, and Shannon‘s index in relation to forest fragment size,
connectivity (distance between fragments), and breeding habitat heterogeneity. A total of 20 species from
12 genera and five families were encountered in 12 fragments. Larger fragments and those closer to
larger fragments had higher species richness. Abundance, however, was not correlated with forest area
or connectivity, but we found fewer individual frogs in the larger fragments. We also found that breeding
habitat heterogeneity best explained frog species diversity and abundance in forest fragments. Fragments
with a high diversity of breeding habitats had more species. We found no evidence to suggest that
abundance and diversity are strongly correlated, particularly in disturbed areas, but that breeding habitat
heterogeneity is an under-appreciated factor that should be considered when prioritizing areas for anuran
conservation. Enriching breeding habitat heterogeneity, creating corridors between fragments, and
reforesting degraded areas are some of the most beneficial strategies for preserving urban frog
biodiversity.



Bickford, David (National University of Singapore);

The ecology and evolution of the lungless frog, Barbourula kalimantanensis

The only lungless frog, Barbourula kalimantanensis, was recently rediscovered in Kalimantan, on
Indonesian Borneo. Here we review aspects of its highly modified morphology and ecology, as well as
some aspects of the evolutionary lineage that gave rise to this strange frog.

The species has strict habitat restrictions, only found in very fast flowing cold water in the lowlands. With
recent severe habitat degradation and loss, the IUCN conservation status of the species was recently
changed from Vulnerable to Endangered, earmarking the species as a conservation flagship for the
region and for Indonesia. The genus is also surprisingly old, currently the oldest estimated cladogenetic
event that produced extant endemic species to Southeast Asia.



Bielby, Jon (Institute of Zoology, ZSL); Bosch, Jaime (Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales, CSIC,
Canada); Fisher, Matthew (Imperial College, Canada); Garner, Trenton (Institute of Zoology, ZSL,
London, United Kingdom)

Stuff the envelope: temperature-associated mortality does not match the expectations of
laboratory estimates of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis physiological requirements

Amphibian host/parasite interactions should be influenced by environmental temperature, and evidence in
support of this has been reported for chytridiomycosis. As a result, the use of climate envelope models to
describe risk of chytridiomycosis has become increasingly common. These models are predominantly
based on laboratory estimates of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) physiological requirements and
therefore assume dynamics causing declines should occur at temperatures where Bd growth is optimal in



                                                                                                           61
the lab. Here we report a combination of field studies of Alytes obstetricans and a lab study of Bufo bufo
that show; 1) temperatures at which mortality occurs are not consistent, even in a single host species; 2)
lethal chytridiomycosis can result at temperatures where Bd is presumed not to grow and reproduce
effectively, and; 3) altering temperature for the host preceding exposure to Bd affects infection dynamics.
Taken together, our results strongly indicate that environmental temperature affects amphibian/Bd
host/parasite interactions in a highly context-dependent manner not fully described by lab estimates of Bd
physiological requirements. Ultimately, the environmental envelope for Bd is the amphibian, not the pond
or forest.



Bienentreu, Joe-Felix (Senckenberg Research Institute Frankfurt);

Taxonomy and phylogeography of the Anolis pachypus complex (Squamata: Iguania: Dactyloidae)

The monophyletic genus Anolis is a highly diverse lizard group, and with 384 described species the
largest vertebrate genus in the world. Intragenerically the species of the A. pachypus complex are
allocated to the Lemurinus group in the Beta-section. The members of the complex are extremely similar
to each other in terms of habitus, general appearance, coloration, habitat, and probably also in behavior
and ecology. They inhabit premontane and montane elevations along both the Caribbean and the Pacific
versants of the Costa Rican and/or Panamanian highlands. Within my thesis I performed a thorough
phylogeographic analysis of the complex. I separated the the male specimens into Operational
Taxonomic Units, according to their dewlap coloration, and in the case of identical dewlap coloration
among geographically widely separated samples also according to geography. Females were assigned
depending on their head scalation, and collection locality relative to nearest assigned male. I gathered
and compared 14 morphometric, and 26 pholidotic characters of 192 specimens (109 ♂, 83 ♀) and
examined the 16S gene of 53 specimens. Integrating these different lines of evidence, my results allow
the most comprehensive view on the taxonomy and phylogeography of the A. pachypus complex so far. I
confirm the validity of the four nominal species A. pachypus Cope 1876, A. tropidolepis Boulenger 1885,
A. magnaphallus Poe & Ibañez 2007, A. pseudopachypus Köhler, Ponce, Sunyer & Batista 2007.
Additionally, the study has lead to the description of A. benedikti Lotzkat, Bienentreu, Hertz & Köhler
2011. I created an updated distribution map, which shows an complex phylogeographic scenario. The
distributional ranges of the species are not arranged in a simple east-west sequence along the
continental divide, but show an irregular pattern and partially contact zones of up to three species of the
complex. In conclusion, within the A. pachypus complex, the male dewlap is the only morphological
character that allows, in combination with geographic data, the reliable assignment of a given male
individual to one of the nominal species. Other morphological characters, for example head scalation,
appear less diagnostic, allowing at most the differentiation between certain pairs of species.



Bigman, Jennifer (Moss Landing Marine Laboratories); Bizzarro, Joseph (Friday Harbor Laboratories,
Friday Harbor, United States); Ebert, David (Moss Landing Marine Labs, Moss Landing, United States)

North Pacific spiny dogfish (Squalus suckleyi) trophic ecology: using integrated gut content and
stable isotope analysis to infer short and long term feeding trends

North Pacific spiny dogfish (Squalus suckleyi) are commercially and ecologically important predators that
are abundantly distributed in North Pacific waters, and therefore may play an important role in regional
marine ecosystems. Most historic research on this species has been focused on dogfish collected within
the inland waters of Washington and British Columbia, but little is known about offshore populations. We



                                                                                                         62
used traditional gut content analysis (GCA) and stable isotope analysis (SIA) to elucidate the trophic
ecology of dogfish from central California, U.S.A. GCA allows for quantification of prey items contained
within the stomach of a single individual and reveals what actual species are consumed on a short-term
basis. SIA uses elements as tracers (specifically carbon and nitrogen) to identify predator-prey
relationships as well as trophic position, allowing for long-term diet information. SIA analysis can be used
to complement gut content data via integrating both short and long term food habits, enhancing
information known about the trophic role of a given species. Based on GCA, the most abundant and
important prey taxa by number, weight, and the prey-specific index of relative importance were
euphausiids, fishes, and cephalopods. Similarly, the most frequently occurring prey taxa were fishes,
euphausiids, and cephalopods. In addition to diet composition, sources of dietary variability with respect
to size, sex, depth, location, season, and year are being investigated for GCA and SIA and will be
presented.



Bigman, Jennifer (Moss Landing Marine Laboratories); Ebert, David (Moss Landing Marine Labs, Moss
Landing, CA, United States); Dewar, Heidi (Southwest Fisheries Science Center, NOAA Fisheries, La
Jolla, CA, United States); Bizzarro, Joseph (Friday Harbor Labs, Friday Harbor, CA, United States);
Kohin, Suzanne (Southwest Fisheries Science Center, NOAA Fisheries, La Jolla, CA, United States);
Vetter, Russ (Southwest Fisheries Science Center, NOAA Fisheries, La Jolla, United States)

Spot a basking shark: how California’s citizen scientists can aid in the recovery of an enigmatic
shark

The basking shark (Cetorhinus maximus) is the second largest shark species, reaching a total length of
up to 10 m. It has been reported globally from high latitude seas, including Arctic waters, to the tropics.
The eastern North Pacific basking shark population was recently designated a ―Species of Concern‖ by
the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) for three main reasons: (1) notable, although largely
anecdotal, population declines; (2) a lack of recovery even after long-term cessation of fishery
exploitation; and (3) a severe lack of biological and fisheries data. Although thousands of basking sharks
were observed off the West Coast of the continental US and Canada in the early 1900‘s, individual
sightings are now uncommon and large aggregations and extremely rare and much reduced compared to
historic records. There have been no directed fisheries for basking sharks in the eastern North Pacific for
more than 50 years, but there does not appear to be any notable increase in population size. It is unclear
if this situation is a result of persistent, undocumented mortality, the naturally low intrinsic population
growth rates of basking sharks, and/or potential changes in contemporary distribution patterns. However,
regardless of the cause, a general lack of recovery following the cessation of fishing is common
worldwide. Without adequate knowledge of basking shark biology (e.g., movement patterns, nursery and
feeding grounds, demography) or fishery exploitation, it has been extremely difficult to develop a recovery
plan for this species in the eastern North Pacific. To address this lack of knowledge, a collaborative
project was initiated in April 2011 between the NMFS and the Pacific Shark Research Center to
investigate spatial aspects (e.g., distribution, abundance, occurrence, movement patterns) and population
status of eastern North Pacific basking sharks. This project has many facets including an outreach
program, tagging, data-mining, and a sightings network that have contributed to its success and will be
addressed in the upcoming oral presentation. The ultimate goal of this project is to provide necessary
baseline information for the formulation of an effective recovery plan for basking sharks in the eastern
North Pacific.




                                                                                                         63
Bishop, Christine (Environment Canada); Ashpole, Sara (University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON,
Canada); Mike, Sarell (Ophiucus Consulting, Oliver, BC, Canada); Owain, McKibbin (Nk'mip Desert
Cultural Centre, Ladner, BC, Canada); Emily, Lomas (Thompson Rivers University, Kamloops, BC,
Canada)

The challenge of reptile and amphibian conservation in Canada's southern latitudes

The pocket desert of       the south Okanagan valley, in the province of           British Columbia, is a rare
ecozone in Canada which is populated by the highest number of Species at Risk (>60 species) and one
of the fastest developing communities in the country. Habitats for wildlife were fragmented within this
rich agricultural landscape in the past 100 years but it is quickly becoming a more urban culture with
condominium and highway expansions that will further compromise the remaining habitat. The quantity of
the habitat has shrunk through the loss of       more than 84% of         wetlands      and 87% of      riparian
habitats. None of this bodes well for the survival of 15 native species of amphibians and reptiles
native to this valley with two species already extirpated and the majority of                the rest listed as
endangered, threatened or special concern in          Canada . The quality of          the remaining habitat is
degreaded by the removal of       water for irrigation, vehicle collisions, pesticide use, and introduction of
invasive species. However, initiatives to create new habitat by building ponds on lands protected through
conservation covenants, exclusion fencing for livestock and restoration of         habitats in federal National
Wildlife have started to show success less than a decade after their inception.



Bishop, Phil (University of Otago/Amphibian Survival Alliance); Germano, Jennifer (Institute for
Conservation Research, Canada)

Does familiarity affect post-release movement in translocations of the endangered Maud Island
frog?

 New Zealand is home to the genus Leiopelma , an ancient group of silent frogs that may rely on
chemical communication for social interactions. One species ( L.pakeka ) occurs naturally on Maud Island
where it has been shown that adults can differentiate between neighbours and non-neighbours based on
chemical cues. These frogs have very small home ranges, which often overlap with other individuals and
frequently multiple frogs will share the retreat space under a single rock, with many of these frog-pairs
being opposite sexes. The importance of neighbours, the presence of territoriality, and the possibility of
long-term mates remain unknown in L. pakeka. However, if any of these are important aspects of their
ecology, then familiarity in the founder group could have possible effects during a re-introduction. A inter-
island translocation of 101 individuals was carried out and the frogs were released in two equal groups;
one group was randomly placed in the new habitat, while the other group was released into the new
habitat in a similar orientation with respect to their neighbours from the source population. Frogs released
in the random pattern travelled significantly farther in their total distances moved than frogs released with
their neighbours although when looking at the straight-line distances moved, there was only a marginal
difference in distance travelled between randomly and non-randomly placed frogs. There was no
significant difference in the bearings taken by randomly placed and non-randomly placed individuals (W =
0.812, P = 0.666). Spatial patterns found at the new site eight months following re-introduction did not
resemble those originally found in the source population. Groups that were relocated with neighbours did
not stay with those individuals. Similarly, those that were released in a random pattern did not search out
or move towards their original neighbours. As the longer term movements made during the eight months
following re-introduction did not differ between the random and non-randomly released individuals,
familiarity with neighbours was not considered a long-lasting effect nor likely to be of importance during a
translocation of these frogs.



                                                                                                             64
Bishop, Phil (University of Otago/Amphibian Survival Alliance); Garcia Moreno M, Jaime (Amphibian
Survival Alliance, Canada)

Implementing amphibian conservation at a global level - The Amphibian Survival Alliance

The planet is currently in a mass extinction episode that is most apparent among the amphibians. The
latest figures from IUCN´s Red List of Threatened Species show that there are nearly as many species of
amphibians categorised as threatened with extinction as those of threatened birds and mammals put
together, and that the proportion of threatened species is higher for amphibians (30.2%) than for birds
(12.5%) or mammals (20.6). Although the 2005 IUCN Amphibian Conservation Summit generated a
global Amphibian Conservation Action Plan (ACAP) outlining steps to understand, halt, and reverse the
crisis, the response has been uneven, disjunct, and generally deficient due to a lack of coordination and
funding. The Amphibian Survival Alliance (ASA), launched in June 2011, is a global partnership for
amphibian conservation. The ASA is a consortium of organisations working together to stem the rapid
losses of amphibian populations and species worldwide by implementing the ACAP. The ASA is
coordinating a united response by actively fundraising and coordinating the development and integration
of four key areas 1) Conservation and restoration of key habitat for amphibians, 2) Ex-situ conservation
efforts, 3) Emergent diseases and pollution, and 4) Assessments and monitoring. The Alliance will bring
focus, coordination, and leadership to address the world‘s most serious extinction crisis. Its goal is the
restoration of all threatened amphibian species to their natural roles and population levels in ecosystems
worldwide. Although it is already working with several partners like ASG, Global Wildlife Conservation,
IUCN Netherlands, AZE, ZSL, it is open to all institutions willing to implement conservation actions and
associated research to address the amphibian conservation crisis at all scales, from global to local. The
ASA‘s progress and strategic plans will be discussed in this presentation.



Blackburn, Daniel (Trinity College); Bonneau, Laurie; Anderson, Kristie (Trinity College, Hartford, CT,
United States); Langkilde, Tracy (Pennsylvania State University, Canada)

Morphology and Development of Fetal Membranes in the Oviparous Lizard Sceloporus undulatus

In oviparous squamates, fetal membranes that line the eggshell sustain embryos from early in
development through the time of hatching. However, function of fetal membranes in oviparous squamates
is poorly understood due to a scarcity of studies of their morphology and development. We are studying
fetal membranes of the lizard Sceloporus undulatus             via histology and electron microscopy. At
oviposition, the egg is largely surrounded by an omphalallantoic membrane, in which an intact isolated
yolk mass separates allantoic vasculature from the eggshell.              The omphalallantois is gradually
converted into chorioallantois through depletion of the isolated yolk mass. These changes reflect growing
embryonic needs for gas exchange. Epithelial cells lining the chorioallantois and omphalallantois show
peculiar surface ridges oriented in hexagonal arrays. These structures increase surface area, possibly to
enhance water uptake and/ or uptake of eggshell calcium. The pattern of fetal membrane morphogenesis
in S. undulatus has not previously been observed in oviparous reptiles, and combines features
associated with gas exchange and absorption. If this pattern is ancestral for the genus, it would explain
previously - observed modifications of fetal membranes for these functions in viviparous Sceloporus.




                                                                                                        65
Blackburn, David (California Academy of Sciences); Wake, David; Bloom, David; Gross, Joyce; Koo,
Michelle; Spencer, Carol; Whittaker, Kellie; Wittsche, Julian; Zhuang, Vicky (University of California,
Berkeley, Canada); Cannatella, David (University of Texas, Austin, Canada); Vredenburg, Vance (San
Francisco State University, Canada)

AmphibiaWeb: 7000 species and counting!

Since 2000, AmphibiaWeb (www.amphibiaweb.org) has served as an online resource for information on
the world‘s amphibian species and their status. AmphibiaWeb will highlight this resource with the
celebration of the description of the 7000th amphibian species in 2012. AmphibiaWeb has become an
increasingly vital resource with accurate and current information for educators, researchers, and
managers. Every species has a webpage and steady progress is being made in producing species
accounts, which are accompanied by photographs, audio recordings, videos, and maps. Browse functions
facilitate taxonomic, photographic, geographic, and other searches. Unique services include a list
(updated daily) of the number of valid amphibian species, mapping of type localities for recently described
species, and ready access to the largest amphibian photo collection (nearly 25,000). Literature on
amphibian declines is summarized monthly. On average, AmphibiaWeb receives 15,000–20,000 unique
queries per day from visitors around the world. The mapping functions of AmphibiaWeb continue to
evolve and currently integrate shape files from IUCN with mapped point locality data from scientific
collections. An iPhone app enables searching and browsing of amphibian data, including locality-specific
searches. A recent overhaul of AmphibiaWeb‘s taxonomy is based on increasingly stable phylogenetic
hypotheses. Taxonomy is monitored by a subcommittee of amphibian specialists from multiple institutions
and is updated as species are described and published revisions are evaluated. AmphibiaWeb is a
community-contributed resource; volunteers produce the vast majority of species accounts and photos.
AmphibiaWeb serves as a useful educational resource and we encourage integration of the website into
herpetology courses.



Blackburn, David (California Academy of Sciences);

Diversification of the Squeaker Frogs across Africa's mountains

The deep-time historical biogeography of Africa's montane faunas remain incompletely known, especially
the relationships between montane regions. I present recent and on-going work on the phylogenetic
relationships within the frog genera Arthroleptis (Squeakers) and Cardioglossa (Long-fingered Frogs),
which are sister taxa. The evolutionary history of these genera sheds light on the relationships between
species in the mountains of the Cameroon Volcanic Line (CVL), the Albertine Rift, and the Eastern Arc.
The phylogenetic relationships within these genera reveal replicated biogeographic patterns, including the
discovery that the Albertine Rift fauna is of mosaic origin, with some montane species part of clades from
the CVL and others from the Eastern Arc.




                                                                                                        66
Blasius, Mary (California State University Long Beach); Mull, Chris (Simon Fraiser University, Canada);
Lyons, Kady (California State University Long Beach, Canada); O'Sullivan, John (Monterey Bay
Aquarium, Canada); Lowe, Chris (California State University Long Beach, Canada)

Bioaccumulation and maternal transfer of organic contaminants and mercury in young of the year
white sharks (Carcharodon carcharias)

Organic contaminants and total mercury were measured in young of the year (YOY) white sharks (
Carcharodon carcharias ) incidentally caught in southern California between 2005 and 2010. DDT and
PCB concentrations were higher in liver (76 ± 87 µg/g ww and 14 ± 10 µg/g, respectively) than in red
(0.05 ± 0.04 µg/g) or white muscle (0.24 ± 0.34 µg/g). Total mercury was higher in white and red muscle
tissue (1.40 ± 1.12 µg/g and 1.90 ± 1.35 µg/g, respectively) than in liver (0.19 ± 0.16 µg/g). These levels
were alarmingly high considering their young age and diet, suggesting these sharks are more likely
acquiring these high levels from their mothers in utero . To examine the YOY‘s potential of maternal
transfer of these persistent organic pollutants, a five-parameter bioaccumulation model was used to
estimate the total loads a newborn shark would accumulate over a one year period from consuming
highly contaminated prey. Contaminant consumption was based on levels representative of fish prey
common in southern California. Based on the model, the maximum potential levels that YOY white
sharks could attain from dietary exposure are 11.17 µg/g ∑DDT, 0.6 µg/g ∑PCBs, and 2.14 µg/g Hg.
Observed organic contaminant levels in YOY sharks were 7 fold higher for PCBs and 23 fold higher for
DDT than the maximum output of our model. Since it is unlikely these YOY sharks are acquiring such
high levels from diet alone (especially for DDT and PCBs), this suggests maternal transfer of
contaminants is a major contributing process to YOY white shark body burdens. Despite signs of
population recovery in the eastern Pacific, anthropogenic impacts via biomagnification and maternal
offloading of environmental contaminants may have future impacts on apex predator populations located
around urbanized areas.



Blouin-Demers, Gabriel (University of Ottawa);

Going beyond descriptive habitat selection studies: making the link with fitness is paramount in a
conservation context

There are hundreds of habitat selection studies published annually. Most of these studies are descriptive
and only compare habitat use to habitat availability. It is often possible, and I will argue it is almost always
desirable, to go beyond simple descriptions of habitat association. It is desirable, especially in a
conservation context, to make the link between habitat selection and fitness. Failing to do so could lead
us to define habitats for conservation that in fact are not suitable for the species. I will plea for the broader
adoption of an approach that attempts to link habitat selection to fitness. I will illustrate how
ecophysiology, for instance, can be used to bridge the gap between habitat selection and fitness. I will
illustrate the ecophysiological approach with our data on several species of reptiles to show that habitat
selection, via its impact on thermoregulation, improves several performances that are related to fitness. I
will also illustrate how information on population fitness in various habitats is a pressing conservation
problem in our efforts to define critical habitat for species at risk.




                                                                                                              67
Boback, Scott (Dickinson College); Davidson, Nicole; Bieber-Ham, Lily; Wood, Kevin; Miller, Matt
(Dickinson College, Carlisle, United States)

Nest site selection in a population of Painted Turtles (Chrysemys picta) in south central
Pennsylvania

In many reptiles the temperature experienced during embryonic development determines the sex of the
offspring. Painted turtles ( Chrysemys picta ) exhibit a strategy known as temperature-dependent sex
determination (TSD) in which warm nest temperatures result in female offspring and cool temperatures
result in male offspring.    Additionally, Painted turtles typically hatch in the late summer but remain
underground and emerge the following spring. As such, the location of Painted turtle nests is of
paramount importance in determining sex and hatchling survival. We have monitored nesting in a
population of Painted turtles in south central Pennsylvania for the past two years. In this population,
females are restricted in potential nesting locations by a Norfolk Southern railroad track 20 meters north
of the pond. Nests are dug in rocky soil heavily influenced by railroad ballast and coal deposits. For all
located nests, we obtained clutch size, egg mass, egg length, nest depth, and nest width. Developmental
and overwintering temperatures in the nests were obtained using temperature and humidity recorders
(iButtons). Results show that some clutches emerged during the fall, some overwintered underground
and others had a mixed strategy. Nest temperatures and relative humidity are presented along with
environmental parameters of the nests.



Bodensteiner, Brooke (Iowa State University); Refsnider, Jeanine; Reneker, Jaymie; Janzen, Fred
(Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States)

Nest depth does not compensate for sex ratio skews caused by climate change in turtles

Female ability to match nest characteristics with environmental conditions can influence offspring survival
and quality, and may provide a mechanism by which organisms can track climate change. In organisms
that construct subterranean nests, including many reptiles with temperature-dependent sex
determination, the depth of the nest may affect incubation temperature and thus offspring sex ratio.
Therefore, female adjustment of nest depth may be a mechanism by which skews in sex ratio caused by
climate change could be prevented. We experimentally manipulated nest depth in 43 painted turtle nests
and quantified the effects on incubation regime, offspring performance, and sex ratio. We found that nest
depth affected the magnitude of daily temperature fluctuation, with deeper nests experiencing less daily
variation, but mean nest temperature was not affected by depth. Within the biologically-relevant range of
nest depths tested here, there was no difference in resultant offspring survival, size, or sex ratio.
However, deeper nests produced hatchlings that were faster at righting themselves and swimming than
hatchlings from shallower nests. We conclude that the adjustment in nest depth that would be required to
affect sex ratio in this species is biologically unfeasible, and therefore female adjustment of nest depth is
unlikely to compensate for climate change.



Boenke, Morgan (Redpath Museum - McGill University);

Fidelity to Daytime Refuge Sites Does Not Lead to Bounded Home Ranges in Fowler's Toads

The use of space by animals is a central ecological theme as it influences the scale at which individuals
interact with their environment. Determining the scale at which organisms operate can illustrates their
spatial requirements. The home range concept provides a framework for evaluating patterns of space



                                                                                                          68
use. Movement models predict the emergence of bounded home ranges when individuals repeatedly
return to central locations. I quantified the home ranges of 70 Fowler‗s Toads, Anaxyrus fowleri ,
monitored over two years using variations of three home range metrics, Minimum Convex Polygons,
Kernel Density Estimators and Localized Convex Hulls. Nearly two orders of magnitude of observed
variation in home range sizes was explained chiefly by search effort. Body size, a driver of inter-specific
home range differences, had little detectable effect. I estimate the minimum home range of Fowler‘s
Toads to be 3517 m2, with the caveat that no stable upper bound may exist. Despite evidence of fidelity
to daytime refuge sites little evidence for bounded home ranges in Fowler‘s Toads was found.



Bolaño Martínez, Nataly (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México); Díaz Jaimes, Píndaro
(Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mèxico, Canada); Uribe Alcocer, Manuel (Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de México, Canada); Galvan Magaña, Felipe (Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas,
Canada)

Philogeography and population genetics of the              hammerhead shark Sphyrna zygaena in the
Oriental Pacific Ocean

Sphyrna zygaena lives in costal a pelagic zones and it is usually found in tropical and subtropical areas
including the Mediterranean Sea (Compagno, 1984; Castro, 1983). In te Oriental Pacific Ocean its
distributed along the occidental coasts of Baja California, Golfo de California, Islas Galápagos, Panama
and Patagonia. It presents a discontinues distribution in the mexican Pacific and Centralamerica. Is the
most important species in fisheries. It is possible that due to its distribution in the Pacific two populations
might be coexisting one in the Nothern Hemisphere and a second in the South. By using molecular
markers we pretend to determine if there is a genetic flux between the two populations. If this flux do exist
might be limited or might not exist. In this case we will be having two discrete populations therefore our
main goals are: 1) to evaluate the genetic structure of S. zygaena          all along the Oriental Pacific; 2) to
determine its genetic variability using both mitochondrial and nuclear markers and 3) to define a
philogeographic pattern. We have obtained 376 biopsys between Baja California Sur, Nayarit, Colima,
and Chiapas in Mexico; from Ecuador and Chile. Until know we have 136 analyzed sequences with D-
loop (Primer SPH_F: ACCGGTTTTTGTACGTCAGT), we have found 7 haplotypes. Of this 7 haplotypes
we found 5 in Chile population in which three of them are exclusive of this population. For the Mexican
population found one exclusive and for the Ecuador population we found 3 haplotypes and 1 exclusive.
Nucleotidic and haplotypic diversity were calculated Hd :0.60 and π:0.001. To determine de genetic flux
between the two apparent populations FST values were calculated (FST: 0.87) this indicates that there
are genetic differences between North and South populations but we have not found yet differences
among groups ( North = Mexico (B.C.S, Coliman and Nayarit) and South = Chile and Ecuador (Manta and
Santa Rosa)).



Bolus, Matthew (Department of Environmental Conservation); Castro-Santos, Theodore (USGS-S.O.
Conte Anadromous Fish Research Center, Canada); Danylchuk, Andy (Department of Environmental
Conservation, Canada)

Spatial ecology of the northern diamondback terrapin (Malaclemys terrapin terrapin), in Wellfleet
Harbor, MA: identifying potential impacts of coastal dredging.

The Northern diamondback terrapin, Malaclemys terrapin terrapin , is at its northern limit of its range
along the shores of Cape Cod, MA and is a state listed threatened species. In spite of this status, little is




                                                                                                              69
known about its spatial ecology in this region, including the distribution of brumation sites. Identifying
brumation sites is particularly important for the conservation of northern diamondback terrapins since this
sedentary seasonal phase could make it particularly vulnerable to coastal dredging activities that
commonly occur during the winter months. We used acoustic telemetry to quantify the movement patterns
of northern diamondback terrapins in Wellfleet Harbor, Wellfleet, MA, and to identify brumation sites. In
March 2011, an array of 20 fixed acoustic telemetry receivers were deployed throughout Wellfleet Harbor
and neighboring creeks, spanning an area of 4.3 km 2 . In May and July, 2011, we captured a total of 75
terrapins (56 females, 19 males) with dip-nets as they emerged from brumation and nesting sites. Turtles
were fitted with external acoustic tags and their movements monitored until December, 2011. Manual
tracking was used late in the fall to locate brumation sites. Movement patterns varied widely among
tagged terrapins with no differences observed between sex or season (mean number of drainages
occupied = 2.4, min = 1, max = 5). Cessation of movement also varied widely: most terrapins began
brumating in late September/early October, but several individuals remained active into December.
Selection of brumation sites was distributed throughout Wellfleet Harbor, with tagged terrapins last
detected in each of the primary tributaries. A total of 22 brumating terrapins were located, of which 12
individuals were found brumating in or near the proposed dredging area. The results from this study not
only provide some of the first information of the spatial ecology of Northern diamondback terrapins near
the northern end of their range, but this information will also be used by federal, state, and local
managers to determine any potential impacts to the terrapin population by proposed dredging.



Bond, Mark (School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, Stony Brook University); Babcock, Elizabeth
(Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, Univerity of Miami, Canada); Pikitch, Ellen;
Chapman, Demian (School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, Stony Brook University, Canada)

Differences in elasmobranch assemblages between marine reserves and fished reefs on the
Mesoamerican Barrier Reef

Our previous research has shown that Caribbean reef sharks (Carcharhinus perezi) are significantly more
abundant inside marine reserves when compared to similar fished reefs on the Mesoamerican Barrier
Reef. We now pose the question: what effect have marine reserves had on the abundance of other
elasmobranchs, such as batoids? Rays, including the southern stingray (Dasyatis americana), spotted
eagle rays (Aetobatus narinari), Caribbean whip-ray (Himuntura schmardae) and yellow stingray (Urobatis
jamaicensis) are not commercially targeted by fisherman in Belize. An appropriate null hypothesis is that
marine reserves have no effect on the relative abundance of these species. Baited Remote Underwater
Video (BRUV) surveys were conducted on the fore-reef at four sites along the Mesoamerican barrier reef
in Belize, at two established marine reserves and two fished reefs (N=50 per site). Of the combined 100
deployments at the two reserve sites 13 batoids were observed compared to 58 observed at the two
fished sites. We constructed a generalized linear model (GLM) to explain the presence of batoids on
BRUVs, which included ―marine reserve‖, ―location nested within marine reserve‖, habitat characteristics
and several environmental variables as potential factors. The GLM found that the factor ―marine reserve‖
had a significant negative effect on the presence of batoids, while none of the habitat or environmental
variables had a significant influence (p>0.002). We discuss ongoing research aimed at explaining this
pattern, including potential mechanisms such as (1) mesopredator release due to reduced predation from
reef sharks, (2) altered batoid behavior due to intimidation by sharks inside reserves and (3) increased
competition for prey inside marine reserves.




                                                                                                        70
Bonfil, Ramon (Bronx High School of Science); O'Brien, Shannon (University of Washington, Canada)

First Adult Female White Shark is Tracked Using Real-Time Satellite Tags in Guadalupe Island,
Mexico

Despite recent advances in our understanding of the spatial behavior of great white sharks, Carcharodon
carcharias, real-time tracks of their movements including oceanic migrations remain rare. Due to the
difficulty and risk of deploying real-time satellite tags on large great white sharks available data is
restricted to juveniles and one single mature male. Here, we report on the first ever adult female great
white shark tracked with a real-time satellite tag. A 5.1 m total length female great white shark was tagged
with a SPOT tag in Guadalupe Island, Baja California, Mexico on October 16, 2006 and tracked
intermittently for a total of 288 days and 7,100 km as she traveled in a large area of the North East Pacific
Ocean. The female great white shark remained in the vicinity of the NE coast of Guadalupe Island moving
between the east and west coasts for the next three and a half months; a preference for the north east
coast was suggested by the data. The shark left Guadalupe Island at the beginning of February on a ca.
3,900 km westward migration. The route followed by the shark showed remarkable directional movement
to a distinct region 790 km north-northeast of the Hawaiian Islands. During the next four months the shark
roamed in this area (ca. 680 km wide) following an irregular search-like pattern. This area is previously
unknown as a point of interest for great white sharks in North East Pacific and different from the
previously reported ‗white shark café‘. Temperature data were intermittently transmitted by the tag and
are also presented. This study shows that real-time satellite tags provide unique and important
information for studying the spatial dynamics of great white sharks and suggests that white sharks have
remarkable navigation abilities and confirms that not all adult great white sharks in the NE Pacific make
use of the 'White Shark Café'.



Boone, Michelle (Miami University of Ohio); Helbing, Caren (University of Victoria, Victoria, BC,
Canada); Youngquist, Melissa (Miami University, Oxford, OH, United States); Veldhoen, Nik (University of
Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada)

Some Times are Better than Others: How Time of Insecticide Exposure Can Influence Anuran
Metamorphosis and Development

The orchestration of metamorphosis is initiated and integrated by thyroid hormones, which change
dynamically during larval development. The impact of pesticides may vary depending on developmental
stage of an amphibian, which may be influenced by physiological changes during development. Previous
studies have found that some anurans reach metamorphosis earlier or are more developed when
exposure to the insecticide carbaryl occurs later in development, suggesting that carbaryl could affect the
thyroid hormone axis as well as alter the food web. We examined the effects of carbaryl exposure from
early to late development in green frogs (Rana clamitans) and northern leopard frogs (Rana pipiens)
tadpoles in the lab and/or the field. We measured effects on survival, time and size at metamorphosis,
feeding and jumping performance of metamorphs, and thryoid response genes in the brain of
metamorphs. We found that carbaryl did not impact survival at metamorphosis, mass at or time to
metamorphosis, or feeding performance for lab reared green frogs, but it did significantly increase the
abundance of some thyroid responsive genes (i.e., TR- ) in brain tissue, suggesting that carbaryl can act
as an endocrine disruptor at some times in anuran development. We have also found that exposure to
carbaryl in the field resulted in greater mass and increased development of green frog tadpoles when
exposure occurred late, suggesting that timing of exposure can also influence traits correlated with
fitness; analyses of brain tissue are currently under way. Timing of exposure also appears to influence
impacts on time at metamorphosis on northern leopards in field studies; analyses of brain tissue and



                                                                                                          71
impacts on overwintering are currently under way for this species. Our studies suggest that physiological
changes associated with metamorphosis may make amphibians more susceptible to effects of an
insecticide at some developmental stages and may have disparate effects on population-level outcomes.



Bosque, Renan (Universidade de Brasília); Colli, Guarino (Universidade de Brasília, Brasília, Brazil)

Distribution and color patterns of mimic coral snakes Oxyrhopus (Serpentes, Colubridae) and the
implications to mimicry

Mimicry is a phenomenon that has instigated scientists for a long time. Still, many aspects concerning the
mimicry dynamics remain unclear. For example, the role that multiple models play in the mimics‘ patterns,
and the necessity of mimics‘ and models‘ geographic distributions to overlap are topics that need further
investigations. The New World coral snakes represent an important example of mimicry among
vertebrates. In this complex, Micrurus species are known as Batesian models for species from Aniliidae
and Colubridae families, including Oxyrhopus genus. In this present work, we asked if there is an
association between the geographic distribution between mimics and models of the Oxyrhopus and
Micrurus species. We asked also what is the influence of the presence of multiple models in the mimic
coloration patterns. Our hypothesis are: (1) the geographic distribution of mimics‘ color patterns is
explained by the presence of the models with the same color pattern; (2) the mimics‘ richness in each
color pattern is explained by the richness of the same model‘s color pattern; (3) the imperfect mimics‘
geographic distribution will be positively correlated with richness of models; (4) the geographic distribution
of perfect mimics will be negatively correlated with richness of models. We classified the color patterns
and obtained from literature the geographic distributions for each species. After that, we constructed a
grid in each distribution polygon. With the grid information we performed generalized linear models using
presence and species richness of the mimics and models. We identified 20 colors patterns, 6 of which
were found both on Oxyrhopus and Micrurus (perfect mimics). Four patterns were found exclusively in
Oxyrhopus (imperfect mimics) and 10 patterns exclusively in Micrurus. The presence of Micrurus
explained the presence of Oxyrhopus (Z=8.40; p< 0.001). Only one model color pattern didn‘t explain the
presence of the mimic. The Micrurus species richness explains the Oxyrhopus species richness (Z=29.0;
p< 0.001). Only in two cases, the model color pattern richness doesn‘t explain the mimic richness. The
presence and richness of mimics was positively correlated with model‘ richness, regardless of the quality
of the mimic. Our work support that Oxyrhopus are indeed mimics of the Micrurus. The Micrurus
diversification apparently is the most important factor for the color pattern diversification, to the detriment
of ecological components.



Boswell, Leigh Ann (Department of Zoology, University of Hawai'i / Hawai'i Institute of Marine Biology);
Tricas, Timothy (Department of Zoology, University of Hawai'i / Hawai'i Institute of Marine Biology,
Honolulu, HI, United States)

Identity and density of olfactory receptor neurons in the nasal epithelium of juvenile hammerhead
sharks, Sphyrna lewini

Aquatic toxicants can damage the fish peripheral olfactory system and cause deficits in fitness-related
behaviors such as feeding, predator avoidance, and mate recognition. However, the response of the
shark olfactory system to toxicants, and for many species the type, density, and total number of olfactory
receptor neurons (ORNs) involved in odorant detection, are still unclear. The olfactory rosette organ was
examined by histology in the juvenile scalloped hammerhead, Sphyrna lewini , to identify and quantify



                                                                                                            72
the ORNs present in their chemosensory epithelium. Microvillar ORNs (mORN) and crypt neurons (CN)
occur in all horizontal sections of the rosette. Cell bodies of mORNs have a circular shape and mean
diameter of 7.2 ± 0.5 µm, highest densities in the mid regions of the sensory epithelium, and an average
density of 23,552 ± 8,198 cells/mm 2 . Cell bodies of CNs have a smaller kidney-shape and mean
diameter of 5.3 ± 0.7 µm, and lower density of 523 ± 944 cells/mm 2 . The primary lamellae epithelial
surface area of both olfactory organs is estimated at 6,010 mm 2 for a 56.1 cm TL juvenile. These
combined estimates indicate that a 56.1 cm TL juvenile S. lewini has a putative total of at least
142,000,000 mORNs and 3,00,000 CNs, and is higher when secondary lamellae and surface area of
adult sharks are considered. The total number of olfactory receptors range from 3-7 million in teleosts, 2.5
million in humans, and 220 million to 2 billion in canines. Thus this first estimate of total olfactory
receptors for S. lewini is in great excess to that reported for other fishes examined so far and is closer to
that of canines. These results provide only the second example of a shark species containing two ORNs
in the olfactory organ and give the first quantitative densities of each ORN type throughout the primary
lamellae of the peripheral olfactory system. This research provides the quantification of ORNs necessary
to determine epithelial degradation after toxicant exposure based on changes in ORN densities.



Bouskila, Amos (Ben-Gurion Univ. of the Negev); Moreno, Elisheva; Shachal, Roni; Wolfman, Anat
(Ben-Gurion Univ. of the Negev, Canada)

Unusual life history of Chamaeleo chamaeleon musae may create unique population
demographics on consecutive years

Some ectotherms cope with desert conditions by adopting an annual life style. The desert subspecies of
the common chameleon (Chamaeleo chamaeleon musae) inhabits arid sandy areas of the Negev Desert
and north Sinai. Practically all individuals perish before they reach their second reproductive season. We
hypothesized that when this character is combined with the 11 months-long incubation period of this
species, separate populations form in odd and even years. Those populations overlap for only a short
period and do not reproduce with each other, because when one reaches maturity, only hatchlings of the
other are present. We predicted that if the hypothesis is correct, the two populations may have separate
and unrelated dynamics. To evaluate this prediction we collected demographic information during two
odd and two even years (2008-2011). We surveyed consistent routes twice a month searching for
sleeping chameleons and the data were analyzed with Robust Design in the program MARK. Each
individual that we found was captured, measured, marked and released at the capture location. For each
month, survival and probability of finding individuals were calculated. For each individual we calculated
an index of body condition in order to look for connections between survival and body condition to
temperature and precipitation on each year.

Odd and even years differed in population size, suggesting that the dynamics of one year is connected to
the population two years earlier, rather than to the population in the previous year. Survival of individuals
that hatched in 2009 was lower than survival of those of 2008 and 2010. Snout-Vent length and
Mean Index of Body Condition for those born in 2009 were larger than the values for those born in 2010.
Our hypothesis may have been confounded with climatic conditions, because the average monthly
precipitation in winter 2009/10 was greater than that of winter 2008/09 and temperatures were
significantly higher too. These conditions may affect growth and survival of lizards, thus the difference we
received may be explained not only by our original hypothesis but also by the climatic conditions on those
specific years. Sorting out the two possible explanations will be possible when we incorporate the results
of the last year and when we complete the genetic analysis we are currently conducting to evaluate the
level of separation between populations in odd and even years.



                                                                                                          73
Bovo, Rafael (Dept. Zoology, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Rio Claro, Brazil); Andrade, Denis
(Dept. Zoology, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Rio Claro, Brazil, Canada)

Altitudinal effects on the thermal physiology and water balance in anurans from the Brazilian
Atlantic Rainforest

Understanding the variation in organismal traits as a function of differences in relevant environmental
parameters, for example along an altitudinal gradient, is a key-factor to comprehend whether the variation
observed reflects an adaptive response or not. For anurans, environmental temperature and water
availability are the most important factors affecting their ecology, physiology, and behavior. In the
Brazilian Atlantic Rainforest, a biodiversity hotspot for anurans, many species exhibit broad geographic
distribution, occurring along the slopes of the Coastal Mountain Range (Serra do Mar), from sea level to
altitudes up to 1000 m. Therefore, in this study, we examined selected physiological parameters related
to thermal physiology (critical thermal minimum [CTMin] and critical thermal maximum [CTMax]) and
water balance (rates of evaporative water loss, skin resistence to water loss, and rehydration rates) of
seven species of five families of anurans found at low and high elevations at the Atlantic Rainforest in
southeastern Brazil. We performed intraspecific comparisons aiming to verify the prediction that the
variation observed in the physiological traits examined could be understood on the basis of differences in
altitude/environmental characteristics. In general, we did not find major intraspecific differences, a pattern
that is in agreement with previous studies on similar taxa but not for others. Environmental effects on
organismal traits are known to be multifactorial (e.g., combined effects of biotic and abiotic factors, past
historical events) and, therefore, we discuss our results considering: (i) climate/altitude, specially for the
gradient along the mountain slope of the Brazilian Atlantic Rainforest (coastal and mainland); (ii)
taxonomic affiliation and; (iii) particular morphological, behavioral and ecological characteristics of the
organisms being examined.

Financial Support by FAPESP, CNPq, and FUNDUNESP



Bower, Deborah (University of Newcastle); Stockwell, Michelle (University of Newcastle, University of
Newcastle, Canada); Garnham, James; Pollard, Carla; Pickett, Evan; Clulow, John; Mahony, Michael
(University of Newcastle, Newcastle, Australia)

Monitoring monitoring: Predicting calling activity to maximize detection in the vulnerable frog
Litoria aurea

Variation in the timing and frequency of calling males can be used to examine male investment of
reproductive effort. Knowledge of the factors that influence reproductive effort is necessary to conserve
threatened frog species. In addition, this information can design monitoring regimes, to maximise
detection. We recorded patterns of calling in the threatened frog, Litoria aurea at Sydney Olympic Park.
Specifically we aimed to i) assess the probability of detecting calling males in the current monitoring
program, and ii) compare the effectiveness of models incorporating differing monitoring regimes. Song
metres were employed to record hourly for five minutes sections between October to March, in two
habitats. Calling occurred over the entire season and diel period. However, frequency of calling peaked
during mid-season and at night. The investment of survey effort necessary to detect Litoria aurea
depends on the time of year in which the pond is surveyed. The period of time invested in monitoring
alters the respective probability of detection and varies according to the approach. The effectiveness of
different monitoring regimes are contrasted and discussed.




                                                                                                           74
Bower, Luke (Southeastern Louisiana Unversity); Piller, Kyle (Southeastern Louisiana Unversity,
Canada)

Niche position and competitive exclusion in stream fish communities: A geometric morphometric
approach

The connection between ecology and morphology has long intrigued ecologists, and investigation of this
relationship has given ecologists insight into the factors that influence assemblage structuring of fish
communities. Stream fish co-occur in similar habitats, but often forage on different prey items or utilize
slightly different microhabitats, thereby allowing them to co-exist. Slight differences in morphology may
optimize stream fish for certain microhabitats. By examining these differences in morphology, it is
possible to predict the niche position of stream fish. Niche-partitioning has presumably allowed for high
species richness in stream fishes communities in the southeastern United States. The purpose of this
study was to take an eco-morphological approach to examine the degree of seasonal niche overlap
among stream fishes of the Tickfaw River (Lake Pontchartrain Basin) in southeastern Louisiana. To
accomplish this, point sample collections were made throughout the year and ecological (habitat and
trophic) and body shape (geometric morphometric) data were collected for each specimen of fish.
Multivariate analyses were performed to examine relationships and differences between stream fish
species body shape and niche position. Results indicate that the niche of several species shifted
seasonally, likely the results of changes in reproductive habitat, food items, or competition with other
congenerics.



Bowie, Rauri (University of California-Berkeley);

Climate cycles, stability, and diversification in an African biodiversity hotspot

That existing models based on contemporary environmental variation fail to predict richness patterns of
many species including the bulk of vertebrates on most continents, is now well-established. To
understand species distribution patterns we need to integrate large-scale macroecology with evolutionary
biology. Of particular interest are mountains where climate interacts with topographic relief to generate
sharp local habitat gradients. This may allow complex communities and species to persist locally,
promoting population isolation and speciation, as well as facilitating the long-term persistence of relictual
lineages so characteristic of tropical biodiversity hotspots. In this talk I explore the hypothesis that
localized habitat persistence through time (stability) promotes lineage diversification and persistence. I
evaluate the importance of habitat stability using a multi-faced approach that includes: (1) the
development of a climate-based model of habitat stability extending to 120,000 BP in order to predict
which sky islands of the Eastern Arc Mountains were likely to have retained forest throughout glacial and
interglacial cycles; (2) I examine how climatic cycles have shaped regional diversification patterns using a
comprehensive molecular dataset from several lineages of birds; and (3) given predictions of which sky
islands had persistent montane habitat I make use of a phylogeographic-scale approach from a
multilocus DNA datasets in order to estimate the extent of genetic structure and diversity among East
African sky island birds, and establish whether peaks of allelic diversity and estimates of population
stability through time correlate with predicted areas of stability.




                                                                                                          75
Bowlin, Noelle (Scripps Institution of Oceanography); Hastings, Philip (Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, Canada); Thompson, Andrew (NOAA Southwest Fisheries Science Center, Canada)

Vertical distribution and abundance of mesopelagic fishes in the Southern California Bight

Mesopelagic fishes have a worldwide distribution from the Artic to the Antarctic with an estimated global
biomass of almost 1 billion tons. They are generally not commercially exploited because of their sparse
dispersion in the expansive mesopelagic zone, and possibly because of their high lipid content, but they
are an important prey source for many commercial fishery species as well as marine mammals and birds.
A large portion of mesopelagic fish research has been concerned with taxonomy and distribution with
much coverage in the North Eastern Pacific, focused in the Southern California Bight (SCB). The majority
of the research in this area is the result of the California Cooperative Fisheries Investigations (CalCOFI)
program which has produced over 60 years of ichthyoplankton data from the SCB. This region is part of a
coastal upwelling system where the southeast flowing California Current merges with the pole-ward
flowing California Countercurrent creating an ecosystem with an oceanographic complexity that supports
a diverse assemblage of marine organisms including many species of mesopelagic fishes. The CalCOFI
ichthyoplankton time series is rich with information and is regularly used in the literature to make
inferences on the adult populations represented by the larvae. Analyses of this dataset have also shown
general group assemblages that include mesopelagic fishes, but they generally lack depth stratification
information because the samples are obtained from integrated oblique tows from the upper 200m of the
water column. During the 1980s, 90s, and early 2000s, discrete depth sampling using a MOCNESS to
depths up to 1200m was carried out in the SCB for a variety of projects focused on commercially
important fish species. I will present a description of the vertical distribution and abundance of
mesopelagic fish larvae in the SCB using the data obtained from these discrete depth samples in
conjunction with the knowledge gained from the CalCOFI dataset to better characterize the role of
mesopelagic fishes in the SCB ecosystem.



Bradford, David (US Environmental Protection Agency); Knapp, Roland (University of California,
Canada); Sparling, Donald (Southern Illinois University, Canada); Nash, Maliha (US Environmental
Protection Agency, Canada); Stanley, Kerri (Oregon State University, Canada); Tallent, Nita (US
Environmental Protection Agency, Canada); McConnell, Laura (US Department of Agriculture, Canada);
Simonich, Staci (Oregon State University, Canada)

Pesticide Distributions and Population Declines of California, USA Alpine Frogs

Airborne pesticides from the intensively cultivated Central Valley of California, USA, have been implicated
as a cause for population declines of several amphibian species, with the strongest evidence for the
Sierra Nevada Yellow-legged Frog ( Rana muscosa ) and Southern Mountain Yellow-legged Frog ( Rana
sierrae ) at high elevations in the Sierra Nevada mountains. Previous studies on these species have
relied on correlations between frog population status and either a metric for amount of upwind pesticide
use or limited measurements of pesticide concentrations in the field. We measured pesticide
concentrations in multiple media at multiple times at up to 28 sites at high elevations in the southern
Sierra Nevada and evaluated the pesticide-decline hypothesis in three ways: (1) we described the
temporal variation in concentrations in lake water and compared these values to established critical
levels; (2) we tested the hypothesis that pesticide concentrations decrease with distance from the Valley,
a pattern that could explain the east-west pattern in population declines; and (3) we tested the hypothesis
that pesticide concentrations are correlated with frog population status (i.e., fraction of suitable sites
occupied within 2 km of a site). Media represented were air, lake water, sediment, and tadpoles of a
surrogate amphibian, the Sierran Treefrog ( Pseudacris sierra ). We also measured total cholinesterase



                                                                                                        76
(ChE) in P. sierra tadpoles; ChE has been used as an indicator for organophosphorus and carbamate
pesticide exposure. Results do not support the hypothesis for a pesticide effect on frog populations. Of
46 pesticide compounds analyzed (41 in water) among the various media, eleven were detected in at
least one medium with ≥ 30% frequency, representing both historically- and currently-used pesticides.
Concentrations were extremely low, on the order of 1 part per trillion in lake water, and well below critical
levels established for aquatic life. Evidence for a distance effect in concentrations among the high-
elevation sites was very limited. No negative association was found between frog population status and
the concentration of any pesticide or tadpole ChE activity level. We discuss the plausibility of factors
other than pesticides that may account for the population declines of these species.



Brandley, Matthew (University of Sydney); Thompson, Michael (University of Sydney, Canada); Wagner,
Gunter (Yale University, Canada)

Gene expression associated with pregnancy in a viviparous skink

Although the morphological and physiological changes involved in pregnancy in live-bearing reptiles are
well studied, the genetic mechanisms that underlie these changes are not known. We used the
viviparous African Ocellated Skink, Chalcides ocellatus , as a model to identify a near complete gene
expression profile associated with pregnancy using RNA-Seq analyses of uterine transcriptomes.
Pregnancy in C.ocellatus is associated with upregulation of uterine genes involved with metabolism, cell
proliferation and death, and cellular transport. Moreover, there are clear parallels between the genetic
processes associated with pregnancy in mammals and Chalcides in expression of genes related to
tissue remodeling, angiogenesis, immune system regulation, and nutrient provisioning to the embryo. In
particular, the pregnant uterine transcriptome is dominated by expression of proteolytic enzymes that we
speculate are involved both with remodeling the chorioallantoic placenta and histotrophy in the
omphaloplacenta. Elements of the maternal innate immune system are downregulated in the pregnant
uterus, indicating a potential mechanism to avoid rejection of the embryo. We found a downregulation of
major histocompatability complex loci and estrogen and progesterone receptors in the pregnant uterus.
This pattern is similar to mammals, but cannot be explained by the mammalian model. The latter finding
provides evidence that pregnancy is controlled by different endocrinological mechanisms in mammals
and reptiles. Finally, 88% of the identified genes are expressed in both the pregnant and non-pregnant
uterus, and thus morphological and physiological changes associated with C. ocellatus pregnancy is
likely a result of regulation of genes continually expressed in the uterus rather than the initiation of
expression of unique genes.



Brandt, Renata (University of Sao Paulo); Camacho, Agustin; Navas, Carlos A.; Kohlsdorf, Tiana
(University of Sao Paulo, Canada)

Is it more difficult to thermoregulate hot or cold? Implications for the evolution of thermal
physiology

In vertebrate ectotherms behavioral buffering of environmental changes may reduce natural selection
favoring physiological evolution. For example, the thermoregulatory behavior exhibited by some lizard
lineages likely favors an evolutionarily conserved thermal physiology. However, as any other
temperature-dependent trait, thermoregulatory behavior may be affected by temperature within the
ecologically relevant thermal range of a species. Under these circumstances, thermal-effects on
thermoregulatory behavior may decrease the quality of thermoregulation and favor exposition to extreme



                                                                                                          77
temperatures, favoring an increase in physiological thermal limits during evolution. Recent studies report
that thermal limits of ectotherms (high and low) decline with increased latitude or altitude but the lower
limit slope is much steeper than the upper limit. If behavioral thermoregulation functions better at
temperatures above the preferred zone than below it, one would expect that environmental changes in
lower temperatures could not be buffered by thermoregulatory behavior and that such change had to be
tracked by physiological limits. Therefore, we tested the hypothesis of thermal impairment of
thermoregulation by assessing voluntary maximum and minimum temperature variation as a proxy for
comparative thermoregulation precision. We measured voluntary thermal extremes of Gymnophthalmidae
and Tropiduridae lizard species in thermal gradients, and also in thermal chambers built to measure it
directly on gymnophthalmids. Voluntary minimum temperatures were significantly more variable on both
treatments and families. Moreover, several species were unable to avoid exposition to extreme low
temperatures. These results suggest increased impairment of behavioral thermoregulation at lower
temperatures and corroborate our hypothesis. Additionally, we found interesting interspecific differences
among the compared species. Further implications of our findings are discussed.



Brasileiro, Cinthia (UNIFESP); Consolmagno, Rafael (UNIFESP, Diadema-SP, Brazil); Toscano, Nayara
(UNESP, Rio Claro-SP, Brazil); Haddad, Celio (UNESP, Rio Claro - SP, Brazil)

Reproduction and diet of island and mainland populations of Thoropa toaphora (Anura :
Cycloramphydae) in Atlantic Forest, Southeastern Brazil

Island and mainland populations of animals may be different in life traits such as diet composition, clutch
size and egg size. Identifying these differences may help us understand the evolution of life history of
animals. Birds, mammals, and reptiles are better represented in the literature, while only a few studies
have focused on amphibians. Generally island populations of different taxa have small clutches and
larger eggs. Island animals also have a different diet composition from those of mainland counterparts,
showing fewer components and more plant items. Herein, we evaluated potential variations in
reproduction traits (clutch and egg size and total reproductive effort) and diet composition of six island
and three mainland populations of the rock frog Thoropa taophora in southeastern Brazil. This species
dwells from rocky seashores to rocky outcrops in the Atlantic rainforest. Eggs are laid on rocks near
dripping water, and tadpoles develop in the same sites after hatching. Males are territorial and display
parental care. We did not find consistent differences in any of the reproductive traits examined between
mainland and island populations. However we found a significant variation among populations of T.
taophora . Despite the insularity effect, densities of adults and availability of territories and oviposition
sites may be very important in the trade-off of reproductive strategies on islands. Ants are the most
important prey item for all T. taophora populations. However, the diet composition of island populations
consisted of fewer items than those of mainland populations. This result was expected due to the
depauperated fauna of potential preys for the rock frog. Our findings are a contribution to the knowledge
of insular shifts in life-history traits of frogs, suggesting the lack of a single pattern. Species with different
feeding habitats and reproductive modes may have different life strategies on islands.



Brattstrom, Bayard H. (American Association of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists);

Social Behavior Of Some Desert Lizards

Studies on the social behavior of lizards have shown them capable of a variety of behavioral postures,
sequences, and sociality, that exceed that found in some birds and mammals. While many lizards are



                                                                                                               78
territorial, others are hierarchial, and some have harems. Fossorial and leaf-litter lizards on the other
hand may just show simple, often size related dominance during chance encounters. Much of lizard
behavior is simple and genetic (displays, courtship), while other aspects of behavior are learned. There
are, however, strong density and resource related determinants of social behavior (food, hiding and egg-
laying placs, and display sistes). With an increase in population numbers (an increase in density),
aggressive interactions increase and behavior may switch from territory to hierarchy. Most lizards in most
situations know their social status by virtue of size, color, odors, sounds, or behavior of dominants.
Subordinates respond by behaviors or postures (escape, submission, waves) to indicate submission,
thereby avoiding energetically expensive or risky social interactions. Behavior observed in the laboratory
or other crowded situations allows the observer to see many if not all possible postures, behaviors, and
social interactions that may be in the behavioral make-up of any given species. It does not mean that the
lizard has to, or does utilize all of them in the wild, only that they are available if it needs them. While
elaborate male-male displays are known for quite a few species of lizards, complete behavioral
inventories (ethograms) are known for only a few species. I report here on postures, positions,
ethograms for nine species of southwestern United States lizards: Coleonyx variegatus, Callisaurus
dracinoides, Uta stansburiana, Sceloporus occidentalis, Phrynosoma coronatum, Heloderma suspectum,
Dipsosaurus dorsalis, Uma scoparia, Cnemidophorus hyperythrus, to species differences and the
complexity of lizard behavior.



Bray, Rebecca (Monash University); Thompson, Michael (University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia);
Chapple, David (Monash University, Melbourne, Australia)

Lizards in paradise: Demography and population dynamics of the Lord Howe Island skink
(Oligosoma lichenigerum)

The Lord Howe Island Group represents the eroded remnants of a large shield volcano that was formed 7
million years ago. The world-heritage listed archipelago is located 700 km northeast of Sydney, and
comprises the main island and numerous smaller outlying islands. The native terrestrial reptile fauna of
LHI consists of two species, the Lord Howe Island skink (Oligosoma lichenigerum) and the Lord Howe
Island gecko (Christinus guentheri). The endemic LHI skink was once widespread across a wide range of
habitats, but experienced severe population declines after the introduction of rats to the main island, and
was thought to have become locally extinct on the main island with populations persisting on small
offshore islands including Ball‘s pyramid. Our research has identified a number of populations of the LHI
skink on the main island, however, our understanding of the distribution, behaviour and ecology of the
species has been minimal to date. Here, we report on our ecological study, a 22 month mark-recapture
study within the grassy dune habitat of North Bay, Lord Howe Island. Consisting of three sites of 20 pitfall
buckets, surveys were conducted at 5 time points throughout the year, with traps open for 7 days/nights
for each survey period, resulting in 8400 trapping days/nights. Over 1000 LHI skinks were marked using
Visible Implant Elastomer (VIE) with a large portion of these recaptured at least once. Our results provide
us with information on seasonal variation in activity time, detailed demography, dispersal and movement,
growth rates and reproductive cycle. They suggest that LHI skinks live in high densities, showing very
high site fidelity both in the short and long-term and are a long-lived species. The data collected in this
study essential for the effective management of the LHI skink.




                                                                                                         79
Braz, Henrique (University of São Paulo); Almeida-Santos, Selma (Butantan Institute, Canada)

Does the cold climate hypothesis explain the evolution of viviparity in Neotropical water snakes
(Hydropsini)?

Viviparity is a derived trait in Squamata. Cold climates (CC) from high latitudes and altitudes are
frequently invoked as the selective pressure leading to viviparity. Such hypothesis predicts that (1) recent
origins of viviparity are associated with high latitudes and altitudes (cold areas); (2) proportion of
viviparous species is larger at higher latitudes and altitudes. Here, we test these predictions within a
phylogenetic context using water snakes of the tribe Hydropsini; a reproductively bimodal taxa widely
distributed in South America. Specifically, we (i) reconstruct the evolution of reproductive modes in a fixed
tree topology obtained by a supertree analysis of all genes present in GenBank for Hydropsini; (ii)
analyze associations between viviparity and high latitudes, altitudes and CC; (iii) compare proportions of
viviparous species across latitudinal and altitudinal distribution. Reconstruction of reproductive modes
suggests that oviparity is plesiomorphic in Hydropsini and viviparity evolved four times independently.
Only one origin may have occurred in cold climates. Viviparity was not correlated with latitude, altitude
and temperatures. Proportion of viviparous species is relatively constant over most of the latitudinal and
altitudinal distribution but is larger only at southern limits of distribution. However, this fact may represent
only differential survival in these areas and not that CC has played some role in the origin of viviparity.
Thus, our results support weakly the CC model and pose the needs to consider other factors as selective
agents for viviparity in Hydropsini. We suggest that viviparity may have evolved in Hydropsini as a
response to egg mortality in nests due to flooding. Hydropsini snakes inhabit rivers and swampy areas
and females lay eggs in crevices in the banks of these environments in the beginning of the rainy season.
At this time, the level of the rivers is low but increases as rainy season proceeds. If these eggs require a
long incubation period nests could be flooded before hatchings. By retaining eggs for longer periods,
females oviposit with embryos at late stages. This would decrease the remaining incubation period and
eggs would hatch before the river levels elevate and flood nests. Alternatively, the maternal manipulation
hypothesis could also be applied to Hydropsini because gravid females could enhance fitness by
maintaining optimal body temperatures for developing embryos than those available in nests.



Brehme, Cheryl (U.S. Geological Survey); Miller, David; Fisher, Robert (U.S. Geological Survey,
Canada)

Nine years of monitoring the endangered Arroyo toad in an occupancy framework: Findings,
program evaluation, and feedback loop to management.

Since 2003, we have monitored the endangered arroyo toad (Anaxyrus californicus) across 87 km of
habitat in three watersheds on Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton (MCBCP), California. The multi-year
species occupancy design originated as part of the Amphibian Research and Monitoring Initiative (ARMI)
within the USGS and incorporates imperfect detection of the species. In this program, we monitor the
presence of arroyo toad breeding populations by documenting the presence of eggs and larvae. Multi-
year occupancy models show that arroyo toad population dynamics differ according to hydrology.
Population dynamics within ephemeral systems are highly variable and driven by stochastic processes
(i.e. amount of rainfall), while those in perennial systems are more stable and likely driven by deterministic
processes (i.e. predation, competition, habitat alteration). In the perennial systems, detection of toad
larvae is consistently negatively associated with the presence of non-native aquatic species, including
bullfrogs, predatory fish, and crayfish. Species interaction models show that after drought years, these
non-natives are temporarily extirpated from ephemeral systems, and are slower than arroyo toads in




                                                                                                             80
recolonizing suitable habitat. However, without drying, the non-native predators have zero probability of
extinction. We currently have a monitoring and management feedback loop with MCBCP, who are
actively working to control non-native aquatics in this system.

In a recent program review, we used simulated data to evaluate the effectiveness of current and alternate
sampling scenarios to detect changes in the distribution of breeding arroyo toads. Using model
comparison techniques, we assessed the power to pick the ―true‖ model vs. competing models of decline
or no decline. All designs had relatively high power to detect a 20% decline in occupancy over a 6-year
period and were able to distinguish between differing patterns of decline simulated for ephemeral and
perennial watersheds.



Breitman, Maria Florencia (CONICET-CENPAT); Avila, Luciano; Parra, Micaela (CONICET-CENPAT,
Canada); Sites, Jack W (Brigham Young University, Canada); Morando, Mariana (CONICET-CENPAT,
Puerto Madryn, Argentina)

How lizards survived blizzards: phylogeography of the Liolaemus lineomaculatus group
(Liolaemini) reveals multiple breaks and refugia in southern Patagonia, and their concordance
with other co-distributed taxa

Patagonia was shaped by a complex geological history, including the Miocene uplift of the Andes,
followed by volcanism, marine introgressions, and extreme climatic oscillations during Pleistocene
glaciation–deglaciation cycles. The distributional patterns and phylogenetic relationships of Patagonian
animals and plants were affected in different ways, and those imprints are reflected in the seven
phylogeographic breaks and eight refugia that have been proposed from phylogeographic studies of
some plant and rodent clades of southern Patagonia. In this study we estimated time-calibrated
phylogenetic/phylogeographic patterns in lizards of the Liolaemus lineomaculatus group, and related
them to historical Miocene-to-Pleistocene events of Patagonia and the previously proposed patterns
summarized from earlier studies. We also found evidence for candidate species, and quantified
phenotypic differences among them. I ndividuals from 51 localities were sequenced for two mitochondrial
(cyt- b and 12S) and one nuclear (KIF24) gene regions. Our analyses revealed strong phylogeographic
structure among lineages and, in most cases, no signal of population changes through time. The
lineomaculatus group is composed of three strongly supported clades ( lineomaculatus, hatcheri and
kolengh+silvanae ), and divergence estimates suggested that their origins may have been associated
with the oldest known Patagonian glaciation (7-5 Ma), while subsequent diversification within the
lineomaculatus clade coincided with the large Pliocene glaciations (~3.5 Ma). The lineomaculatus clade
lineages are strongly structured genetically and geographically and are interpreted (with caveats) as
young candidate species showing various levels of morphological differentiation. Our findings suggest
that some Liolaemus lineages have persisted in situ in multiple refugia through several glaciation-
deglaciation cycles in southern Patagonia without demographic fluctuations. We also provide qualitative
evidence of some shared phylogeographic breaks and refugia among plants, rodents, and lizards.


Briggs, Cherie (Univ. of California, Santa Barbara);

Investigating the mechanisms of Bd-induced extinction versus persistence

 The outcome of infection with the amphibian chytrid fungus (Bd = Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ), can
vary greatly between amphibian species, and in some cases between populations of the same species.
In some amphibians, infection with Bd can lead to the disease chytridiomycosis and death of the



                                                                                                       81
individual, and declines and extirpation at the population level. Other amphibians, however, can become
infected with Bd without experiencing negative effects at either the individual or population level. In
California‘s Sierra Nevada, both of these outcomes of Bd infection are occurring in populations of the
mountain yellow-legged frog species complex ( Rana muscosa and Rana sierrae ). In the Sierra
Nevada, Bd has led to the extirpation of mountain yellow-legged frogs from hundreds of lakes, while
infected populations of the same frog species in other lakes have persisted for many years despite high
Bd prevalence in individuals. Efforts are currently underway, both in the Sierra Nevada and worldwide, to
attempt to control this pathogen and/or limit its impact on amphibian populations.

In this talk, I will investigate the theoretical mechanisms by which a pathogen can lead to population
extinction in some cases, but persistence in others. I will use mathematical models to (a) illustrate the
effects of factors such as amphibian life history attributes, environmental persistence of Bd, and host
immunity, on the outcome of Bd infection, and (b) investigate which of the available control strategies
have the greatest potential to protect amphibian populations from extinctions. Examples of control
strategies include treating individuals with antifungal chemicals to reduce Bd load, bacteria addition to
decrease individual susceptibility, or biological control against Bd zoospores in the environment.
Eradication of Bd is highly unlikely, therefore understanding the mechanisms that allow amphibian
populations to persist with Bd is important for conservation efforts.



Brochu, Christopher (University of Iowa);

Present as palimpsest: the importance of fossils in a phylogenetic context to the recovery of
historical pattern

The rapid growth of genomic data has revolutionized our ability to infer historical patterns for living
organisms, but the degree to which extinction obscures actual patterns in biogeography and past diversity
remains underexplored. Moreover, fossils are the only direct means for accessing the information lost to
extinction, but phylogenetic analyses simultaneously including living and extinct species are
comparatively rare in the literature. Crocodylians have an excellent fossil record and allow us to test
historical scenarios based on molecular analyses of modern species. What appeared to be substantial
conflicts between molecular and morphological data usually proved to be pseudodebates resulting from
different uses of taxon names in the literature, and with a few exceptions, different data sets support very
similar phylogeny estimates and divergence times.Molecular divergence time estimates indicate that most
living crocodylians are the products of Neogene radiations, implying a relatively slow phylogenetic fuse
extending back to the first appearance of the group in the Late Cretaceous, but fossils show that extant
lineages were uniformly more diverse during the Paleogene. Modern species are not only the products of
a radiation, but the survivors of a substantial phylogenetic bottleneck – something overprinted by data
from living species.Biogeographic analyses of living crocodylians produce statistically robust results that
nonetheless can be rejected when fossils are included; some groups, such as the gharials and alligators,
appear to have arisen in regions where crocodylians do not presently occur (e.g. western Europe). Again,
present geographic distibutions sometimes overprint historical occurrences. The inferred morphology of
the ancestral crocodylian is essentially unrecoverable in the absence of fossils, especially outgroups to
Crocodylia. Phylogenetic analyses including the extinct and the extant simultaneously hold the greatest
promise for illuminating both past and present.




                                                                                                         82
Brodman, Robert (Saint Joseph's College);

Short-term amphibian and reptile habitat use and abundance in response to oak savanna
restoration

Habitat restoration improves the diversity of community structure of plants and that can have short-term
and long-term effects on resident animal populations. To investigate the short-term effects of intense
habitat management to restore oak savanna habitat in northwest Indiana on animals, we assessed the
habitat use and abundance of amphibians and reptiles on control plots (closed canopy woodlots),
treatment plots (use of fire and tree thinning to open canopy), and reference plots with a history of oak
savanna management. We collected pre-restoration data on all plots to serve as a base-line in 2009.
Intense habitat management occurred on treatment plots in 2010, and then we collected post-restoration
data on all plots in 2011. In 2009 we found 817 amphibians and reptiles (18 species). There was no
difference in species richness or abundance between control and pre-treatment plots. In 2011 we found
561 amphibians and reptiles (19 species). Five species of amphibians and the total number of
amphibians were significantly less abundant in post-treatment plots than control plots and pre-treatment
plots. One species of amphibians (Fowler‘s Toad) and total reptile abundance were negatively correlated
with canopy cover. These results indicate that there is a negative short-term effect of restoration
management on most amphibians but a positive effect on reptiles and some amphibians. However,
reference plots had significantly more species and abundance than control and treatment plots in both
years. This suggests that the slong-term effect of oak savanna management on the herpetofauna is
positive.



Bronaugh, Whitcomb (Oregon State University); Swartz, Ernst (South African Institute of Aquatic
Biodiversity, Grahamstown, South Africa); Sidlauskas, Brian (Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR,
United States)

Morphological variation in the Cape Kurper, Sandelia capensis (Perciformes, Anabantidae) from
coastal streams of the Cape Region, South Africa

The Cape Kurper, Sandelia capensis (Perciformes, Anabantidae) is a near-endemic primary freshwater
fish of coastal streams of the Cape Floristic Region, South Africa, from the Langvlei River on the west
coast to the Coega River in the east. A previous study of mtDNA revealed two major clades (west coast
and south coast) separated by sequence divergences of 9.8-15.4% for the control region, and 6.7-9.4%
for cytochrome b. Combined, these two clades contain at least 10 distinct genetic lineages with mtDNA
sequence divergences between adjacent drainages of up to 6.7% for control region and 2.7% for
cytochrome b. As part of a larger study on the biogeography and systematics of S. capensis , we here
present preliminary morphological data to compare with the mtDNA lineages. In addition to traditional
morphometrics, meristics (fin-ray counts, scale counts), and comparison of pigmentation patterns, we
performed geometric morphometrics to analyze differences in body shape. We used principal
components analysis to identify the axes associated with the greatest variation, and allometric regression
to correct for allometry. We defined the geographic mtDNA lineages, as a priori groups (putative species)
and used canonical variates analysis and multivariate analysis of variance to test the morphological
diagnosability and distinctiveness of these groups. Variation along the first few principal components,
after correcting for allometry, is primarily in the depth of the body, length of the head, and size and
position of the eye. Preliminary analyses show that mtDNA lineages are clumped into at least four
morphologically diagnosable groups with varying degrees of geographic continuity. Some genetic
lineages within these groups may be morphologically cryptic.




                                                                                                        83
Brooks, Edward (Cape Eleuthera Institute); Brooks, Annabelle; Williams, Sean (Cape Eleuthera Institute,
Rock Sound, Bahamas); Chapman, Demian (Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, United States);
Howey, Lucy; Jordan, Lance (Microwave Telemetry, Columbia, United States); Abercrombie, Debra
(Abercrombie and Fish Consulting, Port Jefferson Station, United States); Grubbs, Dean (Florida State
University, St. Teresa, Canada)

The diversity, distribution and demographic population structure of deep water elasmobranchs in
the northeast Exuma Sound, the Bahamas

There is a fundamental lack of basic taxonomic, biological and ecological information pertaining to the
majority of deep water species, in particular elasmobranchs, largely due to the logistical challenges of
sustained ecological investigation in this remote and hostile ecosystem. The Exuma Sound is a deep
water inlet of the Atlantic Ocean ranging in depth from 500 – 2000 m and characterized by steep walls
along its margin. The sound is in close proximity to land (<3 km), facilitating the sustained investigation of
its deep water elasmobranch fauna over extended periods of time. A total of 69 deep water longline
surveys were conducted from September to December in both 2010 and 2011 (depth: 472.6 – 1024.1 m;
seabed temperature: 15.6 – 5.9 °C), resulting in the capture of 144 sharks of at least eight different
species. This does not include a potentially new species of Centrophorus currently undergoing
morphological and genetic assessment. Elasmobranch species richness declined significantly with
increasing distances from the edge of the Exuma Sound (ρ = -0.295, p = 0.014), increasing depth (ρ = -
0.242, p = 0.045), and increasing seabed water temperatures (ρ = 0.288, p = 0.016). Distance from the
edge of the Exuma Sound was a significant predictor for the presence or absence of Squalus cubensis,
Mustelus canis insularis, Centrophorus spp., Hexanchus nakamurai and Centroscymnus owstoni.
Furthermore, depth and temperature were significant predictors of the presence or absence of S.
cubensis, M. canis insularis and C. owstoni. Depth was also a significant predictor of presence or
absence of H. nakamurai. There were no predictable trends in the abundance of Hexanchus griseus,
Galeus springeri or Pseudotriakis microdon. Significantly skewed sex and/or maturity ratios were
identified for a number of species suggesting that this is a common life history trait in deep water
elasmobranchs. The results of this study indicate that the use of deep water longline surveys in the
Exuma Sound, and similar oceanographic areas, is an efficient and cost effective method for the
sustained investigation of deep water elasmobranchs, and is vital for the effective management of this
especially vulnerable group of species.



Brown, Donald (Texas State University); Swannack, Todd (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Vicksburg,
MS, United States); Forstner, Michael (Texas State University, San Marcos, TX, United States)

A Race Against Extinction: research to inform recovery efforts for the critically endangered
Houston toad

The Houston toad (Bufo [Anaxyrus] houstonensis), a species endemic to east-central Texas, has suffered
range-wide declines and extirpations since being listed as a federally endangered species in 1970. The
34,400 ha Lost Pines ecoregion of Texas has served as the last stronghold for this species since its
listing. Population monitoring results over the last two decades indicate a downward trajectory for the Lost
Pines population, and current exponential human population growth and recent catastrophic wildfires in
the Lost Pines could accelerate the apparent trend towards extinction in the wild. Conservation guidelines
and active management initiatives have been hindered by a lack of knowledge concerning spatial and
temporal habitat use, abiotic and biotic interactions, and population responses to management actions.
Over the past decade we have conducted Houston toad research designed to aid in recovery efforts for
this species. Through extensive breeding activity and movement monitoring, we found that adults were



                                                                                                           84
primarily active from late January to early May, showed strong within-year and among-year breeding site
fidelity, and typically remained with 75 m of breeding ponds during the breeding season. Connectivity
among ponds was maintained through occasional long distance dispersal of both juveniles and adults, but
individuals were not found to move more than 100 m through a grassland patch. Using a presence-
absence modeling approach, we found the strongest abiotic predictors for calling activity were absolute
humidity and wind speed, and the strongest predictor for movement activity was absolute humidity.
Prescribed fire is one of the primary active management tools currently utilized in the Lost Pines. We
investigated the short-term impacts of prescribed fires and high intensity wildfires on herpetofauna and
the invasive red-imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta), a known juvenile Houston toad predator. We found
no indication that low or high intensity fires resulted in significant direct mortality, or impacted fire ant
abundance near ponds. However, we found that low intensity summer fires could potentially benefit
dispersed juvenile amphibians through predator reduction. Direct management implications of these
studies include a better understanding of the distance of terrestrial buffer zones necessary for the
conservation of breeding sites, improved efficiency of call survey monitoring efforts, and validation that
prescribed fire is a beneficial management tool for the Lost Pines ecoregion.



Brown, Jason (Duke University);

Sailing, Swimming and Climbing: recent exploration of the Isthmus of Panama by the Strawberry
Poison Frog (Oophaga pumilio).

A central goal of phylogeography is to identify and characterize the processes underlying divergence. I
describe an approach that combines species distribution models (SDMs), demographic and genetic
models in a spatiotemporally explicit framework. These analyses provide insights into understanding the
genetic consequences of recent climate and sea-level change on Oophaga pumilio . I use the
contemporary geographic structure of genetic variation to elucidate the divergence of populations, but
also their demographic histories. I also address key questions regarding integrative approaches in
population genetics and phylogeography. This includes (i) general issues surrounding the conversion of
time-specific SDMs into dynamic landscapes, (ii) the utility of SDMs to inform demographic models with
deme-specific migration potentials and carrying capacities, as well as (iii) the contribution of the temporal
dynamic of colonization history in shaping genetic patterns of contemporary populations, and (iv) testing
the potential role of specific geographic features on the colonization history. These analyses reveal that
spatiotemporal explicit models of demographic history are a powerful tool and can greatly inform
biogeography studies.



Brown, Mary (USGS); Walls, Susan (USGS-Southeast Ecological Science Center, Gainesville, United
States)

Variation in salinity tolerance of larval amphibians: implications for community composition in
coastal wetlands

Amphibians in freshwater coastal wetlands bordering the Gulf of Mexico periodically experience acute
exposure to salinity from hurricane-related overwash events, as well as chronic exposure associated with
rising sea levels. In a comparative experimental approach, we tested the hypothesis that seven species
of amphibians vary in their tolerance to changes in salinity.   In a laboratory study, we exposed larval
Hyla cinerea (Green Treefrog), H. squirella (Squirrel Treefrog), Lithobates catesbeianus (American
Bullfrog), L. sphenocephalus (Southern Leopard Frog), Anaxyrus terrestris (Southern Toad), and



                                                                                                          85
Gastrophryne carolinensis (Eastern Narrow-mouthed Toad) from an inland population in Gainesville,
Florida and Osteopilus septentrionalis (Cuban Treefrog) tadpoles from Picayune Strand State Forest,
Collier County, Florida, USA to acute salinity for three days. For each species, we exposed tadpoles to
0.2 (control), 5, 10, 12, 14, and 16ppt with 30 replicated trials of each treatment. In all species tested,
tadpoles reared in the control and 5 ppt treatments had 96.7 – 100% survival, yet no individual survived in
the 14 or 16 ppt treatments. Survival varied among species in the intermediate treatments (salinities of 10
and 12 ppt). At 10 ppt, survival in native species ranged from 46.7 to 80%, except for Narrow-mouthed
Toad tadpoles, of which none survived at salinities of > 10 ppt. In contrast, survival was 100% for the
invasive, nonindigenous Cuban Treefrog at this salinity. At 12 ppt, survival in all native species was 0%
except for the Green Treefrog, of which only 3.3% survived.          Survival of Cuban Treefrogs remained
relatively high (75.9%) at this salinity. Our results illustrate that the non-native Cuban Treefrog has a
higher salinity tolerance than do native species, which may contribute to its invasion potential. Moreover,
species commonly associated with coastal freshwater wetlands differ in their salinity tolerances,
suggesting that salt water intrusion due to storm surges and sea level rise may affect the species
composition of these ecosystems.



Brown, Simon (Pacific Shark Research Center/Moss Landing Marine Laboratories); Kim, Sora (Dept. of
Geology & Geophysics, University of Wyoming, Canada); Bizzarro, Joseph (University of Washington,
School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, Canada); Ebert, David (Pacific Shark Research Center, Moss
Landing Marine Laboratories, Canada)

Interspecific and size related patterns of trophic separation in a central California skate
assemblage revealed through stable isotope analysis

Stable isotope analysis is a powerful tool for inferring the trophic position and the niche space of
consumers relative to prey species within an ecological community. Skates are mid-to-upper trophic level
consumers occurring on soft unconsolidated sediments at shelf and slope depths where they feed on a
wide array of invertebrates and teleost fishes. Five skate species ( Bathyraja interrupta, Raja binoculata,
R. inornata, R. rhina, R. stellulata ) and an array of representative prey species from Monterey Bay, CA
U.S.A were analyzed for stable isotope values of d15N and d13C to examine inter- and intraspecific
trophic niche space. Significant relationships of d15N and d13C values with skate size (Total Length)
were detected in the two largest growing species ( R. binoculata and R. rhina ). Statistical comparisons
among the studied skates support niche differentiation among species that reach a similar maximum size,
but not between smaller-sized skates and the smaller size classes of larger skates. Reasons for these
findings are further discussed in relation to habitat and dietary differences.



Brown, Tracey K. (California State Univ., San Marcos); Eifler, Douglas A. (Erell Institute, Lawrence, KS,
United States); Nagy, Ken (Univ. of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States)

Field energetics of horned lizards and the effects of myrmecophagy

Horned lizards (Phrynosoma spp.) are found throughout much of western North America and Mexico, a
distribution closely matching that of harvester ants, their primary prey. The unusual morphology of these
lizards and aspects of their behavior and life history are believed to stem from their dietary specialization
on ants. These traits, along with their largely myrmecophagous diet, have led to the hypothesis that
horned lizards may have unusually low metabolic rates, as have many mammalian myrmecophages. This
hypothesis was evaluated by measuring field metabolic rates (FMR) with doubly labeled water of three



                                                                                                          86
species of horned lizard. The Desert Horned Lizard, P. platyrhinos, was studied in the Mojave Desert, CA
during spring and summer (April to July) of five consecutive years that encompassed highly variable
rainfall; data on growth rate, body condition and behavior were also collected. The Texas Horned Lizard,
P. cornutum, was studied during the monsoon season (July) in desert scrubland near Portal, AZ. And,
Blainville‘s Horned Lizard, P. blainvillii (formerly P. coronatum), was studied during a spring/summer
(June to July) period in coastal sage scrub/chaparral in Riverside Co., CA. The FMRs from these studies
were compared to FMRs predicted for either ambushing , or for wide-foraging lizards of the same body
sizes.

The individual P. platyrhinos observed spent less than 3% of their time abroad moving around their
habitat, similar to the proportion of time spent moving by other species of ambush-foraging lizards. The
mean daily energy expenditure of P. platyrhinos for all years combined was 2.43 kJ/day (N=39, mean
body mass 21.4 g), which is not significantly different from the FMR predicted for an ambush-foraging
lizard of the same mass (2.6 kJ/day). However, between years, the FMRs of P. platyrhinos differed
significantly, and were substantially lower than predicted in years having low rainfall amounts. The
measured FMRs for P. cornutum (5.4 kJ/day; 53.2 g; N=14; dry year) and P. blainvillii (4.1 kJ/day; 42.8 g;
N=12; wet year) are both well below the estimated FMR for same-sized ambush foragers. As has been
found previously for the extremely myrmecophagous Thorny Devil (Moloch horridus), the energy needs of
horned lizards as a group may not be universally depressed when compared to other lizards, but may be
low in certain years and perhaps low routinely in certain species.



Brown-Peterson, Nancy (University of Southern Mississippi); Clardy, Samuel; Peterson, Mark S.
(University of Southern Mississippi, Canada)

Reproduction of Menticirrhus americanus (Sciaenidae) in the Mississippi Sound

Southern kingfish, Menticirrhus americanus , is a commonly occurring sciaenid along the Mississippi Gulf
Coast, but annual harvest has declined over the last decade.      Little is known about the life history of
Southern kingfish in Mississippi,     and thus the objective of this study is to establish the spawning
season, spawning frequency, fecundity, and size at maturity of this species. Specimens were collected
using hook and line in several locations within the Mississippi Sound . A total of 519 southern kingfish
(434 females, 85 males) were captured from April 2008 through May 2009. The size at 100% sexual
maturity for males and females is 141 mm SL and 171 mm SL, respectively, although few immature fish
of either gender were captured. Gonadosomatic index values and overall histological ovarian maturity
phases indicated that fish begin rapid gonadal development in February and March. Actively spawning
females were found from April through September, although some spawning capable fish were still
collected in early October. Southern kingfish are batch spawners and mean relative batch fecundity is
213.10 ± 35.68 eggs/g ovary-free weight. Spawning frequency averaged 6.93 days between spawns from
April through September, with highest spawning frequency occurring in mid-summer (June and July).
The reproductive strategy of M. americanus is similar to that of other sciaenids in the Gulf of Mexico,
although both relative batch fecundity and spawning frequency are lower than most other members of the
family.




                                                                                                         87
Bruce, Richard (Western Carolina University);

Life-history symmetry in the salamander genus Desmognathus (Amphibia: Plethodontidae):
studies in two stable assemblages in the southern Blue Ridge Mountains, USA

Ecology and conservation biology of stream salamanders remain active fields of research at such
institutions as Coweeta Hydrologic Laboratory, Highlands Biological Station, and Mountain Lake
Biological Laboratory in the southern Appalachian Mountains of eastern United States. Key components
of stream salamander assemblages in this region are species of Desmognathus. In this genus the larger
species tend to be more aquatic and the smaller more terrestrial. In a study of life histories in two
assemblages of Desmognathus in the southern Blue Ridge Mountains of North Carolina, USA, I
examined variation in survival, age at first reproduction, fecundity, body size, and propagule size. The first
three are direct fitness traits that enter into the characteristic equation, x=α Σ ∞ l x m x e −rx = 1.0; the
last two are indirect fitness traits. One assemblage, in the Cowee Mountains, comprises three species,
from larger to smaller, D. quadramaculatus, D. monticola , and D. ocoee . The other assemblage, in the
Nantahala Mountains, also includes D. quadramaculatus, D. monticola , and D. ocoee , as well as the
smaller, miniaturized forms, D. aeneus and D.wrighti . The analyses were conducted under the
assumption that populations have been relatively stable over the past 50 years; evidence supporting this
assumption is presented for the Nantahala assemblage. In both assemblages, age at first reproduction,
fecundity, and propagule size are greater in the larger, more aquatic species. Instantaneous mortality rate
is lower in the larger species; however, the latter have lower survival to first reproduction than the smaller
species because developmental time to sexual maturation is greater than in the smaller species. It
appears that tradeoffs exist between fecundity and survival and between fecundity and propagule size.
The tradeoff relationships among life-history traits among species in both the Cowee and Nantahala
assemblages may reflect fitness invariance or symmetry, perhaps stemming from design constraints in
the genus Desmognathus . Thus, tradeoff combinations observed in a particular assemblage are
expected to prescribe equivalent per capita relative fitness on the species. As a consequence, individual
species will exhibit long-term population growth rates of zero. In the context of current understanding of
phylogenetic relationships of Desmognathus , what remains unclear are factors contributing to the
correlation among body size, other morphological traits, and the position of species along the stream-to-
forest habitat gradient.



Bruner, John (University of Alberta);

A phylogenetic analysis of the Percidae using osteology

The present phylogenetic analysis found percids to be divided into five subfamilies based on 49
informative osteological characters, with the subfamily Percinae (genus Perca ) the most primitive form
within the family. The remaining four subfamilies contain the following genera: Acerinae ( Gymnocephalus
), Percarinae ( Percarina ), Luciopercinae ( Stizostedion,           Romanichthys, and      Zingel ), and
Etheostominae ( Ammocrypta, Percina, and Etheostoma ). Luciopercinae is divided into two tribes,
Luciopercini ( Stizostedion ) and Romanichthyini ( Romanichthys, Zingel ). 18 outgroups were used to
polarize the characters for the 28 percid species examined. I compare my results with two recent
publications, Smith and Craig (2007) and Whitlock (2010). Smith and Craig (2007) tried to find the
relationships of the serranid and percid fishes among the Percomorpha using a combination of RNA and
nuclear DNA molecular data sequenced from 180 species. Whitlock (2010) used 73 osteological and 4
integumentary characters to determine phylogenetic relationships of 27 species of percomorph fishes.




                                                                                                           88
Bruschi, Daniel Pacheco (Departamento de Biologia Estrutural e Funcional, Universidade Estadual de
Campinas (Unicamp), Campinas, SP); Busin, Carmen Sílvia (Instituto de Ciências Biológicas (ICB),
Universidade de Passo Fundo, Canada); Lima, Albertina Pimentel (Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da
Amazônia (INPA), Manaus, AM, Canada); Rivera, Mirian; Blasco-Zúñiga, Aílin (Pontifícia Universidad
Católica del Ecuador (PUCE), Quito, Ecuador, Canada); Recco-Pimentel, Shirlei Maria (Departamento de
Biologia Estrutural e Funcional, Universidade Estadual de Campinas (Unicamp), Campinas, SP, Canada)

Cytogenetic studies in Phyllomedusa vaillantii and Phyllomedusa ayeaye with descriptions of
multiple NORs

Chromosomal analyses have been successfully applied to anurans groups as valuable tool to investigate
chromosome evolution. To contribute to the understanding of chromosomal evolution in Phyllomedusa
genus, we described for the first time the karyotype of two species: P. vaillantii , not currently assigned to
any group of species and P. ayeaye of the P. hypochondrialis group. Specimens of P. ayeaye were
collected in Serra da Moeda (Minas Gerais State, Brazil) and specimens of P. vaillantii collected
Jacareacanga, Pará State, Brazil; Porto Velho, Roraima State, Brazil; and in Yasuní, Provincia de
Orellana, Ecuador. Chromosomes were stained with Giemsa and submitted to C-banding and
sequentially stained with two base-specific fluorochromes: DAPI and mytramycin (MM). The nucleolus
organizing region (NOR) was detected using Ag-NOR and fluorescent ― in situ ‖ hybridization (FISH) with
28S rDNA probe isolated from P. hypochondrialis. The karyotypes of both species were
2n=12M+12SM+2ST with chromosome morphology very similar to other karyotyped species of the genus.
In P. ayeaye , the NOR were detected in the pericentromeric region of 9p and in one homolog of pairs 3
and 4 at pericentromeric and interstitial regions, respectively, coincident with secondary constrictions.
These regions were also showed richness in GC nucleotides detected by MM. The C-banding revealed
centromeric heterochromatin in all of the chromosomes and DAPI stained the heterochromatic regions of
pairs 8 (both arms) and of pairs 6q and 10p. In all specimens of P. vaillantii NOR were detected in 7p,
positive to MM and coincident with secondary constriction. Centromeric C-bandings were detected in all
chromosomes and on pericentromeric regions in 11q and 12q, interstitial regions in both arms of pairs 1
and 8, and in 2q, 7q and 9q, and at subtelomeric region in 4q. All bands were DAPI positive. The
karyotype of P. vaillantii differs from those yet described for other species of the genus mostly by
heterochromatic pattern while the karyotype of the P. ayeaye show similar heterochromatin pattern with
other species of the P. hypochondrialis group, as P. hypochondrialis, P. nordestina and P. rohdei,
corroborating it inclusion in this phenetic group. Chromosomal data described herein may represent an
important contribution to cytogenetic studies of the genus Phyllomedusa and it will be useful for future
understanding of the chromosomal evolutionary relationships within the genus.



Buckley, John (Amphibian and Reptile Conservation Trust);

The Pool Frog in the UK - the reintroduction of an extinct native species

The last northern clade pool frog population in Britain became extinct in the 1990s just as it was
recognised as native. Research using four major lines of enquiry, genetic, bioacoustic, zooarchaeological
and archival, demonstrated native status and showed it belonged to the clade of pool frogs also found in
Scandinavia. A reintroduction strategy was written and a 10 ha receptor site with over 40 ponds prepared.

After exhaustive health screening, the first frogs were introduced from Sweden under licence in 2005 and
3 more annual releases followed. Since the last one in 2008 a small population has maintained itself at
about 50 adults. Although seen in a number of ponds it relies on just two nearby ones for breeding.




                                                                                                           89
Individual frogs appear healthy, adult survival is relatively high and breeding behaviour appears to be
normal but the population is not growing as rapidly as hoped. The population remains intrinsically
vulnerable to the threats attendant on all small isolated populations. The reasons for slow population
growth and failure to colonise adjacent habitat are not understood. In an attempt to improve the situation
some ponds were restored in the autumn 2011, head starting of tadpoles is being considered for 2012
and a short list of sites for the next reintroduction is being drawn up.



Buhlmann, Kurt (Savannah River Ecology Laboratory); Koch, Stephanie (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
Canada); Butler, Brian (Oxbow Associates, Inc., Canada); Tuberville, Tracey (Savannah River Ecology
Laboratory, Canada); Palermo, Veronica (Oxbow Associates, Inc., Canada); Bastarache, Brian (Bristol
County Agricultural High School, Canada); Cava, Zachary; Green, Jared; Slocum, Jeff (U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, Canada)

Reintroduction and Head-starting: Tools for Blanding's Turtle Conservation

We designed and implemented a project to reintroduce Blanding‘s Turtles ( Emydoidea blandingii ) to
Assabet River National Wildlife Refuge, Massachusetts, USA. We evaluated the relative benefits and
risks of using various life stages of Blanding‘s Turtles collected from a donor population within the same
watershed, including direct-release hatchlings (released in autumn shortly after hatching), head-started
hatchlings (raised in captivity for 9 mo), juveniles, and adults. We developed a simple population model
to evaluate which of several release strategies was most likely to result in a stable population at the
recipient site while minimizing negative impacts to the donor site.        Model results suggested annual
releases consisting largely of head-started hatchlings were most likely to achieve our goal, given the
assumptions inherent in the model. From 2007-2011, we have released 81 direct-release and 107 head-
started hatchlings at the refuge; approximately 70 more head-starts will be released as of May 2012.
Head-started hatchlings were larger (mean = 62.7 mm carapace length, 46.6 g) compared to direct-
release hatchlings (mean = 36.3 mm carapace length, 8.8 g). Simultaneous radio-tracking of 12
translocated juveniles has provided useful information on habitat preferences that we used to select two
sites within the refuge for future releases. Six head-started hatchlings have also been released with radio
transmitters (one in 2009 and five in 2010), but one was found deceased a year after release. We
continue monitoring efforts to assess survivorship, growth, and site fidelity of all released Blanding's
Turtles and to compare results among the head-started and direct-release hatchlings. We will update our
models and reintroduction efforts based on monitoring data.



Burbrink, Frank (College of Staten Island); Brandley, Matthew (School of Biological Sciences, Sydney,
N, Australia); Myers, Edward (CUNY Graduate Center, Staten Island, NY, United States); Chen, Xin
(CUNY Graduate Center, Staten Island, United States); Pyron, Alex (The George Washington University,
District of Coumbia, NY, United States)

Are processes of diversification in New World squamates deterministic?

Independent colonizations of the New World (NW) from the Old World has occurred among various
squamates groups several times and has yielded spectacular diversity of both species and form.
However, it is unclear if this extreme diversity is the result of single or multiple processes of species
diversification and morphological change over time for these NW colonizers. Here we examine these
processes using new computational techniques for four groups of squamates, which include viperids,
watersnakes, ratsnakes, and Plestiodon skinks. All four groups colonized the New World in the same
region in the early Miocene and thus share a similar source of ecological opportunity. Our results indicate



                                                                                                         90
that the four groups explosively radiated in the mid-Miocene with an eventual reduction in diversification
rates driven by diversity dependence. While processes of species diversification appear to be shared
among the groups, morphological disparity and change in morphology across the tree are both specific to
each taxon. This suggests that rates of morphological change are decoupled from rates of speciation.
Ultimately, these results indicate that processes of species diversification are deterministic in New World
colonizing squamates yet rates of morphological change reflect contingency and are specific to each
group.



Burger, Joanna (Rutgers University); Zappalorti, Robert (Herpetological Associates, Toms River, NJ,
United States); Gochfeld, Michael (UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscatway, NJ, United
States); Devito, Emile (New Jersey Conserve Wildlife, Far Hills, NJ, United States); Schneider, David;
McCort, Matt (Herpetological Associates, Toms River, NJ, United States); Jeitner, Christian (Rutgers
University, Piscatway, NJ, United States)

Long-term Use of Hibernacula by Northern Pine Snakes (Pituophis melanoleucus)

Understanding the specific habitat requirements of reptiles during different life stages or seasons is
critical to conserving viable populations. Northern Pine Snakes (Pituophis melanoleucus) are one of the
few species that spend the winter in underground hibernacula which they excavate themselves. We
report on 26-years (1986-2011) of monitoring Pine Snake use at seven hibernacula in the New Jersey
Pine Barrens. Our goal was to determine the frequency of repeated use, number of snakes present by
year, disruptions of hibernacula, and the relationship between number of snakes present and the
probability of occupancy of each hibernaculum in successive years. The overall goal was to determine
the importance of protecting known hibernation sites regardless of whether they appear occupied in a
given season. These data suggest that if no snakes are observed entering a particular hibernaculum over
a limited time period , it does not mean none are there, or that none will use it in successive years. The
variability in use suggests not only that predation and human disturbance can result in non-occupancy the
following year, but that environmental and temperature-related conditions force snakes to have alternative
hibernacula to reduce risk and insure survival. Pine Snakes are listed as threatened by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection for many reasons, including habitat loss. There is continued
pressure from developers to destroy habitat during development, including critical hibernation sites. The
long-term use of specific hibernacula even with periods of low or no use, suggest that they should be
protected to provide a matrix of available over-wintering sites.



Burgess, George (Florida Program for Shark Research, Florida Museum of Natural History, Univ.
Florida); Coelho, Rui (Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR), Faro, Portugal); Schofield, Pamela
(Southeast Ecological Science Center, US Geological Survey, Gainesville, FL, United States)

Advances in the taxonomic resolution of the Etmopterus lucifer-complex in the Indo-Pacific region

Lantern sharks of the genus Etmopterus (Elasmobranchii: Etmopteridae) are deep-sea sharks
characterized for producing visible light through epidermal photogenic organs (photophores). Within this
group, the Etmopterus lucifer complex forms a species complex characterized for having the dermal
denticles arranged in longitudinal rows. The worldwide distribution of this group and the morphological
and coloration similarities, historically have resulted in difficulties in species identification. Adding to that,
when captured from commercial fisheries this group of sharks is usually discarded due to their low to null
commercial value, making the availability of study material limited. Our review of this complex revealed
the presence of five morphs in the Australian region, including three undescribed species. The two



                                                                                                               91
previously described species, Etmopterus brachyurus (known from Western Australia) and Etmopterus
molleri (New South Wales) are distinguished by their elongate bodies and photophore and pigmentary
patterns. The three additional morphs newly described are provisionally referred to as ―finescale‖, ―dark‖
and ―rough‖. The undescribed ―finescale‖ (NSW and Queensland) is distinguished by its dense curved
denticles, while those of both ―rough‖ (an undescribed Great Australian Bight species) and ―dark‖ (NSW
and Tasmania) are more erect and set in well-spaced rows. ―Rough‖ and ―dark‖ morphs are separated by
a series of morphological and denticle density characters. Ironically, Etmopterus lucifer, by literature
attribution nominally cosmopolitan in distribution, is absent from Australia and seems to be confined to the
NW Pacific, where it was originally described. This study represents and advance in the taxonomic
resolution of this species-complex, that until recently has been poorly-studied. Such increased knowledge
will allow for more detailed (species-specific) data to start being collected, which will contribute for a better
management and conservation of this species group.


