s, and
within seasons. I found that males had larger home range sizes, made longer mean daily movements,
and moved longer total distances than females during the 14-month period. Also, during this time, body
size was not related to home range size or movements within each sex, but this effect was sensitive to
sample size. Among seasons, males moved longer distances than females during the spring reproductive
season but this effect disappeared during the summer post-mating/foraging season. There was also a
negative effect of body size on movement distances for males and a positive effect for females during
summer, but not during spring. Within the spring reproductive season, males with larger body sizes made
their first long distance mate-searching movement sooner than smaller males. Finally, within the summer
foraging season the sex, body size, and body temperature may influence both fine-scale movement
patterns and surface activity time. This work shows that in C. o. oreganus sex may be the most important
factor influencing movement patterns as males search for sedentary females during the mating
season(s), but other factors may have an effect at finer scales.



Pyron, Robert (GWU);

Divergence-Time Estimation Using Fossils as Terminal Taxa and the Origins of Lissamphibia

Were molecular data available for extinct taxa, questions regarding the origins of many groups could be
settled in short order. As this is not the case, various strategies have been proposed to combine
paleontological and neontological datasets. The use of fossil dates as node-age calibrations for
divergence-time estimation from molecular phylogenies is commonplace. In addition, simulations suggest
that the addition of morphological data from extinct taxa may improve phylogenetic estimation when
combined with molecular data for extant species, and some studies have merged morphological and
molecular data to estimate combined-evidence phylogenies containing both extinct and extant taxa.
However, few if any studies have attempted to estimate divergence times using phylogenies containing
both fossil and living taxa sampled for both molecular and morphological data. Here, I infer both the
phylogeny and time of origin for Lissamphibia and a number of stem tetrapods using Bayesian methods,
based on a dataset containing morphological data for extinct taxa, molecular data for extant taxa, and
molecular and morphological data for a subset of extant taxa. The results suggest that Lissamphibia is
monophyletic, nested within Lepospondyli, and originated in the late Carboniferous at the earliest. This
research illustrates potential pitfalls for the use of fossils as post-hoc age constraints on internal nodes,
and highlights the importance of explicit phylogenetic analysis of extinct taxa. These results suggest that
the application of fossils as minima or maxima on molecular phylogenies should be supplemented or
supplanted by combined-evidence analyses whenever possible.




                                                                                                           579
Quadros, Ana (Instituto Butantan);

The Ophiofauna of Botucatu

Throughout the analysis of the collections JJ, CEVAP, IBSP, ZUEC and UEL, a study on the ophiofauna
of Botucatu was made. We present a preliminary list of the species of snakes here found, with small
comments on their natural history. The number of specimens studied was 943. We registered, for
Botucatu, 51 species of snakes, distributed in 31 genera and 6 families. The families here found were
Anomalepididae (1 spp.), Boidae (1 spp.), Colubridae (7 spp.), Dipsadidae (32 spp.), Elapidae (3 spp.)
and Viperidae (7 spp.). The analysis of the relative abundance shows that Dipsadidae was the most
abundant family, with n=425 (44,83%), followed by Viperidae, with n=388 (40,93%), Boidae, n=62
(6,54%), Colubridae, n=57 (6,01%), Elapidae, n=15 (1,6%) and, at last, Anomalepididae, with n=1 (0,1%).
The five more representative species were Crotalus durissus (n=135, 14,31%), Oxyrhopus guibei (n=123,
12,8%) Bothropoides jararaca (N=121, 12,6%), Bothropoides neuwiedi (N=95, 9,88%) and
Sibynomorphus mikani (N=65, 6,76%). A higher number of individuals collected was registered for the
months of january to april that, together, sum up to almost 50% of the total. The months of june to
september registered a lower number of individuals. The spacial distribution analysis shows that a higher
number of snakes was found on the country areas of Botucatu (n=270, 41,54%), specially on pastures.
Due to the lack of studies of Botucatu‘s ophiofauna, this list is probably underestimated. It is mandatory
that future studies approaching this group and its ecological components on this region are made, using
appropriate sampling methodologies, in order to form an accurate list of the species of snakes of
Botucatu.



Queiroz, Nuno (CIBIO - University of Porto); Humphries, Nicolas (Marine Biological Association of the
United Kingdom, Plymouth, United Kingdom); Mucientes, Gonzalo (IMM ¿ CSIC, Vigo, Spain); Sousa,
Lara (CIBIO - University of Porto, Vairao, Portugal); Sims, David (2Marine Biological Association of the
United Kingdom, Plymouth, United Kingdom)

Behaviour, critical habitat and fisheries interactions of pelagic sharks in the North Atlantic Ocean

Surface longlines are widely known to interact with several marine predators and are linked with declines
in targeted and bycatch species in the open ocean, including seabirds, turtles, tunas and sharks. Many
large pelagic predators, such as blue Prionace glauca and mako sharks Isurus oxyrinchus, are of current
conservation concern because of their vulnerability to overfishing and rapid declines in populations.
Management of pelagic shark populations is poorly developed and takes little account of behavioural
characteristics such as spatial and temporal movements and distributions. Recent studies show that
some species remain faithful to particular regions with males and females segregating into different
regions for at least part of the year. This raises the issue of whether fisheries concentrate in key critical
areas where, for example, the majority of a population aggregate for feeding or mating opportunities, or
where important components of a population choose to remain. Consequently, we need to know the
extent to which fisheries overlap with different components of blue and mako shark populations in space
(both vertically and horizontally) and time. Using vessel monitoring system (VMS) data from Portuguese
and Spanish surface longliners operating in the North Atlantic and recorded movements of blue and mako
sharks from satellite-linked pop-up (PAT) tags, we aimed at identifying and characterising critical habitats
of these species, for testing the extent of space-use overlap with pelagic fisheries, and thus, investigate
the vulnerability of sharks to bycatch mortality. Geolocations and behaviour of individual sharks were
related to high-resolution maps of environmental variables (e.g. sea surface temperature, frontal
boundaries, sea altimetry and productivity) to quantitatively characterise the preferred habitat and, using
GIS technology and geostatistics, the degree of spatial and temporal overlap of shark distributions,



                                                                                                         580
including migrations, with the spatial extent and density of satellite-tracked longlining fishing vessels was
quantified. Longlines were deployed over an extensive area from 0 – 60ºN and 2 – 62ºW, with fishing
effort generally concentrated in three wide-ranging areas in the North Atlantic. Tracked sharks also
occupied a broad geographical area, but displayed high space-use of specific regions over 90 to 180
days. Our results indicate that different segments of the blue shark population may be facing differential
risk from spatially heterogeneous longlining effort, depending on which geographical regions are occupied
at specific times. Preliminary results on the space-use overlap between oceanic-tagged sharks and the
longlining fleet operating in North Atlantic waters will be presented.



Ramesh, Rasika (Department of Natural Resources Management, Texas Tech University); Griffis-Kyle,
Kerry; Perry, Gad (Department of Natural Resources Management, Texas Tech University, Canada)

An Amphibian's Dilemma: Wetland Site Selection and Community Assemblages in an Urbanized
Setting

The extent of urbanization has increased dramatically over the past century, causing significant
alterations to the landscape. Rapidly expanding city boundaries and runoff from urban and industrial
areas restrict the availability of natural areas for amphibian use. Hence, improving our understanding of
amphibian populations in urbanized settings is critical to their long-term conservation. Our study focuses
on suitability of available urban wetlands for amphibian use and reproduction in the city of Lubbock,
located in northwest Texas. Amphibian ecology within urban centers of the Southern High Plains remains
poorly explored; this project is the first of its kind in the region. A mid-size city with a population of
229,573, Lubbock is an ideal system for urban amphibian studies. Ephemeral wetlands characteristic of
this landscape have been extensively modified for storm water drainage, agriculture, and construction of
roads, buildings, neighborhoods, and recreational environments. A semi-arid climate with frequent
extremes such as prolonged droughts, together with urbanization, could have an adverse effect on
resident amphibians. We gathered baseline data to assess amphibian presence, species richness, and
species-specific preferences based on site-specific (water quality, percentage of emergent vegetation,
presence of fish) and landscape-scale variables (road density in a 500m buffer, nearest wetland
distance). Between March and October of 2011, we sampled 23 urban lakes in Lubbock after rain events
using a combination of audio surveys, visual encounter surveys, and larval pipe sampling and dip netting
surveys, to document amphibian species presence. Of the 13 species that occur in this region, we
detected five: Gastrophryne olivacea, Anaxyrus speciosus, Lithobates catesbeiana, Spea bombifrons
and Pseudacris clarkii . We found amphibians at seven lakes and tadpoles at four of these lakes. We
found significant negative effects of road density on amphibian species presence and richness (p ≤ 0.05).
We also detected significant negative effects of pH on amphibian species richness (p ≤ 0.05). Negative
impacts of these two factors were also observed specifically on P. clarkii presence (p ≤ 0.05). We will
complete a second season of sampling in 2012. This data is critical for prioritizing lakes in amphibian
conservation strategies and to indirectly monitor ecosystem function in urban wetlands.



Ramirez, Edward (University of Akron);

Gecko Digital Hyperextension: Exploring Diversity and Ecological Applications

The mechanics of gecko adhesion have been tested extensively at the micro- and nanoscopic scale.
However, relatively few studies have examined the adhesive system at the whole organism level. One
feature that has been overlooked in particular is gecko digital hyperextension. The first objective of this



                                                                                                         581
study was to measure the hyperextension of the digits of three different species and test for correlations
between hyperextension and kinematic variables such as duty factor. We tested the hypothesis that
digital hyperextension measurements are significantly different between species. The second objective
was to explore ecological applications to hyperextension by running geckos across substrates of varying
surface roughness. We tested the hypothesis that the sprint speeds of species with greater
hyperextension would vary less across substrates of different roughness. Our study provides insight on
the diversity of gecko adhesion and on how species thrive in different habitats. The results of this
experiment can also contribute to engineering applications, such as synthetic adhesives and robotics.



Randall, Lea (Calgary Zoo); Smith, Des; Jones, Breana (Calgary Zoo, Calgary, AB, Canada); Prescott,
Dave (Sustainable Resource Development, Red Deer, AB, Canada); Moehrenschlager, Axel (Calgary
Zoo, Calgary, AB, Canada)

No evidence of non-assisted northern leopard frog (Lithobates pipiens) recovery in southern
Alberta, Canada

Background/questions/methods: Dramatic decreases in northern leopard frog (NLF) abundance and
distribution were first reported in western Canada and the USA in the 1970s and 80s. As a result of this
decline, the western boreal/prairie populations of NLF are designated as Special Concern by the
Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada (COSEWIC) and Threatened under the
Alberta Wildlife Act. Recovery efforts have primarily focused on reintroducing NLFs to historical portions
of their former range. Recovery efforts are hampered by the fact that little is known about the population
dynamics and current distribution of NLF in this region. To address this knowledge gap we conducted
repeat visual surveys over three summers at 68 sites spanning 90,000 km2 of southern Alberta. Sites
were selected based on historical observations of NLF and those predicted to be suitable habitat. We
used occupancy modeling to explore the population dynamics of northern leopard frogs (NLF) in southern
Alberta.

Results/conclusions: Using AIC we compared models that allowed occupancy, and extinction/
colonization to vary with equilibrium models. Only the top model had a ∆AIC<2 indicating substantial
support and comprised 57% of the AIC weight. This model was an equilibrium model with constant
occupancy and constant rate of colonization/extinction suggesting that NLF occupancy over the course of
our study was stable. While we are cautiously optimistic that the population distribution of NLFs is not
continuing to decline, there is no evidence that they are recovering in their former range.



Randrianantoandro, Christian (Madagasikara Voakajy); Andriantsimanarilafy, Raphali (Madagasikara
Voakajy, Antananarivo, Madagascar); Jenkins, Richard; Griffiths, Richard (Durrell Institute of
Conservation and Ecology, Kent, United Kingdom)

Conservation and sustainable use of chameleons in madagascar

In Madagascar, 76 species of chameleons in the genera Brookesia , Calumma, and Furcifer are
described. These species are distributed in different habitat types from savannah grassland to the primary
humid or dry forests across an elevational gradient from sea level to the highest mountains. Chameleons
are important for ecotourism and trade but not well known by Malagasy people. Recent initiatives have
been undertaken to improve the conservation and sustainable use of these species. Red List
assessments of all Malagasy chameleons in 2011 identified 41 of the 76 species to be threatened. The
major threat identified is loss of habitat due mainly to selective logging and bush fires. Priority species for



                                                                                                           582
research and conservation were identified. Research is underway to determine the distribution areas of
the most threatened chameleons in the protected areas network in Madagascar. Only four large
chameleon species - Furcifer lateralis, Furcifer oustaleti, Furcifer pardalis, and Furcifer verrucosus -
have received quotas for the legal trade since 1994. A better understanding of illegal chameleon trade
was obtained after meetings with Malagasy operators and a pet market survey in Thailand. All recorded
imports to Thailand are reported as captive-bred animals from Lebanon and Kazakhstan. Some activities
were undertaken with the CITES authorities to re-evaluate all Malagasy chameleons for trade. Initially,
Furcifer campani was identified as an additional species that could support moderate harvest. This
species is easy to identify using identification guides. Public awareness, environmental education in
primary schools and student training were carried out to improve the knowledge and awareness of
Malagasy people concerning chameleons. Despite recent progress in research and conservation,
significant challenges remain to ensure the long-term conservation and sustainable harvest of
chameleons in Madagascar.



Rato, Catarina (CIBIO - Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Geneticos Campus
Agrário de Vairão); Carranza, Salvador (Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC-UPF), Barcelona, Spain);
Perera, Anna; Harris, David James (CIBIO - Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos
Geneticos Campus Agrário de Vairão, Vairao, Portugal)

When selection deceives phylogeographic interpretation in two Mediterranean geckos, Tarentola
mauritanica and Hemidactylus turcicus

First mtDNA phylogenetic and phylogeographical studies on the geckos Hemidactylus and Tarentola,
revealed a lack of diversity for this marker within the European populations of H. turcicus and T.
mauritanica, contrary to the divergence obtained in North Africa. These patterns of mitochondrial
divergence led researchers to assume that the European populations of both these geckos were the
result of a very recent colonization, possibly human-mediated due to their frequent association to
anthropogenic environments. However, evolutionary assumptions based only on one type of molecular
marker can be greatly misleading; mtDNA not only reveals just the matrilineal side of the story, but the
use of only one marker makes it impossible to assess if the patterns obtained are due to selection or
stochastic events (i.e. if they are due to processes affecting only part or the whole genome). Therefore, in
this work we aimed to understand which kind of processes have shaped the mitochondrial genome of the
European populations of both T. mauritanica and H. turcicus, using not only mtDNA but also nuclear
markers. The first approach consisted in the integration of phylogenetic with population genetic analyses,
followed by the assessment of selection constraints within the mitogenome of T. mauritanica,

Within the European populations of both T. mauritanica and H. turcicus the nucleotide diversity obtained
for the nuclear markers is significantly higher compared to the values observed for the mtDNA. Also,
neutrality tests detected selection on the mtDNA, but not on nDNA. Therefore, in the northern
Mediterranean populations of both these species, the lack of mitochondrial nucleotide diversity observed
is not the sole result of a recent colonization, but also due to selective forces acting only on the
mitochondrial genome.

The mitogenome study performed here, discovered that each clade of T. mauritanica inspected, presents
different evolutionary patterns as revealed by the nucleotide diversity patterns and selection constraint
analyses; both European (Clade A) and Iberian (Clade B) clades have been subject to a loss of
mitochondrial polymorphism, which in Clade A was due to selective forces, while in Clade B the pattern is
consistent with a bottleneck effect; the pattern observed in the southwestern Moroccan clade seems to be
coherent with adaptation of certain mtDNA variants due to positive selection. Surprisingly, there is an



                                                                                                        583
incredible heterogeneity of genetic divergence across the protein-coding genes of the T. mauritanica‘s
mitogenome; the highest peaks were obtained for ATP8 and ND5, making these genes as ideal to infer
about phylogenetic relationships of closely related Tarentola.



Ream, Joshua (University of Alaska Fairbanks);

An alternative, valuable and underutilized tool in herpetology: application of Local Ecological
Knowledge (LEK) to support research and management in Alaska

Six native species of amphibians occur within the state of Alaska, yet basic information on their
distribution, abundance and population health remains largely unavailable. This is typically due to the
financial and logistical constraints of research in a vast, sparsely populated region. Local Ecological
Knowledge (LEK) is increasingly recognized as a valuable and valid tool in the study of game species in
the North but it has rarely been applied to non-game species or specifically to herpetofauna. This study
considers the ability of LEK to aid in the acquisition of critical baseline ecological data for amphibians by
exploring the nature and extent of herpetological familiarity within local communities as well as the
frequency of human-amphibian interactions on the landscape. It also explores a subset of LEK,
Indigenous Knowledge (IK), as it relates to the Kiks.adi Clan of the Stikine Tlingit Indians, which identifies
the Boreal Toad (Bufo boreas) as its major crest. I report here on the use of mailed questionnaires and
semi-structured interviews to access the herpetological LEK of the community of Wrangell, Alaska located
at the mouth of the Stikine River Valley, a recognized biodiversity hotspot in Alaska. Preliminary data
suggests that human-amphibian interactions in the region are frequent, that LEK can enhance baseline
occurrence datasets for local amphibians and that amphibians are important as cultural, recreational, and
aesthetic ecosystem services in Wrangell. The study resulted in extensive observational datasets for
several species, substantially expanding existing knowledge of Stikine amphibians. This suggests that
LEK may be a valuable, underutilized asset to amphibian researchers in Alaska.



Reddy, Deran (University of the Witwatersrand); Hosie, Margot (University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa)

A morphological study of the lung of the nile crocodile using 3D serial section computer
reconstruction and scanning electron microscopy

The anatomy of the Nile crocodile lung was studied in order to document its morphology. This was done
in order to try and understand how crocodiles alter their physiology and facilitate ethological behavior
such as prolonged submergence under water. Techniques used included 3D computer reconstruction
using routine H&E serial histological sections and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of lung tissue and
latex casts. It was found that the lungs of the Nile crocodile display immense heterogeneity. This was
attributed to the high degree of regional internal subdivision of its parenchyma via three strata of septa;
primary secondary and tertiary. The cranial regions of the lungs display the greatest levels of internal
subdivision. The middle and caudal regions of the lungs display lower levels of internal subdivision
respectively. For the purposes of this study, the lungs were also divided into dorsal and ventral halves.
The ventral regions of the lungs; cranial, middle and caudal; were found to be more internally subdivided
than their dorsal counterpart regions. 3D computer reconstructions and SEM and demonstrate this
clearly.3D computer reconstructions and SEM of the lung also illustrated interfaveolar pores. In both the
dorsal and ventral regions of the lung, these were found to be prominent in the cranial regions decreasing
in a caudal direction. Conversely, in both the dorsal and ventral regions of the lung, smooth muscle was



                                                                                                          584
found to be prominent in the caudal regions decreasing in a cranial direction. SEM also revealed that cilia
are present within the actual gas exchanger, unlike any other vertebrate studied so far. These findings
corroborate the results of Farmer and Sanders (2010) which illustrates that air flow in the alligator lung is
unidirectional. The smooth muscle of the caudal regions of the lung control the rate and direction of air
flow to the cranial regions of the lungs where gas exchange occurs most effectively. The interfaveolar
pores facilitate the sharing of air between faveoli, terminal gas exchange units of the reptilian lung, to
maximize gas exchange as required. The cilia present traps dust and foreign particles which ensures that
the air reaching the terminal gas exchange units are ―clean‖. This facilitates a more effective gas
exchange procedure. Scanning electron micrographs of the lung also revealed an intriguing surface
topography and unique architecture. This provides insight into the pulmonary evolution of the reptilian
lung.



Reed, Heather (Acadia University); Mockford, Steve; Herman, Tom (Acadia University, Canada)

The Science of Stewardship: Species at Risk & Habitat Recovery on Private and Public Lands

Protected areas are unable to counteract global biodiversity loss, and the recent proliferation of
environmental law is an unsuitable mechanism to deal with the majority of loss occurring outside
protected areas. Landowners and resource users lack a mechanism to understand the cumulative
impacts (beneficial or detrimental) of individual decisions. Although landowner and community
stewardship is required to achieve species and habitat recovery – little peer reviewed information is
available specific to ‗how‘ conservation stewardship is achieved. Though many conservation initiatives
exist in Canada and globally – not all key stakeholders are willing or able to be involved. This begs the
question, if recovery science is identifying threats to, and actions for, recovery without addressing the
human dimensions required for stewardship to take place - what is? This is of particular importance in
Nova Scotia where &gt;70% of provincial lands are privately owned. This research directly addresses
gaps that exist between conservation science, regulations, and programs for more than 40 endangered
and threatened species in Nova Scotia- and the measurable behaviour change (stewardship) required to
recover them. An extensive trans-disciplinary literature review, and interviews with formal agencies and
community groups who develop, deliver, or support volunteer based conservation stewardship programs
was undertaken with the goal of finding synergies between the literature and current practice. The result
is a framework of the conservation stewardship-process, which was investigated and evaluated. The
framework identified core concepts embodied in the stewardship process such as: translating research
information into landowner/public knowledge, knowledge application to navigate the decision-making
process, and transformation of decisions to targeted and measurable behaviour change. Additionally, the
interviews identified key elements (group structure and management, internal/external communication,
and program development and evaluation, etc.) that lead to the delivery of successful program with
longevity and the ability to influence social norms (conservation behaviours) at local scales. The
framework was evaluated with a mixed-methodology that included Principle Component Analysis, and
Grounded Theory approach. The framework was translated into a simple tool for use by organizations in
evaluating and designing effective conservation programs for species and habitat recovery and
management.




                                                                                                         585
Reed, Robert N. (U.S. Geological Survey); Rodda, Gordon H. (U.S. Geological Survey, Canada); Siers,
Shane R.; Savidge, Julie A. (Colorado State University, Canada)

Setting the stage for damaging invaders: Do assignations of potential invaders as low risk ignore
ecosystem consequences of invasions?

Risk assessments for invasive species typically focus on (1) the probability of a species establishing in a
recipient location and (2) the probability that the species will cause ecological or economic impacts. In
these risk assessment schemes, organisms that fail to receive high risk ratings for both elements are
often rated fairly low in terms of overall risk. However, such schemes assign risk at a species-by-species
level, without consideration of potential ecosystem-level consequences of the establishment of seemingly
low risk species. One such consequence could be that a low risk species, once established, aids the
establishment or increases the impacts of a second, more damaging species. We illustrate this possibility
using data on vertebrates on Guam, where the native avifauna has been largely eliminated by the
invasive brown treesnake ( Boiga irregularis ). Of the remaining vertebrate prey items available to brown
treesnakes on Guam, approximately half of the lizards and all of the terrestrial mammals are themselves
introduced. Using data from historical surveys, complete removal plots, snake necropsies, and other
projects, we demonstrate that current snake densities are largely tied to the availability of exotic
vertebrate prey. Exotic prey historically helped sustain snake populations at high levels even while bird
populations were being depleted on Guam, which facilitated the island-wide extinction of many bird taxa.
Furthermore, the introduction of new prey species to Guam is ongoing and these introductions could
bolster snake populations, making snake control more difficult. Apart from rodents, none of the exotic
prey species currently consumed by brown treesnakes would be assigned a high risk rating when
subjected to most formal risk assessment schemes. Low risk species can thus set the stage for the
establishment of high risk species, and by subsidizing the high risk species can increase its ecological
impacts and make it more resilient to control efforts. Such considerations are as yet not incorporated in
formal risk assessments for potential invaders.



Refsnider, Jeanine (Iowa State University);

Environmental and evolutionary constraints on nest-site choice in a reptile with temperature-
dependent sex determination

Female ability to match nest characteristics with environmental conditions can influence offspring survival,
quality, and sex ratio in species with temperature-dependent sex determination. Adjustment of nest
characteristics such as shade cover and nest depth may provide a mechanism by which organisms can
track climate change. However, constraints on availability of suitable habitat or morphology may limit the
extent to which such adjustment is possible. I studied resource selection of shade cover over nest sites
by painted turtles (Chrysemys picta) in populations at the center and southern edge of their range to
determine whether nesting habitat is limited at either site. I also used several measures of female body
size and nest characteristics to predict nest depth in both populations. I found that while turtles in both
populations selected nest sites that were shadier than average available sites, overall resource selection
differed between the populations, which was likely due to differences in vegetation structure between
sites. Further, accessible, highly-shaded nest sites are limited at the southern site, demonstrating an
environmental constraint on adjustment of nest-site choice in this population. I found that female body
size, and, to a lesser extent, clutch size, are important predictors of nest depth. Nest depth in painted
turtles appears to be constrained by female body size because smaller females have shorter rear limbs
with which to excavate the nest cavity. Females from the southern site constructed deeper nests than




                                                                                                        586
females from the central site, and females from the southern site also appear to be constructing nests
with depths closer to their maximum physical capability compared to females from the central site. These
results suggest that southern females may have less capacity to compensate for a warming climate by
constructing deeper nests than females from the center of the species‘ range. Because evolutionary
constraints on female body size limit the extent to which nest depth can be adjusted, shade cover over
nest sites may be the component of nest-site choice that is most adjustable in response to climate
change. By maintaining a range of shade cover options in nesting areas used by turtles, plasticity for
choice of shade cover over nests can be expressed, and thereby potentially allow turtles to minimize
skews in offspring sex ratio caused by climate change.



Reichling, Steve (Memphis Zoo);

Progress and Challenges in Returning the Louisiana Pine Snake into Restored Habitat

 A partnership between zoos, academia, state and federal agencies to conserve the Louisiana pine
snake ( Pituophis ruthveni ) has launched a reintroduction effort.           Captive-bred snakes are being
released into tracts of restored habitat within the historic range of the species. Suitable release snakes
are difficult to acquire, and previous experimental reintroduction showed that acclimation and survival in
natural habitat can be poor in captive-bred P . ruthveni .        Consequently, it is essential that released
snakes be closely monitored for evaluation and improvement of the program‘s effectiveness. Due to the
species‘ unique biological and husbandry attributes, the steady release and subsequent monitoring of
sufficient numbers of propagules presents significant challenges.



Reider, Kelsey (Florida International University); Donnelly, Maureen (Florida International University,
Miami, FL, United States)

Are peccaries contributing to the amphibian and reptile declines at La Selva Biological Station,
Costa Rica?

Populations of the highly diverse leaf litter-dwelling frogs and lizards within the nature reserve at La Selva
Biological Station in Costa Rica have declined by 75% over the last 35 years. The causes of these
worrisome declines are unknown, but likely include synergistic effects of multiple stressors that include
infectious diseases and changes to the quality and/or quantity of the leaf litter habitat. One factor that
could affect the leaf litter habitat is an apparent increase in the size of the collared peccary ( Pecari tajacu
) population within the La Selva reserve. Peccaries are medium-sized, pig- like, terrestrial mammals that
travel in large groups and can create disturbances in the leaf litter and soil. Peccaries may affect the
breakdown of leaf litter, the cycling of nutrients, and the availability of food and habitat for animals that
live in the leaf litter. I tested the hypothesis that peccaries are contributing to the ongoing leaf litter
amphibian and reptile declines at La Selva by comparing the abundances of amphibians and reptiles
inside fenced peccary exclusion plots to paired, open control plots. If peccaries were contributing to the
amphibian and reptile declines at La Selva, I expected to find fewer amphibians and reptiles in the control
plots where peccaries had access. However, I encountered significantly more individual amphibians and
reptiles on control plots than inside peccary exclusion plots ( t = -3.408, P = 0.000653). My results
indicate that peccaries are not one of the stressors contributing to the amphibian and reptile declines at
La Selva.




                                                                                                            587
Reilly, Sean (UC Berkeley); McGuire, Jim (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, Canada)

Comparative phylogeography of reptiles & amphibians from the Lesser Sunda Islands, Indonesia -
testing the stepping stone hypothesis in a two-way filter zone

The Lesser Sunda Islands occupy the area between Java and New Guinea and form a set of ―stepping
stones‖ for taxa dispersing between the Oriental and Australo-Papuan biogeographic regions. This area
of Indonesia has been termed ―Wallacea‖, and it is putatively one of the best examples of a two-way filter
in the world. If these islands are acting as stepping stones, then this should be evident in the topology of
molecular phylogenies for taxa that have colonized them. Taxa dispersing from Asia eastward through the
archipelago should have their most basal lineages associated with the westernmost islands, and the most
derived lineages associated with the easternmost islands. The reverse pattern would be expected for taxa
dispersing from Australia or New Guinea. Here we use phylogenies from multiple species of lizards,
snakes, and frogs that are co-distributed across the Lesser Sunda Islands to test the ―stepping stone‖
colonization hypothesis. Our results indicate that these islands are not acting as stepping stones, and that
more complicated colonization scenarios are needed to produce the observed phylogenies. However,
there are some repeated patterns that emerge across taxa suggesting the occurrence of a common
vicariance or dispersal mechanism tied to historical geological forces or pervasive ocean and wind
currents.



Reinke, Beth (Indiana University); Burnside, Andrew; Fitzpatrick, Kara; Lawing, A. Michelle; Polly, P.
David (Indiana University, Canada)

Comparative analysis of body size, diet, and growth of the painted turtle, Chrysemys picta,
between eutrophic and oligotrophic waters

Bodies of water in the United States are increasingly being affected by the anthropogenic introduction of
nutrients. Eutrophic bodies of water have a high level of nutrients and high productivities which alter plant
and algal growth and could potentially affect the diets and growth rates of vertebrates. Freshwater turtles
in eutrophic sites may consume more protein because of the high productivity of the environments.
Conversely, they may consume more plant matter because of the availability of plant resources and the
difficulties of consuming mobile prey in dense macrophytic growth. We captured Chrysemys picta from
eutrophic and oligotrophic bodies of water to determine if water productivity affects size, diet, and growth
rates. We found that C. picta male and juvenile plastron lengths are significantly different by water
quality (p=0.028 and p=0.013, respectively), and that the percent carnivory of C. picta female‘s diet is
significantly influenced by water quality (p=0.002). Additionally, we found that mature turtles in waters of
different productivities do not have significantly different growth rates (p&gt;0.05), but juveniles do have
significantly different growth rates (p=0.043). We suggest that water quality be assessed in future studies
of freshwater turtles and other aquatic vertebrates, as it can have significant impacts on size, diet, and
growth.



Relyea, Rick (University of Pittsburgh);

Putting the ecology back into ecotoxicology

To understand the effects of pesticides on non-target organisms such as amphibians, the traditional
approach is to conduct single-species lab experiments. Growing evidence has made it clear that this
approach can produce limited insights because it removes the organisms from their ecological context.



                                                                                                         588
The reality is that amphibians live in communities that contain a wide range of environmental stressors
and an abundance of indirect effects that can have both positive and negative effects on amphibians. As
a result, if we wish to understand how pesticides can affect amphibians, we need to examine their
performance when returned to their natural ecological context. In this symposium, I will highlight my
group‘s research on how natural stressors and indirect effects, combined with changing abiotic
conditions, can dramatically affect our understanding of how pesticides affect amphibians. While the
insights are focused on the aquatic communities in which many larval anurans and caudatans live, the
principles apply to all of the communities in which all stages of amphibians live.



Reshetnikov,    Andrey       (Ecology&Evolution     Institute);   Manteifel,   Yuriy;   Kiseleva,   Elena
(Ecology&Evolution Institute, Canada)

Behavioral responses of anuran tadpoles and the fish rotan to a low molecular weight metabolite

Ammonia (NH 3 ) is a final product of tadpole nitrogenous metabolism. This low molecular weight
metabolite is present as background in water of natural aquatic sites. Kiesecker et al. (1999)
demonstrated that larvae of North-American amphibian species Rana aurora avoid zones with increased
concentrations of conspecific excretions and ammonia. We found similar behavioral reactions in larvae of
three European anurans ( R. temporaria, R. arvalis , and Bufo bufo ). We assumed that amphibian
larvae may use information about gradient of ammonia concentration as a signal for avoidance of the
invisible alarm source. We determined differential sensitivity of anuran larvae to ammonia in experimental
conditions with various b ackground concentrations of NH 3 . This characteristic varied in the studied
species, being higher in the frog R. temporaria, than in the toad B. bufo . This inter-species
difference may be well explained by ecological features: in contrast to the frog, the toad larvae have
diverse antipredator mechanisms (noxious substances in the skin and alarm pheromone, excreting from
damaged skin) and hence they are less dependent on the reactions to ammonia.            Thus, tadpoles of
examined anurans are capable of using ammonia as a cue for intra- and interspecies communication.
We also found avoidance of high ammonia concentration by invasive fish rotan Perccottus glenii .
However, communicative role of ammonia for this fish is still discussed. In general, communicative role of
simple substances is perspective for further investigation of chemical communication in amphibians, fish
and other aquatic animals. A mmonia may be regarded as one-component nonspecific disturbance
pheromone. We suppose that the dynamics of ammonia concentration may act as chemical cue in
diverse biocenological interactions.



Reshetnikov, Andrey (Ecology&Evolution Institute);

Interactions between native amphibians, reptiles, and the invasive fish Perccottus glenii

Various aspects of interactions between European amphibians, reptiles and the invasive fish rotan,
Perccottus glenii Dybowski, 1877 (family Odontobutidae), also known as Amur or Chinese sleeper, were
studied. This fish is native to the Far East region of Eurasia and was transported for the first time into
Europe one hundred years ago. Since the beginning of the 20th century, non-native populations of rotan
have been recorded in Russia, Mongolia, Kazakhstan, Belarus, Ukraine, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia,
Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, Serbia, Bulgaria, Croatia , Romaniaand Moldova. The expansion of this
species is continuing and could potentially spread to Western Europe and North America. Investigations
of rotan-amphibian and rotan-reptile interactions were performed using multi-year ecosystem monitoring
of amphibian breeding sites in the region of Glubokoe Lake Biological Station (GLBS), Moscow Province,



                                                                                                      589
Russian Federation. Research included regular expeditions to several regions of the Russian Federation
and experimental approaches under laboratory conditions at the GLBS. Results show rotan are capable
of colonising small water bodies – favourable breeding sites of native amphibians. In general, rotan
negatively influence amphibian temporary assemblages in ponds and other aquatic sites. Breeding
success of most amphibian species is absent in small pond-like water bodies inhabited by rotan. However
vulnerability of native amphibians to predation of rotan may depend on season, limnological
characteristics of a waterbody, structure of ecosystem, systematic position, behavior and ontogenetic
stage of the potential prey objects. The most vulnerable are larvae of Triturus and Lissotriton newts as
well as larvae of Rana and Pelophylax frog species during their summer development in small shallow
water bodies where native predatory fish species are absent. The inter-ecosystem impact of aquatic
invaders on reptiles has evaded the attention of investigators and hence may be underestimated.
Evidence of both direct and indirect interactions of rotan and European semi-aquatic reptiles was recently
obtained.



Reyes, Catalina (University of British Columbia); Fong, Angelina (Macquarie University, Sydney,
Australia); Milsom, William (University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada)

Peripheral arterial chemoreceptors in reptiles and their role in cardiorespiratory control

Vertebrates respond to respiratory stimuli such as low oxygen and high CO2 by adjusting cardio-
respiratory variables to maintain blood gas homeostasis. Arterial chemoreceptors responsible for sensing
these stimuli have been well studied in mammals, but are relatively unknown in lower vertebrates. In
particular, the mechanisms underlying O2-sensing, the O2 stimuli that trigger cardio-respiratory
responses (arterial O2 tension or content) and the reflex roles of different receptor groups remain
unknown. The phylogenetic trend appears to be a reduction in the number of chemosensory areas from
fish to reptiles to mammals. It has been hypothesised that multiple chemoreceptive sites may be
advantageous for reptiles that regulate blood gases by changing ventilation and/or the degree of cardiac
shunt (fraction of blood re-circulated through the systemic or pulmonary circulations). Three functional
chemosensory areas have now been identified in the carotid artery, aorta and pulmonary artery of turtles
and snakes. All three chemosensory areas have putative oxygen sensing cells innervated by the Vagus
nerve and with similar neurochemical content as in fish and mammals. In snakes, stimulation of aortic
and pulmonary chemoreceptors increases ventilation and reduces cardiac shunt, while carotid
chemoreceptors are primarily involved in ventilatory control. Our work confirms that reptiles have multiple
chemosensory sites with different reflex roles (respiratory or cardiovascular), and suggests that the O2-
sensing structures are highly conserved among vertebrates. Funded by NSERC Canada.



Reynolds, R. Graham (University of Massachusetts Boston);

Conservation Genetics of West Indian Boas

In the Caribbean, West Indian boas represent a diverse and ecologically important group of poorly-
studied large snakes. The boid genus Epicrates contains nine species in the West Indies, several of
which are listed as threatened or endangered, while the status of the others remains unknown. The Turks
Island Boa ( E. chrysogaster ), endemic to the Turks and Caicos Archipelago, has been the subject of a
recent intensive conservation, ecological, and genetic study. The Puerto Rican boa ( E. inornatus ),
endemic to the island of Puerto Rico, is fairly well studied from an ecological perspective; however no
conservation genetic studies have been undertaken. The Virgin Islands boa ( E. granti ) is found in



                                                                                                       590
eastern Puerto Rico and the U.S. and British Virgin Islands, and is the subject of a reintroduction
campaign that is increasing numbers and establishing new populations, though no conservation genetic
studies have been conducted on this species. Knowledge of standing genetic variation within and
between populations of species is important in designing conservation strategies. Here I report on our
work to evaluate genetic diversity in Turks Island, Puerto Rican, and Virgin Islands boas in a conservation
and evolutionary context.



Reynolds, R. Graham (University of Massachusetts Boston);

Invasion of Puerto Rico by a Giant Constricting Snake

Invasive species are among the top three causes of global biodiversity decline, and understanding their
means and avenues of introduction and establishment is important for regional conservation and
management. Recently, much attention has been given to the establishment of giant constricting snakes
outside of their native ranges- particularly in the Everglades of Florida, USA. Boa constrictors ( Boa
constrictor ), native to Central and South America, a few continental islands, and some of the Lesser
Antilles, are locally established in south Florida, and are also establishing damaging invasive populations
on the islands of Cozumel and Aruba. Puerto Rico has a thriving exotic reptile trade, and some of these
species, such as Green Iguanas ( Iguana iguana ) and Red-Eared Sliders ( Trachemys scripta elegans )
have become established throughout the island. Giant constricting snakes, including Burmese ( P.
molurus ) and Reticulated ( Broghammerus reticulatus ) Pythons, Dumeril‘s Boas ( Acrantophis dumerili ),
and Boa Constrictors ( B. constrictor ), are regularly found across the island yet until recently none had
become reproductively established. Here we provide the first substantial report of Boa constrictors
establishing an invasive population on the island of Puerto Rico, and using genetic methods we show that
this population was recently founded from a single introduction of closely related individuals instead of
ongoingrelease of propagules.



Richards-Hrdlicka, Katy (Yale University);

Using qPCR to detect the EIP, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis, in fluid-preserved amphibian
museum specimens

Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis       is a fungal pathogen driving many amphibian species extinct.     For
some species, the only place they can be found is in natural history museum collections. Harnessing
molecular tools to uncover this pathogen‘s date of arrival and movement throughout a region and through
time will prove useful to broader B. dendrobatidis research.         However, it has remained difficult to
access B. dendrobatidis DNA from within preserved host tissues, especially specimens that were
originally fixed in formalin. I describe two methods to extract and detect, via qPCR, B. dendrobatidis
DNA in herpetological natural history collections.    Both extraction methods use a DNA-binding matrix,
either a magnetic bead resin or a silica-membrane, that retains and separates the extracted DNA from
potentially qPCR-inhibiting contaminates.        Nine positive control specimens enabled initial method
optimizations, but coincidently limited empirical comparisons between each extraction method.
Therefore to test each method, a pilot study involving 164 formalin-fixed amphibians from Connecticut,
either having been originally fixed in the 1970‘s or 2000‘s, were swabbed and samples extracted by one
of the two presented methods. Each method successfully extracted B. dendrobatidis DNA; of the 164
specimens tested, 37 were found Bd -positive, including 6 specimens (representing 3 caudate species)
from 1968. The results suggest that these methods and qPCR are well suited to assess Bd presence



                                                                                                       591
but not to assign zoospore loads in preserved specimens.        Further research would benefit from a
comparison between the extraction methods to determine which yields more DNA or is more sensitive to
low zoospore loads or degraded DNA.      Recommendations for choosing and using these methods as
well as sampling herpetological natural history collections for B. dendrobatidis DNA detection are
provided.



Richardson, John (University of British Columbia);

Disconnections of riparian-associated amphibians from dispersal routes resulting from forest
harvesting in Pacific coastal ecosystems

Coastal forests and aquatic ecosystems of southern British Columbia are host to over a dozen amphibian
species and concern over impacts from forest harvesting has motivated many studies. A meta-analysis
of the effects of leaving riparian forest buffers shows that even that is not sufficient to maintain amphibian
densities, with densities in riparian reserves being about half of that in unharvested forest. The
standardized effect size of this difference did not show any evidence of becoming smaller with increasing
reserve size across the range of widths normally left after forest harvesting. However, the mechanisms
and the relative magnitudes of changes to those processes due to forestry impacts are difficult to detect
from passive surveys.        We have used a series of experimental approaches to try to determine how
amphibians respond to forestry practices in terms of movements, growth, and demography. Tracking of
several species has shown that some species can respond adaptively to being reciprocally ―transplanted‖
between habitat types (harvested versus unharvested) and appear to react according to predictions to
perceived differences in their local habitats.       To further evaluate the potential costs to growth and
survival of being in harvested or unharvested areas, we have done enclosure experiments with a
common salamander species. These experiments found that harvested areas, even with supplemental
food, resulted in lower growth and survival rates in summer, but there were no detectable differences
through the autumn period.        Pronounced seasonal differences with dry, warm summers and cool, wet
autumns presumably account for the observed variation in outcomes. Additional studies of amphibian
populations in experimental riparian management treatments have shown only very small differences in
amphibian relative abundances between treatments and controls in autumn, and within two years after
forest harvesting there were no summer differences in relative abundances either. Understanding the
mechanisms from forest practices that impact amphibians from forest practices, and particularly their
movements, should help in developing means to ameliorate the effects.



Richards-Zawacki, Corinne (Tulane University);

Selection and the rapid evolution of color polymorphism in Panamanian poison frogs

The strawberry dart frog ( Dendrobates pumilio ) exhibits an amazing array of color and pattern variation
in and around the Bocas del Toro archipelago of Panama. These frogs are toxic suggesting that their
bright coloration acts as a warning to would-be predators (aposematism). However, recent laboratory
studies have also demonstrated that color is important in female mate choice and male-male agonistic
interactions. While imprinting has not previously been reported in frogs, the unusual form of parental care
exhibited by D. pumilio could allow for learning of mate choice and/or agonistic behavior during the larval
stage. To better understand the origin of color pattern preferences and their role in the diversification
process, we tested the hypotheses that (1) preferences are learned through imprinting, and (2) that




                                                                                                          592
females within a natural polymorphic population show evidence of color-assortative mating. Our results
could help to explain the persistance and stability of color polymorphisms in this and other species.



Richmond, Jonathan (US Geological Survey); Barr, Kelly (US Geological Survey, San Diego, Canada);
Backlin, Adam; Fisher, Robert (US Geological Survey, Canada)

Genetic erosion at the margin of a species' boundary: A case study on the threatened California
Red-legged Frog (Rana draytonii)

Management of marginal populations is particularly challenging due to natural processes that typically
affect such populations (i.e. reduced gene flow, smaller size, etc.) as well as ‗unnatural‘ process related to
urbanization, anthropogenic-induced fires, pesticides, competition with invasive species and others. This
clash of phenomena is highlighted in southern California, where recent fires and other disturbances have
created new concerns for threatened taxa; however, few studies have studied the genetic consequences
of modern disturbances such as fire in this landscape. Using microsatellites and mtDNA sequence data,
we studied the geographic structuring and diversity of the threatened California Red-legged Frog ( Rana
draytonii ) at the southern range limit in California, where populations have rapidly extinct since the
1960s. We found that isolated populations at the southernmost sampling sites form distinctive clusters
within a larger southern phylogroup, and that genetic diversity and admixture substantially increase in
populations that are closer to the species ‗core‘ in California‘s central Coast Ranges. For populations in
which the fire history is known, we show although census sizes notably decreased in post-burn sampling,
no clear loss of genetic diversity could be directly attributed to any major fires. We used use approximate
Bayesian modeling to show that reductions in effective population size predate the fires in all cases. For
one population, we traced the bottleneck to a catastrophic dam break in 1928 and provide evidence that
reduced effective size was likely due to a founder event, given that remnant dam infrastructure is
responsible for creating the current frog habitat in the canyon.



Richter, Stephen (Eastern Kentucky University); Denton, Robert (Ohio State University, Columbus, OH,
United States); Drayer, Andrea; King, Susan (Eastern Kentucky University, Richmond, KY, United
States); Biebighauser, Thomas (United States Forest Service, Morehead, KY, United States)

Adaptive management and the science behind improving constructed wetlands for amphibians

Most natural wetlands have been lost in the United States and other industrialized nations, and wetlands
constructed to replace them typically do not provide the functions and biological communities of original
wetlands. We have been studying ridge-top wetlands in the Daniel Boone National Forest, Kentucky, that
are natural or have been constructed for habitat enhancement, not for compensatory mitigation. Over the
past 24 years, the management focus for these wetlands shifted from game animals to rare bats, and
most recently to amphibians. We have compared habitat characteristics of multiple types of constructed
wetlands and their amphibian communities to those of natural wetlands and discovered interesting
patterns in amphibian distribution and wetland characteristics. Broadly, there are different amphibian
communities that use constructed wetlands compared to natural wetlands, and these differences can be
predicted by habitat factors such as hydroperiod and canopy cover. We know that construction method
affects amphibian species composition and have been working closely with the Forest Service to
incorporate our data into refining management practices and construction protocols. We then study the
resulting constructed wetlands. The presentation will provide data through the first three iterations of this




                                                                                                          593
adaptive management strategy and highlight the successes of a cooperative relationship between
researchers and managers.



Riemann, Jana Carina (University of Hamburg); Ndriantsoa, Serge Herilala; Raminosoa, Noromalala R.
(University of Antananarivo, Antananarivo, Madagascar); Rödel, Mark-Oliver (Museum für Naturkunde
Berlin, Berlin, Germany); Glos, Julian (University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany)

Biodiversity loss due to habitat fragmentation? The case of frogs in Madagascar

Habitat fragmentation is a process that may lead to the loss of biodiversity, i.e. to species-depleted
communities in fragments. Various phenomena are associated with habitat fragmentation, e.g. the
reduction in the total habitat area, an increasing ratio of edge to interior habitat, and the isolation of one
forest fragment from others. Matrix habitat, i.e. the non-forested area in between patches of natural forest
habitat, might have a key influence on community structures in a fragmented landscape as it might or
might not act as a corridor for dispersal, or it might even be suitable habitat per se for some species. In
our study we aim at understanding how patterns of amphibian diversity depend on fragmentation
related properties of amphibian habitat such as forest fragment size and matrix quality, and how local
extinctions depend on functional components of diversity.        Our study site is the Ranomafana National
Park (RNP) and its surroundings, a mid-altitude rainforest ecosystem in Eastern Madagascar that is
exceptional in its amphibian diversity (&gt; 100 species). We determined species richness and
composition along transects distributed along streams (community of stream breeding frogs) and in
terrestrial parts (community of frogs that reproduce independent from running water) that were spread
over three major habitat types: RNP (control area), forest fragments, and matrix (i.e., secondary
vegetation, matrix streams, rice fields, banana plantations). We found no differences in total species
richness and local species richness (i.e., SR per transect) along stream transects between RNP,
fragments and matrix. Hence species richness of stream dependent frogs was not affected by
fragmentation. However, local species richness along terrestrial transects decreased with increasing
degradation, with most species found in RNP and least in the matrix. Species turnover between RNP and
fragments was similar as between RNP and matrix, as well as between fragments and matrix, an entirely
unexpected result. Beside a relatively consistent community along streams, each habitat type comprises
unique species. Therefore we hypothesize that amphibian communities in RNP, fragments and matrix
sites differ in functional diversity, and that the functional groups from which species are lost are non-
random.



Rifai, Lina (Indiana University Kokomo);

The effects of desertification on lizard communities in Jordan

Over the last century the earth‘s temperature has increased and is predicted to rise further in the near
future. However, very little is known, in particular, about how this will affect extreme climates, such as arid
environments. Previous studies have shown that desert communities respond differently to climate
change than communities from more temperate and humid regions.                 In this study we examined the
effects of desertification on lizard communties in a Middle Eastern desert. This study took place in the
Eastern Desert of Jordan, where we identified more and less desertified sites and analyzed lizard
community structures. Our results show that lizard abundance increased while the Simpson's diversity
index decreased with increasing temperatures and decreasing humidity. During the hottest and driest
time of the day the most abundant lizard species found was Acanthodactylus opheodurus , which is a



                                                                                                           594
highly specialized desert species. This specialist was found at all of our sites. Other more generalist
species, were mostly found during the cooler and more humid times of the day. Our results indicate that
asgeneralist species disappear with increasing desertification, the diversity of lizard communities
decreases.



Rigby, Cassandra (Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries and Aquaculture & School of Earth and
Environmental Sciences, James Cook University); Simpfendorfer, Colin (Centre for Sustainable Tropical
Fisheries and Aquaculture & School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, James Cook University,
Townsville, Australia)

Habitat associations of deepwater chondrichthyan life history traits

Life history traits are important indicators of the productivity of a species, and its ability to tolerate fishing
pressure. Using a variety of life history traits (male and female traits of maximum size, size at maturity,
age at maturity, longevity, growth rate and size at birth) from a wide range of chondrichthyans we
demonstrate that there are life history differences between shelf, oceanic and deepwater habitats. This
included deepwater species having lower growth rates, later age at maturity and higher longevity than
both shelf and oceanic species. This analytical review used a larger suite of species than previously
assessed and also undertook an examination of deepwater species life history traits associated with
depth and geographic range. We examined the patterns in life history traits by depth (upper, mid and
deep slope), region (North and South Atlantic, North and South Pacific) and latitudinal zone (Polar,
Temperate and Tropical). North Atlantic female deepwater chondrichthyans were found to have
significantly higher growth rates and lower longevity than those in the South Atlantic and size at birth was
smallest in species inhabiting the deeper slope habitats, Polar to Temperate zones and the North Atlantic
region. There was a trend for both male and female chondrichthyans of lower growth rate, later age at
maturity and higher longevity with increasing depth. However this trend was not significant when
phylogenetic relatedness and size were taken into account which suggests that differences in species
composition and size among habitats can drive these trends and stresses the importance of accounting
for these to clearly determine the influence of habitat on life history traits. These associations of life
history traits with habitat, both among deep, shelf and oceanic species and within deepwater species will
be discussed within the context of ecological theories and conservation strategies.



Riley, Julia (Laurentian University); Tattersall, Glenn (Brock University, Canada); Litzgus, Jacqueline
(Laurentian University, Canada)

Should I stay of should I go? Influence of environmental factors on Chrysemys picta hatchling
overwintering strategy

In northern temperate areas, Chrysemys picta hatchlings spend their first winter either aquatically after fall
emergence from the nest, or terrestrially within their natal nest chamber with subsequent spring
emergence from the nest. The occurrence of these two strategies varies among populations throughout
the species‘ range, and temporally within the same population; however, the factors that determine the
strategy employed by a given clutch in nature are not well understood. Subzero nest temperatures above
-4 ºC can be survived by hatchlings using freeze-tolerance or supercooling, but lower nest temperatures
like those found in the temperate north, can only be survived in a supercooled state. If overwintering
strategy maximizes winter survival and is cued by environmental factors, then northern hatchlings should
remain in nests when the environment promotes supercooling. Clutches that overwinter in-nest should, as
previous research has shown, experience lower fall nest temperatures, soil moisture and vegetation



                                                                                                              595
cover, higher nest soil organic content, and smaller nest soil particle size (all characteristics that promote
overwinter survival in a supercooled state) than clutches that experience fall nest emergence. We are
testing this hypothesis over two field seasons in Algonquin Park, Ontario. Over both 2010-11 and 2011-
12, 52 C. picta nests were caged and a data logger was placed in each to record temperature. Soil
texture was quantified for each nest. Nest microhabitat variables were recorded at oviposition and
monthly during incubation. In the fall of 2010, 12% of the nests emerged. From April to May 2011, spring
emergence was monitored and overwinter survival was 41% (N = 18 clutches). In the fall of 2011, 50% of
the nests emerged; overwinter and spring emergence data are currently being collected. Of the
environmental factors examined to date, none appear to influence overwintering strategy; however,
additional environmental factors, such as percent oxygen, are currently being monitored. Knowledge of
hatchling C. picta overwintering strategies is predominately based on laboratory studies; our study will
contribute to understanding this phenomenon in nature.



Riley, Julia (Laurentian University); Litzgus, Jacqueline (Laurentian University, Canada)

To Conserve and Protect: Evaluation of a turtle conservation tool, nest caging

Conservation biology‘s primary goal is to mitigate anthropogenic impacts on natural ecosystems. It follows
that conservation tools themselves should not be detrimental to target species. Subsidized predators can
push turtle nest depredation to unnatural levels. Nest caging, a widely-used conservation technique,
counteracts this by protecting nests and promoting recruitment. Despite these benefits, shortcomings
have been identified. Entrapment in cage wire can cause mortality, and anecdotal evidence suggests that
some nest caging methods may reduce incubation temperature which may in turn have deleterious
consequences for hatchling development. The first goal of this study was to examine the effects of nest
caging on the nest micro-environment. The second goal was to determine if nest caging has an effect on
hatchling fitness. In 2010 and 2011 in Algonquin Provincial Park, Ontario, Painted Turtle ( Chrysemys
picta ; N = 86) and Snapping Turtle ( Chelydra serpentina ; N = 89) nests were assigned to one of three
treatment groups or a control: above- or below-ground wire cages, wooden-sided cages, or no nest cage,
respectively. A data logger was placed in each nest to record incubation temperature, and canopy and
vegetation cover were measured. Once hatching occurred, incubation duration, hatching success, and
proxies of hatchling fitness were quantified. Temperature, hatching success, and frequency of
deformities did not differ among treatments. Hatchling body condition and locomotor performance differed
significantly among treatments. Some nest caging types incurred fitness consequences for hatchlings;
however, above-ground cages were found to have the most positive influences on fitness in both species,
indicating that they should be the cage style of choice. Evaluation of conservation techniques is crucial
for effective recovery of at-risk species in order to comprehend their long-term population-level
implications, and maximize project efficiency, funds, and impacts.




                                                                                                          596
Rinaldi Colli, Guarino (Universidade de Brasilia); Garda, Adrian (Universidade Federal do Rio Grande
do Norte, Canada); Wiederhecker, Helga (James Cook University, Canada); Gainsbury, Alison (The
University of Texas at Austin, Canada); Costa, Gabriel (Universidade Federal da Paraíba, Canada);
Pyron, R. Alexander (The George Washington University, Canada); Vieira, Gustavo (Universidade
Federal da Paraíba, Canada); Werneck, Fernanda (Brigham Young University, Canada)

Microhabitat variation explains local-scale distribution of terrestrial Amazonian lizards in
Rondônia, Western Brazil

We investigate the role of ecology and phylogeny on the association between lizard abundance and
microhabitat variables in an Amazon rainforest site. Using pitfall trap arrays, we collected data from 349
individuals belonging to 23 lizard species. After accounting for spatial autocorrelation and using a
Canonical Correspondence Analysis (CCA), we found that lizard captures were significantly associated
with microhabitat variables,

which accounted for 48 percent of the observed variation. Further, a Canonical Phylogenetic Ordination
(CPO) indicated that microhabitat variables are more important in determining the distribution of lizard
species than phylogenetic relationships among species. Termite nests, canopy openness, and tree
circumference were strongly associated with the number of captures of certain lizard species. Our results
confirm autecology studies of individual lizard species for which data are available. We suggest that
maintaining heterogeneous forested microhabitats should be a central goal for sustaining a high lizard
biodiversity in Amazon rainforests.



Rinaldi Colli, Guarino (Universidade de Brasilia); Françoso, Renata; Machado, Ricardo; Nogueira,
Cristiano (Universidade de Brasília, Canada)

Predicted climate change effects on lizards in the Brazilian Cerrado hotspot

Through local extinctions and distributional shifts, climate change is a potential menace to biodiversity,
especially when associated with habitat degradation. Because of ectothermy, climate changes can affect
lizards populations in several ways, including reduced foraging time and increased metabolic costs of
growth, maintenance and reproduction, leading to reduced population growth. We investigated changes
in suitable areas for the potential occurrence (SAPO) of Cerrado lizards in response to climate changes
predicted for 2050. We also investigated changes in the potential occurrence of lizards in Cerrado
conservation units. Climate changes predicted for 2050 will imply in substantial loss of SAPO for Cerrado
lizards, either confining ranges to the actual limits of Cerrado or to South America. Combined with trends
of human occupation, our simulation indicates that predicted climate changes will drastically reduce
SAPO of lizards in Cerrado within half a century.



Ringler, Eva (University of Vienna); Ringler, Max (University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria); Jehle, Robert
(University of Salford, Salford, United Kingdom); Hödl, Walter (University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria)

The genetic mating system and analyses of reproductive success in Allobates femoralis

Dendrobatoid frogs hold an extraordinary position within anuran amphibians due to their elaborate and
complex reproductive behaviour. While their courtship behaviour and parental care is well documented
from behavioural observations in the field and laboratory, comprehensive data on mating systems and
underlying genetic population structures is scarce. Throughout the prolonged breeding period, males of



                                                                                                       597
the pan-Amazonian dendrobatoid frog Allobates femoralis are highly territorial; females are iteroparous
and show strong site fidelity. Courtship and mating takes place inside the male territories. The a im of my
dissertation was to assess the genetic mating system and to investigate the distribution and determinants
of male and female reproductive success across an entire A. femoralis population. Through molecular
parentage analyses of two successive generations of adult individuals a highly polygynandrous mating
system was identified. A high percentage of the males and females in the population produced progeny
which survived until adulthood. Reproductive success was significantly associated with territory
occupation in males, but not related to the size of a territory or to body size in both sexes. Parentage
assignments of one offspring generation at two different life history stages were used to identify patterns
of parental relatedness on reproductive success in A. femoralis . Females mainly chose their mating
partners within a radius of 20 m. Mean pairwise relatedness coefficients of successful reproducers did not
differ from random mating but had a lower variance than expected by chance, suggesting optimal
reproductive output at intermediate genetic divergence. The number of effective mating partners per
female increased with the number of spatially available candidate males, and the number of offspring per
female increased with the number of mating partners. We hypothesize that the benefits of multiple mating
outweigh the costs of in- and outbreeding depression, and consequently precluded the evolution of
‗choosy‘ mate selection in this species.



Ringler, Max (University of Vienna); Ringler, Eva; Hödl, Walter (University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria)

Supplementation of reproductive resources for amphibian conservation: Artificial tadpole sites for
Allobates femoralis (Aromobatidae)

Dendrobatoid population sizes have been shown not to be generally regulated by food availability and
supply, while the supplementation of reproductive resources resulted in a significant demographic and
behavioural response. However the influence of added reproductive resources on the genetic population
structure and the distribution of reproductive success has not been studied so far. In a 4-year population
scale experiment in Allobates femoralis we could show that artificial pools can serve as sites for tadpole
deposition and that the addition of the pools led to a significant increase in population size. Density
increase of offspring was negatively correlated with distance to the pools, while adults that lived longer
than one breeding season showed no behavioural response to the new reproductive resources.
Parentage analyses revealed that most of the population increase was due to an increase in the
autochthonous reproductive rate. The new reproductive resources had no influence on the genetic
population structure, as reproductive success increased equally throughout the population for males and
females. Thus, all males and females in the population produced more adult offspring when the artificial
pools were available. Eggs and tadpoles are generally recognized as the most vulnerable stages in the
amphibian life cycle with typically only a small fraction of offspring surviving into the early post
metamorphic stage. Dendrobatoids face this situation by providing some sort of parental care to their
offspring, which consists at least of tadpole transport to suitable bodies of water. Our experiment
indicates that the supplementation of suitable habitats for the tadpole stage results in a significant
increase in population size, most likely due to a decreased mortality from desiccation, insufficient food
supply and predation. Beside general threats like habitat destruction and degradation, climatic change
and disease, several dendrobatoid species are threatened by illegal, uncontrolled poaching for the pet
trade. Our experiment suggests that reproductive resource supplementation can be an effective measure
to increase or stabilize population size. Of specific importance is the absence of any detrimental effects
on genetic population structure. Therefore we want to advocate the approach to be implemented in
population management plans to enable the sustainable use of natural dendrobatoid populations and to
restore endangered populations to their original size.



                                                                                                          598
Rios, Nelson (Tulane University); Bart, Henry (Tulane Univeristy, Belle Chasse, LA, United States);
Bentley, Andy; Wiley, Edward (Kansas University Natural History Museum, Lawrence, KS, United States)

BOSS, Biological Object Search Service: An Overview of the Architecture and Features of the
FishNet2 Search Engine

On April 22, 2010 an explosion on the British Petroleum Deepwater Horizon Oil Platform resulted in the
release of large quantities of crude oil into the northern Gulf of Mexico. The ability of ecologists and other
scientists to assess the impacts of the spill on the Gulf of Mexico ecosystem depends critically on the
availability of baseline data on the composition and structure of biotic communities in the region under
natural conditions. Natural history museums have the ability to provide much of this information as they
contain data on biological resources spanning hundreds of years to the present. The FishNet2 network is
a collaborative effort among fish collections around the world to share and distribute data on specimen
holdings. Over the past year a number of developments have been made to address the needs of
acquiring baseline data from FishNet2 in response to such temporally &amp; geographically defined
events as the BP Oil Spill. Specifically, we have improved upon the data harvesting architecture, added
geospatial query capabilities, improved result summaries, made significant changes to the UI and
produced an API to facilitate third party integration. The underlying architecture for FishNet2 has been
generalized as the Biological Object Search Service allowing us to create instances applicable to other
taxonomic networks. HerpNet2 is an example of such an instance utilizing the same architecture.



Rios, Nelson (Tulane University);

Technology and Innovation in Herpetology and Ichthyology Collections: Digitization of Collection
Data and Collaborative Multi-Institute Projects.

There are an estimated 3 billion biological specimens housed in museums and herbaria around the world.
The past decade has seen significant efforts focused on digitization and mobilization of these specimens
resulting in the development of numerous software applications for data capture, enhancement and
analysis. It has also led to the establishment of data-sharing portals, such as the HerpNet, FishNet and
the Global Biodiversity Information Facility. Despite the success of these networks, the data often
present inconsistent taxonomic and geographic assignments across and within collections. Furthermore,
a significant amount of data still exists solely in hard copy form, inaccessible from the Internet. This
presentation will focus on current impediments to digitization of collection data and discuss existing and
potential technologies for ―collaborative digitization‖ that can be used to overcome these hurdles.



Ripley, Matthew (Southeastern Louisiana University);

Exploring Herpetological Distribution Changes Associated With Climate Change Over A
Latitudinal Transect Using Temporal Species Richness Trends

Climate changes over the past several decades have had drastic effects on the landscape of the eastern
North America. These alterations have translated to changes in the distribution of fauna over latitude and
elevation. While individual species shifts have been studied over wide ranges and globally, there has not
been sufficient work on studying a change in overall richness over a latitudinal transect. This study
examines how species richness has changed over the past several decades along a latitudinal transect in
comparison to climate changes. Using anurans, squamates, salamanders, testudines, and crocodilians,




                                                                                                          599
historic and current locality data will be used to chart distributions to determine species richness changes
temporally in comparison to latitude.



Rittmeyer, Eric N. (Museum of Natural Science, Louisiana State University); Austin, Christopher C.
(Museum of Natural Science, Louisiana State University, Canada)

One Species or Two? Integrating genomic and morphological data to delimit species in the
Crocodile Skinks (Tribolonotus pseudoponceleti complex)

Species are a fundamental unit in biology, critical to a wide variety of studies in nearly all subfields of the
life sciences. Despite this importance, determining the status of populations as conspecific lineages or as
independent evolutionary lineages (i.e. species) is a far from trivial task, particularly if the populations are
morphologically similar (i.e. cryptic species) or recently diverged. Genetic data, particularly from
numerous independent loci, represents a powerful tool for testing hypotheses regarding the taxonomic
status of divergent populations; however, other types of data, such as morphology and ecology, also
provide critically important information regarding such hypotheses. Here, we integrate genomic and
morphological data to examine the divergence between populations of Tribolonotus pseudoponceleti
(Squamata: Scincidae) from the islands of Buka and Bougainville in Papua New Guinea. In a recent study
examining the phylogeny of the Crocodile Skinks ( Tribolonotus ), Austin et al. (2010) found these
populations to be reciprocally monophyletic and relatively deeply divergent (~4.7% divergent at
mitochondrial ND4 and cytochrome b loci), despite the close proximity of the islands (separated by a
narrow channel of only ~100 meters) and their connection during periods of lower sea level, such as
during Pleistocene glacial cycles. We used next-generation sequencing to collect a genomic scale
dataset of several thousand loci for five samples from each of Bougainville and Buka, as well as two
outgroup samples of the sister species, T. ponceleti . We applied isolation with migration models to
estimate the levels of gene flow and timing of divergence between the Bougainville and Buka populations,
as well as genetic clustering algorithms (Structurama) to elucidate population genetic structure in the T.
pseudoponceleti complex. This genomic dataset is combined with multivariate statistical analyses of a
morphological dataset consisting of several meristic and mensural characters scored for specimens
spanning the distribution of the        T. pseudoponceleti      complex. Together, these genomic and
morphological data allow for a thorough examination of the divergence between these populations, and
enable robust inferences regarding the processes driving their divergence, and the taxonomic status of
these populations as divergent but conspecific lineages, or as distinct species.



Rivas, Jesus (New Mexico Highlands University); Thorbjarnarson, John (Wildlife Conservation Society,
Canada); Muñoz, Maria (Universidad Simon Bolivar, Canada)

The data versus the model: An anaconda's tale about growth rate, survival, and demography

Our understanding of demography and growth rate of long living snakes has increased by leaps and
bounds thanks to long term studies in a few taxa. However, data from the tropics have not been as
abundant, particularly regarding South American species. Here we present data from a 19-year long mark
and recapture study on green anacondas from a location in the Venezuelan llanos. We collected data
from 917 captures (444 females and 473 males) and re-caught 210 in an area of approximately 2500 h.
Average female mass was 19 kg while average male mass was 5.9. We modeled the anaconda
population using MARK (CJS model). The estimated population size is 394 anacondas with 286 males
and 108 females. The apparent contradiction between the data from the field and the results of the model



                                                                                                            600
falls into place when considering the length of the study and other aspects of anaconda biology. Due to
their larger size, females are easier for us to find. This is why they seem to be almost as abundant as
males in the raw data, in apparent contradiction with the results of the model. Females experience lower
survival (65%) than males (77%) from year to year. This difference in survival explains the male biased in
the estimated population. The higher mortality among females is surprising because males never
outgrow predators of the area (spectacled caimans, large cats, foxes, female anacondas) and suffer high
mortality while looking for receptive females in the breeding season. Females face few predators once
they have reached reproductive size and do not seem to be exposed to predators as much during the
mating season. Females grow faster than males (0.038mm/day vs 0.017mm/day) which explains the
observed sexual size dimorphism. Females tackle larger, more dangerous prey and this difference in prey
choice likely contributes to their larger growth rate. However, risk of injury and even death while attacking
a large prey also may be associated to their lower survival. The population of female anacondas seems to
be under an unusual kind of bottom-up regulation. This study emphasizes the need for comprehensive
long term studies that address all aspects of life history, including input from both field work and
theoretical models, as the best approach to gain a complete understanding of the animal's ecology.



Robbins, Travis (Penn State); Langkilde, Tracy (Penn State, University Park, United States)

Native predator eats invasive toxic prey: evidence for increased incidence of consumption rather
than aversion-learning

Contemporary adaptation of native prey species to invasive predators has been relatively well
documented, but that of native predators to invasive prey has received less attention. Because the level
of impact an invasive species will have on its predators versus its prey will determine changes in
community trophic structure, it is important to understand how native predators respond to novel prey.
Here we examine the response of native fence lizards to the invasion of red imported fire ants, a novel
toxic prey. Examining invaded and uninvaded lizard populations, we tested whether or not aversion-
learning occurs in juvenile fence lizards over successive feedings (within lifetime), how previous fire ant
exposure may affect avoidance behavior (over generations), and whether population differences are
consistent when prey choice exists. We also examine rates of phenotypic divergence in traits associated
with the native species as both predator and prey. Aversion-learning did not occur in either population.
Instead, the incidence of fire ant consumption increased over both successive feedings and generations.
Lizards from the fire ant invaded population had a higher propensity to eat fire ants than fire ant-naïve
lizards, even when given a choice between prey items. We found greater phenotypic divergence in traits
associated with the native species as predator on, versus as prey to, fire ants. Although the strategy of
eating these novel toxic prey can impose survival costs in the short term, over the longer-term, eating fire
ants may cost little or even benefit survivors.



Robbins, Travis (Penn State); Mushinsky, Henry (University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, United
States); McCoy, Earl (University of South Florida, Tampa, United States)

On juvenile intrinsic growth and survival of lizard populations along a fine scale temperature
gradient: a reciprocal transplant approach

To understand the evolutionary and ecological significance of geographic variation in life history traits, we
must understand whether the patterns are induced through plastic, extrinsic or adaptive, intrinsic
responses. The eastern fence lizard, Sceloporus undulatus , exhibits a reverse Bergmann‘s cline in body



                                                                                                         601
size at fine geographic scales and Bergmann‘s cline at larger geographic scales. Population differences
in life history traits such as growth and survival must explain these resulting geographic trends in body
size and appear to be dependent on geographic scale. To begin examining how, and at what scale, life
history tactics change from exhibiting plastic (null model) responses to that of adaptive responses, small
scale reciprocal transplant experiments were conducted between populations that experience a 1° C
difference in their monthly average temperatures. Two separate reciprocal transplant experiments were
conducted along the latitudinal/environmental temperature gradient of the Florida peninsula. One
experiment used populations of the S. undulatus , exhibiting reverse Bergmann‘s cline in body size, and
the other used populations of its sister species the Florida scrub lizard ( S. woodi ), exhibiting no cline in
body size. In S.undulatus , larger adult body sizes in the southern population were not a result of faster
extrinsic juvenile growth rates, although potential activity periods were greater in the southern
environment. Rather, population-specific, intrinsic, differences in juvenile growth rates and survival
explained the body size differences. The adaptive differences in juvenile growth rates between
populations were masked, however, by plastic responses to the environment. In S. woodi, similar adult
body sizes between the north and south populations could be explained by faster intrinsic and extrinsic
juvenile growth rates observed in the northern population. We did not observe greater potential activity
periods in the southern environment and juvenile survival was not different between populations. In S.
woodi , the similarity in adult body sizes between populations is likely a result of adaptive responses. The
null hypothesis that plastic, extrinsic juvenile growth rates and survival would explain body sizes was not
supported in either species. Even on fine geographic scales there appears to be complex relationships
among environmental temperatures and trade-offs among life history traits of Sceloporus lizards.



Roberts, Dale (University of Western Australia);

Polyandry: the next jump in the social behaviour of anurans

Since the late 1970‘s, studies on frogs have been an integral part of the revolution in studies of sexual
selection. Those studies have focused on species where a female mates with a single male and female
choice and male competition interact to determine mating outcomes.          However, at least since Darwin
there have been reports of frogs engaging in polyandrous matings: multiple males mating simultaneously
with a single female. Using both direct observational data and inference from patterns of testis mass,
and development of the male reproductive tract I will demonstrate that polyandry is widespread and
occurs in a variety of forms. For example, Rhacophorid frogs have a very high frequency of polyandrous
species but simultaneous polyandry has been reported in 7 frog families. Comparative data show that
sperm competition arising from polyandry has been a strong factor selecting for larger testis mass in
several lineages. Across species there is also compelling evidence of elaborate modifications of the male
reproductive tract in many polyandrous species and, that secretions from the vesicula seminalis may
positively affect sperm performance. Using the Australian frog fauna I will also argue that polyandry might
have profound effects on the evolution of anuran size and call structure and may allow novel speciation
processes, e.g. sexual conflict, to drive frog evolution. My goal is to convince you that polyandry is a
seriously understudied feature of frog biology that will have the same pervasive effects it has in many
other animals. I urge you to look again at that ―mistake‖ where three males amplexed a single female or
the egg masses were so close together that sperm might have crossed a boundary: these might be
deliberate mating tactics – used by either sex!




                                                                                                          602
Roberts, Mark (University of South Carolina); Arendt, Michael (South Carolina Department of Natural
Resources, Canada); Owens, David (College of Charleston, Canada); Schwenter, Jeffrey; Segars, Albert
(South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Canada); Quattro, Joseph (University of South
Carolina, Canada)

Loggerhead sea turtle (Caretta caretta) serum testosterone and genetic data collected over twelve
years reveal disproportionate gender contributions of nesting regions to a subadult foraging
ground.

A large subadult feeding assemblage of loggerhead sea turtles ( Caretta caretta ) exists off the
southeastern coast of the United States. Here we examine loggerhead sea turtle mtDNA haplotype data
and serum testosterone data collected during eight summers spanning a twelve year period (2000, 2001,
2002, 2004, and 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011) to estimate the temporal stability of nesting beach contributions
to this mixed stock feeding aggregation.         In addition, this unique combination of genetic and serum
testosterone data in subadult sea turtles will allow for a gender specific analysis of nesting beach
contributions to subadult foraging grounds.        This gender based approach to mixed stock analyses is
especially critical in sea turtles as nesting rookeries have highly variable sex ratios; not utilizing a gender
based approach can mask the importance of rookeries that would be undervalued based on rookery size
alone.     We anticipate overall findings congruent with a previous single-year analysis that demonstrated
a disproportionately large contribution from the nearby nesting populations relative to more distant
populations.         Further, we anticipate that the uneven nature of nesting beach gender production will
increase this disproportionate contribution when only one gender is considered in the mixed stock
analysis.     These findings will be discussed in the context of a warming climate further changing the
relative importance of nesting beach contributions to overall reproductive success, particularly as it
relates to the smaller loggerhead nesting beaches of the northwest Atlantic ocean.



Rocha, Carlos Frederico (Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro); Diego, Guedes; Monique, Van
Sluys (Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil); Carla C., Siqueira
(Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil); Cristina V., Ariani (Universidade do
Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil); Davor, Vrcibradic (Universidade Federal do Estado do
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil); Mara C., Kiefer (Universidade Federal Fluminense, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil); Mauricio, Almeida-Gomes (Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil); Vitor N. B., Borges-Junior (Universidade do estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil);
Pablo, Goyannes-Araújo (Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil)

Visual search of amphibians in Atlantic Forest areas of Brazil: What is the best time of day to
conduct the sampling?

In general, anurans tend to be nocturnal, though diurnal activity is characteristic of some groups. Studies
show that frog activity may be inferred based on the quantities of individuals collected at different periods
of the day during large-scale field surveys. We evaluate what the best period of the day to conduct
amphibian sampling in nine Atlantic Rainforest areas in southeastern Brazil, based on intensive field
surveys. At each locality we employed similar sampling effort during diurnal, crepuscular and nocturnal
transects (1412 transects in 706 sampling hours). Data provided richness of frogs active at each period of
day and species specific abundance of active frogs at each period. We pooled data from all localities for
each period and estimated the proportion of frogs of each species active at each period based on the
total number of individuals and on the number of species found during all surveys for that period. We
recorded a total of 814 individual frogs from 68 species. Mean species richness was highest at night
(~11), intermediate at dusk (~7.9), and lowest during day (~4.0). Total number of individual frogs found
(pooled species) was highest during night (53.1%) and lowest during day (14.4%). Analyzing each



                                                                                                           603
species separately, the number of individuals recorded was consistently higher at dusk and night for most
species. Our study evidence a trend for crepuscular and nocturnal activity for most Atlantic Rainforest
frogs, with few species having primarily diurnal habits. Those results may favor future studies of
autoecology and conservation with specific species.



Rocha, Luiz (California Academy of Sciences); Robertson, Ross; Lessios, Harilaos (Smithsonian
Tropical Research Institute, Canada)

Allopatric speciation with gene flow and peripheral isolation in Damselfishes (genus Stegastes)

Stegastes is a diverse genus of damselfishes associated to coral and rocky reefs in tropical oceans.
Most species are solitary territorial herbivores that aggressively defend their feeding grounds, but a few
are gregarious and feed on plankton. Juveniles are usually brightly colored and common in the aquarium
trade. We sampled all 38 nominal species while scuba diving or snorkeling and preserved tissue samples
in ethanol. Standard laboratory procedures were used to obtain sequences of one ribosomal RNA gene
(16s) and one mitochondrial DNA gene (ATPase). As part of the phylogenetic analysis, we performed
maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses. The monophyly of the genus was
rejected in all analyses. The genus appears to be split into two main groups, one clade (clade I)
containing all Atlantic and eastern Pacific (indicating that this radiation originated from a single invasion of
the Atlantic before the closure of the Isthmus of Panama) as well as some Indo-Pacific species, and a
second clade (clade II) containing only Indo-Pacific species. Species of the genus Microspathodon form
the base of clade II, whereas species of Plectroglyphididon are present in both clade I and II. Additional
taxon sampling is necessary to revise the current nomenclature. Cryptic speciation was also detected
within many widely distributed species, the most notable case being Stegastes fasciolatus , which seems
to be comprised of four different species. Even though ongoing speciation seems to follow an allopatric
pattern, several instances of gene flow were detected between incipient and or young species. There is
also an apparent pattern of peripheral speciation, with all populations in isolated islands or archipelagos
belonging to separate clades.



Rödder, Dennis (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig); Ahmadzadeh, Faraham
(Department of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Management, Environmental Sciences Research Institute,
Shahid Beheshti University, Canada); Carretero, Miguel A.; Harris, David J.; Freitas, Susana N. (Centro
de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, Universidade do Porto, Canada); Rödder,
Dennis (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Bonn, Germany); Perera, Ana (Centro de
Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, Universidade do Porto, Canada); Böhme,
Wolfgang (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Canada)

Inferring the effects of past climate fluctuations on the distribution pattern of Iranolacerta
(Reptilia, Lacertidae): evidences from mitochondrial DNA and species distribution models

A variety of different methods are available for investigating the effects of past climate fluctuation on
biota. Among them, molecular phylogeographic and species distribution modeling approaches have been
shown to be especially useful tools to trace past climate induced modifications of species' geographic
distributions. Comparing the results of both analytical approaches are here combined to better
understand the influences of past climate changes on the fragmented distribution pattern of the lizard
genus Iranolacerta, that currently ranges the northwest and central Zagros Mountains of Iran. While I.
zagrosica is restricted to few localities and cannot be modeled, the distribution modeling of I. brandti
suggested a large region of unfavorable habitat between Azerbaijan and the central Zagros Mountains



                                                                                                            604
populations. For the phylogenetic perspective, both species display deep genetic separation predating
likely the Pleistocene. However, limited genetic diversity across this divided range of I. brandtii, imply that
the current separation is recent. Deeper genetic divergences were, nevertheless, uncovered within
Azerbaijan. Since no recent geological events explain these results, the most likely explanation for such a
distribution pattern is due to past climate fluctuations. Both sources of evidence suggest that during the
last glaciation the Azerbaijan and Zagros populations of I. brandtii were connected, and the current
pattern was shaped with their disconnection in the early Holocene. Further studies may identify potential
glacial refugia for other species in this biodiverse region.



Rödder, Dennis (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig);

Niche stasis in invasive herps? The role of accessible climate space in invasion success

Several amphibian and reptile species have successfully established invasive populations around the
globe and successful management often requires estimates of invasion risk for a given region. The use of
species distribution models (SDMs) to predict potential distributions of species including invasion
potentials is steadily increasing. A necessary assumption when projecting such models throughout space
or time is that climatic niches do not change, at least in contemporary time frames. However, recent
findings of niche shifts during biological invasion of particular plant and animal species have indicated that
this assumption is not categorically valid. One reason for the detected niche shifts may relate to the
selection of predictive variables used for modeling. Another reason may be related to evolutionary
responses. In this talk, I provide examples of studies addressing differences in climatic niches in the
native and invasive ranges of amphibians and reptiles. I highlight which variables are more ‗conserved‘ in
comparison to more ‗relaxed‘ variables (i.e. subject to niche shift) and how they influence transferability of
SDMs through space and time. Using quantifications of available climate spaces I discuss whether these
niche shifts are likely to represent methodological artifacts or evolutionary responses. Most studies
indicate that the degrees of niche similarity and conservatism vary greatly among the predictive variables.
Some shifts can be attributed to active habitat selection, whereas others apparently reflect variation in the
availability of climate conditions or biotic interactions between a species native and invasive ranges.
Patterns suggesting active habitat selection also vary among variables. These findings evoke
considerable implications on the transferability of SDMs over space and time, which is strongly affected
by the choice and number of predictors. The incorporation of ‗relaxed‘ predictors not or only indirectly
correlated with biologically meaningful predictors may lead to erroneous predictions when projecting
SDMs - and ultimately to unreliable assessments of invasion risk. I recommend thorough assessments of
invasive species' ecology for the identification biologically meaningful predictors facilitating transferability.



Rödel, Mark-Oliver (Museum fuer Naturkunde Berlin);

West African amphibians: diversity, threats and future

Globally the biodiversity of the Afrotropics is probably among the least well known. West Africa is no
exception from that rule. Although amphibians of this region were intensively studied, in particular since
the 1960s, we continuously added new and spectacular discoveries throughout the last 20 years. This
process is still far from being completed. In the first part of the talk I will summarize our findings and
pinpoint on the major gaps that still exist.        Unfortunately, biodiversity in the region suffers from a
constantly increasing exploitation of natural resources (i.e. conversion of habitats to agricultural land,
logging, mining, bush meat trade), as well as from changing climatic conditions. To uncover the potential



                                                                                                             605
effects of these environmental changes, amphibians are an especially valuable group of organisms. In the
second part of my talk I will highlight the known responses of West African amphibians to these
challenges and outline what we may deduce from their evolutionary history (biogeography, life histories)
concerning their future.



Rodriguez, David (Cornell University); Becker, C. Guillerme (Cornell University, Canada); Pupin, Nadya
C.; Haddad, Celio F.B. (Universidade Estadual Paulista, Rio Claro, Canada); Zamudio, Kelly R. (Cornell
University, Canada)

Historical distribution of the frog-killing fungus in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest

Across the globe, amphibians are declining at alarming rates. Habitat loss, pollution, and climate change
are major drivers of these declines, but amphibians also have to contend with the disease
chytridiomycosis, which is caused by the frog-killing fungus ( Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis [ Bd ]). The
fungus causes an epidermal infection that disrupts osmotic balance and can lead to death in susceptible
amphibians. The global spread of the fungus is most likely the result of anthropogenic movement,
although regional patterns of spread are less understood. The Atlantic Forest in southern Brazil harbors a
large number of endemic species, yet it has been reduced to less than 16% of its original extent. Other
studies have confirmed the presence of Bd within the Atlantic Forest, but catastrophic declines and
extinctions have not been well documented like those in Panama, California, and Australia. We sampled
Brazilian museum accessions representing nine frog families with varying breeding strategies and used
quantitative PCR to determine the historical prevalence and distribution of Bd in southern Brazil. We
also use internal transcribed spacer (ITS1) sequences to infer the population genetics of Bd over space
and time.



Rohr, Jason (University of South Florida); McMahon, Taegan; Halstead, Neal; Raffel, Thomas
(University of South Florida, Canada); Johnson, Steven (University of Florida, Canada)

Effects of the pesticides atrazine and chlorothalonil on amphibians

Although chemical contaminants have been implicated in amphibian declines, few contaminants cause
enough direct mortality at ecologically relevant concentrations to drive declines, suggesting that, if there is
a direct link, it is caused by understudied chemicals or that any link could be indirect and perhaps
mediated by contaminant effects on infections.        Infections are particularly important because many
amphibian declines are associated with diseases, such as chytridiomycosis, which is caused by the
pathogenic chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd). Here, we present evidence that the
understudied but most commonly used fungicide in the US, chlorothalonil, causes significant amphibian,
macrophyte, gastropod, algal, zooplankton, and Bd mortality well below field concentrations. Moreover,
the dose-mortality relationship for amphibians was non-monotonic.           We then use a meta-analytical
approach to reveal that exposure to atrazine, the second most commonly used herbicide and pesticide in
the US, is consistently associated with immunomodulation and elevated infections in amphibians. In
dose-response studies on Bd, atrazine reduced Bd growth rates suggesting that it might temporarily
reduce the risk of Bd infections. However, early-life (1 week) exposure of amphibians to the expected
environmental concentration of atrazine (~102 µg/L) was associated with significant immediate and long-
term (7 weeks after atrazine exposure) increases in amphibian mortality due to Bd, independent of when
the atrazine exposure occurred during development. Our findings indicate that atrazine must be present
to kill Bd, but only has to have been present in the past to cause persistent increases in the risk of Bd-




                                                                                                           606
induced amphibian mortality. Hence, our results support the hypothesis that the net effect of atrazine
could increase the threat posed by Bd, but clearly the effects are complex and we encourage further
investigations into the role of this widespread herbicide in amphibian health. Overall, this work highlights
the need to examine understudied chemicals for direct effects on amphibians and for more research on
the role of contaminants in mediating changes in host-symbiont interactions.



Rohr, Jason (University of South Florida); Halstead, Neal (University of South Florida, Canada); Liu,
Xuan (Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Canada); McMahon, Teagan; Raffel, Thomas;
Venesky, Matthew (University of South Florida, Canada)

The role of climate, vegetation, non-amphibian hosts, introduced hosts, and trade in shaping the
global chytridiomycosis pandemic

Recent worldwide declines of amphibians have been linked to the spread and/or emergence of
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), a fungus that causes amphibian chytridiomycosis. Many factors
have been implicated in the spread and/or emergence of Bd. Here I will present a series of studies that
include laboratory experiments, local and regional surveys, and national and global analyses that explore
how climatic variation, amphibian and non-amphibian hosts, vegetation, introduced species, and
international trade have shaped the chytridiomycosis pandemic. Our studies establish the importance of
both fundamental niche factors (e.g. climate variation and vegetation), host diversity including alternative
hosts (e.g. crayfish), and propagule pressure factors (e.g. introduced host species and international trade)
to the global distribution of Bd. I will discuss the implications of each of these groups of factors for the
management of chytridiomycosis.



Rojas, Bibiana (Deakin University);

Treefall gap invasion by Dendrobates tinctorius: a case of responsible parenthood

Treefall gaps, like any other kind of habitat disturbance, can act as evolutionary forces generating
adaptations in the life histories of the organisms affected. Gap formation, colonisation and role in forest
dynamics have been extensively studied but little is known about their effects on animal ecology and
behaviour beyond species counts. Most studies have focused on the differences in species richness and
composition in gaps older than six months compared to closed forest, but little is known about breeding
adaptations to invading fresh treefall gaps. Dendrobatid frogs are diurnal rainforest dwellers with an
elaborate parental care that consists of clutch attendance and tadpole transport to treeholes and other
phytotelmata, which have been shown to be a limited resource. Dendrobates tinctorius is known
anecdotally to invade treefall gaps. I studied the invasion of six natural treefall gaps by D. tinctorius in a
healthy, undisturbed forest in French Guiana in order to test experimentally the hypothesis that males
might go immediately to fresh gaps in search for new sites for tadpole deposition. I compared the latency
to occupancy and tadpole deposition rate in artificial pools placed in fresh gaps (less than 24 hours old) to
those away from gaps. I found that the latency to occupation and the rate at which tadpoles are deposited
in fresh gaps were significantly shorter and higher, respectively, than in the closed forest, thus proving the
importance of rearing sites in the colonization of treefall gaps. I discuss these results in the light of
possible benefits for the development and survival of tadpoles and of how selection could favour the best
parental decisions. These results offer new insights to our general understanding of thebiology of
invasions.




                                                                                                          607
Roje, Dawn (American Museum of Natural History);

Phylogenetic placement of flatfishes (Percomorpha: Pleuronectiformes) and the phylogenetic
utility of three new molecular markers

Flatfishes (order Pleuronectiformes) are a group of approximately 650 species in 14 families that, like
most other marine teleosts, begin life as bilaterally symmetrical larvae. As they mature, they undergo a
remarkable metamorphosis in which one eye migrates across the dorsal margin of the cranium resulting
in their definingThe placement of Pleuronectiformes within the species-rich Percomorpha has been
elusive. To test both the monophyly of flatfishes, as well as the phylogenetic placement of flatfishes within
Percomorpha, a phylogenetic analysis was carried out on a molecular dataset. DNA sequences (totaling
approximately 5,200 bp) from the nuclear protein-coding loci Rhodopsin 1 (Rho), ring-finger protein 213
(RNF213), trans-membrane protein 22 (TMEM22), suppressorof cytokine signaling 6 (SOCS6) and beta-
1,3-galactosyltransferase 6 (B3GALT6) were generated for 140 species from 10 flatfish and 26 non-
flatfish families. TMEM22, SOCS6 and B3GALT6 are all single-exon genes (SEGs) that have not been
used as phylogenetic markers. To test for congruence six phylogenies (one for each marker and a
concatenated, total-evidence dataset) were analyzed using maximum likelihood methods and compared
using the approximately unbiased (AU) and Shimodaira-Hasegawa (SH) topology tests. The results of
those tests suggest that the signal provided by Rho is incongruent with those from the other datasets.
The recovered topologies suggest that Pleuronectiformes is not monophyletic, and comprises two major
lineages: one most closely related to the monotypic Nematistiidae (rooster fish), and another to Toxotidae
(archerfishes). The implications of this topology on the evolution of bilateral asymmetry will be discussed,
as will the potential for characters of larval morphology to provide additional support for the phylogenetic
placement of flatfishes.



Romagosa, Christina (Auburn University); Guyer, Craig (Auburn University, Canada)

Global wildlife trade and biotic homogenization

The wildlife trade is an important economic activity that creates global movement of millions of individuals
annually. This anthropogenic transport of wildlife is a major threat to biodiversity by depleting wild
populations and introducing invasive species, disease, and parasites. As a major pathway for species
introductions and depletions, the live vertebrate trade contributes to this process of biotic homogenization.
The transport, introduction, and extinction of species have been shown to be non-random processes
among higher taxonomic groups. Use of data describing trade in live vertebrates, lists of species of global
conservation concern, and records of successful vertebrate introductions provide a framework to explore
the relationship between trade and species introductions and extinctions. Data on vertebrate species
transported to and from the United States were used for a synthetic review of US trade in live vertebrates
over 30 years and its contribution to biotic homogenization. Trade-related dynamics have led to changes
in species used for trade, individual quantities of those species traded, and their geographic origin.
Vertebrate families that are traded preferentially are also more likely to contain species that have
established nonindigneous populations or are threatened with extinction. The importance of trade in
homogenization of vertebrates suggests that additional efforts should be made to prevent introductions
and extinctions through this medium.




                                                                                                         608
Roosenburg, Willem (Ohio University);

Should I Stay or Should I Go: Facultative Neonate within Nest Overwintering in the Diamondback
Terrapin

I studied facultative neonate within nest overwintering in the Diamondback terrapin, Malaclemys terrapin,
in Chesapeake Bay.        The Poplar Island Environmental Restoration Project is rebuilding an island in
Chesapeake Bay where raccoons and foxes are absent.              Therefore, nest survival rates exceed 80%
annually and we can evaluate hatchling emergence strategies in a natural setting.                Our project
documents approximately 200 nests per year and 20-35% of nests overwinter as live hatchlings that
emerge in the spring; the remainder emerge in the fall.         Within nest survivorship and hatchling lipid
levels do not differ between fall and spring emerging nests.          We also evaluated the effect of nest
oviposition date, soil composition, soil bulk density and the presence of ice-nucleating agents between fall
and spring emerging nests. Only soil bulk density and the presence of ice nucleating agents differed,
with fall emerging nests having higher freezing points (more ice nucleating agents) and lower bulk
density. Interestingly, the difference in freezing temperatures between fall and overwintering nests was
on either side of the survival threshold for prolonged exposure to freezing temperatures for terrapins
(Baker et al., 2006). Our findings suggest that hatchling terrapins use environmental cues to determine
emergence timing.



Rose, Jonathan (Graduate Group in Ecology, UC Davis); Todd, Brian (Dept. Wildlife, Fish &
Conservation Biology, UC Davis, Canada)

Predicting invasion risk of non-native watersnakes in western North America using environmental
niche models

When introduced outside their native range, snakes are capable of having devastating impacts on
ecological communities throughpredation on, and competition with, native species. The northern
watersnake ( Nerodia sipedon ) and the banded watersnake ( N. fasciata ) are both generalist, semi-
aquatic snakes native to eastern North America and have been introduced to California where they are
currently established. These species pose an additional threat to California‘s endangered fish and
amphibians as a novel predator, and may inhabit a niche similar to that of threatened gartersnakes of the
genus Thamnophis . We geo-referenced over 1,000 occurrence points for these species from the
scientific literature and online databases, and used Maxent to create ecological niche models to project
areas of suitable climate in western North America for these two species. We also measured the spatial
overlap of the projected range and similarity of the climatic niches inhabited by these two species to those
of California‘s native gartersnakes, to assess the risk they pose as potential competitors for these
species. We found that both N. fasciata and N. sipedon have the potential to spread in the west, due
to extensive climatic similarity between their native and invaded ranges. Based on our model results, we
suggest that N. fasciata is likely to spread throughout the Central Valley of California where it may
compete with the threatened giant garter snake, T. gigas .            N. sipedon is more likely to spread
throughout northern California and the Pacific Northwest. We discuss the implications of our models for
the management of these introduced species, and recommend immediate action to prevent further
spread from their current, localized populations.




                                                                                                        609
Rosen, Philip (Universityof Arizona); Schwalbe, Cecil (USGS Southwest Biological Science Center,
Canada); Caldwell, Dennis (Caldwell Design, Canada); Hall, David (University of Arizona, Canada)

Collaborative conservation successes for native leopard frogs of the southwestern USA

Ranid frog conservation in the American Southwest faces 3 primary biological challenges: (1)eliminating
harmful non-native animals; (2) finding warm waters or non-susceptible populations for chytridiomycosis (
Bd ) resistance; and (3) sustaining landscape scale metapopulations. Dispersal of non-native animals and
pathogens puts a premium on landscape-level efforts and thus cooperation with multiple landholders,
public and private. Regulatory issues can limit and facilitate efforts, particularly with special-status
amphibians. Conflicts and synergies exist with sportfish and other native species. However, most land-
use modes can be reconciled with ranid conservation. We focus on 4 case studies from Arizona involving
Chiricahua Leopard Frog ( Rana [ Lithobates ] chiricahuensis ; CLF; a federally threatened species) that,
over two decades, provide successful models and cautionary notes: Case 1 (San Bernardino Valley)
demonstrated that private ranches are suitable conservation areas, benefitting ranchers and frogs, while
highlighting concerns that discouraged private participation. Case 1 also highlighted difficulties with
bullfrog control in complex environments; international boundaries; leopard frog disease and dispersal;
and complications with native fish needs. In Case 2 (Altar Valley), a large National Wildlife Refuge
facilitated landscape-scale success with CLF recovery, while highlighting bullfrog dispersal from adjoining
ranches. Initially contentious public-private and public agency disagreements imposed heavy costs on
participants, even as recovery succeeded. Fortuitous funding and perseverance reversed this, yielding
total elimination of exotics from valley waters and a robust CLF metapopulation. In Case 3
(EmpireValley), a large National Conservation Area is facilitating landscape-scale recovery
implementation for native aquatic vertebrates. Challenges include Bd management; bullfrog removal;
increased non-native fish populations on private ranchettes; and permitting and timeliness issues for
cooperating conservationists and public agencies. Cooperation of private entities reflects successes in
Cases 1 and 2. In Case 4 (Pajarito Mountains), extensive public agency cooperation is facilitating bullfrog
eradication across a landscape with large aquatic complexes. This ongoing effort by NGO, university,
state, and federal agencies‘ personnel is enlarging successful recovery zones that facilitate
metapopulation function of native frogs and defeat bullfrog metapopulation dynamics. Private assistance
has been strong, but sportfish and crayfish challenges remain on public lands. Success throughout the
Case 4 region would meet federal criteria for Recovery Unit 1 (of 7) of the Chiricahua Leopard Frog, a first
step toward de-listing. Similarly active restoration efforts are occurring in other recovery units.



Rosenblatt, Adam (Florida International University); Heithaus, Michael (Florida International University,
North Miami, FL, United States)

Ecological roles and individual specialization of American alligators revealed by stable isotope
analysis and movement patterns

Understanding the movement and feeding patterns of top predators is crucial for understanding their
ecological roles and how these roles may become altered as climate change continues. However, the
movement and feeding patterns of top predators have been primarily examined at the population scale,
assuming that all of the individuals in a population behave similarly. Recent research has shown that
individual behavioral specialization is more common than usually assumed and that specialization could
affect population, community, and ecosystem dynamics, ecological roles, and require novel conservation
strategies for proper management. Using stable isotope analysis and movement tracking we studied the
prevalence of individual specialization in a population of American alligators ( Alligatormississippiensis)
and how it could impact the ecological roles of these toppredators in a subtropical estuary. We found that



                                                                                                        610
individual alligators were capable of long distance movements over short time periods and adopted one of
three distinct movement tactics that were linked to variation in diets. The adoption of a particular tactic
was associated with tradeoffs between access to food resources and likely salt stress. Also, one of the
movement/feeding tactics indicated that alligators may act as vectors of nutrient transport between
marine and brackish waters. The use of this tactic, however, varied with salinity of the estuary, suggesting
that anthropogenic changes to freshwater delivery likely have modified, and will continue to modify, their
ecological role. We further found that alligators consumed prey at lower trophic levels than we
hypothesized, and that this may have been caused by past human impacts. Ultimately, our results show
that alligators can vary widely in their movement and feeding patterns, with some possibly transporting
nutrients within ecosystems and acting as simultaneous stabilizing top-down forces in disparate habitats.
However, other individuals may fill different roles in the environment. These varied roles will most likely
change as habitat restoration (in the form of increased delivery of freshwater to theestuary) and sea level
rise continue, but the degree and direction of change will be difficult to predict on an individual level.



Ross, Julie (Florida Gulf Coast University); Allman, Phil (Florida Gulf Coast University, Fort Myers,
United States); Winters, Colleen (Towson University, Towson, United States)

Genetic structure of a gopher tortoise, Gopherus polyphemus, population on a barrier island in
southwest Florida, USA

This study examines the genetic structure of an island gopher tortoise population in southwest Florida.
Understanding the genetic structure of this threatened species is becoming increasingly important since
development pressures continue to fragment populations and force individuals to be relocated. This
project uses species specific microsatellite analyses to determine the genetic structure of the Marco
Island population as well as gene flow across the island. Marco Island is a barrier island in southwest
Florida (USA) approximately 1 km from the adjacent mainland. Zooarchelogical evidence suggests that
gopher tortoises have inhabited the island since before the island became separated from the mainland
approximately 4000 years BP (Frantz and Quitmeyer 2005). We hypothesized that the Marco Island
population will be a single population with no evidence of a bottleneck. Our results indicate that the Marco