ledge gaps. We performed
surveys through various partnerships and tested monitoring methods to develop detection probability
statistics, standardize methodology, and develop sampling recommendations which account for false
absences. We identified overlaps in sampling methods for achieving best return on effort for monitoring
programs, and determined the minimum sampling effort required to achieve 95% confidence in detection.
Many species are readily detected (many by several methods), but detection probabilities vary among
species, methods, habitats and sampling periods. We discuss challenges in collecting and vetting data,
and in achieving effective herpetofaunal monitoring across differing geographic scales.



Caspers, Barbara (University of Bielefeld);

The importance of mate choice for speciation in amphibians

Assortative mating – preferred mating with the own type - is a major pre-zygotic isolation mechanism that
is supposed to play a central role in ecological and adaptive speciation. First, this talk will provide an
overview in how far assortative mating has been found to be important for differentiation processes in
amphibian species. Second, we are going to present our research results centred on the importance of
assortative mating in an adaptively diverging salamander population. Recent studies on a population of
the terrestrial fire salamander ( Salamandra salamandra ) in Germany (the Kottenforst near Bonn)
suggest that the adaptation to different reproduction habitats within the small forest initiated a process of
adaptive divergence under sympatric conditions. We analysed whether assortative mating might explain
the maintenance of the two different genetic clusters in this system using a three steps approach. i) we
investigated the degree of assortative mating under natural conditions. Therefore we reconstructed the
paternal genotype by analysing more than 1150 larvae deposited by 46 wild caught females, which
deposited there larvae in our lab. The results clearly indicate that female fire salamanders mate
assortatively according to their own habitat type. ii) we used mating experiments under semi-natural
conditions in order to document existing pre-zygotic isolation mechanisms. Therefore, we kept females



                                                                                                          117
with two other males, one of each habitat type, in a enclosure for two subsequent days and recorded all
matings. iii) we investigated the use of chemical cues in habitat dependent assortative mating, as odour
cues are widely used by salamanders for intraspecific communication and sexual recognition. The results
of these experiments indicate that female fire salamanders are actually able to distinguish between males
of the two habitat types. Here, we present the full data set of three years of experiments, showing the
importance of assortative mating for adaptive speciation in the fire salamander.



Castañeda, Maria del Rosario (Harvard University);

Anolis lizards in the Encyclopedia of Life

The Encyclopedia of Life (EOL) aims to gather detailed and accurate information on all life forms on earth
(i.e., animals, plants, fungi, protist, and bacteria), concentrate it in one place and make it widely available.
The content is produced and compiled by scientists in different areas to ensure high quality of the
resulting product. With nearly 400 species currently recognized, Anolis Daudin 1802 (Squamata:
Iguanidae) is one of the most diverse groups of vertebrates traditionally ranked as a genus. These lizards,
commonly known as anoles, are distributed from southeastern North America to central South America,
including the West Indies, and are characterized by the presence of adhesive toe-pads and, in most
species, brightly colored throat fans, called dewlaps. Anolis species have been a research tool for many
areas of biology including behavior, ecology, evolution, functional morphology and genomics, just to
name a few. In addition to being an important research group, Anolis species are highly appreciated in
the pet world. For these reasons, as well as their abundance and visibility where they occur, anoles are a
clade of great interest to both scientists and the public in general. Here I present progress on the creation
of new content and the revision of previous entries of EOL Anolis pages. In addition, I provide
information on how to navigate the EOL pages, details on the many resources available through the EOL,
and contacts to participate in the EOL Anolis community and other EOL initiatives.



Castañeda, Maria del Rosario (Harvard University); de Queiroz, Kevin (Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, DC, United States)

Multivariate analysis of the morphological component of ecomorphology in mainland Anolis
lizards (Dactyloa clade).

Based on Greater Antillean communities of Anolis lizards, the term ecomorph has been used to describe
the association between ecological and morphological features. Species in each ecomorph class have
similar morphologies (e.g., relative body, tail, hind and forelimb lengths) and similar ecological
characteristics, including foraging behavior and perch height and diameter. When analyzed with
multivariate statistics, species form identifiable clusters in morphological and ecological space, each
representing a different ecomorph class. In the Greater Antilles, species of the same ecomorph class from
different islands are not each other‘s closest relatives; instead, each island has assemblages of closely
related species representing different ecomorphs. Here we focused on the morphological aspect of
ecomorphology in mainland Anolis species of the Dactyloa clade. We analyzed six morphological
characters associated with habitat use to answer the following questions: 1) Are there recognizable
clusters of Dactyloa species in multivariate morphospace? 2) Are species in the same morphological
cluster also phylogenetically close? And 3) is the distribution of Dactyloa species in morphospace similar
to that seen in Caribbean species? We found seven clusters composed of morphologically similar
species. These clusters do not correspond to monophyletic groups, though the species composition of



                                                                                                            118
some clusters is not completely independent of phylogeny. Finally, some of the Dactyloa species were
classified as members of the trunk-crown, trunk-ground and twig ecomorph classes. Other species (and
complete clusters) occupied regions in multivariate space that were not occupied by Caribbean species
(i.e., they exhibited distinct combinations of morphological traits). In conclusion, we found that Dactyloa
species exhibit both similarities to and differences from the Caribbean Anolis radiation in the association
of morphological characters in multivariate space.



Castoe, Todd (U of Colorado School of Medicine); de Koning, AP Jason (U Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO, United States); Ray, David (Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS, United
States); Bronikowski, Anne (Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States); Secor, Stephen (University
of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, United States); Feschotte, Cedric (University of Texas at Arlington,
Arlington, TX, United States); Warren, Wesley (Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO,
United States); Pollock, David (U Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States)

Comparative genomics and transcriptomics of snake - what makes snakes soo cool?

Studying organisms with extreme phenotypes can provide unique insight into the structure and function of
biological systems, and advances in sequencing technologies provide new unparalleled access for
investigating such non-traditional model systems. Here we share new insight from 3 complete snake
genomes that showcase the unique genomic attributes of snakes, and discuss how these relate to
evolution of extreme phenotypes. We provide highlights from new transcriptomic analyses of extreme
physiological remodeling in snakes that demonstrates the power of snakes as a model, and of taking a
system-wide approach to studying such extreme adaptive remodeling. We discuss how these changes
we observe in snake genomes and transcriptomes may be collectively related to the evolution of extreme
phenotypes and, indeed, why snakes are soo cool.



Cates, Corey (The University of Texas at Tyler); Ford, David; Pettingill, Kaitlyn; Ford, Neil (The University
of Texas at Tyler, Tyler, TX, United States)

Nutritional stress early in life can be compensated for with increased feeding after subsequent
improvement in prey availability. That hyperphagy may require behaviors that would increase
susceptibility to predators. This investigation set out to discover what and how those behaviors are
altered during compensatory growth after dietary restriction in a snake species.         Twenty-four corn
snakes ( Pantherophis guttata ) were each raised on either high (50% body mass/week) or low
(15%/week) diets of dead mice for 174 days. The average body mass between the two groups differed by
~50% at that time. Three behavioral trials were started; aggression, hiding versus exploration, and time to
feeding. Aggressive behavior in the High Diet Group (HDG) was found to be statistically lower than in the
Low Diet Group (LDG). The HDG was also found to spend less time in exploration behavior within their
cage than the LDG. The LDG was faster to find and consume the food. These behaviors all appear to be
related to the compensatory growth response as seen in the drive to find additional food. At day 175, the
two groups were placed on the same diet of 50% body mass/week (HDG diet). At this time the food
availability was made on a selection basis, with the food being offered in multiple small amounts (two
mice/feeding) rather than in one large offering (one mouse/feeding) as in the first 174 days.
Compensatory growth occurred in the LDG due to the increase in food availability. Food availability
fluctuations seem to elicit a slowed growth rate when food sources are low but a catch up growth
response when food availability increases.




                                                                                                         119
Caviedes Solis, Itzue Wendolin (Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México);
Nieto Montes de Oca, Adrián (Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,
Canada)

Molecular Phylogeny of the Plectrohyla bistincta Group (Anura: Hylidae)

The hylid genus Plectrohyla includes 42 species, which represent 42.85% of the total number of hylid
frog species in México. In a recent phylogenetic analysis of Plectrohyla , the genus was composed of two
main clades separated geographically from each other by the Isthmus of Tehuantepec: the P.
guatemalensis group, which includes 18 species distributed eastward from the Isthmus, Mexico, to El
Salvador and Honduras in Central America, and the P. bistincta group, which is endemic to Mexico and
includes 24 species distributed westward from the Isthmus to Durango. Most of these species are
microendemic, and because they have been only occasionally recorded or not recorded at all during the
last 20 years, they are considered endangered species.

The relationships among the species in each of the above groups are still poorly known: only eight
species of the P. bistincta group and four species of the P. guatemalensis group have been incuded in
the most recent phylogenetic analyses of the genus. Evidently, these hypotheses cannot be regarded as
a final assessment of the phylogenetic relationships within the P. bistincta or P. guatemalensis groups,
and the inclusion of additional species in the analysis may change the relationships in the phylogeny.

The main goal of this project is to investigate the monophyly of the P. bistincta group and the
phylogenetic relationships within the group. We present a phylogenetic analysis of 17 species of the
group using data from two mitochondrial genes (ND1, 960 bp and 12S, 943 bp) and three nuclear genes
(Rag-1, 420 bb, Rhod, 361 bp, and POMc, 508 bp). To evaluate the monophyly of the group, we included
representatives of the       P. guatemalensis      group and the genera         Exerodonta, Ecnomiohyla,
Duellmanohyla, Bromelioyla , and Ptychohyla . Data analysis was performed using Bayesian methods;
the best fitting models for each gen were identified using the Akaike information criterion in MrModelTest,
version 2.0, and Bayesian analyses of the concatenated data were performed using MrBayes, version
3.1.2.



Cayot, Linda J. (Galapagos Conservancy); Gibbs, James P. (State University of New York College of
Environmental Science and Forestry, Syracuse, United States); Tapia, Washington (Galapagos National
Park Service, Puerto Ayora, Galapagos, Canada)

Restoring Tortoise Populations in the Galapagos: Contrasting case studies from Española and
Pinta Islands

At the time of the establishment of the Galapagos National Park in 1959, giant tortoises were rare on the
southern island of Española and considered extinct on the northern island of Pinta. Eventually 14
tortoises were discovered on Española but only a single tortoise, ―Lonesome George,‖ was recovered
from Pinta. Goats, the only introduced mammal on either island, destroyed much of the habitat on both,
causing long-term impacts that endure after eradication. The recovery of the tortoise population on
Española began in the late 1960s with the initiation of a captive breeding program and the eradication of
goats. Young tortoises were repatriated to Española starting in 1975, with a total of 1750 released by
January 2012. Annual survival rates of >95% of adults and 90-95% of juveniles have resulted in
approximately 50% overall mortality of all repatriates over the 35-year release program. In situ
reproduction was first observed about 15 years after reintroduction began and has now generated a
sizable component of native-hatched tortoises in the population (approximately 20%). The success of the




                                                                                                       120
Española project has been aided by targeted research in the breeding and rearing program, regular
surveys of the growing population, and genetic studies. An ecological assessment completed on
Española in June 2010 has provided new information regarding the long-term impact of the now
eradicated goat population and the relationship between tortoises and cactus, and resulted in
recommendations for experimental habitat manipulation to restore the island ecosystem to a more
pristine, pre-goat condition. On Pinta, tortoise restoration followed a very different trajectory. Lack of
breeding stock to re-establish the original population and failure to find additional Pinta tortoises either in
Galapagos or in zoos around the world led to competing strategies: (1) to release an analog subspecies
of tortoise to preserve the island‘s ecosystem in its natural state (―rewilding‖), versus (2) not releasing any
tortoises thus preserving the evolutionary integrity of the Galapagos biota. The final eradication of goats
in 2003 followed by rapid incursion of woody vegetation catalyzed an interim decision to release 39 non-
reproductive tortoises to restore ecological services of tortoises to Pinta. Genetic analyses of a large
sample of tortoises from Wolf Volcano on northern Isabela Island continue to provide slight hope for the
potential recovery of a genetically original Pinta tortoise. With genetic analyses still pending, no final
decision on the source of a breeding population for Pinta has been determined. These two case studies
provide stark and contrasting examples of the interplay between conservation policy, practicality, and
scientific research in restoring giant tortoise populations and their island ecosystems in the Galapagos
Archipelago.



Cecala, Kristen (Warnell School of Forestry and Natural Resources); Maerz, John (Warnell School of
Forestry and Natural Resources, Athens, GA, United States)

The Role of Behavior in Influencing Headwater Salamander Responses to Anthropogenic
Disturbance

Changes in behavior can alter movement patterns of animals, which can impact patterns of occupancy
among habitats and fragment populations. Evolutionary theory predicts that animals have evolved to
move in response to a suite of cues that maximize animal survival and growth and minimize risk of injury
or mortality. Behavioral plasticity allows these animals to adjust their behavior to appropriately respond to
variable cues. When humans modify environments, new conditions can suddenly yield maladaptive
responses to cues that were adaptive in the undisturbed environment. Headwater streams generally have
dense over- and mid-story canopies that limit direct light penetration and moderate values and ranges of
light intensity, temperature, and humidity known to affect salamander behavior. We tested whether
canopy gaps in otherwise natural systems could 1) alter salamander responses to light cues, and 2)
fragment previously contiguous populations. Controlled laboratory tests indicated that salamander larvae
exhibit strong, negative phototaxis that can be mediated by different stream substrates. Secondly,
reciprocal transfers across a canopy gap and within forested areas demonstrated that salamanders were
approximately 50% less likely to home to their capture location if a gap was present. This study
demonstrates that behavioral plasticity allowed salamanders to adapt to high light environments, but the
interactive effects of substrate were important to consider. Field experiments indicated that despite this
plasticity, small canopy gaps (< 15 m) were capable of inhibiting homing behavior. Canopy gaps are a
ubiquitous consequence of anthropogenic activity, precede more intensive development, and may yield
unforeseen consequences for stream populations.




                                                                                                           121
Centeno, Fernanda (Universidade Estadual Paulista "Júlio de Mesquita Filho"); Andrade, Denis
(Universidade Estadual "Júlio de Mesquita Filho", Canada)

Skin color change in a basking treefrog: does it affect predation risk?

Skin color is an important organismal trait known to influence the risk of an animal being detected by
visually oriented predators. Therefore, the resemblance of skin color with the background is commonly
acknowledged as camouflage and largely accepted as an important antipredator mechanism. However,
skin color integrates many different functions and its role in predation avoidance might involve the
complex interaction with other functions and with the physical environment. Bokermannohyla alvarengai
is a treefrog found in altitude areas in southeastern Brazil, known for spending long periods basking in the
sun, completely exposed sitting on rock boulders. As skin temperature is raised during basking, skin color
also changes markedly from a grayish mottled pattern to a white chalk. Although, this physiological
change in skin coloration has been suggested to be important to modulated heat exchange during
basking, its potential influence on camouflage remains unknown. Thus, to test the influence of skin color
on the potential risk of predation in B. alvarengai , we distributed 225 plasticine-made frog models of
three different colors (white, black, and mottled gray) in the habitats where this frog is found basking.
Replicas were distributed randomly in the field covering an area of approximately 420 m 2 , observing a
minimum distance of at least 2 m between models. Models were placed in the field early in the morning,
just before sunrise, and collected in the same day just before dawn (~12 hours). The risk of predation was
then assessed by the presence of scars identified in the models upon their recovery. The rocks used for
basking by B. alvarengai usually bear abundant lichens on their surface, which provides a composite
background coloration intermingling a general grayish/brownish mineral coloration with spots varying from
dark-gray to chalk white. Thus, B. alvarengai appears to be, at least to the human eye, equally well
camouflaged for its entire range of skin color. However, and contrary to what we have anticipated, white
models suffered significantly more predatory attacks than black and grayish ones ( x 2 =10.1; df=2;
p=0.006). We conclude, therefore, that the whitening in skin color elicited by the increase in body
temperature during basking may compromise camouflage increasing the risk of predation.
Thermoregulatory benefits afforded by the basking behavior and associated changes in skin coloration,
however, are likely to compensate for such drawback.



Chabarria, Ryan (Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi); Pezold, Frank (Texas A&M University-Corpus
Christi, Canada)

Molecular phylogeny of Sicydium (Gobiidae: Sicydiinae)

Gobies of the subfamily Sicydiinae are common inhabitants of tropical and subtropical island streams and
tropical continental rivers with limited or no coastal plains. The genus Sicydium is restricted to such
streams in the tropical eastern Pacific and Atlantic basins. Like other members of the subfamily, they are
amphidromous, having adults that live and breed in freshwater and a planktonic marine larval stage. With
22 nominal species and no comprehensive systematic review, there is considerable taxonomic confusion
within Sicydium. Variable coloration in life and preservation, overlapping morphological characters, and
parochial taxonomic studies have all contributed to this confusion. In this study we present a phylogeny
of the genus using both nuclear and mitochondrial DNA data. Preliminary data suggest that the actual
number of species is less than what has been described.




                                                                                                        122
Chakrabarty, Prosanta (LSU Museum of Natural Science);

SpeciesMap: a web-based application for determining the effects of the 2010 Gulf of Mexico oil
spill on wildlife, with a preliminary list of fishes put at risk

The 2010 Gulf of Mexico Oil Spill was the largest in history outside of warfare and because the spill
occurred in the deep sea, its impact on the biota will be difficult to assess. To help address this problem
we have created SpeciesMap (http:// speciesmap.org), a web-based application (web app) that allows a
user to synthesize data on the oil spill with distributional records and other information on marine species.
We have combined satellite image data collected over the course of the oil spill with locality data from
historical collection records of fish species in a geographic information system (GIS). In doing so, we have
created maps to assess which species were potentially in the region of the spill and to what degree their
range was exposed to pollution. To evaluate the impact of the spill, we examined and categorized various
levels of overlap between the observed surface range of the 2010 spill with collections records for 124
fish species including all 77 endemic to the Gulf of Mexico. More than half of all species examined
(including more than half of all endemics) were found to have population records in the region of the spill.
SpeciesMap contains interaction maps for all the species examined and t hese data can be used to target
post-spill collections, to evaluate changes in habitat and to discover extirpations or extinctions in
response to environmental disturbances.



Chan, Eng Heng (Turtle Conservation Society of Malaysia); Chen, Pelf Nyok (Turtle Conservation
Society of Malaysia, Canada)

Performance of Head-started Southern River Terrapins, Batagur affinis edwardmolli in the Wild

Growth data on head-started southern river terrapins that had hatched in 2004 and 2005, and released
into the Setiu River in Terengganu, Malaysia between 2005 and 2009 and recaptured between 2009 and
2011 is presented. Recaptures were obtained from fishermen using gillnets and hooks. The terrapins
were alive and released back into the river after they had been scanned for microchips, measured and
weighed. 222 terrapins hatched in 2004 and 131 in 2005 were released at ages ranging from 1 to 4 years.
A total of 61 recaptures were made, giving a recapture rate of 17.2%. Growth data for both groups were
combined to provide average weight and straight carapace length (SCL) gains for varying durations spent
in the wild after release. Terrapins that had been in the wild from 10 to 15 months gained an average of
990 g and 2.78 cm in SCL. Those recaptured after 30 to 35 months gained 2535 g in weight and 5.98 cm
in SCL. For recaptures made 50 to 55 months cafter release, the gains were3131.3 g in weight and12.75
cm in SCL. The longest duration in the wild (65 to 70 months) exhibited the highest weight gains of 7258
g and SCL gains of 22.03 cm. Size at age data was also computed. Two individuals aged 7 years
weighed an average of 7874 g with a SCL of 38.45 cm. At 6 years of age, they weigh 4092 g and
measure 28.11 cm in SCL. 5 year old terrapins weigh 3570 g with a SCL of 28.11 cm. The youngest
obtained, the 4 year-olds, had weights of 2675 g and SCL of 25.5 cm. Our data demonstrates that head-
started river terrapins are able to grow significantly after release into the wild.




                                                                                                         123
Chan, Hon Ki (The University of Hong Kong); Karraker, Nancy E. (University of Rhode Island, Kingston,
RI, United States); Thomas, Daniel C. (The University of Hong Kong, Pofulam, Hong Kong, Hong Kong);
Kusrini, Mirza (Bogor Agricultural University, West Java, Indonesia)

Are we losing common and widespread species? Implications from the phylogeography of the
floating frog (Occidozyga lima)

Conservation efforts generally focus on species that are rare and restricted in distribution, while those
considered common and widespread are often overlooked. However, it is becoming apparent that
commonness does not protect a species from extinction in this age of rapid environmental change.
Moreover, the phenomenon of cryptic diversity raises the question of whether any truly widespread
species exist at all. A cryptic species complex appearing to be widespread and unthreatened may
obscure declines or extinctions of some species within the complex. The floating frog (Occidozyga lima) is
a common lowland frog with a vast distributional range across tropical East Asia, but populations in South
China have been undergoing declines recently due to extensive habitat loss. In order to determine
whether these populations were distinct and potentially in need of conservation, we evaluated the genetic
variation of O. lima based on 4000bp of DNA data (12S, 16S, 28S, ND1, tyrosinase and histone H3
genes) from 140 individuals representing multiple populations ranging from South China to Indonesia.
Analyses were conducted using maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference. We
discovered at least four distinct, well-supported lineages (South China, Myanmar, Indochina, Indonesia)
across the species‘ range, and the phylogenetic pattern matches the geographical pattern of mountain
ranges. Our results suggest that O. lima is a cryptic species complex. Despite documented population
declines in South China, O. lima is not regarded as threatened, because populations of its counterparts in
other area of tropical East Asia are considered stable, and there is currently no regulatory protection for
the species. The findings of this study provide an example of how a threatened species may be masked
within a cryptic species complex and raise the specter of a loss of evolutionarily significant units before
they are fully understood. These results have significant conservation implications for rapidly declining
amphibian populations in tropical East Asia, where many species are still poorly known.



Chan, Lauren (Duke University); Hibbits, Toby (Texas Cooperative Wildlife Collective, Canada); Hill,
Mike; Leavitt, Dan (Texas A&M University, Canada); Painter, Charlie (New Mexico Game & Fish,
Canada); Fitzgerald, Lee (Texas A&M University, Canada)

Conservation genetics of the endangered Dunes Sagebrush lizard: uniting landscape and
population genetic perspectives to understand current and historical connectivity

 The Dunes Sagebrush lizard, Sceloporus arenicolus , is a habitat specialist endemic to the Mescalero-
Monahans shinnery sands ecosystem, a naturally dynamic and spatially complex landscape that is
fragmented and degraded by human activities and construction associated with oil and gas development.
Identifying the habitat features, both natural and anthropogenic, that affect Dunes Sagebrush Lizard
population persistence and connectivity at multiple spatial and temporal scales is critical to the
development of effective management and conservation plans. We combine approaches from population
genetics, phylogeography, and landscape ecology to understand the current and historical contexts of
population isolation and connectivity, and identify the set of landscape features important to both local
and range-wide persistence. With thorough sampling across the entire range and a multilocus sequence
dataset, we characterize phylogeographic differentiation and estimate the historical demographic context
of population divergence. We find support for substantial differentiation across seemingly contiguous
areas, with small effective population sizes in some regions. In addition, we present preliminary data on




                                                                                                       124
population genetic diversity and differentiation at fine-scales with respect to natural and human-altered
landscape features.



Channing, Alan (University of the Western Cape); Hillers, Annika (Museum für Naturkunde, Berlin,
Canada); Loetters, Stefan (Trier University, Canada); Roedel, Mark-Oliver (Museum für Naturkunde,
Berlin, Canada); Schick, Susanne (Trier University, Canada); Conradie, Werner (Port Elizabeth Museum,
Canada); Roedder, Dennis (Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Canada); Mercurio,
Vincenzo (Museum für Naturkunde, Berlin, Canada); Wagner, Philipp (Villanova University, Canada);
Dehling, Maximillian (Universität Koblenz-Landau, Canada); Du Preez, Louis (North-West University,
Canada); Kielgast, Jos (University of Copenhagen, Canada); Burger, Marius (University of the Western
Cape, Canada)

Taxonomy of the super-cryptic Hyperolius nasutus group of long reed frogs of Africa (Anura:
Hyperoliidae), with descriptions of six new species

Specimens from across the range of the Hyperolius nasutus species group were sequenced for two
mitochondrial genes and one nuclear gene. Advertisement calls were recorded from the same specimens
where possible, and morphological characters were compared. Bayesian inference and maximum
likelihood produced a well-supported tree indicating 15 clades that were assigned to existing or new
species. Hyperolius lamottei is confirmed to be outside the H. nasutus group clade. On the basis of
molecular, vocalisation and morphological data we recognise            H. acuticeps, H. adspersus, H.
benguellensis, H. dartevellei, H. igbettensis, H. nasutus, H. poweri, H. viridis and describe six new
species. Hyperolius granulatus, H. nasicus, H. oxyrhynchus, H. punctulatus and H. sagitta are assigned
as junior synonyms. As our results are based on a small number of specimens, these hypotheses await
testing with larger sample sizes and more characters. A species distribution model suggests where outlier
populations might be found.



Chapple, David (Monash University); Simmonds, Sarah; Wong, Bob (Monash University, Melbourne,
Australia)

Know when to run, know when to hide: can behavioural differences explain the divergent invasion
success of two sympatric lizards?

Invasive species represent a select subset of organisms that have successfully transitioned through each
stage of the introduction process (transportation, establishment, and spread). Although there is a growing
realisation that behaviour plays a critical role in invasion success, few studies have focused on the initial
stages of introduction. We examined whether differences in the grouping tendencies and exploratory
behaviour of two sympatric lizard species could contribute to their divergent invasion success. While the
non-directed activity of the two species did not differ, the invasive delicate skink (Lampropholis delicata)
was found to be more exploratory than the congeneric non-invasive garden skink (L. guichenoti), which
enabled it to more effectively locate novel environments and basking site resources. The delicate skink
also exhibited a greater tendency to hide, which may act to enhance its probability of ensnarement in
freight and cargo and decrease its likelihood of detection during transit. The grouping tendencies of the
two species did not differ. Together, our results suggest that while the two species have an equivalent
‗opportunity‘ for unintentional human-assisted transportation, several pre-existing behavioural traits may
enhance the success of the delicate skink in negotiating the initial stages of the introduction process, and
subsequent post-establishment spread.




                                                                                                         125
Charvet, Patricia (SENAI / PR); Viana, Anderson (Projeto Trygon, Canada)

Embryonic Stages of Development of Neotropical Freshwater Stingrays (Potamotrygonidae)

Neotropical freshwater stingrays are highly valued as ornamental fish and the trade is concentrated on
neonate and juvenile specimens due to size issues. Despite having these after birth life stages well
known, little information is available on the embryonic development of potamotrygonids. In the present
study over 500 embryos of potamotrygonid species (mainly Plesiotrygon iwamae, Paratrygon aiereba,
Heliotrygon rosai, Potamotrygon leopoldi, P. scobina, P. motoro, P. orbignyi and P. signata ) were
macroscopically analyzed, weighted and measured. Five main stages of development were noted, each
with specific morphological characteristics such as disc and pectoral fins formation, gills development,
pigmentation, disc width size, weight and yolk sac proportion. The results were consistent for all species
studies until now and a specific embryonic development scale is presented for this group. Some of the
main features for each stage are presented as follows. At the first stage gills are external, pectoral fins not
fused, there is no sign of pigmentation and the yolk sac weight corresponds to approximately 90% of the
embryo weight. The second stage has similar features, however, pectoral fins are fused and yolk sac
decreases to around 60% of the embryo weight. At the third stage gills become internal and the yolk sac
corresponds to less than 50% of the embryo weight. The most significant changes at stage four comprise
beginning of the pigmentation process and a significant reduction on the yolk sac proportion,
corresponding now to around 15% of the embryo weight. The fifth and last stage of development is widely
known as near term embryonic development, when pectoral fins are fully developed, gills are internal,
pigmentation patterns are well defined and the yolk sac proportion drops down to less than 5% of the
embryo weight. In some regions of the Amazon basin where ornamental captures are carried out illegally,
some fishermen capture pregnant females, cause abortions and try to commercialize embryos at stages
of development four or five. This condemned practice leads to embryo mortality in most cases, since only
occasionally embryos at stage five might survive if aborted. The existence of an embryo development
scale for this group of stingrays contributes to determine pregnancy development and provides data for
law enforcement agents to detect when illegally aborted embryos are tentatively being commercialized.



Chen, Pelf-Nyok (Turtle Conservation Society of Malaysia);

Community Participation in a River Terrapin Conservation Project                in Kemaman, Terengganu,
Malaysia

A statewide survey carried out in Terengganu in 2010 has resulted in the discovery of two new localities
where the critically-endangered River Terrapins (Batagur affinis) were present. One of these localities is
the Kemaman River.

In 2011, we initiated a pilot river terrapin conservation project in the Kemaman River with the cooperation
from the Department of Wildlife and National Parks and three local communities, i.e. Tok Kapor, Pasir
Gajah and Dadong Villages.A total of 649 B. affinis eggs were procured and incubated, and of these 233
hatchlings were produced, with an average hatching success of 36%.In Tok Kapor, 219 eggs were
incubated and 27 hatchlings were produced. The hatching success was recorded at 12%. The eggs were
initially incubated by the Pinang River bank but a bout of heavy rain and subsequent floods inundated the
eggs undergoing incubation. While the nests survived the movement and relocation to higher grounds
during the floods, most eggs were depredated by ants. In Pasir Gajah, 420 eggs were incubated and 198
hatchlings were produced. The hatching success was recorded at 47%. Finally, in Dadong, ten eggs were
incubated and eight hatchlings were produced, with a hatching success of 80%.All hatchlings were
weighed, measured and marked by way of scute mutilation before they were released into the Kemaman



                                                                                                           126
River. We would like to commend the local communities for their enthusiasm, support and action in the
conservation project. Their participation is crucial in ensuring the survival of the critically-endangered river
terrapins.



Chen, Pelf-Nyok (Turtle Conservation Society of Malaysia);

Population Structure and Growth of the Critically Endangered Painted Terrapin (Batagur
borneoensis) in the Setiu River, Terengganu, Malaysia

The Setiu River is home to two critically-endangered but poorly-studied freshwater turtles, the Painted
Terrapins (Batagur borneoensis) and River Terrapins (Batagur affinis). In 2009, a mark-and-recapture
study was initiated to study the population structure and growth of these freshwater turtles. Between 2009
and 2011, we encountered 510 individuals, of which 286 were B. borneoensis (56%) and 224 were B.
affinis (44%). Of the 286 B. borneoensis individuals, 34 were males, 60 were females and 180 were
undetermined. Size classes suggested that 58 individuals were hatchlings less than 20 cm SCL, 169
were juveniles between 20 and 40 cm SCL and 59 were adults between 40 and 60 cm SCL. Of the 274
wild-caught individuals, 248 individuals were captured once over three years, 18 were recaptured twice
between 11 and 905 days, seven were recaptured thrice between 29 and 785 days, and one individual
was recaptured four times over 187 days. Terrapins that were recaptured twice and thrice recorded an
average growth of 1.15 g/day and 1.36 g/day, respectively, where as the only individual that was
recaptured four times gained 2.67 g/day. The 12 remaining individuals were head-started, of which 11
individuals were recaptured once between 4 and 489 days, and one individual was recaptured twice in
139 days. The low recapture rates indicate that the population may be suffering from the negative effects
of fishery-related activities and habitat destruction in the river. Effective conservation measures are
urgently required to ensure the viability of the critically-endangered freshwater turtles in the wild.



Chen, Xin (The City University of New York, The Graduate Center and College of Staten Island);
Burbrink, Frank (The City University of New York, The Graduate Center and College of Staten Island,
Canada)

How does ecological niche change through time in serially diversifying globally distributed
ratsnakes?

Understanding how ecological traits change through time is critical for investing the mechanisms of
adaptive radiation via ecological opportunity. During adaptive radiations, rates of diversification are
expected to be highest during the early history of the group and decline through time as available niches
are filled. Along with this pattern of species diversification, ecological disparification should be low,
indicating that niche variation is highest among subclades rather than within subclades. Moreover, the
evolution of ecological traits should fit an early burst pattern suggesting that most change in ecology
happens during the earliest phases of diversification. Global ratsnakes represent a species-rich
assemblage in Colubrinae, currently including 74 recognized species distributed across both the Old
World (OW) Eurasia and the New World (NW). Originating in the tropical Asian, this group has rapidly
radiated in both the OW and NW temperate regions and holds the highest diversity in these two areas. In
this study, we use phylogenies of worldwide ratsnakes as our model system to test the early burst pattern
of ecological niche disparity, examine the best-fitting evolutionary models of niche divergence (Brownian
motion, OU, early burst, late burst, white noise), reconstruct the ancestral state of niches and quantify the
niche similarity among different taxa. We first estimated the phylogenetic history of ratsnakes with a



                                                                                                            127
concatenated gene matrix representing one mitochondrial gene and four nuclear loci. Second, we
obtained ratsnake niche information using world climate data sampled from 5576 georeferenced localities
from 70 taxa. The pattern of ecological disparity was determined by implementing variations of the
disparity-through-time estimates and the best evolutionary model of niche disparity was decided using
AIC weights and simulations. We then estimated the ancestral state of ratsnake niches and compare the
niche overlap using environmental niche models and comparative phylogenetic methods. Our results
provide information to better understand the evolution of ecological traits in snakes and determine if
general rules govern the change of these traits in serially radiating groups.



Chernoff, Barry (Wesleyan University); Miller, Kate; Heinemann, Ross; Tipton, Michelle (Wesleyan
University, Canada); Welchel, Adam (The Nature Conservancy, Canada)

The Effects of Dam Removal on the East Branch of the Eightmile River, CT

The hydrography of the East Branch of the Eightmile River has been modified since the 1720‘s when a
dam was constructed on the Zemko property. While the dam has occasionally fallen into disrepair, the
dam has largely been intact for more than the last hundred years. In 2006, the water in the impoundment
behind the dam was drawn down and the dam was removed by fall 2007; a 10 m rocky connector was
constructed between the portion above and below the former dam. The former impoundment above the
dam has changed to form a meandering, shallow stream channel. We have surveyed fishes, benthic
macroinvertebrates (BMI), water chemistry and physical parameters from 2004 through 2010 at the
former dam sites and at control sites five river miles downstream.The biological communities have
changed dramatically since drawdown and dam removal. The inter-annual variation of the communities in
the vicinity of the dam site is significantly higher than at control sites. The data from both fish and benthic
macroinvertebrates indicate that the patterns of change or ―recovery‖ differ in the sections of river above
and below the dam. Our data suggest that there is insufficient knowledge to predict the duration and
manner of ―recovery‖ following dam removal. If the hydrographic system has been modified for almost
300 years, have the biological communities adapted to an impeded hydrographic regime? If so, does dam
removal itself constitute a major disturbance to the functioning of biological communities? While these are
unsettling questions because of implications for aquatic conservation and management, our data suggest
that achievement of goals from the modification of streams and rivers may not be easily predictable.



Chestnut, Tara (US Geological Survey); Anderson, Chauncey W (US Geological Survey, Canada);
Popa, Radu (Portland State University, Canada); Olson, Deanna H (US Forest Service, PNW Research
Station, Canada); Kirshtein, Julie D (US Geological Survey, Canada)

Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in the boreal environment

Amphibians are among the most vulnerable taxa due to synergistic effects of habitat loss, disease, and
climate change. The amphibian chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), causes an
infectious disease, chytridiomycosis, that is associated with mass mortalities of many amphibian species
and local extinctions in disturbed and pristine landscapes in both temperate and tropical regions. The
‗boreal‘ is the largest ecoregion on the planet, yet largely because of its remoteness, it is one of the least
sampled for Bd. Our research investigates the distribution of Bd in the boreal environment and the
relationship between water quality, Bd detection, and Bd density in both amphibians and their aquatic
habitats. In spring/summer 2009–2011, we examined Bd occurrence in water samples from 29 amphibian
breeding sites in Alaska (USA) across a latitudinal range from approximately 60 to 67 degrees north.



                                                                                                           128
These latitudes were chosen to represent the northern-most latitude of Bd that had been reported in the
literature up until 2009 (60 degrees) and the known northern-most extent of the wood frog ( Lithobates
sylvatic us) in Alaska (67 degrees). In 2009 and 2011 we collected skin swabs from amphibians to assess
Bd occurrences on animals at these sites. Water quality parameters measured were water temperature,
pH, specific conductance, and turbidity. We used qPCR for Bd quantification, and analyzed the results
using an occupancy approach with the program PRESENCE 4.1, with AIC as a measure of parsimony for
model selection. We found Bd at 38% of sites and as far north as 67 degrees latitude, at very low
densities (max. = 8.96 zoospore equivalents per liter of water filtered). All detections except for one
occurred in spring. Climate change scenarios are expected to interact with both the wood frog and Bd
distributions in Alaska. Our inventories are hoped to provide baseline data for boreal Bd monitoring and a
baseline for testing the Red Queen Hypothesis, which explains the evolutionary arms race between host
and pathogen, using Bd and wood frogs as a model case study .



Chestnut, Tara (US Geological Survey); Anderson, Chanucey W (US Geological Survey, Canada);
Voytek, Mary A (National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Canada); Kirshtein, Julie D (US
Geoligical Survey, Canada)

Spatial and temporal patterns of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis occupancy in amphibian
habitats

The chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) is an aquatic pathogen to amphibians
implicated as one of the causal agents for global amphibian declines across a spectrum of habitats
ranging from heavily degraded to intact wilderness. Bd was first described in 1999, and has been
detected in museum specimens dating back to at least 1902. Bd research has focused primarily on the
ecology of the pathogen in infected amphibians. Our research seeks to describe Bd ecology in the
aquatic environment outside of the amphibian host, evaluate spatial and temporal patterns of detection
and density, and investigate the relationship between Bd occupancy and potential covariates including
water quality. In spring/summer 2007–10, we collected Bd samples by filtering water from amphibian
breeding sites at 36 sites in the United States and measured temperature, pH, and specific conductance
at a subset (19 sites). We also intensively monitored one site in Oregon, collecting monthly Bd samples
and water quality measurements from 2007 to 2011. DNA was extracted from filters and Bd was
quantified using qPCR following established methods. Occupancy modeling was performed using the
program PRESENCE, we used AIC as a measure of parsimony for model selection.

Bd was detected at 47% of sites sampled (17 of 36 total sites, and 9 of 19 subset with water quality
measurements); however, individual site estimates of occupancy ranged from 0.07 to 0.83. Bd
occupancy was conditional on pH and detection was conditional on pH and volume filtered. At the
intensively monitored site, Bd was detected at least once in every month over 4 years of monitoring.
Density reached a peak in spring of every year and a second smaller peak was observed in December in
two of the four years. Our findings contribute to the understanding of the ecology of Bd in the aquatic
environment, which will be critical for amphibian conservation. The patterns observed at these sites have
informed hypotheses we will test across a broader landscape in the next year.




                                                                                                       129
Chettri, Basundhara (Sikkim Government College, Tadong);

Elevational distribution pattern, their underlying causes, and conservation of Herpetofauna along
an Eastern Himalayan elevation gradient, India

Eastern Himalayan Region is considered as one of the important wildlife corridors and a global
biodiversity hotspot. With its unique biogeographical locations and high variation in elevation (300-8000
m), Eastern Himalaya harbors diverse habitats resulting in variety of life forms and high endemicity.
Here, I examine elevational distribution pattern of herpetofauna and their underlying causes along
elevation gradient (300-4800 m) in Sikkim, Eastern Himalaya, India. Understanding elevational pattern
of species helps to identify high diverse areas and, therefore, aids in conservation. I also evaluate threats
to herpetofauna and suggest measures for conservation. Based on elevation, study area was
categorized into seven zones (at 500 m interval). I used Visual Encounter and Night Stream Survey
methods for data on population, and field surveys, home visits and informal interviews for data on threats.
In total, 1552 individuals of reptiles belonging to 42 species (14 lizards and 28 snakes) were observed
during the study. Combined data of VES (1236 man-hours) and night stream survey (27 km) resulted in
23 species and 1346 individuals of amphibians. Along the elevation gradient, both reptiles and amphibian
species followed quadratic relation with elevation. However, the decline was abrupt towards higher
elevation with no reptilian species beyond 3000 m although amphibians were seen up to 4800 m
elevation. Mid-Domain Effect (MDE) Null model deviated from the empirical richness pattern showing
minimal effect of geometric constraints on elevational pattern indicating the role of other abiotic and biotic
factors in governing the pattern. Range profile of herpetofauna showed that most of the species are
restricted to narrow elevational range. Among the evaluated threats, rampant killing of reptiles, especially
snakes, and mass extractions of amphibians for consumption by ethnic communities were the major
ones. Such activity has caused decline in herpetofaunal diversity and their population in Eastern
Himalaya . As conservation measures, we extensively raised awareness at various levels on the role of
herpetofauna in ecosystems and their conservation need. The study strongly recommends that
herpetofauna must be taken into consideration for any conservation planning. The river valleys all along
the elevation, more importantly mid-elevation, are crucial for herpetofauna conservation in the eastern
Himalaya and needs immediate conservation attention.



Childers, Jackie (University of California Museum of Vertebrate Zoology); Eifler, Douglas; Eifler, Maria
(Erell Institute, Canada)

Age dependent behavioral variation in the lizard Meroles cuneirostris

The Wedge-snouted Lizard ( Meroles cuneirostris ) is a lacertid endemic to the Namib Desert of coastal
Namibia where they're diurnally active and restricted to sparsely vegetated sand dunes. To date, little
research has been done on the behavioral ecology of M. cuneirostris; we examined how demographic
classes vary behaviorally and in habitat use. We characterized and quantified behavioral differences
between adults (mean SVL: 53mm) and juveniles (mean SVL: 33 mm), and between adult males and
females. Behavioral variation was also analyzed relative to microhabitat.

During Dec. 2011-Jan. 2012, 49 juveniles and 95 adult individuals were captured and marked. Twenty-
minute focal observations were conducted on 33 juvenile (21 male; 12 female) and 50 adult (25 male; 25
female) individuals to gather behavioral data as well as to obtain information on microhabitat preference.
Behavioral variation was characterized by recording sitting and walking events/h and head turns/h.
Microhabitat preference was quantified by measuring the amount of time spent in and near vegetation, as
well as in open areas. Juveniles were more active than adults; they moved almost twice as frequently as



                                                                                                          130
adults (median moves/h: 21 (0-81) vs 12 (0-63)) and more frequently scanned their surroundings (median
head turns/h: 45 (0-99) vs 24 (0-99)) while there appeared to be no such variation among adult males and
females. Individuals spend most of their time sitting. The posture assumed during these periods was
separated into two categories: erect and splayed. Erect sitting was characterized by the animal having
either partially or fully extended forelimbs, while splayed sitting was characterized by the animal being
completely prostrate. Juveniles sat in a splayed configuration more often than adults; there was no
difference in how often individual adults and juveniles sat erect. There were two primary habitat types in
the study area: the vegetated base of the sand dune and the gravel plain lying just beyond the base of the
dune. We recognized four microhabitat categories: 1) in or 2) near dune vegetation, 3) in the open dune
sand or 4) in the gravel plain. Microhabitat use was not related to lizard age, but did seem to influence
behavior. On the dunes, head turn rates and the frequency of splayed sitting depended on proximity to
vegetation. The behavioral variation exhibited by M. cuneirostris provides an example of how the
environment can differentially influence animals of varying age or size.



Chinnasamy, Ramesh (Salim Ali Centre for Ornithology and Natural History); Subramanian, Bhupathy
(Salim Ali Centre for Ornithology and Natural History, Coimbatore, TN, India)

Application of natural marking in ecological studies on Indian pythons

Natural marks on dorsal anterior part of pythons are unique and useful for individual identification. Since
handling snakes and use of radio-telemetry is prohibited in Keoladeo National Park (KNP), Bharatpur,
India, we used dorsal marks to estimate the population and home range of Python molurus molurus. Low
temperature during winter (November-February) prompting the pythons to bask outside their ground
burrows which helped us sighting of each individual. From October 2007 to April 2010, about 50 ground
burrows were used by pythons. These burrows were monitored every fortnight, photographs of dorsal
body marks of pythons were taken to identify individuals. A total number of 124 individuals were identified
in 29 sq km of study area. In KNP, juveniles and sub adults were often unavailable for sampling. Hence
the identified adult pythons (Total Length >210 cm) in each winter considered as sample population.
During 2007-08 and 2008-09 a total of 47 and 75 (18 recaptures) pythons were identified respectively,
and the Lincoln Index used for population estimation was 183.3. During 2009-10, 37 pythons were
identified including 24 recaptures of 2008-09 marked individuals (75) and the estimated population was
115.63. Variation in the estimated population (183-116) could be due to differential emergence of
pythons during the time. Sighting and re-sighting locations were marked by GPS; maximum distance
between two points computed to know the linear distance. The home-range of pythons, evaluated by the
GE Path 1.4.4a (software) area/perimeter polygon protocol used for estimate showed it as 12.89+20.94
ha (n=20). Pythons moved to an average of 770.38+ 880.73m (range 0-3727.09m, n=47) of which 44.5%
were operating within 500m and 25.5% were found between 500 and 1000m from the burrow. Further
studies using radio-telemetry may provide precise data on the home range of this species.



Chiquillo, Kelcie (San Francisco State University); Crow, Karen; Bravo, Nerieda (San Francisco State
University, Canada); Ebert, David (Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, Canada)

The secret of the Mermaid's Purse: A novel reproductive strategy in two skates of the genus Raja

 Skates ( Rajiformes ) are considered to be the most diverse group of cartilaginous fishes and occur
throughout the world, in benthic, sandy habitats. Skates are classified as elasmobranchs, along with 350
other species of cartilaginous fishes. The systematics of the Rajiformes remains contentious, with



                                                                                                       131
multiple topologies inferred from various sources of data. Several studies have called for a reorganization
of the genus and therefore a reliable phylogeny of the genus has not been proposed. The goal of this
research is to evaluate the phylogenetic affinities of skates within the genus Raja based on molecular
data from multiple mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) loci-- 12S, 16S, and COI. Previous studies focused on
determining several Raja species, none have addressed monophyly of the genus. Furthermore, none of
these studies have included the two species that exhibit the unique trait of having multiple embryos per
egg capsule- Raja Binoculata and Raja Pulchra . We propose a phylogenetic hypothesis to infer the
evolutionary history of multiple embryos per egg capsule within this genus. We found that R. pulchra
and R. binoculata are sister taxa, and therefore we infer that the character of multiple embryos per egg
capsule has arisen once in evolution. We are currently investigating fitness tradeoffs, such as differential
survivorship and multiple paternity in collaboration of the Aquarium of Bay in San Francisco, to determine
whether this reproductive strategy has a fitness advantage and whether it effects conservation projects.



Chodkowski, Nicole (Hofstra University); Burke, Russell (Hofstra University, Hempstead, United States)

An Evolutionary and Behavioral Study of the Prevalence of Parasitic Trematodes (Pleurogonius
malaclemys) in Diamondback Terrapins (Malaclemys terrapin)

The diamondback terrapin (Malaclemys terrapin) is found in brackish waters of the eastern and southern
coasts of the United States. Hunter (1961, 1967) described a parasitic trematode (Pleurogonius
malaclemys), whose definitive final host is the diamondback terrapin. She showed that the eastern mud
snail (Ilyanassa obsoleta), an abundant terrapin prey species is an intermediate host for P. malaclemys.
Byers et al. (2011) further showed that the frequency of P. malaclemys cysts on mud snails was an
accurate measure of terrapin abundance. Our studies censusing P. malaclemys cysts on mud snails in
Jamaica Bay, NY and Great South Bay, NY have confirmed that the trematode occurs further north than
previously reported, that the trematode cysts infect snails year round but that snail infection frequencies
vary dramatically by season. We also found that juvenile terrapins can be infected by P. malaclemys
under laboratory conditions, but the number of cysts consumed is not equivalent to the number of adult
trematodes present in the gut. We plan additional studies to measure the prevalence and intensity of P.
malaclemys infection in wild adult terrapin populations, and field and laboratory studies will investigate the
effects of P. malaclemys infection on terrapin behavior and growth. We predict that terrapins infected with
P. malaclemys will thermoregulate to stay warmer which may have implications for social behavior and
predation risk.



Christie, Nicole (Sonoma State University); Geist, Nick; St. John, Wendy (Sonoma State University,
Canada)

Effects of Nest Temperature Variation on Viability and Sex Determination of Western Pond Turtles

The western pond turtle, E. marmorata, is the only native freshwater turtle along the Pacific Slope of the
United States and is experiencing population declines in much of its historical range. In response to
these declines, this species is now listed by the respective state Departments of Fish and Game as
Endangered in Washington, Threatened in Oregon and a Species of Special Concern in California. Along
with anthropogenic factors correlated with these losses, there is broad consensus among scientists that
rapidly changing climates are becoming an increasingly serious threat to a range of organisms on a
global scale, with taxa such as turtles with temperature dependent sex determination (TSD) among the
most vulnerable. In laboratory experiments, this population of E. marmorata has been shown to exhibit



                                                                                                          132
TSD, with a pivotal temperature (m/f 1:1) of 29°C. We are examining how natural incubation temperature
regimes affect sex determination, hatching success, and incubation duration. Gravid female E.
marmorata were tracked to nesting sites in the month of June for four consecutive years at a Northern
California nesting ground. After nest construction, nests were carefully excavated and egg position and
dimensions were recorded. I-Button temperature sensors were then placed at various levels within the
nest chambers to record temperatures for each row of eggs at 1-hour intervals. Eggs and sensors were
recovered at ~70 days (past sex determining period) and placed in an incubator until hatched. Incubation
duration and hatch success were recorded and sex was determined by endoscopy at ~7 months. Nest
locations and egg position within the nest affected mean temperature and degree of temperature
fluctuation experienced by each egg. Daily temperature fluctuation within most nests commonly
exceeded 20°C. Most nests experienced temperatures that exceeded 40°C for several hours each day,
conditions that our previous studies indicate are well above the lethal threshold at constant temperature
incubation. We also found hatchling sex ratios to be biased toward females in the majority of the nests.
Our results indicate that alterations to nesting grounds can disrupt natural temperature patterns, sex
ratios, and reproductive success with potentially serious consequences for E. marmorata populations.



Churchill, Diana (Florida International University); Heithaus, Michael R. (Florida International University,
North Miami, FL, United States); Grubbs, Dean (Florida State University, St. Teresa, FL, United States);
Vaudo, Jeremy (Florida International University, North Miami, FL, United States)

Effects of the Deepwater Horizon Spill on the trophic interactions of deep-sea sharks and
associated species of the Gulf of Mexico.

The Deepwater Horizon oil spill (DwH) was significant not only in the amount of oil, but also the depth of
the release and the unprecedented subsurface use of dispersants. Therefore, the benthic contaminants
from the spill may have had significant impacts on the poorly characterized deep-sea communities of the
northern slope of the Gulf of Mexico (NGS). We explored the potential impacts of the DwH on deep sea
food webs by comparing trophic interactions of upper level predators (sharks, teleosts) and benthic
scavengers (crabs, giant isopods, hagfish) from sites located in close proximity to the spill site (NGS) and
sites at similar depths located 400 km from the spill along the west Florida slope (WFS). We also took
advantage of samples from the WFS sites collected prior to the spill to investigate temporal variation in
trophic interactions of representative species. We assessed trophic interactions using a combination of
stomach contents and stable isotope (δ13C and δ15N) analysis. Stomach contents analysis revealed the
diet of Cuban dogfish (Squalus cubensis), the numerically dominant elasmobranch, to be composed of
shrimp, cephalopods and mesopelagic fishes, with slight variation in their relative contributions to diets in
the NGS and WFS sites. Cuban dogfish δ13C isotope values varied slightly between the NGS and WFS
sites. In general across all species, there was little interspecific variation in isotopic values within and
between sites. These results, however, are based on the first of a series of sampling events after DwH
and because of likely slow isotopic turnover rates in deep-sea organisms may not yet reflect potential
changes in trophic structure after the spill.




                                                                                                         133
Cicia, Angela (University of New England); Frederich, Markus (University of New England, Canada);
Mandelman, John (New England Aquarium, Canada); Sulikowski, James (University of New England,
Canada)

Utilizing a combination of physiological and cellular stress markers to assess the impacts of trawl
capture in

 In elasmobranchs, studies assessing the impacts of trawl capture have primarily focused on discard
mortality and the extracellular alterations it produces. No studies have utilized intracellular markers, to
better define this response. To provide a more complete understating of trawl stress, alterations in both
extra and intracellular parameters were assessed in two skate species typically captured by this gear
type. In the field, blood and tissue (heart, liver, and muscle) samples were obtained from little ( Leucroraja
erinacea ) and thorny ( Amyblyraja radiata ) skates subjected to the same three trawl durations
(control;30min; 90, 180min). Results indicate that blood acid-base status (decrease in pH; increases in p
CO 2 and lactate) became progressively more disturbed with longer tow durations in both skate species;
however the magnitude of this response was more pronounced in thorny skates. On a cellular level, only
minor increases (2-3 fold) in HSP70 mRNA levels were observed in little skate heart, liver and muscle
tissue following the longest tow duration. In contrast, tow durations of 180min only elicited an elevation in
HSP70 mRNA (12-fold) in thorny skate heart tissue. Lastly, tow duration produced virtually no alterations
in AMPK activity or mRNA levels, with the exception of a 4-fold increase in AMPK mRNA in thorny skate
heart tissue after 180min tow. In conclusion, despite profound alterations in acid-base status, changes in
the measured cellular markers were minimal. Furthermore, the absence of a response in AMPK, suggests
energy availability is not a limiting factor in coping with trawl capture.



Clardy, Todd (Virginia Institute of Marine Science); Hilton, Eric J. (Virginia Institute of Marine Science,
Gloucester Point, VA, United States)

A preliminary look at the systematic relationships of the prickleback family Stichaeidae
(Cottiformes: Zoarcoidei) based on morphological data

The prickleback family Stichaeidae is a diverse group of small blenny- or eel-like marine fishes that are
distributed within the intertidal and subtidal continental slope waters of the northern hemisphere. The
family is one of nine in the Cottiformes suborder Zoarcoidei and currently includes six subfamilies, 37
genera, and about 75 species. Although a systematic framework is necessary for addressing aspects of
their biology, such as the evolution of life history patterns and biogeography, the systematics of
Stichaeidae and their relatives remain unresolved due in part to a lack of fundamental morphological
data. In this presentation, we will present the preliminary results of a morphological analysis of
Stichaeidae and their relatives. This analysis includes representatives from at least 21 genera of
Stichaeidae, all other zoarcoid families, and several outgroup taxa from within Cottiformes. At least 65
characters from the external and skeletal anatomy were included in the analysis. Preliminary analyses
indicate a lack of resolution among the genera of Stichaeidae. Subfamily groups, as recognized in the
current taxonomy, are not recovered as monophyletic units, and the family does not appear to be
monophyletic, with many non-stichaeid zoarcoid taxa interspersed throughout the resulting cladograms.
Additional work needs to be conducted, including adding stichaeid genera and incorporating additional
characters, to determine the relationships among the Stichaeidae.




                                                                                                          134
Clark, Rulon (Herpetologists League); Barbour, Matthew (University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada)

Consequences of ground squirrel signaling at multiple stages of rattlesnake foraging

Many species approach, inspect, and signal towards their predators. These behaviors are often
interpreted as pursuit-deterrent signals—honest signals that indicate to predators that the prey animal is
aware of its presence and is likely to escape if pursued. However, empirical evidence for pursuit-deterrent
signals is scant. Not only do we have few studies that have quantified predator responses to these
signals, but also the mechanisms maintaining these responses are often assumed, and unexplored. We
examined the effects of a putative pursuit-deterrent signal, the tail-fag display, given by California ground
squirrels (Spermophilus beecheyi) toward northern Pacific rattlesnakes (Crotalus oreganus oreganus).
Our study was conducted in the field, using manned and unmanned video cameras to record behaviors of
radio-tagged, free-ranging rattlesnakes foraging in ground squirrel colonies. We found that squirrel tail-
flags deter snake predation on two different time scales. At the time of the interaction, snakes were more
likely to attempt to strike squirrels that did not tail flag than those that did. This may be because tail
flagging is reliably associated with squirrel vigilance and their readiness to dodge a snake strike. Tail
flagging also influenced subsequent behaviors of rattlesnakes. Tail-flagging by adult squirrels increased
the probability that snakes would abandon their ambush site, but rattlesnakes did not abandon after
receiving signals from squirrel pups. Furthermore, the probability of of a snake successfully striking a
squirrel at that site increased after tail-flagging interactions with pups. These differences are likely shaped
by the differential effects of pup and adult signaling on nearby squirrels, as well as pups being associated
with high prey density areas. By focusing on the receiver‘s perspective in this signaling interaction, our
results highlight how the context in which predators encounter prey has an important influence on their
responses to prey signaling.



Clark, William (Western Wyoming Community College); Weaver, Robert (Department of Biological
Sciences, Central Washington University, Ellensburg, WA, United States)

Recent Observations of the California Mountain Kingsnake (Lampropeltis zonata) in Washington
State

The California Mountain Kingsnake is found from Baja California, Mexico north into California and
southwestern Oregon. It reaches its northern most distribution within the Columbia River Gorge National
Scenic Area of Skamania and Klickitat Counties, Washington State. In Washington State it is closely
associated with Oregon White Oak ( Quercus garryana ) Savannah, and open Douglas-fir ( Pseudotsuga
menziesii ) and Ponderosa pine ( Pinus ponderosa ) forest. While it may be locally abundant in California,
the secretive nature of L . zonata has resulted in few observations in Washington State, and this
species is considered critically imperiled and vulnerable to extinction. While surveying for other species of
snakes in the Columbia River Gorge individuals of L . zonata were occasionally encountered. For most
observations I recorded the time of day (or night), air and substrate temperatures, and GPS position of
snakes. Live snakes were not disturbed or handled (except to remove off the road). However, dead-on-
road (DOR) snakes were collected and analyzed for both stomach content and reproductive condition.
Since 2006, nearly 30 individuals of L . zonata have been observed, or reported to me. While all
observations have been recorded within the known range of L . zonata, this increase in the number of
observations leads me to believe this species is far more abundant than previously thought. Additionally,
the relative ease of finding individuals while road-cruising may allow for the first ecological study of L.
zonata in Washington State, and such data will aid in management decisions and the conservation of this
species.



                                                                                                           135
Clarke, Tayler (University of Costa Rica); Espinoza Mendiola, Mario (James Cook University, Canada);
Villalobos, Fresia; Wehrtmann, Ingo (Unidad de Investigación Pesquera y Acuicultura, Universidad de
Costa Rica, Canada)

Reproductive ecology of four elasmobranch species in the Pacific coast of Costa Rica, Central
America

Sharks and rays are a common component of the bycatch in many tropical demersal trawling fisheries.
The elasmobranch bycatch of the commercial shrimp trawling fishery operating along the Pacific coast of
Costa Rica is comprised by a total of 24 species. In data deficient fisheries such as this one, life history
may be used as a valuable tool to identify vulnerable species and apply precautionary measures that
could ensure their long-term conservation. Therefore, we studied the reproductive ecology of Raja velezi,
Mustelus henlei, Zapteryx xyster and Torpedo peruana associated to the commercial deepwater shrimp
fishery along the Pacific coast of Costa Rica. This information was used to identify essential habitats and
recommend management measures for elasmobranchs in Costa Rica. A total of 217 tows were carried
out at 25-350 m from March 2010 to September 2011. During this period, a total of 751 individuals of R.
velezi , 569 M. henlei , 394 Z. xyster and 157 T. peruana were obtained. The size at sexual maturity
was estimated as: 52-56 cm TL for R. velezi , 39-43 cm TL for M. henlei , 45-47 cm LT for Z. xyster and
54-65 cm LT for T. peruana . Fecundity increased with female length. M. henlei presented between 1
and 12 embryos, and Z. xyster carried between 1 and 9 embryos. Segregation by size and sex was
detected in all species, mainly related to depth. Most gravid females were found at depths >50 m along
the Pacific coast. However, some areas such as the Golfo de Nicoya, the Quepos-Manuel Antonio
wetlands and the Humedal Nacional Térraba-Sierpe (HNTS) presented large aggregations of gravid
females and immature individuals. We recommend the protection of these critical habitats and the
creation of discrete fishing closures at depths 50 m along the Pacific coast of Costa Rica.



Clay, Timothy (University of Arkansas at Little Rock); Gifford, Matthew (University of Arkansas at Little
Rock, Canada)

Repeatability and correlations among morphology, physiology, and behavior in a lungless
salamander

Consistent individual differences in behavior are often observed. However, the mechanisms promoting
such consistency are unclear. It has been suggested that the integration of morphological and
physiological traits might promote consistent individual differences in behavior. Specifically, individuals
with higher resting metabolic rates are expected to have larger internal organs, which require increased
energy intake to fuel them.      Therefore, the integration of these morphological and physiological traits
should allow higher rates of activity. We test this hypothesis in the Ouachita dusky salamander,
Desmognathus brimleyorum . First, we tested whether physiological and behavioral traits are consistently
different among individual salamanders.         We then tested whether individuals with higher standard
metabolic rates have higher rates of activity and foraging behavior than those with lower standard
metabolic rates. Finally, we tested these traits are correlated with the size of metabolically expensive
internal organs (i.e., the ―metabolic engine‖) among individuals.




                                                                                                        136
Clay, Timothy (University of Arkansas at Little Rock); Gifford, Matthew (University of Arkansas at Little
Rock, Little Rock, AR, United States)

Thermal dependence of aggression in plethodontid salamanders

Within Plethodon, there are numerous examples of elevational replacement between montane endemics
and lowland conspecifics. Recent evidence suggests that interspecific aggression limits the range of the
lowland conspecific. Plethodon cylindraceus and P. montanus occur in the southern Appalachians and
have elevational replacement, with P. montanus occurring at higher elevations. Interspecific trials were
conducted with sixteen males of each species as both an intruder and a resident. Trials were conducted
in the dark at both 15 and 23 C and were videotaped with infrared cameras. P. cylindraceus delivered
more bites and displayed more aggression than did P. montanus at both temperatures. This is the first
documented case of the lowland congener being more aggressive than the montane endemic. Both
species were less aggressive at 23 than they were at 15 C. This suggests that 23 C is a thermally
stressful environment for both species.



Cline, Brittany B. (University of Maine); Popescu, Viorel D. (University of California, Berkeley; Simon-
Fraser University; Smith Fellowship Program, Burnaby, BC, Canada); Hunter, Jr., Malcolm L.
(Department of Wildlife Ecology, University of Maine, Orono, ME, United States)

Amphibians in complex landscapes: Effects of forestry and urbanization on juvenile movements

The persistence of forest amphibians depends on conserving permeable migration corridors in
increasingly human-shaped landscapes, where forestry practices, suburban structures, and agriculture
coincide. For many pond-breeding amphibians, successful dispersal of the juvenile stage is essential for
population connectivity. We examined the effects of various forestry practices and land cover types on the
emigration success of juvenile wood frogs (Lithobates sylvaticus) in three experiments in Maine, USA.
First, to examine the effect of short-term vegetative regrowth post-harvesting, we sampled amphibians in
four treatments (partial harvest, clearcut with coarse woody debris [CWD] removed and retained, uncut
control) over 6 years. There was no difference between the partial harvest and controls; we found a
modest increase in use of clearcuts by juveniles following harvest (from an 8-fold difference between
forest and clearcut in yr-1 post-clearcutting to a 3-fold difference during yrs 3 – 5). Second, we conducted
a habitat permeability experiment by releasing juveniles in 50 x 2.5 m enclosures located perpendicular to
a forest edge and extending into the following treatments: (1) chronosequence of stands (recent clearcut,
11-yr, 20-yr-old stand, mature forest), and (2) open-canopy cover types (cornfield, hayfield, lawn). We
found that the mature forest was 3.1 and 3.7 times more permeable than the 11-yr-old stand and clearcut,
respectively. There were no differences between the mature forest and 20-yr-old stand. We observed a
differential response among open-canopy types: (1) cornfield and 45%-cover lawns had highest
permeability, (2) 0%-cover lawn and hayfield had lowest permeability, and (3) clearcuts were intermediate
between (1) and (2). Third, we expanded our studies of dispersal (in clearcuts, light gap cuts, lawns,
hayfields, row crops) to include what has become the dominant form of harvest in the Acadian forest:
heavy partial harvests undertaken in strips with mechanical harvesters. We experimentally tested the
initial dispersal orientation of juveniles along silvicultural edges. Using release-trials (10-m dm arenas),
we found slight (but statistically insignificant) evidence of preference for contiguous forest (relative to
partial-harvests). Results suggest that canopy cover may not serve as sole metric for assessing
microhabitat quality outside of forestry contexts. While the effect of even-aged silviculture may be long-
lasting, the conversion of natural habitats to human-dominated cover may have more severe
consequences for dispersal by inducing dramatic structural and compositional vegetation change. Future
research should focus on direct-tracking methods to assess fate and behavior of individually-marked



                                                                                                        137
juvenile amphibians – metrics that are traditionally difficult to measure, but critical for identifying the
drivers of population persistence.



Closel, Melissa (Universidade de São Paulo - USP); Kohlsdorf, Tiana (Universidade de São Paulo -
USP, Canada)

Evolution of Fossorial and Nocturnal Gymnophthalmidae Lizards: Did the Metabolism Change?

Evolution of either fossoriality or nocturnality is observed among several Squamate lineages. Both
transitions likely involve shifts in ecological traits such as diet, field temperatures during rest and activity,
competition and exposition to predators, among others. In that sense, physiological traits also seem to
change when a diurnal epigeal lineage becomes either fossorial or nocturnal. But what happens with
physiology if in the same clade both transitions occurred subsequently? The Gymnophthalminii
(Gymnophthalmidae) lizard clade is a good example of the postulated scenario: first the fossorial habit
evolved, which was followed by an origin of a new lineage of nocturnal species, inside the fossorial clade.
The present study investigates evolutionary changes in metabolic physiology likely associated to the
origin of fossoriality or to the subsequent evolution of nocturnality in the gymnophtalmid lineage. We focus
on the standard metabolic rate (SMR), because in ectotherms it represents the energy demand required
to maintain vital functions. It is relevant to point that SMR is affected by several parameters including
temperature. Thus, thermal environments during rest and activity are probably different for nocturnal and
fossorial species, in comparison with diurnal lizards that move closer to the surface. We measured SMR
in seven species (two epigeal diurnal, two fossorial diurnal and three fossorial nocturnal), using Stop-Flow
Respirometry. Tests were performed at three temperatures (24, 30 and 36°C), chosen based on field
operative temperatures obtained with copper models during field trips. Data were analyzed using
phylogenetic regressions. We found that metabolism did not change with the adoption of the fossorial
habitat in Gymnophthalminii. However, SMR and nocturnality were significantly associated (p<0,05)
whereas nocturnal species presented lower SMRs. Thermal sensitivity of SMR (given by Q12) did not
change with these evolutionary transitions. Then, the major shift observed in SMR of Gymnophthalminii
seems to have occurred with the adoption of a nocturnal habit after the previous colonization of
subterranean environments. Among many possible explanations, the lower SMR observed in nocturnal-
fossorial species might be interpreted as a response to evolution under less severe thermal conditions,
when compared to those experienced by diurnal species living closer to the surface in the hot sand dunes
of Brazil.



Closel, Melissa (Universidade de São Paulo - USP); Kohlsdorf, Tiana (Universidade de São Paulo -
USP, Ribeirão Preto SP, Brazil)

Evolution of Surface-to-Volume Ratio in Gymnophthalmidae Lizards: A New Approach Using
Stereology

Body size affects many aspects of organismal physiology, performance and fitness. Variation in body size
likely implies differences in thermal exchange between an animal and its environment, with important
consequences for thermoregulation. Body size and shape might increase or decrease heat flow by
changes in surface to volume ratio (SVR), so that smaller and elongated forms are expected to have
increased SVR (and consequently higher heat flow) because their surface areas are proportionally larger
than their volumes. Despite the intimate relationship between body temperature and physiological
processes in vertebrate ectotherms, evolutionary patterns of SVR in these animals remain obscure,



                                                                                                             138
especially due to the lack of statistical tools for assessing SVR. The present study developed a
methodology for estimating SVR based on Stereology principles, and used gymnophthalmid lizards to
investigate evolutionary patterns of SVR under a phylogenetic approach. Stereology is based on
geometry and probability statistics, and is useful to estimate surface area and volume of three-
dimensional objects from its two-dimensional images obtained by sections. Data acquisition is based on a
test-system composed by a frame with points and lines that are superimposed to a section. The lines and
points that overlap the image are accounted and added to a formula that calculates an object surface
area and volume. We used specimens from zoological collections (which could not be sectioned), and
applied CT Scans to obtain sections without any damage to them. Five to ten specimens were used for
each species, in a total of 31 species. Gymnophthalmidae lizards present both epigean and fossorial
species, which have different degrees of body elongation. Our results suggest that evolution of fossorial
elongated forms have occurred in association with an increase in SVR. Increments in SVR likely involve
changes in heating and cooling dynamics, with consequences for thermoregulation and habitat selection.
Operative Temperatures measured where gymnophthalmids are collected (surface and subterranean)
suggest that fossorial species experience a more homogeneous environment regarding temperature
variation, which may have acted as a compensatory mechanism for the increment in SVR in fossorial
species.



Cloud, Tiffany (Penn State University); Heinicke, Matthew (Villanova University, Canada); Hedges, Blair
(Penn State University, Canada)

Hidden Diversity in the Jamaican Croaking Gecko

The sphaerodactylid gecko genus Aristelliger currently contains eight described species, all found on
Caribbean islands. Although their confamilial relatives are mostly small in size, species of Aristelliger are
moderate-to-large lizards (50–135 mm, maximum snout-vent length). Two species are endemic to the
Bahamas bank ( A. barbouri and A. hechti ), two to Hispaniola ( A. expectatus and A. lar ), one to
Navassa Island ( A. cochranae ), one to Cuba ( A. reyesi ), one to Jamaica, the Cayman Islands, and
Swan Islands ( A. praesignis ), and one to the Yucatan Peninsula (Mexico and Belize) and islands off the
eastern coast of Middle America ( A. georgeensis ). Species in this genus vocalize loudly and have fragile
skin that is usually mottled with shades of browns and tans and includes scapular ocelli. Our molecular
phylogeny of the genus is inconsistent with the current species-level taxonomy, especially concerning A.
praesignis . There are multiple clades showing deep divergences, and the Middle American species A.
georgeensis is nested within one of them. There are several clades on the island of Jamaica, where only
a single subspecies has been recognized in the past. Most are allopatric but there is at least one zone of
sympatry on Jamaica. To distinguish these species morphologically, we have used some unconventional
morphological characters. These findings are significant because it reveals that the genus Aristelliger is
considerably more diverse than was previously thought. Because the newly defined species have much
smaller distributions, these results also have a bearing on their conservation status.




                                                                                                         139
Clulow, Simon (University of Newcastle); Harris, Merrilee; Mahony, Michael (University of Newcastle,
Callaghan, N, Australia)

Measuring amphibian immunocompetence: validation of the Delayed-Type Hypersensitivity (DTH)
assay in multiple Australian frogs

The need to assess and compare immunocompetence in vertebrate organisms is obvious: a decrease in
immunocompetence impacts survival and fitness. Immune system maintenance comes at a cost, and
trade-offs occur between an organism‘s level of energy investment in immune system function and other
costly physiological processes. Knowledge of immunoecology is advancing rapidly in the endotherms;
however ectothermic groups including amphibians are less studied, largely due to a lack of available tools
for assessing immunocompetence. We investigated the effectiveness of using DTH assays to assess
amphibian immunocompetence, trialing various lectins injected subcutaneously into the lower leg of
several species of taxonomically unrelated Australian frogs. The lectins trialed elicited swelling in all
species compared to the control injection; however, there were significant differences in the magnitude of
swelling response between higher taxon groupings, and between lectins used. We found the traditional
method of validating swelling response to be inadequate, and developed a novel methodology for more
accurately determining peak-response. Finally, we tested the validity of our DTH assay experimentally,
comparing intentionally stressed and non-stressed individuals of a single species. We conclude that the
DTH assay provides a valid, inexpensive, and rapid quantitative measure of amphibian
immunocompetence, but warn against its use without validation in new species.



Coelho, Rui (Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR)); Erzini, Karim (Centro de Ciências do Mar (CCMAR),
Faro, Portugal)

Demographic analysis of the velvet belly lantern shark, Etmopterus spinax, caught and discarded
by trawl fisheries in southern Portugal (NE Atlantic)

The velvet belly lantern shark, Etmopterus spinax, is a deep-sea shark usually caught as by-catch and
discarded in deep water commercial fisheries in southern Portugal, particularly deep water trawls and
longlines. The objective of this study was to determine demographic parameters for this species, in order
to determine how the current levels of fishing mortality are affecting this population. Mortality and
survivorship parameters were estimated both by indirect empirical methods from life history parameters,
and from the trawl fisheries catch curves. An age-structured demographic model was created, and
analyzed with Leslie matrices, considering scenarios with and without taking into account fishing
mortality. The analysis was carried out using both deterministic scenarios (considering the point
estimates), and with scenarios taking into account the uncertainty in the parameter estimation (using
random errors according to specific distributions). The stochastic scenarios were simulated by Monte
Carlo simulation, with each input parameter randomly generated based on the previously assumed
distributions. In general, when only natural mortality was considered, the population rate of increase was
usually higher than 1. In the scenarios considering total mortality from the trawl fisheries catch curves, the
population rates of increase were usually lower than 1, meaning that the population in those cases is
declining. Matrix elasticities were calculated. For the survivorship parameters, the elasticities were higher
for the younger age classes and tended to decrease for the older ages, which is typical of the slower
growing elasmobranch species. The results presented in this paper provide insights on how commercial
fisheries, particularly trawls, are affecting this deep water shark species, and how uncertainty in the life
history parameters can affect the demographic models estimations.




                                                                                                          140
Coelho, Rui (Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR)); Fernandez-Carvalho, Joana (Instituto Nacional de
Recursos Biológicos (INRB, I.P./ IPIMAR), Olhão, Portugal); Santos, Miguel (Instituto Nacional de
Recursos Biológicos I.P. (INRB, I.P./IPIMAR), Olhão, Portugal)

Hooking mortality of elasmobranchs caught in a swordfish pelagic longline fishery in the Atlantic
Ocean.

Hooking (at-haulback) fishing mortality of elasmobranchs captured by Portuguese longliners targeting
swordfish in the Atlantic Ocean was analyzed. Information was collected by on-board fishery observers
that monitored 834 longline fishing sets between August 2008 and December 2011, and recorded
information on 36,067 elasmobranch specimens from 21 taxa. The hooking mortality proportions are
species-specific, with some species having relatively high percentages of alive specimens at-haulback
(e.g. blue shark, crocodile shark, pelagic stingray, manta, devil and eagle rays), while others have higher
percentages of dead specimens (e.g smooth hammerhead, silky shark, bigeye thresher). Specimen size
is a significant covariate for calculating the odds-ratios of hooking mortality for the blue, the crocodile
shark and the shortfin mako, with larger specimens having lower odds of being dead at-haulback. For the
blue shark, a multivariate Generalized Linear Model was calculated, and the factors affecting at-haulback
mortality were specimen size, geographical coordinates (latitude and longitude), year, quarter of the year,
vessel, and branch line material. To assess possible dependency in the binomial response variable (dead
or alive at-haulback), a Generalized Estimation Equation model was calculated using each longline set as
the grouping variable. The correlation parameter in the GEE model was low, and the parameters
estimated with the GEE were similar to the GLM. The results presented in this paper provide new
information on the hooking mortality of elasmobranchs captured as by-catch in this pelagic longline
fishery, and can be integrated in future ecological risk assessment analysis for pelagic elasmobranchs.
Additionally, these results also provide new information on the efficiency of the recent recommendations
for the mandatory discards of some vulnerable elasmobranch species mandated by ICCAT.



Coles, Robert (University of Salford); Reading, Christopher J (Centre of Ecology and Hydrology, Oxford,
United Kingdom); Jehle, Robert (University of Salford, Salford, United Kingdom)

Tracing genealogical relationships in a common toad ( Bufo bufo ) population

Over the last decades, long-term studies on pond-breeding amphibians have revealed vital insights into
the dynamics of populations, contributing to natural history knowledge as well as producing a wealth of
conservation-relevant information. However, in contrast to birds and mammals, for example, amphibian
population studies only rarely capture information based on genealogical relationships among individuals.
As a consequence, we only have very limited knowledge about individual fitness measures such as
lifetime reproductive success and th consequences of such variation on the linkage between generations
of amphibians in the wild. Here, we make use of an existing long-term study on the common toad ( Bufo
bufo ) in southern England (Dorset), and employ genetic markers to identify parent-offspring relationships
among individuals sampled in years that represent two successive generations (2004/2005/2006 and
2008/2009).      To generate the cross-generational genealogies, about 1000 individual toads were
genotyped using PCR amplification of eight microsatellite loci. Parentage assignments were achieved
using the software Colony, and parental pairs, identified through genetic information, were compared with
field observations of amplexed pairs. Preliminary results reveal that at least one parent could be assigned
to approximately 40% of offspring, and that about half of the parent pairs identified with genetic markers
matched with amplexed pairs identified in the field. Apart from shedding light on the genetic mating
system, the obtained pedigree information will also be invaluable in the identification of a possible
hereditary basis for an observed decrease in female body condition and fecundity correlated to increased



                                                                                                       141
environmental temperatures. Further DNA samples collected in 1983 will also enable a comparison of
effective numbers of breeders and the effective population size before and after the observed decline in
female fitness.



Collette, Bruce (National Marine Fisheries Service Systematics Laboratory); Carpenter, Kent (Old
Dominion University, Canada)

Red Listing Marine Species

The IUCN (International Union for the Conservation of Nature) Red List Categories and Criteria are
intended to be an easily and widely understood system for classifying species at high risk of global
extinction. The aim of the system is to provide an explicit, objective framework for classification of a broad
range of species according to their extinction risk. There are 9 Red List Categories including three
threatened categories: Vulnerable (VU) when a taxon faces a high risk of global extinction; Endangered
(EN) a very high risk of extinction; and Critically Endangered (CR) an extremely high risk of extinction.
Since their adoption 1994, the Red List Categories have become widely recognized internationally and
they are now used in a range of publications and listings by IUCN as well as by various governmental
and non-governmental organizations. Until recently, Red Listings have been mostly of terrestrial and
freshwater taxa but there are efforts underway to expand the Red Listing procedures to add 20,000
marine taxa to the Red List by the Global Marine Species Assessment (GMSA). Red Listing workshops
have been held both regionally (Mediterranean, Eastern Tropical Pacific), by taxon, or regionally by
taxon. About 10,000 marine species have been assessed since 2006. Habitat building primary producers
such as mangroves, seagrasses, and corals have high levels of species in threat categories relative to
other marine species, largely because of human impacts in the coastal zone. All species of sea turtles
and a large proportion of marine mammals, sharks and rays, and groupers fall into one of the three
threatened categories. Global assessments have been completed for groupers, butterfly fishes,
angelfishes, Sciaenidae, hagfishes, surgeonfishes, triple fins, and damselfishes. Reef fishes such as
butterflyfishes, angelfishes, wrasses and parrotfishes all have 5% or less of species in threatened
categories despite the fact that they typically inhabit coastal areas partly because most of these colorful
reef species are not heavily exploited for food. Groupers rely on degraded coastal habitats but a major
threat is also heavy fishing pressure. Consequently, at 12% in threatened categories, groupers have
much higher levels of threatened species compared to other reef-related fishes. Two thirds of the highly
valuable and heavily fished species of tunas and billfishes are Least Concern and only 17% are in one of
the three threatened categories. Heavy exploitation of tunas and billfishes is the primary threat to these
species.



Collins, James P. (Arizona State University); Minteer, Ben A. (Arizona State University, Canada)

Ecological ethics and invasive species in a time of global change

We are in a period of extensive global change reflected in such things as rapidly shifting temperatures
and increasing ocean acidification. Climate change will join with habitat destruction, landscape
fragmentation, and invasive organisms to threaten the survival of many species in this century. There is
also a rapid increase in species movement due to human intervention and dispersal unaided by humans
in response to changing environments. This has fueled a debate about the best way to conserve species
on a rapidly changing planet: some argue for moving organisms outside a historical range to save the
species (―managed relocation‖) while others see such actions as risky and argue for relying on traditional



                                                                                                          142
in situ approaches. Although there is a strong policy consensus in the conservation community to save
species threatened with extinction by human actions, global climate change (GCC) is challenging
traditional conservation strategies for achieving this goal. GCC is forcing the conservation community to
confront novel and difficult ethical questions concerning the relative value of climate-sensitive species and
ecological integrity under conditions in which moving species might be encouraged or actively facilitated
and ecosystems disrupted by intensive conservation interventions. Rapid global change is and will
continue to challenge traditional preservationist norms governing in-situ conservation. It is increasingly
clear that we will need to embrace a more anticipatory and interventionist model of conservation action in
cases where traditional preservationist strategies are expected to prove insufficient. Moreover, GCC is
challenging the presumptive historical environmental baselines supporting the preservationist model. This
emerging philosophical and policy orientation marks a retreat from the generally accepted understanding
of wilderness, nativeness, and idealized, ―pristine‖ systems free from human control and management. It
is a debate about the values and ethical responsibilities of conservationists as much as it is about the
scientific and technical demands of protecting species. We will discuss several cases that highlight the
issues and challenges surrounding development of an ―ecological ethics‖ able to identify and articulate
the values, duties, and obligations of conservationists in a time of rapid environmental change.



Collins, Sara (Carleton University);

Toxicity of Deicing Salt Components to Early Amphibian Life Stages

Chemical contamination is a primary factor contributing to worldwide amphibian declines. Toxic chemicals
in road runoff water are known to negatively affect amphibians inhabiting roadside wetlands. Road salt
(NaCl) is recognized as major pollutant in northern latitudes due to its extensive use as a deicing agent.
Application has resulted in elevated chloride concentrations in many freshwater systems and excessive
chloride is known to damage ecosystem structure and function. Additionally, ferrocyanide anti-caking
agents are released from road salt and effects on the environment are poorly understood. Amphibians
are particularly vulnerable due to their permeable skin and eggs, and low tolerance to salt. The purpose
of this research was to investigate the effects of environmentally significant acute and chronic NaCl
exposures on early developmental stages of amphibians, and to determine the acute toxicity of cyanide to
larval amphibians. Acute toxicity tests to NaCl and cyanide were performed on the larvae of five
amphibian species native to Nova Scotia, Canada. Chronic toxicity tests at environmentally significant salt
concentrations were performed on eggs and larvae of three species to assess effects on growth,
development, survivorship, and behaviour. Test species included: spotted salamanders ( Ambystoma
maculatum), American toads ( Anaxyrus americanus ), spring peepers ( Pseudacris crucifer ), green frogs
( Lithobates clamitans ), and wood frogs ( Lithobates sylvaticus ). Median lethal concentration values
were calculated from NaCl and cyanide acute toxicity experiments. Chronic NaCl exposure reduced
hatching, increased mortality, and induced developmental and behavioural anomalies. These effects have
the potential to inflict devastating consequences to populations in nature. Differential responses among
species indicate that chloride is an important stressor influencing amphibian community structure in
roadside wetlands.




                                                                                                         143
Coloma, Luis A. (Centro Jambatu de Investigación y Conservación de Anfibios);

The future for the frogless Andes

The Andes has the greatest amphibian diversity in the world, containing more than twice the diversity
(~800 species) of rich amphibian regions such as the Amazonia-Guiana (~350 species) or the Atlantic
Forest domain (~350 species). However, the current diversity of the Andes has collapsed given the
catastrophic extinctions that have occurred, mostly attributed to pathogens and climate change.
Extrapolation of scattered presence, absence, and census data indicates that about 30–50% of such
diversity might be extinct or suffering severe declines. Predictive modeling of pathogen spread and
occurrence, and/or climate changes indicates growing future losses.

Global and local efforts of moving from theory to action have been in place since the catastrophic event
was reported in 1991. Nonetheless, responses and actions in the fields of science, conservation, and
policy have been slow and largely insufficient, and have generally failed. Priority actions and conservation
measures remained in the realm of rhetoric. Extinctions of Atelopus, Telmatobius, and other anurans,
have been beyond control and are increasingly exacerbated by global warming, pathogens, and a cocktail
of other factors. The scenario is further worsened by the perennial lack of funds in Andean countries, the
largely unfilled gap between theory and practice in conservation biology, the poor institutional and
government commitments to amphibian‘s research and conservation, and the insignificant number of
researchers involved. Under this past scenario, a current and future rethinking of integrative theory and
actions is urgently needed. Among multiple new or renewed conceptual and practical approaches, a
summary of them (with examples and results) are presented, and the future for the frogs in the Andes is
discussed.

A growing interest by governments on genetic resources, bio-knowledge, and sustainable development
require new and updated legislation, and adequate allocation of funds, which should strongly promote
research and conservation in the Andean region. Aggressive bio-restoration programs of Andean
ecosystems are required. Private enterprises deeply committed to fund research and conservation could
be strong actors in the revolution needed. Democratization of information needs impulses. Bioinformatics
provide an open opportunity for education and is a powerful tool for development of Citizen Science,
which might take a critical role in helping to accelerate inventories, monitoring of species, among an
increased body of applications. Ex situ management programs should be strongly developed to secure
species that cannot currently be safeguarded in nature.

Finally, it is argued that an army of global researchers and citizen scientists are urgently needed to
change the current slow trend, which in turn could rapidly change the ethics, actions and policies needed
if the remaining amphibian Andean diversity is to be preserved.



Conkey, Nancy (University of Texas at El Paso); Greenbaum, Eli (University of Texas at El Paso, El
Paso, TX, United States); Pramuk, Jennifer (Bronx Zoo/Wildlife Conservation Society, Bronx, NY, United
States); Carr, John (University of Louisiana at Monroe, Monroe, LA, United States); Oliver Rödel, Mark
(Leibnitz Institute for Research on Evolution and Biodiversity at the Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany)

Phylogenetics of African Toads (Anura: Bufonidae: Amietophrynus)

African "true" toads (frog genus Amietophrynus) include forty morphologically conserved species that live
in an array of habitats from the fringes of the Sahara to the mountains of South Africa. We examined the
evolutionary relationships of these African bufonids by sequencing approximately 4 kb of combined




                                                                                                        144
mitochondrial (12S–16S) and nuclear (CXCR4, POMC, and RAG1) sequence data from sixty-two
divergent samples of the genus Amietophrynus, and several bufonid outgroups. DNA sequences were
analyzed with maximum parsimony, maximum-likelihood and Bayesian inference with the programs
PAUP, RAxML and MrBayes v.3.1, respectively, after appropriate models of nucleotide substitution were
identified in the program jModelTest. Our phylogeny agrees in most respects with the results of the most
comprehensive, previously published hypothesis investigating the relationships of African bufonids (e.g.,
the monophyly of African Amietophrynus is well supported). However, our phylogeny supports several
novel relationships, clarifies chromosome evolution in the group, demonstrates the importance of the
Congo Basin as a center of endemism, and notes widespread cryptic speciation, suggesting that current
diversity of Amietophrynus is vastly underestimated.



Conway, Kevin (TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY); White, Macaulay (TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY, College
Station, TX, United States); Baldwin, Carole (Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C., United States)

Cryptic clingfish diversity in the western Atlantic: molecular and morphological evidence for a
new species of Acyrtus (Teleostei: Gobiesocidae)

Members of the clingfish genus Acyrtus are small, benthic and cryptic inhabitants of shallow coastal
areas throughout the western Atlantic, from the Bahamas to the northern coast of South America, and
along the North East coast of Brazil. Three species are currently recognized, including Acyrtus artius
Briggs, Acyrtus pauciradiatus        Sampaio, de Anchieta, Nunes & Mendes, and Acyrtus rubiginosus
(Poey), though there is some debate in the literature abou the validity of Acyrtus artius (which has been
suggested to represent juveniles of Arcos macrophthalmus (Günther)). Parsimony and Maximum
Likelihood analysis of cytochrome oxidase 1 (CO1) sequences obtained from samples of Acyrtus and
Arcos from throughout the Western Central Atlantic indicate that Acyrtus artius is distinct from Arcos
macrophthalmus       .    Additionally, Acyrtus artius is composed of two distinct and highly divergent
genetic lineages. Individuals from each of these lineages exhibit consistent diagnostic morphological
characters (including differences in adhesive disk papillae pattern, adhesive disk shape, and head shape)
and occupy different habitats, being segregated by depth (0-10m vs. 25-70m). Based on molecular,
morphological and ecological differences we conclude that Acyrtus artius (as currently recognized)
comprises two species, one of which is new and requires formal description.



Conway, Kevin (TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY); Rüber, Lukas (Naturhistorisches Museum Bern, Bern,
Switzerland); Summers, Adam (University of Washington, Friday Harbor, WA, United States); Hastings,
Philip (Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, CA, United States)

Phylogenetic revamp of phenetic clingfish classification

Members of the family Gobiesocidae (clingfishes) are small and cryptic inhabitants of the intertidal zone,
characterized by a unique ventral adhesive disk. The roughly 150 species and 45 genera of clingfishes
are currently divided between nine subfamilies in a ―phenetic‖ classification scheme proposed over 50
years ago. Though heavily criticized, this classification is still widely utilized, reflecting the paucity of
phylogenetic studies conducted on these small and cryptic marine fishes. Using a combination of
mitochondrial (CO1) and nuclear (RAG1) sequence data we investigated the phylogenetic relationships of
37 clingfishes, representing 17 genera and 7 subfamilies of the Gobiesocidae. Preliminary topologies
derived from Parsimony and Maximum Likelihood analyses of individual and concatenated data matrices
depict relationships that are largely congruent with current clingfish subfamilial groupings (including a



                                                                                                         145
monophyletic Gobiesocinae and Diademichthyinae) but are not entirely free of conflict (e.g.,
Lepadogastrinae and Aspasminae as currently recognized are paraphyletic). Our preliminary findings also
support the placement of the Australian shore eels (genus Alabes ) within the Gobiesocidae, supporting
previous hypotheses based on morphological synapomorphies. Comparison of topologies derived from
molecular and morphological data highlight areas of conflict between the two. We tentatively propose
changes to the current clingfish classification to recognize only monophyletic groups recovered in both
molecular and morphological phylogenetic analyses.



Cook, Simon (University of Ballarat); Fox, Eleanor; Gell, Peter; Westbrooke, Martin; Florentine,
Singarayer (University of Ballarat, Canada)

Demonstrating the impacts of artificial water-point closure on reptile communities in semi-arid
Australia

The provision of artificial water through bores, dams and ground tanks has negative environmental effects
in terms of increased grazing pressure, prevention of native species regeneration and promotion of exotic
plant and animal species. Though some species may benefit from increased provision of water, watering
points are a major factor in the decline of native species. In the arid zone of Australia, as in arid
environments worldwide, reptiles are a major component of the vertebrate community. Reptile species
may be drastically affected by the disturbance that occurs in proximity to artificial water points. Past
studies addressing these issues have been limited in terms of lack of experimental manipulation at the
landscape scale and failure to adequately replicate experimental treatments. We carried out a four year
replicated study in semi-arid Australia investigating the impacts of four alternative water point closure
treatments on the native reptile community. The treatments in the experiment were: 1) fencing to exclude
mammalian grazers; 2) partial tank closure by blocking of inlets to reduce catchment of runoff; 3)
complete tank closure through backfilling; 4) untreated to act as a control. Each of these treatments was
replicated three times, and pitfall trapping sites were established at varying distances from each replicate;
20, 500 and 1500 meters and in dune and swale habitats. In addition to reptiles, plant structure and
floristics and soil characteristics were monitored at each site to assess their potential effect on reptiles.
Results indicate changes in reptile community structure in relation to distance from water and treatment
type which may have implications for management of water points in the arid zone.



Corey-Rivas, Sarah (New Mexico Highlands University);

Threatened amphibian species in Venezuela's socioecological landscape: people, parks and
indigenous lands

Current conservation practices rely heavily on the need for protected areas. This is especially true
regarding the amphibian extinction crisis. However, parks and people are inextricably linked in this global
crisis and broader scale geographic and anthropogenic interactions must be accounted for. The aim of
this study is to investigate spatial patterns in amphibian species vulnerability in megadiverse Venezuela
and identify successful scenarios for amphibians in terms of people, parks and environment. I evaluate
the use of spatially explicit measures of general and indigenous human population density, park
presence, human footprint, net primary productivity, and elevation to predict threatened amphibian
species distributions. These factors are assessed using an information theoretic approach (AIC) and a
simultaneous autoregressive model (SAR), which also account for spatialdependence. I then test
assumptions that parks and their underlying protectionist paradigm work to protect amphibian species.



                                                                                                         146
Finally, I search for local spatial autocorrelation (LISA) in species richness, endemics, threatened and
data deficient species, and identify geographic hotspots of species at risk. Results of this study
demonstrate that traditional measures of human impact (density and footprint) effectively predict higher
numbers of threatened amphibian species. However, indigenous peoples population density does not
predict abundance of threatened species. Accounting for spatial dependence in the landscape reveals
that cultural stewardship, i.e., parks on indigenous versus non-indigenous land, cannot predict
threatened species distributions, failing to validate typical conservation concerns over indigenous
population impacts to parks and biodiversity.      The LISA analysis reveals that the northwest region of
Venezuela is a hotspot of threatened, endemic, and unknown amphibian species. Overall, this study
demonstrates that a landscape approach to understanding threats can help to empirically identify socially
and ecologically successful or risky scenarios for amphibians and move away from a priori expectations
embodied in traditional notions of the impacts of parks and people.



Corke, Jarrett (WWF-Canada); Wimmer, Tonya (WWF-Canada, Halifax, NS, Canada)

Fishers' Knowledge for Elasmobranch Conservation

Bycatch and unaccountable discard mortality in fishing operations are the primary threat to
elasmobranchs in Atlantic Canada. Pelagic and groundfish longline, mid-water and bottom trawl fisheries
account for the largest proportion of shark bycatch. Enhanced data collection is needed to accurately
estimate bycatch mortality, but additional important information on non-target species catches in
commercial fisheries can be accessed by direct communication with fishermen. To gather this knowledge
for WWF-Canada, qualitative interviews were conducted with pelagic and groundfish longline captains.
The objectives were to: 1) through a mapping exercise, determine spatial and temporal distributions of
elasmobranchs and identify potential bycatch hotspots; 2) identify modifications to fishing practices
employed by fishers in response to elasmobranch interactions; 3) identify methods to reduce and/or avoid
bycatch; and 4) describe fishers‘ attitudes and perceptions towards elasmobranchs and the bycatch of
these species.

This study will be completed by the summer of 2012. Results thus far indicate that fishermen have a
considerable knowledge of elasmobranchs. Blue sharks (Prionace glauca) were the elasmobranch
species most commonly caught in both pelagic and groundfish longline fisheries. Fishermen reported a
significant change in both the size and age blue sharks they caught over the past decade, potentially
indicating shifts in overall population structure of this species in the NW Atlantic. A mapping exercise has
also revealed the spatial and temporal distributions of areas where certain bycaught species are
consistently encountered (e.g. Portuguese dogfish, Centroscymnus coelolepis).

Significant conservation benefits can be obtained from fishers‘ knowledge, which can provide a real-time
perspective of the current circumstances on the water. Through integration of scientific literature with the
study results, a more comprehensive perspective may emerge on the elasmobranch bycatch problem in
Atlantic Canada. Furthermore, results may inform the future direction of management objectives to further
elasmobranch conservation in Atlantic Canada.




                                                                                                        147
Corn, Stephen (US Geological Survey); Muths, Erin (US Geologica Survey, Fort Collins, CO, United
States); Patla, Debra (Northern Rockies Conservation Cooperative, Jackson, WY, United States);
Hossack, Blake (US Geological Survey, Missoula, MT, United States); Gould, William (New Mexico State
University, Las Cruces, NM, United States); Peterson, Charles (Idaho State University, Pocatello, ID,
United States)

Trends in amphibian populations in U.S. national parks on the continental divide

The U.S. Geological Survey‘s Amphibian Research and Monitoring Initiative (ARMI) conducts long-term
monitoring of amphibian populations in a hierarchical manner with varying levels of effort and spatial
coverage. At the middle level of this hierarchy, study areas are often national parks or national wildlife
refuges with a defined area of inference, and samples are selected using a probabilistic design.
Occupancy and associated vital rates are used to evaluate status and trends. ARMI‘s Rocky Mountain
Region and the National Park Service‘s Greater Yellowstone Inventory and Monitoring Network conduct
monitoring at this scale along a transect composed of the national parks in 3 regions on the Continental
Divide, including Glacier National Park in the north, Yellowstone and Grand Teton national parks in the
middle, and Rocky Mountain National Park in the south. The transect covers 8° of latitude and the parks
differ in size, climate, vegetation, and amounts of human influence. Beginning in 2005, we selected
random samples of small drainages (catchments) in each park. . We hypothesized that catchments, which
contained an average of 8 wetlands with suitable breeding habitat for amphibians, better represent
functional populations and may be less influenced by stochastic variation. Each wetland in a catchment
was surveyed at least twice each year for presence of breeding populations, and presence/non-detection
of each species was aggregated among the wetlands in each catchment. We found strong differences in
occupancy among species and between regions. Occupancy was lowest in Rocky Mountain National
Park and highest in Glacier National Park, and of the species broadly distributed in each park, the boreal
toad was least abundant in all regions. Initial analyses will evaluate the evidence for declines of each
species in each region. These data constitute a good baseline for evaluating future changes to amphibian
populations in the Rocky Mountains. Given existing and potential threats from the amphibian chytrid
fungus and potential threats to amphibian habitat from climate change, continued monitoring of amphibian
populations will provide park managers with information needed to fulfill statutory mandates to maintain
biological diversity.



Cosandey-Godin, Aurelie (Dalhousie University); Worm, Boris (Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada)

Analysing Elasmobranch Bycatch Patterns in Arctic Canadian Waters

The Arctic is one of the last ocean wilderness areas in the world. However, with sea ice coverage
decreasing, previously inaccessible areas are increasingly being exploited by commercial fisheries. In
Baffin Bay, fisheries targeting Greenland halibut (Reinhardtius hippoglossoides) and northern shrimp
(Pandalus borealis) have been expending since mid-1990s. There is a clear commitment from the
Canadian federal government to further increase fishing operation in the western and eastern Arctic
areas. Fisheries bycatch is a main cause of population declines in several species of sharksand skates
around the world. To date, no research has investigated elasmobranch bycatch patterns in the Arctic
region. At-sea observer data from fisheries operating offshore the Nunavut Territory ( Northwest Atlantic
Fisheries Organization (NAFO) subarea 0) from 1995-2011 have been combined for all elasmobranch
species. We used spatial point pattern methods, a novel way to analyse bycatch hotspot to enhance our
understanding of the factor driving these catch patterns. Data were split into different seasons and
species groups to investigate variations at these different scales. Otter trawl, twin trawl, and gillnet
targeting Greenland halibut are contributing to the largest catch of elasmobranch. In term of weight (kg),



                                                                                                       148
the most common species encountered are Greenland shark (Somniosus microcephalus), Arctic skate
(Amblyraja hyperborea), thorny skate (Amblyraja radiata), and the shorttail or Jensen's skate (Amblyraja
jenseni). This study provides the first complete perspective of fisheries bycatch for elasmobranch in
Eastern Arctic waters and highlights specific region–fleet combinations that require scientific scrutiny and
conservation measures.



Cosandey-Godin, Aurelie (Dalhousie University); Wimmer, Tonya (WWF-Canada, Halifax, NS,
Canada); John H., Wang (NOAA-Kewalo Research Facility, Honolulu, HI, United States); Worm, Boris
(Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada)

No Effect from Rare-Earth Metal Deterrent on Shark Bycatch in a Commercial Pelagic Longline
Trial

The indiscriminate capture of non-target organisms (bycatch) in commercial fisheries is an issue of critical
concern to the sustainable development and conservation of marine resources. In the Northwest Atlantic,
blue sharks ( Prionace glauca ) comprise a significant proportion of unwanted bycatch in the Canadian
pelagic longline fleet targeting swordfish and occasionally tuna. Minimizing the capture of these species is
of interest to the industry as well as conservation organizations. Several shark species have been shown
to be repulsed by the magnetic field generated by rare-earth magnets. For this reason, magnetic
deterrents have become a promising bycatch solution on pelagic longlines, but controlled trials under
commercial fishing conditions are still lacking. In collaboration with the longline industry, a total of 7 sets
(6300 hooks) with three hook treatments: standard hooks, hooks equipped with rare-earth alloys (Nd/Pr),
and hooks with lead weights were deployed in 2011 on the outer scotia Shelf, Nova Scotia. Results
suggest that rare-earth metals do not have any significant deterrent effect on the most common shark
bycatch species (blue, mako, and porbeagle) and as such are not a practical bycatch mitigation option in
the Canadian fishery. The inclusion of all stakeholders in this study has proven valuable in improving the
methodology by operating under realistic commercial-scale conditions; we believe that this is an effective
way to conduct bycatch research at a regional level.



Costello, Jennifer (CUNY Graduate Center); Department of Biology, CUNY College of Staten Island,
2800 Victory Blvd, Staten Island NY 10314

Frogs as Biological Indicators: Does Habitat Degradation Impact Prey Capture Efficiency?

 Anthropogenic disturbances to freshwater ecosystems are intensifying with the continued growth and
expansion of the human population. Rapid identification of species or habitats most vulnerable to
disturbance is therefore important for conservation. Biological indicators are species whose condition
correlates with that of other taxa in the same location. This allows for observation of proxy organisms to
reflect or even predict the condition of others sharing the same habitat. Common pollutants in these
degraded habitats are organics, heavy metals, and insecticides. Heavy metals, particularly, are of great
concern due to their persistence in the environment. By monitoring a species recognized as a biological
indicator, early detection of adverse responses to these hazardous conditions may be possible. Recently,
frogs have been proposed as biological indicators due to the unique nature of the amphibian life cycle.
Identification of sub-lethal effects of habitat degradation through monitoring several levels of biological
organization in a species recognized as a biological indicator may allow for early detection of threats.
Numerous studies attribute responses at single biological levels to environmental pollutants; however few
studies have established links between these biological levels. The results of this research will establish



                                                                                                           149
1) which levels of biological organization are influenced by habitat degradation and 2) if a link exists
between lower levels of biological organization, such as cellular abnormalities and metal accumulation,
and upper levels of biological organization, such as feeding behavior and population composition. This
study not only provides an understanding of the impact of degraded habitats on Green frog, Lithobates
clamitans populations and identifies the processes by which these changes are occurring, but also
forecasts changes in other organisms that share the same habitat.



Cotten, Taylor (Arizona Game and Fish Department); Grandmaison, David (Arizona Game and Fish