ding climate change, habitat loss, diseases, introduced species, environmental
contamination, and unsustainable take. Given these concerns, there is an urgent need to evaluate the
current management framework for these taxa in California and to develop a more comprehensive
management strategy to guide future conservation decisions. Here, we outline a process recently begun
to develop a guiding vision for the management of these taxa in California. We describe the ways in
which protected amphibians and reptiles and their ecological communities are currently managed in the
state and we describe opportunities to extend these models to common and unprotected special status
species. Additionally, many native amphibians and reptiles are allowed to be legally taken in California
with a sportfishing license. However, these taxa present unique management challenges for the
application of the traditional North American model of wildlife management. We describe the
NorthAmerican model of wildlife management and discuss the challenges and opportunities this model
presents for the management of amphibians and reptiles.



Todd, Melissa (BC Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations); McEwan, Alexis;
Johnson, Chris (University of Northern British Columbia, Canada); Govindarajulu, Purnima; Paige, Kathy
(BC Ministry of Environment, Canada); Steventon, Doug; Hetherington, Anne; Vanderstar, Len (BC
Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations, Canada); Turney, Laurence; Rach, Lis
(Ardea Biological Consulting, Canada)

Habitat Factors Influencing the Distribution of Coastal Tailed Frogs (Ascaphus truei) in North-
western British Columbia

 In coastal British Columbia, Canada, post-metamorphic Coastal Tailed Frogs ( Ascaphus truei ) inhabit
cool, moist micro-sites and habitats closely associated with old growth and mature second growth forest,
away from larval streams. These terrestrial habitats are afforded little to no protection and are at high
risk of degradation or permanent loss from development activities such as logging, Run-of-River
independent power projects (IPP), and urban development.              Where applied, BC conservation
management focuses on streamside retention (30 to 50m) to protect aquatic and stream bank integrity.
The extent to which this meets the life requisites of terrestrial post-metamorphic frogs in the face of
human- and climate-induced change is largely unknown. To address this knowledge gap, we have
established 15 research sites - 3 riparian forest treatments (undisturbed, 50m buffer, harvested) in 5
watershed blocks - in the upper reaches of small (&lt;3m wide) occupied streams in the forests of north-
western BC. We are evaluating the influence of terrestrial habitat factors on the distribution and




                                                                                                       722
persistence of tailed frog populations at a range of scales by integrating a study of post-metamorphic frog
habitat use and movement, as characterized by radio-telemetry, mark- recapture studies, and visual
encounter surveys (McEwan et al. 2012), with an assessment of terrestrial habitat conditions
(microclimate, structure, composition) within and between buffer treatments and watersheds. Aquatic
larval populations and habitat conditions in adjacent stream reaches are monitored to confirm continued
reproductive occupancy, with high variability in larval abundance between sites (0 to 64 larvae per 60
minutes of survey) due to watershed and stream effects.         Preliminary stand-level results indicate frog
use of moist micro-sites tied to within-stand topography (e.g., seepages, gullies, and ephemeral draws),
and fine-scale selection of downed wood elements within those moist micro-sites. Autumn breeding
aggregations were associated with such micro-sites 12 to 31m away from streams. Frogs distribute
themselves closer to stream edges (mean distance to stream = 29.8m, SD 12.60m; range 3 to 71m), but
occur farthest from streams in undisturbed treatments. Microclimate monitoring indicates warmer and
drier mid-summer conditions further from streams in harvested and buffer sites. A preliminary study of
genetic connectivity is underway to better assess distribution and dispersal at larger scales.



Todd, Melissa (BC Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations); McEwan, Alexis;
Johnson, Chris (University of Northern British Columbia, Canada); Govindarajulu, Purnima (BC Ministry of
Environment, Canada)

Use of Radio-telemetry to Investigate the Habitat Ecology of Post-metamorphic Coastal Tailed
Frogs (Ascaphus truei) in North-western British Columbia.

We are investigating the habitat ecology of post-metamorphic Coastal Tailed Frogs within 3 riparian buffer
treatments (undisturbed, 50m buffer, harvested) distributed across 3 watersheds in north-western British
Columbia. This research is part of a larger study designed to determine the influence of habitat factors on
the distribution of Tailed Frogs in landscapes affected by human development. Post-metamorphic frogs
are rarely encountered during larval surveys in this area due to their association with moist habitats and
micro-sites away from streams. Studies to date have used mark-recapture techniques to examine post-
metamorphic habitat use and movement, but are limited by narrow spatial scope and low recapture rates.
We are using radio-telemetry, a first for this species, to track the movements of individual post-
metamorphic frogs. These data will allow us to quantify p atterns of terrestrial habitat use and movement.
In 2011, we used visual encounter surveys to locate 60 post-metamorphic frogs within 100m of occupied
larval streams from mid-July to early November. We fit 12 adult males and 6 adult females with radio-
transmitters (BD-2N Holohil) as part of a use-availability study. Of those, 5 males and 4 females were
monitored for the full nominal life-span of the transmitters (10-14 days). We measured microclimate
conditions (light intensity, temperature and relative humidity) at all used and random locations, and
habitat attributes at three nested scales (micro-(1m 2 ), meso-(25m 2 ) and macro-(100m 2 )). Results
demonstrated a strong association between radio-tagged frogs and downed wood, debris piles and root
hollow elements as well as moist micro-sites (e.g., Devil‘s Club and Skunk Cabbage sites). Adult females
were larger than males in all sites, averaging 11.1g (SD=1.92; n=13) as compared to a male average of
6.4g (SD=0.74; n=38); males outnumbered females in captures in all seasons. In summer, frogs were
located up to 70m from larval streams, with daily movements in localized areas of &lt;15m 2 . In contrast
to summer distribution, we observed late fall (mid-October – early November) aggregations of frogs (8 to
39 breeding and non-breeding adults and juveniles), another first in the study of this species, at 2
research sites located 32km apart. Work continues in 2012, with frogs permanently marked (visual
implant elastomer) for long term population assessment, and the installation of pitfall arrays for a mark-
recapture study to supplement telemetry data.




                                                                                                         723
Toledo, Gabriela (University of Kansas Biodiversity Institute);

X-frogs: "wolverine frogs" found in Borneo

 Phylogenetic studies of Limnonectes kuhlii , a fanged frog from Southeast Asia, have shown substantial
genetic variation among lineages, which is surprising given the phenotypic uniformity among the species.
As a consequence, L. kuhlii is considered a cryptic species complex in which different species remain
subsumed under the same name. The species complex condition has potentially detrimental implications
with regards to conservation efforts. A recent phylogenetic evaluation of the group recognized 22
divergent clades within the L. kuhlii complex. Morphological data are necessary to corroborate the
phylogenetic findings and to properly diagnose the individual species currently within the complex. In this
study, we examined the presence of digital claws in the L.kuhlii complex. The terminal phalanges of the
hind limbs act as claws by protruding through the skin in the toe pad. It is likely that the claws serve as
defense structures to escape predators. These claws were present in 6 clades, representing all of the
known diversity of the complex in Borneo. Histological analysis of the claws was used to describe the
internal anatomy and to note differences among clades. These results divide the clades into two groups
with respect to the presence of one morphological character. These preliminary data represent the first
step in the attempt to use discretemorphological characters to distinguish among the species of this
complex.



Toledo-Hernandez, Carlos (UPR-Rio Piedras); Vélez-Zuazo, Ximena; Ruiz-Diaz, Claudia; Patricio, Rita;
Mege, Pascal; Navarro, Melissa; Sabat, Alberto (UPR-Rio Piedras, Canada); Betancur, Ricardo (George
Washington University, Canada); Papa, Riccardo (UPR-Rio Piedras, Canada)

Population ecology and genetics of the invasive lionfish in Puerto Rico

Lionfishes ( Pterois spp. ), endemic tropical and subtropical Indo-Pacific Ocean reef-fish, are now
establishing sustainable breeding populations along the Northwest Atlantic and Caribbean coasts. As
many Caribbean reefs have exceeded their resilience capacity due environmental stresses, this invasion
presents an immense threat to their communities. Since 2008 lionfishes have been consistently reported
throughout inshore waters of Puerto Rico, however no scientific study has addressed that incident (there
might be a better expression than incident) yet. In this study, we sampled 24 sites around Puerto Rico for
lionfishes to investigate their sex- and life-stage-specific ratios, length-weight relationship, and relative
condition factor . Furthermore we documented the number of lionfish species inhabiting local waters, their
genetic diversity and population of origin . A total of 227 lionfishled to an overall sex-ratio of 1:1 and a
similar ratio of juveniles to adults. When individuals were classified by sex and life-stage, juveniles were
biased towards females and adults towards males. Juveniles had positive allometric growth, suggesting
allocation of resources into somatic growth, whereas adults showed isometric growth, with most
resources allocated into reproduction. According to their relative condition factor, juvenile males are under
sub-optimal conditions, not observed for other classes. Genetic analyses demonstrated that P. volitans
L. is the only lionfish species present in Puerto Rico, originating from the Florida invasive population. Only
4 haplotypes out of the 9 haplotypes identified in the Atlantic, were detected suggesting a secondary
founder effect after the initial invasion.




                                                                                                          724
Tolley, Krystal (SANBI); Herrel, Anthony (CNRS/MNHN, Paris, France); Measey, G. John (Nelson
Mandela Metropolitan University, Port Elizabeth, South Africa); Townsend, Ted M. (San Diego State
University, San Diego, United States); Vences, Miguel (Technische Universitat Braunschweig,
Braunschweig, Germany)

Chameleons through time and space: Extinction or Adaptation?

Biogeographic patterns are often explained by spatial shifts that match changing environmental
conditions to which species are adapted. We hypothesize that biogeographic patterns however, can also
be explained through the adaptation of organisms in situ to changing environments over time, rather than
purely through shifting distributions as a response to those changes. We combined multiple existing and
newly dated phylogenies, using between three and thirteen genetic markers, for 174 taxa representing ca.
90% of described species in the family Chamaeleonidae (BEAST, MrBayes). We show that most genera
radiated in the Oligocene, and that recent radiations are scarce, resulting in a phylogeny dominated by
paleo-endemic lineages. We suggest that the reduction of the Pan African forest coupled to the increase
in open habitats (savannah, grassland, fynbos) since the Oligocene has generated a preponderance of
paleo-endemic lineages (e.g. Brookesia, Kinyongia, Nadzikambia, Rieppeleon, Rhampholeon).
Geographic regions (Eastern Arc, northern Madagascar, and eastern Madagascar) which contain
fragments of ancient forests show comparatively higher phylogenetic diversity (PD) due to the retention of
paleo-endemic lineages. Randomisations were performed to obtain a null model for comparison against
observed PD, and the result shows that PD is lower than expected by chance across all areas. This
suggests that on the whole, the phylogeny is over-dispersed, possibly as a result of extinction filtering
(and/or undiscovered taxa). Recent radiation (e.g. Pliocene and later) is uncommon, and occurs primarily
within the genera Bradypodion and Trioceros. We suggest that these lineages were able to take
advantage of fine-structure microhabitats (e.g. grasses, fynbos) within the open vegetation that has been
dominant since the Pliocene. We investigated a combination of morphological and performance data (bite
force, gripping, sprinting) among Bradypodion species, and conclude that some Bradypodion lineages
adapted to fine-structure habitats through the evolution of small body size, limb lengthening, hand/feet
reduction, and ornamentation reduction. In contrast, paleo-endemic lineages have not radiated
substantially since the Oligocene-Miocene, and these lineages retain morphological features that are
adaptive in habitats that lack fine-structure vegetation (i.e. bushes/trees, or leaf litter). Our work suggests
that biogeographic patterns of chameleons can be explained primarily by lineage loss that corresponds
with forest habitat reduction since the Oligocene, but that certain lineages in this family have adaptively
radiated to new habitats since the Pliocene.



Tomita, Taketeru (Hokkaido University Museum); Sato, Keiichi (Okinawa Churaumi Aquarium, Motobu,
1, Japan); Suda, Kenta; Kawauchi, Junro (Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Japan); Nakaya, Kazuhiro
(Hokkaido University, Hakodate, 4, Japan)

Feeding of the megamouth shark (Pisces: Lamniformes: Megachasmidae) predicted by its hyoid
arch: A biomechanical approach

Studies of the megamouth shark, one of three planktivorous sharks, can provide information about their
evolutionary history. Megamouth shark feeding has never been observed in life animals, but two
alternative hypotheses on biomechanics suggest either feeding, i.e., ram feeding or suction feeding. In
this study, the second moment of area of the ceratohyal cartilages, which is an indicator of the flexural
stiffness of the cartilages, is calculated for 21 species of ram- and suction-feeding sharks using computed
tomography. The results indicate that suction-feeding sharks have ceratohyal cartilages with a larger
second moment of area than ram-feeding sharks. The result also indicates that the ram–suction index,



                                                                                                           725
which is an indicator of relative contribution of ram and suction behavior, is also correlated with the
second moment of area of the ceratohyal. Considering that large bending stresses are expected to be
applied to the ceratohyal cartilage during suction, the larger second moment of area of the ceratohyal of
suction-feeding sharks can be interpreted as an adaptation for suction feeding. Based on the small
second moment of area of the ceratohyal cartilage of the megamouth shark, the feeding mode of the
megamouth shark is considered to be ram feeding, similar to the planktivorous basking shark. From these
results, an evolutionary scenario of feeding mechanics of three species of planktivorous sharks can be
suggested. In this scenario, the planktivorous whale shark evolved ram feeding from a benthic suction-
feeding ancestor. Ram feeding in the planktivorous megamouth shark and the basking shark evolved
from ram feeding swimming-type ancestors and that both developed their unique filtering system to
capture small-sized prey



Torello-Viera, Natalia (UNESP); Braz, Henrique (University of São Paulo, Canada); Araújo, Daniela
(Butantan Institute, Canada)

Activity patterns and substrate use of the snail-eating snake, Dipsas bucephala

The genus Dipsas is widely distributed throughout the Neotropical region. Diet is specialized in slugs and
snails. They are considered semi-arboreal and present exclusively nocturnal. However, duration of the
daily activity, seasonal activity and the differences in the substrate use for activity or resting are still
unknown for several species. Here, we study the seasonal and daily activity patterns, and substrate use
of Dipsas bucephala . Moreover, we verify the influence of food availability on the duration of the activity.
We inferred seasonal activity pattern from the number of specimens collected in southeastern Brazil (n =
114) between January 1990 and December 2010, totaling 21 years. To characterize daily activity and
substrate use, three individuals of D. bucephala (2 females and 1 male) were individually and
continuously filmed during 20 days (10 days with available food and 10 days without food). Individuals
were kept individually in terraria with a pot of water, branches, dry leaves and natural photoperiod. Food
was offered daily, varying of 2 to 6 snails and slugs. Use of the rest substrate was characterized by
recording daily for each individual (during 10 days) the place where the animal was found: (1) branches
and (2) ground. Adult D. bucephala were collected during all months of the year but more commonly in
the summer (peak in March), showing a highly seasonal activity. Minimum and maximum temperature
and precipitation explained together 63% of the variation in number of captures, but none of the variables
contributed significantly more than other for the observed variation. Daily activity in D. bucephala was
registered between 05:30 pm and 6:00 am, occurring practically during all the nocturnal period. The food
availability seems to influence directly the activity with a decrease in the lack of food. Slugs and snails,
food items of D. bucephala , are nocturnal and more abundant in the rainy season what may explain the
seasonal and activity patterns of the species. However, other factors such as reproductive events may
also influence activity patterns. Regarding the use of the substrate, branches and ground were similarly
used corroborating the semiarboreal habits of the genus. Nevertheless, our data suggest differences in
the form of using the substrate by D. bucephala in relation to the played activity (foraging or rest).
Branchesare more used during activity whereas ground is more used during inactivity period.




                                                                                                         726
Towns, David (Department of Conservation and Auckland University of Technology);

Beyond invasives: the practice and politics of island restoration in New Zealand

Invasive species devastate island ecosystems and New Zealand is a well-documented example; in
particular for extinctions among avifauna. Extinctions and declines of herpetofauna are less well known.
In New Zealand, half of the frog fauna and at least two species of lizards became extinct and others
underwent massive range declines that coincided with the arrival of people and their associated
predators. However, in the late 19th Century, attempts were made to translocate species of birds
threatened by spreading invasive species, and eradications of introduced species from some islands
soon followed. A systematic approach to these eradications has, over the last 25 years, resulted in the
eradication of all invasive mammals from more than 100 islands. Ecological restoration of these systems
is now underway, including reintroductions of amphibians and reptiles. The reconstruction of devastated
island ecosystems presented many ecological challenges, but induced little controversy while they were
at a small scale and largely out of sight. More recently, very large projects on islands with high public
interest have been undertaken. These have been more controversial. Regardless of their ecological
justification, projects on large inhabited islands are likely to be thwarted unless there is high public
involvement in planning and implementation alongside a transparent system for dealing with the
increasingly complex value-judgments required.



Tracy, Richard (University of Nevada Reno); Maloney, Nichole; Hunter, Kenneth; Mohammadpour,
Hamid; DuPre, Sally; Sandmeier, Franziska; Hyde, David; Marlow, Ronald (University of Nevada Reno,
Canada)

Transmission of Mycoplasmal URTD in Gopherus agassizii

Mycoplasma agassizii has been identified as a cause of disease, and a possible cause of declines in wild
populations of desert tortoises (Gopherus agassizii) (USFWS 1994). In Clark County in Nevada, more
than 3,230 federally‑protected desert tortoises were euthanized, over the course of 17 years, as a means
to reduce transmission of upper respiratory tract disease (URTD) to a wild population. Previous research
has identified Mycoplasma agassizii as one of the pathogens causing URTD. Immunological tools have
been developed to diagnose an immune response to the pathogen. However, there remains a paucity of
information as to what is required to transmit the disease, and how the immune response in the host
influences transmissibility. Reported here are the results of a three-year, semi-natural field experiment in
which serological tests and clinical signs are used to assess transmission of M. agassizii among desert
tortoises. This study is the first large-scale, longitudinal investigation of transmission of pathogen in this
host/pathogen complex. We found that appearance of disease does not require exposure to ill tortoises,
but that tortoises exposed to seropositive tortoises had a higher probability of developing clinical signs.
The appearance of clinical signs does not significantly result in seroconversion. Tortoises emerge from
brumation immunologically challenged, and for most tortoises, there is a lag period of eighteen months
between clinical signs and seroconversion. The contemporary model of this disease is one of epizootic
responses to a novel Mycoplasma escaping from pet turtles. Our research indicates that a more
parsimonious model of this host-pathogen system includes the notion that Mycoplasma is present in high
proportions of wild tortoises, but that it causes few infections unless tortoises are challenged with stress
(including brumation). In some tortoises, the Mycoplasma likely evolves greater virulence in situ insofar as
this microbe has on the order of 1,000,000 generations per year within the host, and the host can live for
many years. The evolved more virulent strain then can cause an infection, but the timing of onset of an
infection is not predictable, and this complicates management prescriptions for this threatened species.




                                                                                                          727
Trapaga, Ann (University of California at Berkeley); Spencer, Carol; Cicero, Carla (University of
California at Berkeley, Canada); McGuire, Jimmy (University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA,
United States)

The Big Chill: A framework for the conversion of the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology genetic
resources collection from ultra-cold to liquid nitrogen storage

The Museum of Vertebrate Zoology (MVZ) Genetic Resources Collection is one of the largest museum
vertebrate tissue collections in the world, with over 100,000 tissues vials representing approximately
95,000 individual specimens, collected since 1965. With NSF funding we are converting our tissue
collection from ultra-cold to liquid nitrogen (LN2) storage. We based this conversion on: 1) preventing
catastrophic loss and needing to replace the aging bank of ultra-cold freezers that currently house the
collection, 2) ensuring long-term viability and maximum research utility of genetic samples, 3) reducing
carbon footprint and improving cost efficiencies, and 4) increasing opportunity for growth and storage. We
created a new cryogenic laboratory facility, implemented a new tissue barcode labeling system for field
and curatorial practices, and integrated the barcoded vials and their location into our Arctos database.
This conversion provides a unique opportunity to re-inventory and consolidate the collection, discover and
correct tissue issues, record the volume of tissue per specimen and the exact location of each vial. All
vials, boxes, rack slots, racks, and freezers are barcoded and exist as hierarchical containers in Arctos.
We also examined existing curatorial practices related to data management and handling of tissue
specimens for loans and curatorial workflow. The conversion was warranted in terms of cost/benefits,
collection preservation, and growth. Such a conversion could be beneficial for many collections but
requires dedicated resources and oversight. Challenges that arose during the conversion will also be
discussed.



Travers, Scott (Villanova University); Bauer, Aaron; Jackman, Todd (Villanova University, Villanova, PA,
United States)

Diversification of an African dwarf: Molecular phylogenetics, species limits, and historical
biogeography of southern African dwarf geckos (Gekkonidae: Lygodactylus)

Dwarf geckos of the genus Lygodactylus are a species-rich group of small, diurnal lizards. Currently, 64
species are recognized. Most are distributed in sub-Saharan Africa and Madagascar, but two species are
endemic to South America. Although these diminutive geckos are morphologically conservative, they
have diversified considerably in an ecological context, occupying most of the major African biomes. Some
species or species complexes are widespread across large parts of sub-Saharan Africa, whereas others
are restricted to single mountaintops. Given their ubiquity in much of sub-Saharan Africa, their high
species richness, and their range of spatial patterns of diversity, dwarf geckos provide an excellent model
to test a variety of hypotheses regarding the evolution and biogeography of continental African
organisms. We here provide the most comprehensive hypothesis of phylogenetic relationships among
African Lygodactylus to date, with a regional focus on southern African representatives. Phylogenetic
relationships were inferred from the analyses of mitochondrial (ND2) and nuclear (RAG1 and MXRA5)
genes of 38 Lygodactylus species (> 200 individuals), including all 15 nominal species and subspecies
from southern Africa. We used this hypothesis to: (1) test the monophyly of the previously proposed
mainland African species-groups of Lygodactylus, and evaluate the validity of the currently recognized
species and subspecies within southern Africa; (2) investigate species limits in members of the
widespread capensis-group; and (3) reconstruct the historical biogeography of southern African
Lygodactylus. Our results indicate extensive paraphyly in the species-groups and non-monophyly of the
polytypic southern African species. There are also high levels of cryptic diversity in the widespread



                                                                                                       728
capensis-group. Lastly, southern African Lygodactylus appear to have undergone two independent
radiations, one in the savanna and the other in the Afromontane biome, which account for most of the
diversity found in the region today. The results of this study have taxonomic and conservation
implications, and add to the growing body of knowledge on the origin and evolution of African biodiversity.



Treglia, Michael (Texas A&M University); Fisher, Robert (U.S. Geological Survey, Western Ecological
Research Center, Canada)

A Species Distribution Model for the Endangered Arroyo Toad, Anaxyrus californicus, in
Southwestern California

The arroyo toad, Anaxyrucalifornicus , is a U.S. endangered species, endemic to southern California,
U.S.A. and northern Baja California, M.X. The species is generally associated with streams in large,
sandy floodplains throughout the region. A number of factorshave caused the species to become
endangered including altered flow regimes,invasive predators, and invasive vegetation that alters habitat
structure. To better understand large-scale factors that influence the distribution of A. californicus , we
developed species distribution models for a portion of its range, in Orange, Riverside, and SanDiego
Counties of southwestern California. We incorporated landscape variables such as topography, soil type,
and land cover, as well as vegetation and climatic data. The distributional data that we used to develop
our models were derived from multiple sources including locality information associated with voucher
specimens in museum collections, data provided by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and distribution
surveys conducted by the U.S. Geological Survey, Western Ecological Research Center. We used
maximum entropy methodology for data that were considered as ―presence-only‖ (i.e., no survey data are
available to confirm absence of the species from sites), and regression-based approaches for data that
could be considered as ―presence/absence‖ (i.e., specific distribution surveys that could confirm presence
as well as absence). These species distribution models can be used to identify potential habitat where A.
californicus may exist but has not been surveyed. Additionally, our approaches can be used to help
predict changes in the species‘ distribution under various future scenarios including climate change and
regional alterations to land cover. We will continue to develop these models to incorporate the recent
history of regional land cover change, and to analyze changes in the distribution of A. californicus . By
analyzing influences of regional land cover on the presence of habitat for this endangered species, we
hope to develop a more thorough understanding of the steps necessary for its conservation.



Tricas, Timothy C. (Department of Zoology, University of Hawai'i / Hawai'i Institute of Marine Biology);
Boyle, Kelly S. (University of Hawai'i at Manoa, Canada)

Acoustic behavior and sound distinction of Hawaiian coral reef fish

Previous studies on sound production by marine fishes have identified the characteristics of sounds made
by single species in the lab or field, with much work concentrated on those that produce distinct, long or
repeated sounds. Less complete field work exists on small species that produce relative low intensity
sounds, are members of species-dense coral reef communities or are of non-commercial value. More
than 600 fish species inhabit the inshore and reef areas of Hawai'i but sound production is characterized
for only a few.    We used closed circuit rebreather diving, which produces almost no acoustic noise and
allows close approach to wild fish, to record synchronized video and sonic behaviors of fish on west
Hawai'i reefs. From the videos we have identified 45 sonic species in 12 families that produced a total of
82 sound types associated with intra and interspecific aggression, feeding, courtship and spawning.



                                                                                                       729
Cross correlation analyses of sound waveforms and spectra from identified species show broad overlap
within and among some species, and also some unique sounds that represent narrow acoustic clades.
These acoustic waveforms and features show promise as templates to determine species identification
from long-term passive acoustic recordings in the field. This technique may be of future use to coral reef
resource managers to remotely characterize seasonal and annual periods of fish population activity.



Triska, Maggie (The University of Western Australia); Hobbs, Richard; Craig, Mike (The University of
Western Australia, Crawley, Australia); Stokes, Vicki (Alcoa World Aluminum Australia, Dwellingup,
Australia); Pech, Roger (Landcare Research, Lincoln, New Zealand)

Reptile occupancy across unmined and restored forest in southwestern Australia

The jarrah (Eucalyptus marginata) forest in southwestern Australia lies within one of the world‘s 25
biodiversity hotspots. Due to this diversity there is limited knowledge about the habitat requirements of
much of its native fauna. Additionally, the jarrah forest has been drastically changed by habit clearance.
For example, Alcoa World Alumina Australia mines and restores forest patches totaling 600 ha annually
creating a mosaic of seral and mature forest. The restoration techniques used are intended to return the
forest to a fully-functioning ecosystem and many native fauna species have been documented in restored
forest, but if these areas do not meet habitat requirements, species may traverse, but not permanently
occupy, restored forests. We determined detection attributes for 6 native reptile species through
occupancy modelling using 5 years of detection histories from 35 trapping grids in unmined forest around
Alcoa‘s Huntly mine. We used this information, along with data collected on restored forest vegetation
structure to predict species occupancy and the potential success of restoration over time. Occupancy
models indicated that reptile species‘ detection probabilities were often influenced by weather covariates
such as temperature, solar radiation, or survey month. These results imply that survey times greatly
impact species detection and provide a guide of when, and under what conditions, to survey for specific
species. However, the best models of species‘ occupancy often included null models and only 2 reptile
species‘ occupancies were influenced by covariates (Hemiergis initialis; bare ground and Menetia greyii;
0-1 meter cover). Our recent surveys (2011/2012) were similar to older surveys in regards to species
present and covariates influencing detection probability and they provide additional data for assessing
occupancy. Currently, restored sites are missing slow-forming features (tree hollows, fallen trees) that
develop over time, however the development of these features along with present structure, (e.g., bare
ground, canopy cover, etc.) may be critical and can be directly influenced by modifying restoration
processes. Determining which species are present in the restoration as it matures is essential because
mining companies aim to return restored forest back to its original state. Our study supports the idea that
restoration practices may need to be modified to accelerate fauna species return and increase restoration
success.



Trudeau, Vance L. (University of Ottaewa); Schueler, Frederick W. (Bishops Mills Natural History Centre,
Bishops Mills, ON, Canada); Somoza, Gustavo M. (Instituto de Investigaciones Biotecnológicas-Instituto
Tecnológico de Chascomús, Chascomús, Argentina); Natale, Guillermo S.; Salgado Costa, Carolina
(CIMA, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, La Plata, Argentina); Thoney, Dennis (Animal Operations,
Vancouver, BC, Canada); McGinnity, Dale (Nashville Zoo, Nashville, TN, United States)

Hormonal control of spawning in amphibians

Improved understanding of the neuroendocrine control of spawning is critical for species conservation. In
fish and frogs it is the surge release of luteinizing hormone (LH) that causes coordinated egg release in



                                                                                                       730
females and sperm release in males, leading to fertilization. Many neurohormones are involved in
controlling pituitary LH release in fish and mammals, but only a few have been studied in amphibians.
The decapeptide Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) is critical. Various synthetic GnRH agonists
stimulate LH release, and sometimes spawning in frogs. The catecholamine dopamine (DA) is a potent
inhibitor of LH release in many teleosts and several mammals, yet little is known about its role in LH
release in frogs. Increasing evidence indicates that combined GnRH agonist/DA antagonist treatments
effectively stimulate spawning. We have named this the AMPHIPLEX method. It is simple and effective
because both sexes are injected at the same time. There is no need to sacrifice males to obtain viable
sperm because amplexus is induced. We have successfully induced spawning on a large scale in
Lithobates pipiens both in the breeding season and outside of the breeding season after a short
‗hibernation/brumation period‘. This method has been applied to both abundant and endangered species
where there is very little information on their physiology. In L. clamitans, L. pretiosa, Ceratophrys ornata,
C. cranwelli, C. aurita, and Odontophrynus americanus we obtained successful spawning and high fertility
with subsequent tadpole development and metamorphosis.                   In the case of the hellbender,
Cryptobranchus alleganiensis, one female produced hundreds of eggs and milt was easily stripped from
the 3 males approximately one week after AMPHIPLEX. Sperm collected from the males was
successfully cryopreserved and had similar morphology, concentration and motility to milt cryopreserved
from both healthy and declining populations of wild hellbenders in Tennessee. Some eggs were artificially
fertilized, started to develop but did not reach metamorphosis. Post-spawning examination indicated an
initial poor egg quality (white yolk sac) in this single female, providing an explanation for failed egg
development in hellbender. Our current efforts are focused on a new and easy-to-use formulation and
improved induction of spawning outside normal breeding seasons in captive animals. Funded by
Environment Canada and the University of Ottawa Research Chair program.



Trumbo, Daryl (Washington State University); Spear, Stephen (University of Idaho, Moscow, ID, United
States); Baumsteiger, Jason (University of California, Merced, Merced, CA, United States); Storfer,
Andrew (Washington State University, Pullman, WA, United States)

Rangewide landscape genetics of an endemic Pacific Northwestern salamander

Individuals of a species often vary in their responses to ecological and landscape processes in different
portions of their geographic range, yet landscape genetics studies are rarely replicated spatially.   The
Cope‘s giant salamander (Dicamptodon copei ) is a neotenic, dispersal-limited amphibian with a restricted
geographic distribution in the Pacific Northwestern USA. We investigate which landscape factors affect
D. copei gene flow in three regions spanning its geographic range that vary in climate, land cover, and
degree of anthropogenic disturbance.       Least cost paths and circuit current analyses reveal that gene
flow patterns vary across the range, in addition to unique combinations of landscape variables affecting
gene flow among regions. Populations in the northern core areas of the range have relatively high gene
flow rates and are dependent on streams for dispersal. Near the southeastern edge of the range gene
flow is more restricted, with increased effects of fragmented forest cover andtemperature and
precipitation gradients. Overall, our results suggest that landscape genetic models and conservation
measures should not beextrapolated from one portion of a species‘ range to another.




                                                                                                         731
Tuberville, Tracey (University of Georgia / Savannah River Ecology Lab); Buhlmann, Kurt (University of
Georgia, SREL, Aiken, United States)

Lessons learned from gopher tortoise translocations in South Carolina: a synthesis

Gopher tortoises (Gopherus polyphemus) are large terrestrial turtles associated with xeric habitats of the
southeastern Coastal Plain. However, due to habitat loss and degradation, tortoise numbers are declining
and populations have become fragmented and isolated. Continued loss of upland habitat, coupled with an
increased focus on rigorous translocation research and post-translocation monitoring, points to
translocation as an increasingly important management tool for this species. In Fall 2001, we translocated
105 gopher tortoises from an industrial development site to the Savannah River Site (SRS), South
Carolina – an area within the historic range but from which tortoises were previously extirpated. The goals
of the project were to re-establish a protected viable population, test efficacy of existing relocation
methods, and develop a model for relocation of other tortoise species. Experimental releases and two
years of subsequent monitoring via radiotelemetry were conducted to test the relative effectiveness of no
penning, 9-month and 12-month penning treatments. Penning significantly increased site fidelity both in
terms of reducing activity areas and limiting the proportion of animals dispersing. Longer-term monitoring
efforts also included survival of translocated juveniles and head-started hatchlings, winter dormancy
behavior and survival, body condition, and social interactions. We will summarize the results of the SRS
translocation and, based on our subsequent experiences with translocation at other sites and data
reported in the literature, provide recommendations for future translocations of gopher tortoises with
application to other species of turtles.



Tuberville, Tracey D. (UGA Savannah River Ecology Lab); Andrews, Kimberly M. (UGA Savannah River
Ecology Lab, Aiken, SC, United States)

Evaluating climate change vulnerability of reptiles and amphibians in the Sandhills ecoregion,
USA

Due to their sensitivity to slight changes in their environments, ectotherms (particularly reptiles and
amphibians) serve as ideal taxa for which to develop and perform climate change vulnerability
assessments. In addition, reptiles and amphibians collectively possess a wide range of life history,
physiological and behavioral traits that presumably translate into variability among species in their ability
to acclimate and/or adapt to changing conditions. The Sandhills Ecoregion has among the highest
diversity of reptile and amphibians, including species that are endemic or otherwise have restricted
distributions. Ranking species based on these biological traits will aid in assessing vulnerability of extant
species to climate changes predicted to occur in the region over the next 50 years. We used
NatureServe‘s Climate Change Vulnerability Index (CCVI) to predict the relative vulnerability of Sandhills
herpetofauna, identify potential species at risk, and evaluate common factors contributing to their
vulnerability. However, we found that the CCVI did not capture all of the life history traits and natural
history characteristics that might contribute to their vulnerability. We will present the quantitative results of
the CCVI analysis, provide recommendations for additional factors to consider, and propose additional
potentially vulnerable species based on those factors.




                                                                                                             732
Tucker, Derek (Brigham Young University); McBrayer, Lance (Georgia Southern University, Canada)

Overcoming obstacles: the effect of obstacles on locomotor performance and behavior

Sprinting and jumping ability are key performance measures that have been widely studied in vertebrates.
The vast majority of these studies, however, use methodologies that lack ecological context by failing to
consider the complex habitats of many animals. Because successfully navigating obstacles within the
habitat is critical for predator escape, running, climbing, and/or jumping performance are each likely to
directly affect fitness. Here, we quantify how behavioral strategies and performance change as lizards
approach obstacles of varying height. Obstacle size had a significant influence on behavior (e.g. obstacle
crossing strategy, intermittent locomotion) and performance (e.g. sprint speed, jump distance). Jump
frequency and distance increased with obstacle size, suggesting that it likely evolved because it is more
efficient (i.e. it reduces time and distance to reach a target position). Jump angle, jump velocity, and
approach velocity accounted for 58% of the variation in jump distance on the large obstacle, and 33% on
the small obstacle. Although these variables have been shown to significantly influence jump distance in
static jumps, they do not seem to be influential in running (dynamic) jumps onto a small obstacle.
Because selection operates in simple and complex habitats, researchers should consider quantifying
additional measures such as jumping or climbing in future studies of the evolution of locomotion
performance.



Tucker, Mitch (University of Missouri);

Parallel changes in mate-attracting calls and female preferences in autotriploid treefrogs

 For polyploid species to persist, they must be reproductively isolated from their diploid parental species,
which coexist at the same time and place at least initially. In a complex of biparentally reproducing
tetraploid and diploid tree frogs in North America, selective phonotaxis—mediated by differences in the
pulse- repetition (pulse rate) of their mate-attracting vocalizations—ensures assortative mating. We show
that artificially produced autotriploid females of the diploid species ( Hyla chrysoscelis ) show a shift in
pulse- rate preference in the direction of the pulse rate produced by males of the tetraploid species (
Hyla versicolor ). The estimated preference function is centred near the mean pulse rate of the calls of
artificially produced male autotriploids. Such a parallel shift, which is caused by polyploidy per se and
whose magnitude is expected to be greater in autotetraploids, may have facilitated sympatric speciation
by promoting reproduc- tive isolation of the initially formed polyploids from their diploid parental forms.
This process also helps to explain why tetraploid lineages with different origins have similar
advertisement calls and freely interbreed.



Tuma, Michael (SWCA Environmental Consultants);

Individual-based, spatially explicit modeling of desert tortoise population response to
anthropogenic threats

The decline in desert tortoise population densities and abundances since the 1970s has been attributed
to numerous threats, leading scientists, land managers, and conservationists to describe the plight of the
species as a ―death by a thousand cuts.‖ Because the desert tortoise is threatened by so many
anthropogenic stressors, and because the distributions and severity of these threats vary in time and
space, the challenge of determining management priorities for the species is daunting. Further, because




                                                                                                        733
the desert tortoise is long-lived, has delayed sexual reproduction, and has long generation times, it is
difficult for field-based studies to mechanistically link population response to the presence or absence of
specific threats. We have attempted to overcome these difficulties through use of the HexSim population
modeling software. HexSim makes it possible to examine single threats in isolation, and multiple threats
in concert, to determine their individual and combined effects on populations. We developed a predictive
habitat model that describes the potential for occurrence of desert tortoises based on the occurrence of
importance habitat elements within the Gold Butte-Pakoon tortoise conservation area, located in southern
Nevada and northwestern Arizona. We used this habitat model in HexSim, where we linked it to rules
governing tortoise movement and population density. We obtained information on vital rates and
movement behaviors from field studies and existing literature on the species. After developing a baseline
tortoise model, we added threats (human presence, subsidized predators, grazing livestock, and wildfire)
to evaluate population responses, and to prioritize the importance of each threat in limiting tortoise
population growth. Previous population models developed for turtle and tortoise species have determined
that increased adult mortality, particularly of females, was the most influential factor limiting population
growth. However, these models could not account for spatial variance in threat number or intensity. Our
spatially-explicit model determined that threats with a widespread distribution were much more important
in limiting population growth than those that were patchily-distributed over a limited area. Moreover, our
results suggest that threats that cause habitat degradation over a broad area, such as livestock grazing
and illegal off-road vehicle use, could be more important contributors to desert tortoise population decline
than patchily distributed threats that cause mortality alone, such as the presence of subsidized predator
populations or road mortality. These results challenge previous assumptions pertaining to desert tortoise
population management, and set the stage for a re-evaluation of management priorities.



Tupy, John (Western Carolina University); Sisson, Michael (North Carolina Wildlife Resources
Commission, Canada); Lee, Jim (The Nature Conservancy, Canada); Baxley, Danna (Kentucky
Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources, Canada); Murphy, Michael (The Nature Conservancy,
Canada); Pechmann, Joseph (Western Carolina University, Canada)

Translocation of the endnagered dusky gopher frog

The Mississippi or Dusky Gopher Frog, Rana sevosa, is considered by many as the most imperiled
amphibian in North America. Only one productive population remains, ―Glen‘s Pond‖ in Harrison County,
MS. In an effort to establish a separate, self-sustaining population, translocation of Glen‘s Pond offspring
began in 2004. The translocation site, ―TNC 1 Pond‖, is located 35 km southeast of Glen‘s Pond on a
property owned by The Nature Conservancy in Jackson County, MS. Prior to translocation efforts no
gopher frogs were known to occur at this site. The property was a slash pine (Pinus elliotti) plantation,
the pond basin was overcrowded with hardwood trees and shrubs. Management actions before and
during translocations have included tree thinning in the pond basin and surrounding uplands, frequent
intervals of prescribed fire in and around the pond and longleaf pine (Pinus palustris) replanting. Animals
released at TNC 1 were either tadpoles hatched in a laboratory, tadpoles head-started in 350 gallon tanks
or newly metamorphosed frogs (metamorphs) also raised in tanks. A total of 4,867 newly hatched
tadpoles, 3,587 head-started tadpoles and 245 metamorphs have been released at TNC 1 Pond to date.
Animals were translocated every year except 2006 and 2011, when no breeding took place at Glen‘s
Pond. One R. sevosa male was recorded calling at TNC 1 Pond in December 2007, subsequently one
egg mass was found.         Multiple (approx. 4- 10) R. sevosa were recorded calling Jan. - Apr. 2010, yet
only a single egg mass was found. This evidence of R. sevosa breeding can be considered initial
success of translocation efforts. Lack of multiple egg masses maybe a result of low survivorship or timing




                                                                                                        734
to female maturity ( ≥ 3 yrs). Additionally, many cohorts of tadpoles were lost to pond drying before
metamorphosis during these 5 years of translocation efforts



Turner, Andrew (CapeNature); de Villiers, Atherton (CapeNature, Stellenbosch, South Africa)

Impacts of fire on the fynbos frogs of South Africa

Data from CapeNature‘s Long Term Frog Monitoring Project at two monitoring sites over the last 8 years
show that fire can have dramatic effects on certain species of frogs in the fynbos biome of South Africa.
Although these frogs evolved in a fire-driven environment over the last 5-3 million years, changes in land-
use, fire frequency and the presence of invasive alien vegetation presents an unprecedented threat to
these species. Species affected are species in the genera Arthroleptella, Capensibufo, and Poyntonia
and Microbatrachella. Most of the species in these genera occur in small and very patchily distributed
habitat. This may be a result of the past effects of fires and a drying climate. These patchy distributions
and the generally small extent of suitable habitats exposes individual populations to an increased risk
from fires.

The impacts of fire include the direct reduction of population sizes, reduction in permanently available
surface moisture and increased invasion of fire-adapted alien plant species. The described threats may
result in the local extirpation of populations and eventually extinction of these range-restricted
amphibians. Recolonisation of breeding sites from nearby populations is slow relative to the average
inter-fire interval. This coincidence of factors has direct implications for: A) the threat assessment of these
species: individual populations need to counted and monitored; B) the mitigation of these threats through
management of alien invasive species: local removal of pine trees; and C) pro-active fire management:
creation and maintenance of tracer belts and rapid response to ecologically damaging wild fires to
maintain viable meta-populations.



Turner, Thomas (University of New Mexico); Osborne, Megan (University of New Mexico, Canada)

From pariah to panacea and back: genetic monitoring and recovery planning for the endangered
Rio Grande silvery minnow

Endangered species issues have intensified already contentious water disputes in New Mexico. For the
first time in the history of the basin, the ESA requires water allocation to benefit a biological entity – the
Rio Grande silvery minnow – through maintenance of instream flows during critical periods.            Species
recovery requires establishment of conditions that would permit a self-sustaining wild population, but over
allocation in drought years and a highly fragmented habitat are obstacles to recovery. For the last 14
years, we have annually monitored genetic diversity in Rio Grande silvery minnow. Compared to other
cyprinids, our data indicate that the species is genetically depauperate, and that downstream advection of
eggs and larvae past dams alters demography and reduces genetic diversity compared to expectations
based on census size.         Consequently, a large population is necessary to maintain genetic diversity.
Genetic data also suggest that augmentation from hatcheries is sustaining the species in the wild and that
a self-sustaining population has not been achieved. Our work has been criticized because it implies that
recovery must be implemented across the entire species‘ range rather than by small-scale habitat
restoration. Here, we review some potentials and pitfalls of genetic monitoring and implementation of
recovery goals based on such data.




                                                                                                           735
Tuttle, Krysia (LGL Limited);

Creating habitat for amphibians in hydroelectric reservoirs: a proof-of-concept constructed
wetland

Constructed wetlands are one example of habitat restoration that can be effectively used to mitigate for
the loss of aquatic habitat and to offset the impacts of human activities such as hydroelectric
development. In 2007, BC Hydro‘s Fish and Wildlife Compensation Program funded a conservation
project to create wildlife wetland habitat within the drawdown zone of Diversion Reservoir in the Jordon
River Watershed on Southern Vancouver Island. This wetland habitat restoration strategy was proposed
to compensate for the loss of wildlife (specifically amphibian) habitat during the impoundment of Jordan
River and as a proof-of-concept design to demonstrate the utility and effectiveness of constructed
wetlands adjacent to the drawdown zones of reservoirs. In 2009, LGL Limited designed and built a two-
tiered wetland on the edge of Diversion Reservoir consisting of a lower pond of 3,300 m 2 and an upper
pond of 4,050 m 2 . Two years of post-construction monitoring in 2010 and 2011 revealed that 1) the
wetlands were maintaining structure and holding water for two years post-construction, 2) the process of
plant succession was occurring naturally, mostly with aquatic and terrestrial plants native to the area, and
3) multiple wildlife species were using the newly constructed wetland habitat. Amphibian species were of
particular interest, in part because of the diversity of species that occur on Vancouver Island, but also due
to their world-wide decline in numbers. Four amphibian species were documented to successfully breed
(as evidenced by egg mass, tadpole and metamorph life stages present) within the constructed wetlands:
Red-legged Frog ( Rana aurora ); Northwestern Salamander ( Ambystoma gracile ); Pacific Chorus Frog (
Pseudacris regilla ); and Rough-skinned Newt ( Taricha granulosa ). Two species of garter snake were
also documented using the area and feeding on newly emerged metamorph amphibians. The success of
this constructed wetland provides a model that could be applied to other watersheds in BC affected by the
impoundment of rivers and creation of reservoirs. To further ensure success of this wetland over time, we
recommend additional monitoring surveys to targeting species at risk (e.g., Red-legged Frog, Western
Toad, rare plant surveys, and general monitoring of wetland physical characteristics including water
quality and berm integrity.



Twomey, Evan (East Carolina University); Summers, Kyle (East Carolina University, Canada)

Mimetic divergence and the evolution of reproductive isolation in the mimic poison frog
Ranitomeya imitator

Understanding mechanisms that promote population divergence has been a central topic in evolutionary
research and is key to our understanding of speciation and global biodiversity. In several examples of
Müllerian mimicry, where two or more toxic species resemble each other, a single species is known to
resemble more than one model species. This situation would seem to provide a good scenario for
speciation: as populations diverge to resemble different models, both pre-mating and post-mating
isolation could evolve. Ranitomeya imitator is a species of poison frog from central Peru which is involved
in Müllerian mimicry with 3 other species of poison frogs. There are four primary mimetic morphs of R.
imitator, each of which occurs in different geographical regions. We have identified three distinct transition
zones which occur where two morphs come into contact. Ongoing analyses of morphological variation
across contact zones (in both the model and mimic species) are providing insights as to the width of the
transition zones, which may provide some information as to the balance between migration and selection
across morph boundaries. We are also conducting mate choice experiments between the mimetic morphs
in order to infer levels of reproductive isolation that may have arisen through mimetic divergence. We



                                                                                                          736
approaching these mate choice experiments in such a way as to test for reproductive character
displacement, that is, whether strength of mate preference (if any) is increased near mimetic transition
zones. Although evidence to test for reproductive character displacement is currently incomplete, we
have evidence that least two of the four primary mimetic morphs prefer to court within their own morph. In
one of these cases, we have been able to conclude that mating preference is based on color pattern
(rather than acoustic cues). Thus, we have found an apparent example of an ecologically relevant trait
subject to divergent sexual selection.



Uetz, Peter (VCU); Sakhawalkar, Neha (VCU, Canada)

Reptile distributions, morphological characters, and species

Species are defined primarily by morphological characters and subspecies are usually geographically
defined populations within these species. We have analyzed the a few simple characters (such as size,
pattern, color) in North American snake species and relate them to their geographic distribution. The first
goal of this analysis was the creation of a simple identification tool that uses the locality and only a few
characters that are easy to recognize. The second goal was to correlate these characters with geographic
distribution and phylogeny. The long-term goal is to collect character information and develop an ontology
of morphological characters that can be used to describe and identify all species world-wide; in addition,
such character catalogs could be useful for all kinds of phylogenetic, macroecological, or taxonomic
analyses. The data will be available at the Reptile Database (http://www.reptile-database.org).



Uetz, Peter (VCU); Mohan, Agne (Virginia Commonwealth University, Canada); Hosek, Jiri (Reptarium,
Canada)

The Reptile Database and the Catalogue of Life

The Reptile Database (http://www.reptile-database.org) was founded in 1996 as EMBL Reptile Database
and has evolved into a major online resource for systematic herpetology. Currently (7 March 2012) it lists
9,574 species and 2,846 subspecies, although these numbers change almost daily. For instance, 136
new speices were described in 2010 and another 129 in 2011, i.e. one every 2-3 days. All species have
distribution information and their original citations, with a total of 29,485 literature records of which 10,187
were linked to web sites where they can be obtained (many at the Biodiversity Heritage Library and other
public sites). At the time of this writing, 1,904 species had diagnoses, 2,700 had etymologies, 8,207 had
type localities (many with coordinates that are mapped to Google maps online), and 6,704 had type
information (i.e. museum specimens). Currently the database receives ~ 45,000 visits and ~190,000 page
views a month. The database is a member of the Catalogue of Life consortium of ~100 global species
databases, which can be queried at http://www.catalogueoflife.org/, and which provides the taxonomy for
the Encyclopedia of Life (http://www.eol.org).




                                                                                                            737
Ukuwela, Kanishka (Univerisity of Adelaide); Lee, Michael (University of Adelaide, Canada); de Silva,
Anslem (Amphibian and Reptile Research Organization of Sri Lanka, Canada); Rasmussen, Arne
(University of Copenhagen, Canada); Mumpuni, Mumpuni (Museum of Zoology, Bogor, Indonesia,
Canada); Sanders, Kate (University of Adelaide, Canada); Fry, Bryan (University of Queensland,
Australia, Canada)

Evolution and faunal assembly of the viviparous sea snakes (Elapidae: Hydrophiinae) of the
Indian Ocean

One of the major goals in biogeography is to understand how biotas have been assembled in different
regions of the world. The origins of the viviparous sea snakes in the Indian Ocean pose a unique question
in this regard. Viviparous sea snakes evolved from the viviparous terrestrial elapids in the Australasian
region approximately 8 mya (million years ago). Ancestors of present day viviparous sea snakes initially
colonized the seas adjacent the northern Australian regions and then dispersed to the Indian and Pacific
Oceans. Thus, the Indian Ocean sea snake fauna is currently considered a recent derivative of the
Southeast Asian and Australian sea snake faunas. To test this hypothesis we assessed the phylogenetic
relationships of the Indian Ocean sea snakes to their counterparts in Southeast Asia and Australia and
estimated their divergence times. We used a six-locus molecular dataset and Bayesian inference to
assess the phylogenetic relationships and divergence times. Our results support the dispersal and
colonization hypothesis but indicate evidence for in-situ radiations and vicariant speciation in the Indian
Ocean sea snakes. In several species, our results revealed deep genetic divergence between the
populations in the Indian Ocean, Southeast Asia and Australia that is largely congruent with patterns
reported for marine fishes and invertebrates. Divergence dating suggested that most South Asian species
diverged from their Southeast Asian populations approximately 2.0-3.5 mya. These results indicate that
viviparous sea snakes have a relatively long and complex evolutionary history in the Indian Ocean region
and have a unique conservation value.



Uller, Tobias (University of Oxford);

Sexual selection and the evolutionary consequences of multiple introductions

Recent research suggests that multiple introductions of distinct lineages are common in invasive species.
Yet, its evolutionary implications are poorly understood. Human introductions of walllizards ( Podarcis
muralis ) into the UK have brought into contact several genetically and phenotypically distinct lineages.
Here I present new experimental data that show how sexual selection influences patterns of admixture
following multiple introductions, and its implications for colonization success and morphological evolution
in the non-native range.



Unger, Shem (Purdue University); Williams, Rod (Forestry & Natural Resources Purdue University, West
Lafayette, United States)

Population Genetics of the Eastern Hellbender (Cryptobanchus alleganiensis alleganiensis) at
multiple spatial scales

The eastern hellbender ( Cryptobranchus alleganiensis alleganiensis ) is a large paedomorphic
salamander experiencing population declines throughout its geographic range. The genetic ramifications
of these declines are currently unknown. To this end, we developed a suite of 12 hyper-variable genetic
microsatellite markers    to examine levels of genetic variation and genetic structure across multiple



                                                                                                       738
scales. We collected ~1,000 individuals from 50 rivers throughout 11 states from June 2008 to September
2010. Levels of genetic diversity were relatively high among all sampling locations. The number of alleles
per locus ranged from 4 to 32 (mean of 8.79), while observed and expected heterozygosity averaged
0.812 and 0.831, respectively. We detected significant genetic structure across sample locations (F st
values ranged from 0.001 - 0.218). We also detected significant genetic structuring at all hierarchal levels
within a watershed (AMOVA; among catchments p = 0.018, among steams, p &lt; 0.0001) with most
genetic variation occurring within individuals within streams (93%). We did not detect significant isolation
by distance either across the range (Mantel, r             = 0.146) or at the local scale ( r = 0.001).
Understanding range-wide levels of genetic variation and differentiation will enable natural resource
managers to make informed decisions and plan watershed specific conservation strategies for this
cryptic, protected species.



Upton, Katy (Durrell Institute of Conservation Ecology);

Amphibian diversity and temporary habitat use in Pacaya-Samiria Reserve, Peru

Peru has high levels of biodiversity, including nearly 500 species of amphibians. This diversity is due to
Peru‘s diverse range of habitats from arid deserts, high Andean plateaus to tropical rainforests This
research is being conducted as part of long-term biodiversity assessments in the Pacaya Samiria
National Reserve within the Loreto region of Peru in the north-east of the country. Pacaya Samiria
consists of low lying varzea forests which are seasonally inundated with floodwaters. This dynamic
environment creates a wide range of niches which supports many species. Over sixty species of
amphibians were recorded in just 100 surveys days (across 2009 – 2011). There are 62 frog species and
one salamander species which are representative of nine families. The microhabitat use of these species
changes with seasonal fluctuations. Floating meadows consist of herbaceous water plants that grow on
lakes and are washed downriver during heavy rain fall. Anurans utilise these temporary habitat potentially
for breeding and foraging, they also offer researchers an insight into the distribution of hylid species which
rarely venture down from the rainforest canopy. When these meadows are washed downriver sections
inevitably break away creating floating rafts which have the potential to transport amphibians‘
downstream potentially aiding dispersal. However, these meadows are easily affected by changes in
flooding patterns. 2009 saw the lowest flooding in Pacaya Samiria on record while 2010 saw the highest.
These extreme weather patterns are becoming more common in this area and may have significant
implications for the diversity and distribution of amphibian species found in this region.



Ursenbacher, Sylvain (Institut für Natur-, Landschafts- und Umweltschutz (NLU), Universität Basel);
Zwahlen, Valerie (Institut für Natur-, Landschafts- und Umweltschutz (NLU), Universität Basel, Basel,
Switzerland); Mebert, Konrad (-, Merenschwand, Switzerland); Golay, Philippe (Cultural Foundation
Elapsoïdea, Aire-Geneva, Switzerland); Monney, Jean-Claude (karch, Neuchâtel, Switzerland); Durand,
Thierry; Thiery, Gilles (-, -, France); Ott, Thomas (-, -, Switzerland)

Color polymorphism and population genetic in the asp viper: is local selection stronger than
gene-flow?

The asp viper (Vipera aspis) is a very polymorphic species, with ground color varying from light grey, dark
gray to reddish brown. The subspecies exhibit different dorsal patterns which could be rhomboid (in V. a.
hugyi), with thin to large dark blotches (in V. a. aspis and V. a. francisciredi) or with a zigzag band (in V.
a. zinnikeri) similar to the one displayed by the adder (Vipera berus). Melanistic individuals are frequently




                                                                                                          739
found in the Alps, representing locally more than 50% of the population. In addition, previous studies
demonstrated that the dorsal pattern is substantially affected by abiotic factors, such as temperature or
humidity (Golay, 2005).

We investigated a mountain massif in the French Alps containing up to 50% of concolor individuals (i.e.
showing no or greatly reduced dorsal pattern; see Mebert et al., 2011). This peculiar morph is restricted to
a small area and become rare of absent 5 km away from the source population. We consequently took
this opportunity to study the gene flow and the morphological differentiation at a small scale in order to
understand if local selection or limited gene flow could explain this particular dorsal pattern.

First results demonstrated that morphological differentiation is more marked that genetic structure
(QST>FST), suggesting a local selection over particular dorsal pattern. Further evaluations will be
conducted to understand the environmental parameters favoring this particular coloration.



Golay, P., 2005. Systématique du complexe Vipera aspis (Serpentes, Viperidae) en Suisse. Université de
Monptellier, Montpellier.

Mebert, K., Zwahlen, V., Golay, P., Durand, T., Ursenbacher, S., 2011, Ungewöhnlich hoher Farb-
Polymorphismus in alpinen Aspisvipern in Frankreich – Zufall oder natürliche Selektion? Elaphe 2011, 13-
19.



Valenzuela, Nicole (Iowa State University); Neuwald, Jennifer; Literman, Robert (Iowa State University,
Ames, IA, United States)

Wild Turtle Sex: Ecogenomics And The Risk Of Climate Change

Species whose sexual development depends on the environmental temperature during embryogenesis
(TSD), as in many reptiles, are particularly susceptible to climate change. Yet, the extent of the effects
that climate change will have on the persistence of TSD reptiles is incomplete as the molecular
underpinnings of TSD under thermal fluctuations remain obscure. Recent research in our lab shows that
increases in thermal variance predicted to occur within seasons can reverse sex ratios and exacerbate
the detrimental effect of raising mean temperatures. Here we show for the first time the effect that varying
fluctuating temperature regimes have on the expression of genes known to be important in gonadal
development, Wt1 , Sf1, Dax1, Sox9, and Aromatase in the painted turtle Chrysemys picta , and
compare our results to new data from constant temperature, and under natural nest profiles. Results from
constant temperature confirm the previously reported differential expression of Wt1 and Sf1 prior to the
onset of the thermosensitive period and their potential role as TSD master switch, reveal new surprising
differential patterns for Dax1, Sox9, and Aromatase at these early developmental stages, while
uncovering expression patterns in the gonad alone during the thermosensitive period that are concordant
to those reported for some other TSD turtles. We detected the first evidence of Dax1 involvement on
male development in any reptile. Fluctuating temperature caused remarkable changes in expression
patterns by treatment and overtime from those under constant temperature. The expression of some
genes clustered by mean temperature while that of the other genes clustered by the sex ratio that was
produced by each treatment. Expression patterns under replicated natural male- and female-producing
profiles recorded from natural nests helped elucidate the ecological relevance of the observations from
the laboratory experiments and to disentangle the likely slaves in the developmental cascade from the
likely masters for thermal sensitivity. Our findings indicate that rising mean and variance scenarios pose a



                                                                                                        740
real challenge for TSD taxa as they profoundly disrupt the gene regulatory network underlying sexual
development, and underscore the urgency to decipher the regulation of global transcriptomic responses if
we are to fully understand the perils faced by TSD systems and their evolutionary potential as climate
changes.



Valenzuela-Quiñonez, F (CIBNOR); Garza, JC (NOAAA SWFSC, Santa Cruz, CA, United States); de-
Anda-Montañez, JA; García-de-León, FJ (CIBNOR, La Paz, B.C.S., Mexico)

Infering Past Demographic Changes In Collapsed And Crytically Endangered Fish

Most of worldwide fishery stocks are overexploited or collapsed, fishery induced changes at several levels
into population: biomass reduction, phenotypic and evolutionary changes. However, the dynamic of
fishery collapse at genetic level is still unknown, how the magnitude that fishery can reduce genetic
variability and then drive species to extinction. Here we present as a model of study the case of totoaba a
long lived fish and first worldwide marine fish considered as critically endangered that suffered not only a
fishery collapse also has faced habitat degradation, poaching and baycatch. Thus, we test the hypothesis
of genetic diversity loss. Data indicate that genetic diversity of totoaba is in the range expected for fish
with similar biological treats and no treated. The historical demographic analysis showed no
contemporary genetic diversity loss but a strong long term population reduction was detected 9550 years
ago which could be linked to climatic events on Holocene. Furthermore, effective size is large enough to
ensure long term genetic diversity conservation (>1000). We conclude that past population collapse had
not consequences at genetic level and that totoaba still conserve its evolutionary potential to face
environmental adversities. Finally, more studies are needed to understand the impacts of fishery collapse
on Ne and therefore in genetic diversity at neutral markers.



Vamberger, Melita (Senckenberg Natural History Collections Dresden); Stuckas, Heiko; Fritz, Uwe
(Senckenberg Natural History Collections Dresden, Dresden, Germany)

Speciation Under Gene Flow? The Case Of Mauremys Caspica And M. Rivulata

The stripe-necked terrapins Mauremys caspica and M. rivulata are a sister species occupying a similar
ecological niches and occurring in more or less mutually exclusive parapatric distribution ranges. The
ranges of the two species are forming a narrow contact zone over hundreds of kilometres. We used 13
quickly evolving microsatellite loci and five nuclear genes for gaining insights in gene flow and
hybridization of 13 populations of M. caspica and 18 populations of M. rivulata from the contact zone and
compared these to randomly chosen individuals from the whole distribution range of each species.



Van Dyke, James (Virginia Tech); Hopkins, William (Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, United States);
Jackson, Brian (Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, United States)

Influence Of Trophic Ecology On Selenium Exposure In Turtles From A River System Impacted By
A Coal Fly-Ash Spill

Selenium (Se) is a major componentof coal fly ash that can disrupt reproduction of oviparous wildlife. The
2008 coal ash spill in Kingston, TN introduced 5.4 million cubic yards of fly ash into the Emory and Clinch
River systems. While the majority of ash was removed, the potential for Se to enter local food webs and




                                                                                                        741
affect biota is still being addressed. Turtles are excellent model organisms for assessing the effects of Se
exposure in vertebrates because they are long-lived, have small home ranges, and feed at a variety of
trophic levels. Because Se does not biomagnify in food webs as strongly as many other bioaccumulative
contaminants, we hypothesized that the highest trophic enrichment of Se would occur in turtle species
feeding at lower relative trophic levels. We used stable isotopes ( δ 13 C and δ 15 N ) to infer relative
trophic positions of several turtle species at the Kingston, TN site, and then examined the effects of
feeding ecology on Se exposure. Delta- 13 C and δ 15 N were quantified in claws, and Se
concentrations were quantified in blood, sampled from turtles captured 0-5 miles downstream from the
spill. We compared δ 13 C and δ 15 N among species using MANCOVA, with carapace length as a
covariate. We also regressed Se concentrations against both δ 13 C and δ 15 N, across and within
turtle species. Claw δ 13 C and δ 15 N varied significantly among species, and with carapace length.
Stable isotope results suggested relative trophic positions of turtles as: Chelydra serpentina           &gt;
Graptemys sp. &gt; Apalone spinifera = Sternotherus odoratus = Trachemys scripta &gt;
Pseudemys concinna . As predicted, Se concentration decreased with increasing δ 15 N across species,
and within A. spinifera , but also decreased with increasing δ 13 C across species, and within A.
spinifera , and S. odoratus . Because δ 15 N is thought to increase with trophic position, our results
are consistent with the hypothesis that Se accumulation is greater in turtles feeding at lower trophic levels
than in those feeding at higher trophic levels. In addition, the decreasing relationships between Se
concentration and δ 13 C



Vance, Carrie (Mississippi State University); Martin, Michelle (University of Memphis, Memphis TN,
United States); McDonough, Caitlin (Beloit College, Beloit WI, United States); Cole, Judith (University of
Memphis, Memphis TN, United States); Willard, Scott (Mississippi State University, Mississippi State MS,
United States); Kouba, Andrew (Memphis Zoo, Memphis TN, United States)

Frequency of hormone induced gamete production in the Fowler’s Toad (Bufo fowleri)

Hormone induced gamete production in amphibians has been gaining ground over the past decade as
increasingly more species have been subjected to artificial reproductive technologies(ART). Two
prominent questions still remaining are: 1) how frequently can animals be treated with hormones and still
produce viable gametes; and, 2) does hormone therapy work for gamete production outside the breeding
season. We examined these questions in Fowler‘s toads (Anaxyrus fowleri) which had been held in non-
seasonally adjusted captive environments for at least 14 months, and assessed gamete quantity(egg
counts or sperm concentration) and quality (fertilization and embryo development rates and sperm motility
parameters). Female toads (n=7/treatment) were hormonally induced to produce eggs at an interval of 4,
8 or 12 months after initial treatment in August 2010, when 20/21 animals spawned eggs. Females were
treated at each interval with two priming doses of 100 IU hCG(human chorionic gonadotropin), followed

fertilized with fresh sperm collected from multiple males that were hormonally induced with 300 IU hCG.
The percent of females producing eggs again after 4, 8 or 12 months was 57%, 86% or 100%,
respectively. The mean number of eggs per female was similar (P>0.05) across treatments, as were
fertility and embryo development rates. Male toads (n=5-6/treatment) were hormonally induced with 300
IU hCG at a frequency of every 0.5, 1.0, 2.0 or 3.0 weeks. Sperm concentration and percent motility of
the biweekly treatment group was significantly lower (P<0.01) than at other treatment frequencies.
Moreover, these effects were reached at a much faster rate (P<0.01) in this group, and although the
motility did recover over time, sperm concentration remained depressed. No differences were seen in
sperm forward progression for any treatment or time effect. We have shown that too frequent hormone
treatments for either gender can have a negative effect on gamete production. However, we have also



                                                                                                         742
shown that gametes can be generated repeatedly from an individual throughout the year in females, after
a 4 month resting period, and in males sperm could be collected every two weeks with no significant
difference in quantity or quality. These results are valuable for designing repeated breedings of critically
endangered species where a captive assurance colony is needed to prevent extinction.



Vangewege, Michael (Texas State University); Crump, Paul (Houston Zoo, Houston, TX, United States);
McHenry, Diana; Dittmar, Hahn; Jones, Melissa; Forstner, Michael (Texas State University, San Marcos,
TX, United States)

The use of genetic markers to trace the fate of released Houston toads among a reinforced wild
population

Post-release monitoring of individuals during a population supplementation, translocation, or
reintroduction is an essential component of the program. Amphibians present unique challenges because
of their biphasic life history, small body size, and cryptic behavior. At best, traditional field marking
methods have inherent failure rates that confound the detectability of low frequency recaptures of
released individuals; at worst, they are incompatible for use on certain life stages. Too often,
reintroductions are initiated with poor to no pre-release survey effort, and reports of reintroduction
success are correlated with increased activity at the release site rather than empirically shown to be the
result of the reintroduction. In an attempt to overcome the difficulties associated with re-identification of
late stage larvae or recently metamorphosed individuals of the endangered Houston toad (Anaxyrus
[Bufo] houstonensis) released during a population supplementation program, we used molecular
techniques to develop a genetic profile of the sibling group. The utility of these techniques was
demonstrated in populations of Houston toads having sufficient genotypic diversity to differentiate among
sibling groups, with results from historical reintroduction efforts assessed with surprisingly positive results.
The applicability of the method remains problematic for low diversity populations, but overall underscores
the need for as much genetic information as pragmatic to assist with guiding conservation efforts.



Varella, Henrique (Museu de Zoologia da USP);

Taxonomic revision of the species of Crenicichla Heckel, 1840 from the Paraná and Paraguay river
basins (Teleostei: Cichlidae)

Crenicichla Heckel, 1840 is currently recognized as the most species rich cichlid genus in South America,
including 85 valid species distributed in most rivers of cis-Andean South America. Of the eighteen
nominal species recorded from the Paraná and Paraguay river basins, fourteen were considered as valid
previous to the present study. In this contribution, a comprehensive taxonomic revision of all species of
Crenicichla from those basins is undertaken. Seventeen species are considered valid, four of them
undescribed. Crenicichla edithae is recognized as a junior synonym of C. lepidota , a widespread
species from rio Guaporé, rio Paraná below the Itaipu dam, rio Paraguay, rio Uruguay and Lagoa dos
Patos and Lagoa Mirim system. As earlier suggested by some authors, Acharnes chacoensis, Boggiana
ocellata and Crenicichla simoni are considered synonyms of Crenicichla semifasciata , which is
distributed in rio Paraguay, rio Paraná below Itaipu dam and rio Uruguay, coincident with the distribution
of C. vittata . Crenicichla britskii , C. haroldoi and C. jaguarensis are apparently restricted to the upper
rio Paraná basin. Crenicichla jupiaensis occurs in tributaries of the rio Paraná basin, from the rio
Paranaíba to the rio Paraná in Yaciretá, Corrientes, Argentina. Crenicichla iguassuensis, C. tesay and
C. yaha are distributed in the rio Iguaçu, the type-locality of C. yaha being the arroyo Urugua-í, a



                                                                                                            743
tributary of the left margin of the rio Paraná. Crenicichla hu , C. mandelburgueri and C. ypo are
distributed in tributaries of the rio Paraná from below Itaipu dam to the Yaciretá lake. Crenicichla sp.
"Paraná" and Crenicichla sp. "Paranaíba" are undescribed species from the upper rio Paraná basin,
Crenicichla sp. "Alto Paraguai/Juruena" is found in tributaries of the upper rio Paraguay basin and rio
Juruena, and Crenicichla sp. "Iguaçu" is from the rio Iguaçu above the waterfalls. Acharnes niederleinii
from the rio Uruguay basin is considered a nomen dubium and the species is not distributed in the rio
Paraná as currently assumed. Intraespecific variation related to hipertrophied lips was found in three
species from the rio Iguaçu: Crenicicha iguassuensis , C. tesay and Crenicichla sp. "Iguaçu". In
addition, a key to species identification is provided.



Vargas Salinas, Fernando (Universidad de los Andes); Amezquita, Adolfo (Universidad de Los Andes,
Canada)

Stream Noise, Hybridization, And The Evolution Of Call Traits In Two Species Of Poison Frogs

Factors promoting geographic variation in communication signals can promote phenotypic divergence
between populations and eventually reproductive isolation. According to the acoustic adaptation
hypothesis, communication signals are evolutionary shaped in a way that minimizes its degradation and
maximizes its contrast against the background noise. To test the importance of acoustic adaptation and
hybridization, an evolutionary force allegedly promoting phenotypic variation, on call divergence we
compared the mate recognition signal of two species of poison frogs ( Oophaga histrionica and O.
lehmanni ) at five localities: two (one per species) live and call alongside noisy streams, two away from
streams, and one interspecific hybrid. We recorded the call of 42 males and characterized the
microgeographic variation in its spectral and temporal features, measuring ambient noise level, body size,
and body temperature as covariates. As predicted, frogs living in noisy habitats alongside streams uttered
higher frequency calls and, in one species, were much smaller in size. These results support a previously
unconsidered role of noise on streams as a selective force promoting an increase in call frequency and
pleiotropic effects in body size. Regarding hybrid frogs, their calls overlapped in the signal space with the
calls of one of the parental lineages. Our data support acoustic adaptation following two evolutionary
routes but do not support the presumed role of hybridization in promoting phenotypic diversity. Whether
geographic divergence in advertisement call does promote reproductive isolation in poison frogs deserves
further study.



Vassilieva, Anna (Joint Russian-Vietnamese Tropical Research and Technological Center of the A.N.
Severtsov Institute of Ecology and Evolution); Galoyan, Eduard (Moscow State University, Moscow,
Russian Federation); Poyarkov, Nikolay (Joint Russian-Vietnamese Tropical Research and Technological
Center of the A.N. Severtsov Institute of Ecology and Evolution, Canada)

Rhacophorus vampyrus: a new case of obligatory oophagy in rhacophorid tadpoles

Tadpoles of recently described Treefrog Rhacophorus vampyrus from Dalat Plato, Southern Vietnam,
are known to live in tree hollows and to posses relatively long tail and specific mouthparts structure that
is unknown in another anuran larvae. We suggest that unique tadpoles morphology may be caused by
unusual larval feeding mode in this species. Our study of R. vampyrus reproductive biology revealed
that it reproduces in small water-filled tree hollows deposing clutches in foam nests above water level;
after hatching tadpoles fall in a small water bodies inside the hollows (capacity 25-300 ml) and develop
there until metamorphosis. Up to 45 tadpoles may be registered in the same small hollow. During




                                                                                                         744
development tadpoles are fed on unfertilized conspecific eggs (maternal care). Trophic eggs (more than
250 per clutch) are regularly laid in to the water and are enclosed within dense mucus. Most of analysed
larvae guts contained swallowed trophic eggs (up to 40). No other feeding objects common for tadpoles
feeding on plankton or detritus were included into their digestive tract content. Some features of R.
vampyrus tadpoles morphology indicate their specialization to oophagy, including presence of well-
defined extensible stomach and relatively small gut length (no more than 3.5 times body length) that
means exclusively macrofagous feeding mode. Highly specialized body morphology and oral disc
structure (devoided of papillae and armed by serrated horny arch on the upper jaw and two prominent
fang-like horny teeth on the lower jaw) apparently reflect the adaptation of R. vampyrus tadpoles to
mucus burrowing and egg extraction from the trophic clutches. Unusually small diameter of eggs also
seems to be an adaptation for convenient swallowing by larvae. Obligatory larval oophagy is
characteristic for quite a number of tropical anuran phytotelm-breeding species, especially among
dendrobatids and hylids. Untill now, the only one rhacophorid frog, Kurixalus eiffingeri , is known to feed
its tadpoles by trophic eggs. Our data reliably proof that R. vampyrus represent another Asian tree frog
species with highly specialized parental care and tadpole feeding modes.



Vaudo, Jeremy (Guy Harvey Research Institute; Florida International University); Wetherbee, Bradley
(Guy Harvey Research Institute; University of Rhode Island, Canada); Howey, Paul (Microwave
Telemetry, Inc., Columbia, MD, United States); Shivji, Mahmood (Guy Harvey Research Institute; Nova
Southeastern University, Canada)

Vertical movements of tiger sharks (Galeocerdo cuvier) tagged in the US Virgin Islands

Tiger sharks (Galeocerdo cuvier) are a wide ranging species that display a variety of horizontal movement
patterns, making use of coastal and pelagic waters. Far less, however, is known about their vertical
movements. To investigate the vertical movement behavior of tiger sharks around the US Virgin Islands,
seven individuals (4 males, 3 females) were tagged in 2008 with high rate, pop-up satellite archival tags
(HR X-Tag, Microwave Telemetry, sampling rate: every 3.5 to 4 min; 30-day programmed duration). Five
of the seven tags reported and uploaded 19 to 83% of archived data, providing fine-scale depth and
temperature data from a total of 105 days. Two sharks displayed post-release dive irregularities lasting
~2 days. Sharks spent the majority of their time making yo-yo dives (repeated oscillatory dives) within the
upper 50 m with 18 to 44% of their time spent within the upper 5 m. As a result, sharks typically occupied
a narrow temperature range (27 to 29°C for four sharks tagged in June and 25 to 27°C for one shark
tagged in March). Dives to greater than 200 m were common and all sharks made dives to at least 400
m, with one shark briefly exceeding 700 m and experiencing temperatures less than 9°C. Although diel
patterns were identified in four of the five sharks, whether deeper dives were made during the day or
night varied among individuals. Overall, tiger sharks in the vicinity of the US Virgin Islands displayed a
high degree of variability in their dive patterns, but typically could be found in the upper 50 m and making
regular dives to the deeper waters available to them.



Vega, Sondra (University of Puerto Rico); Puente, Alberto; Cuevas, Elvira (University of Puerto Rico,
Canada)

Omnivory in Puerto Rican Anolis lizards

The lizard‘s genus Anolis are considered as strictly insectivorous; however it is known that some species
can feed on fruits. In lizards, omnivory/frugivory is considered unusual and restricted to some species.




                                                                                                        745
The degree of omnivory within members of an ecosystem is an important aspect that can influence food
web dynamics, interspecific interactions, and trophic structure.     The natural history of Anolis lizards is
well studied; however information about their feeding habits and trophic ecology remains incomplete .
We preliminarily assessed omnivory among             Puerto Rican anole lizards using stable isotopes, a
technique that provides time-integrated information about feeding relationships. In general, herbivores
are expected to have lower δ 15 N values than carnivores, and omnivores should have δ 15 N values
intermediate between those of herbivores and carnivores.             Based in the preliminary results, the
evaluated species can be divided in two groups according with the isotopic signature of δ15N and δ13C.
The first group consist of species that exhibited levels intermediate of δ15N ranging around 6.3–6.9 ‰;
the other group exhibit a higher and broader signature for δ15N with values ranging around 7.9–9.4 ‰.
When the isotopic signature of δ15N and δ13C is compared w ithin the same species inhabiting different
habitat, the isotopic signature for both stable isotopes varied according with the habitat. Detailed studies
are being conducted to determine the level of omnivory/frugivores and trophic position of Anolis lizards.
The information gathered in those studies will allow determining the role of anoles lizards in food webs as
well as in the function and dynamics of insular tropical ecosystems.



Velez Zuazo, Ximena (University of Puerto Rico); Alfaro Shigueto, Joanna; Mangel, Jeffrey
(ProDelphinus, Canada); Papa, Riccardo; Agnarsson, Ingi (University of Puerto Rico, Canada)

What barcoding is revealing about the shark fishery in Peru

Many sharks and rays are globally threatened as a result of overfishing and bycatch. Currently, there is a
growing interest in sustainable conservation of sharks but important gaps in knowledge hinder decision-
making at the government level including a lack of basic knowledge of the diversity of species targeted as
well as incidentally captured by comercial fisheries. In Peru, in the southeast Pacific, the small-scale
fisheries comprise ca. 10,000 vessels and, for most elasmobranchs species, it goes largely unregulated
and unmonitored. Moreover, for the elasmobranchs fisheries, insufficient monitoring of landings coupled
with limited taxonomic identifications have resulted in a poor understanding of the diversity of species
caught in Peruvian waters. Molecular analyses, particularly the use of a genetic barcode approach, can
play an important role in improving our knowledge of the diversity of elasmobranchs species occupying
the marine habitats of Peru and captured by the small-scale fisheries. We analyzed samples collected
from six ports along the coast of Peru between 2004 and 2009. We successfully amplified 715bp of the
cytochrome oxidase I region of the mitochondrial DNA and identified 110 specimens at the species level.
Nine species of sharks were identified. In many cases landed specimens had been misidentified. In port,
the smooth hammerhead ( Sphyrna zygaena ) was identified correctly every time, the blue shark (
Prionace glauca ) was correctly identified 86% of the time and the shortfin mako ( Isurus oxyrinchus )
66% of the time. For other specimens with a non-informative common name (i.e. shark), molecular
identification clarified the species. Interestingly, all samples from thresher shark were identified as
pelagic thresher ( Alopias pelagicus ) although in Peru the common thresher ( A. vulpinus ) is the species
reported as more common and commercially important. We identified one specimen of the dusky shark (
Carcharhinus obscurus ) which represents a new species report for Peru. Of the nine sharks species
identified, five are considered a threatened by the IUCN Red List. This study represents the first large-
scale initiative to barcode Peruvian marine species and generated a molecular-based taxonomic list of
elasmobranches targeted by fisheries in Peru.




                                                                                                         746
Velez-Alavez, Marcela (Centro de Investigaciones Biologicas del Noroeste, S.C.); Zenteno-Savin, Tania;
De Anda-Montañez, Juan A. (Centro de Investigaciones Biologicas del Noroeste, S.C., La Paz, Baja
California Sur, Mexico); Galvan-Magaña, Felipe (Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, La Paz,
Baja California Sur, Mexico)

Vitamin C concentration in muscle of teleost and elasmobranch fishes

The fishes include a variety of species which differ phylogenetically, that inhabit different environments,
and have different capacities for vigorous excercise. Fishes, like all other aerobic organisms, are
susceptible to the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). ROS production in muscle increases
during physical activity due to the increased oxygen flow and metabolic rate associated to exercise.
Vitamin C acts as a metabolic antioxidant, protecting cell membranes and processes that are sensitive to
oxidation. The hypothesis of this study is that fish species that have the capacity for sustained vigorous
exercise have higher antioxidant defenses, both enzymatic and non-enzymatic, as compared to less
active fish species. The aim of this study was to determine the concentrations of the antioxidant vitamin C
in muscle of different species of teleosts and elasmobranchs that swim at different speeds. Vitamin C
content was analyzed by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) in muscle samples of three
teleosts (Tetrapturus audax, Coryphaena hippurus, Totoaba macdonaldi) and three elasmobranchs
(Isurus oxyrinchus, Prionace glauca, Mustelus henlei). Higher concentrations of vitamin C were found in
the most active fish, I. oxyrinchus (N = 20, average 0.395 mg 100 g-1 wet tissue), P. glauca (N = 29,
average 0.636 mg 100 g-1 wet tissue), and C. hippurus (N = 24, average 0.417 mg 100 g-1 wet tissue).
Vitamin C concentration in muscle samples from T. macdonaldi and M. henlei was below detection limit.
These results are in accordance to previous studies, in which, vitamin C concentrations were found to be
higher in cartilaginous compared to bony fishes, probably due to the evolutionary process of the
antioxidant defense strategies of each group. We found that more physically active species have higher
vitamin C concentrations, which probably contribute to balancing ROS production and avoidance of
oxidative damage during vigorous exercise. In conclusion, more active, mainly elasmobranch fishes, have
higher concentrations of the antioxidant vitamin C.



Vences, Miguel (Technical University of Braunschweig); Rodriguez, Ariel (Instituto de Ecologia y
Sistematica, Havana (Cuba), Germany)

Molecular phylogeny, skin alkaloids and aposematism in Cuban                      dwarf frogs of the
Eleutherodactylus limbatus group

Thioautotrophic endosymbionts in the Domain Bacteria mediate key sulfur transformations in marine
reducing environments.

Frank J. Stewart

The recent discovery of skin alkaloids in a clade of Cuban eleutherodactylid frogs comprising some of the
smallest frogs of the world added a fifth independent origin of lipophilic alkaloid sequestering to the
amphibian tree. The Eleutherodactylus limbatus group contains six species, four of which ( E. iberia , E.
jaumei , E. limbatus , E. orientalis ) have a highly contrasting coloration that can be interpreted as
aposematic. We provide evidence that all four of these species contain alkaloids in their skin. Molecular
phylogenetic analysis based on DNA sequence data placed dull-colored species ( E. etheridgei and E.
cubanus ) in a basal position with respect to the aposematic-colored species. Within the aposematic
clade various subclades of a similar degree of differentiation were detected, rendering paraphyletic the
formally described species and indicating the need for a taxonomic revision. The integrated phylogenetic,



                                                                                                       747
geographic distribution and coloration data suggest that the evolution of diverse variants of contrasting
coloration patterns in these miniaturized frogs has been characterized by extensive homoplasy and that
their center of genetic and species diversity is in the eastern mountains of Cuba.

Keywords: chemosynthesis, endosymbiosis, sulfide, thiosulfate, gene expression



Vences, Miguel (Technical University of Braunschweig);

Origins and biogeographic patterns of Madagascar's amphibians and reptiles

Thioautotrophic endosymbionts in the Domain Bacteria mediate key sulfur transformations in marine
reducing environments.

Frank J. Stewart

Elucidating the origin of Madagascar's biota by time-calibrated molecular phylogenies has been a major
success story. It has become obvious that a major proportion of Madagascar's vertebrates, including
amphibians and reptiles, originated on Madagascar by ancestors rafting over the ocean from Africa.
Several other groups such as microhylid and mantellid frogs probably dispersed shortly after the KT-
boundary from Asia. New analyses indicate that their diversification on Madagascar was then weakly
influenced by a time effect, early arriving lineages being today more species rich. However, the most
important influence on species richness of clades appears to be their ability to colonize rainforest – those
clades that could not adapt to this habitat and remained stuck in Madagascar's drier western regions are
remarkably species-poor. Spatial patterns of diversity within Madagascar are furthermore strongly
influenced by body size, and a remarkable degree of microendemism appears to characterize especially
miniaturized taxa such as Stumpffia frogs and Brookesia leaf chameleons. Phylogeographic case
studies as well as geographic metaanalyses suggest that a variety of mechanisms have been active in
the diversification of the Malagasy herpetofauna and highlights the southern and especially northern parts
of the islands as important centers of species richness and endemism, and possibly of centers of
adaptive speciation.

Keywords: chemosynthesis, endosymbiosis, sulfide, thiosulfate, gene expression



Venesky, Matthew (University of South Florida); Liu, Xuan (Chinese Academy of Sciences, Canada);
Sauer, Erin; Rohr, Jason (University of South Florida, Canada)

The dilution effect: linking experiments to field data and evaluating its relative strength

 The dilution effect, the hypothesis that biodiversity reduces disease risk, has received support in some
systems. However, few dilution effect studies have 1) linked mechanistic experiments to field patterns to
establish both causality and ecological relevance or 2) rigorously evaluated the strength of the dilution
effect relative to other factors known to influence disease risk, such as factors associated with the
fundamental niche of the pathogen. In a series of experiments, we show that tadpoles can filter feed
zoospores of the pathogenic chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ( Bd ) and that the degree of
filter feeding was positively associated with their dilution potential. Eastern narrowmouth toad tadpoles (
Gastrophryne carolinensis ) generally diluted the risk of chytridiomycosis for Southern toad ( Bufo
terrestris ) and Green treefrog ( Hyla cinerea ) tadpoles, whereas B. terrestris generally amplified
infections for the other species. Surprisingly, under certain combinations of density and species



                                                                                                        748
composition, hosts switched from being diluters to amplifiers, emphasizing the nonlinear, context-
dependent effects of diversity on disease risk. Field data from across the U.S. revealed that the presence
of Bufo spp. and Gastrophryne spp. were positive and negative predictors of Bd prevalence,
respectively, corroborating our laboratory findings. Furthermore, there was a significant negative
association between amphibian species richness and Bd prevalence in the U.S., but the strength of
richness as a predictor of prevalence was weak in comparison to the effects of climate. Thus, our results
suggest that increased species richness can reduce the risk of chytridiomycosis but that this dilution
effect is not very important at the spatial scale we evaluated. These results emphasize that the
relationship between species richness and pathogen prevalence is complex and the need to evaluate the
importance of the dilution effect relative to other factors that affect disease risk.



Veríssimo, Ana (CIBIO - Research Center in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources); Cotton, Charles
(Virginia Insitute of Marine Science, Canada); Buch, Robert (National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, Canada); Burgess, George (Florida Museum of Natural History, Gainesville, FL, United
States); Gullart, Javier (Universitat de València, Canada)

A revision of the gulper sharks (genus Centrophorus) in North Atlantic waters

The genus Centrophorus (Squaliformes: Centrophoridae) comprises a group of medium-sized
benthopelagic sharks usually found on continental and insular slopes of the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific
oceans. Many of the 10-12 recognized species are routinely caught in mid- and deep-water fisheries
worldwide and some have shown a considerable decline in abundance in the last few decades. Despite
the need for efficient and sustainable management of these species, clear and consistent species
discrimination and taxonomic identification of Centrophorus is still problematic. The poor resolution of
diagnostic morphological characters coupled with the absence or poor condition of the type material and
the lack of detail in the original species descriptions contribute to the widespread confusion in the alpha
taxonomy of the genus.

We used molecular and meristic characters as well as detailed morphometric measurements to re-
evaluate and characterize the diversity of Centrophorus in the North Atlantic, including the Gulf of Mexico
and the Mediterranean Sea. Molecular characters were obtained from nucleotide sequences of the
mitochondrial DNA cytochrome oxidase I (COI) and 16S ribosomal RNA (16S) gene regions. Data were
collected from fresh specimens caught by commercial and research vessels, from preserved specimens
deposited in museum and research institute collections, and from publicly available databases (e.g.
GenBank; BOLD) and the scientific literature.

Nucleotide polymorphisms at COI and 16S separated North Atlantic Centrophorus specimens into five
well-supported groups consistently retrieved by both markers. Morphometric measurements corroborated
the existence of these five groups but also indicated the presence of additional groups not represented in
the molecular matrix. We provide a morphological characterization of each group and present a
combination of morphometric measurements useful for species discrimination in the field.

Comparison of North Atlantic specimens with those collected elsewhere showed that four of the five
groups identified above also occur in the Indian and/or Pacific oceans. Our results extend the reported
range of some species considerably and suggest that most Centrophorus species have wider geographic
distributions than previously reported. Assignment of species names to each of the morphotypes retrieved
here is pending further evaluation of Indian and Pacific specimens and a thorough analysis of all extant
Centrophorus types.




                                                                                                       749
Vickaryous, Matthew (University of Guelph); Gilbert, Emily (University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada);
Delorme, Stephanie (University of Guelph, Guelph, Canada)

Anatomy, histology and protein expression during tail loss and regeneration

It has long been observed that many lizards are able to voluntarily self-detach (autotomize) a portion of
the tail as an anti-predation strategy.        For most, tail autotomy is followed by tail regeneration.
Beginning with a mass of mesenchymal-like cells—the regeneration blastema—a replacement
appendage is formed complete with nerves, blood vessels, and skeletal support.         Using the gekkotan
Eublepharis macularius , the leopard gecko, we investigated the anatomy and histology of tail loss,
wound healing and tissue restoration. Autotomy is facilitated by intravertebral fracture planes, permitting
controlled breakage of the skeleton, and smooth muscle sphincters on the caudal artery, to minimize
bleeding. We demonstrate that autotomy is not a requirement for regeneration: original and previously
regenerated tails will regenerate after surgical amputation outside the fracture plane. Autotomized and
amputated tails follow a matching sequence of anatomical and histological events, beginning with the
formation of an exudate clot. Deep to this clot, a highly proliferative wound epithelium forms and the tail
stump is eroded to provide a new structural interface for the regenerating tissue. The wound epithelium
differs from the original epidermis by expressing the protease MMP-9 and the keratin marker WE6.
Blastema cells accumulate between the wound epithelium and tail stump and are also proliferative and
immunopositive for MMP-9.        Continued expansion of the blastema is matched by angiogenesis and
outgrowth of the ependymal tube lining the central canal. Although we have identified several important
proteins known to be involved in embryonic development, including the morphogen Shh, the transcription
factor Sox9, and the homeobox protein Msx1/2, their functional role during regeneration remains unclear.
Our data indicates that regeneration is not a simple recapitulation of development but a secondarily
evolved process.



Vickers, Mathew (James Cook University / CSIRO); Schwarzkopf, Lin; Alford, Ross (James Cook
University, Canada)

Null model for behavioral thermoregulation

Classically, assessing behavioural thermoregulation in ectotherms involves comparing field-active body
temperatures of an organism to available habitat temperatures from where the organism lives. The closer
the mean difference between field-active body temperature to the organisms‘ preferred temperature, the
better a thermoregulator it is, and similarly, the closer habitat temperature is to the preferred temperature,
the higher the thermal quality of the habitat. However, a behavioural thermoregulator doesn‘t experience
static temperature, nor can it choose among all possible habitat temperature at each moment; rather,
through moving, it sequentially samples spatially contiguous temperature through time. Accordingly, the
appropriate null model for behavioural thermoregulation is a random walk through a spatially explicit
temperature-field. By modelling a random walk through a realistic fine-scale thermal environment we are
able to estimate the body-temperature distribution of a non-thermoregulator, and more accurately
estimate the quality of thermoregulation of a real ectotherm: an Australian skink. In addition, we
demonstrate the importance of distinguishing environments that are too-hot from too-cold by inverting
habitat temperature for the non-thermoregulator around the organisms‘ preferred temperature.




                                                                                                          750
Vijayakumar, SP (Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science); Shanker, Kartik (Centre
for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Canada)

Radiation in a Refuge: Contrasting patterns of in-situ diversification of bush frogs (Raorchestes)
in the Western Ghats, Peninsular India.

AIM: One of the striking features in the evolutionary history of life is species radiation. Depending on the
degree of ecological and phenotypic disparity, radiation can take an adaptive or a non-adaptive form.
Radiations allow us to understand the causes and consequences of diversification and recognizing and
describing exceptional radiations is an important first step towards this goal. This talk is based on one
such radiation that we discovered in the Western Ghats of Peninsular India. As an initial step towards
generating causal hypothesis, we tested the significance of regional scale factors including that of an
ancient barrier and that of a southern refugia in the initial diversification of the bush frog clade
(Raorchestes, Rhacophoridae). METHODS: Results are based on an extensive sampling over four years
across &gt;240 sites in all the eight major hill complexes, across elevation (0-2650m) and latitudinal
gradient (8 to 18 degrees). Phylogeny of the bush frogs was reconstructed with a ~2600bp data matrix (4
mtDNA and 2 nuclear) using Bayesian and maximum likelihood methods. We included outgroups
composed of members from major genera in rhacophoridae. Spatial analyses is based on &gt;1900 point
records. Lineages were delimited based on multiple criteria and a final dated tree was generated using
secondary calibration points. RESULTS: Analyses uncovered a spectacular radiation of bush frogs
consisting of 61 lineages (including &gt;19 new species) with two strongly supported clades: north and
south, separated by the geographic barrier. Ancestral range reconstructions showed that there has been
limited dispersal across this barrier, highlighting its significant role in the initial diversification of bush frog
clade. In addition, presence of a deeply nested clade consisting of SE Asian members in the northern
clade supports a single out-of-Peninsular India range expansion and a vicariance scenario. Constant rate
model of diversification was rejected (Gamma= -2.329) at the scale of Western Ghats. The initial
diversification of the north and south clades coincides with Oligocene glaciation followed by an
accelerated diversification during the Miocene. Out-of-Peninsular India range expansion coincides with
the Mid-Miocene Climate Optimum. Species richness in space was strongly influenced by latitude (Rsq=-
0.853***) with a greater concentration of species in southern Western Ghats. In addition, comparison of
northern and southern clades showed that the southern clade is species rich with greater proportion of
endemics and also exhibit greater morphological and ecological diversity. These results support the
existence of a southern refugia and it‘s role in the adaptive radiation of Western Ghats bush frogs.



Vila Pouca, Catarina (CIBIO - University of Porto); Queiroz, Nuno (CIBIO - University of Porto, Vairão,
Portugal); Mucientes, Gonzalo (Instituto de Investigaciones Marinas, CSIC, Vigo, Spain); Humphries,
Nick; Sims, David (Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, Plymouth, United Kingdom)

High-resolution diving behaviour revealed by satellite tagging of blue sharks

Recent advances in satellite tagging technologies have provided increased resolution in studying the
movements, patterns of activity and behaviour of individual animals in relation to different environmental
features. Such accurate records of long term vertical movements of large predators at fine temporal
resolutions have enabled the identification of variable behavioural patterns amongst species, such as diel
temporal shifts in behaviour. In addition, by investigating diving behaviour in relation to changing
oceanographic variables and to potential foraging success, we are beginning to understand why such
behaviours occur at particular times and places. The characteristics of dive profiles, including dive shape,
have often been useful to address such questions. For most species, dives can be classified into
predefined dive types based on their two dimensional shape, and these types, or the dive characteristics



                                                                                                                751
within a type, may reflect activities such as foraging, travelling or resting. Concerning marine fish, two
main dive types, V- and U-shaped, have been largely identified. Overall it is thought that V-shaped dives
are associated with transiting/prey searching behaviour, while U-shaped profiles are related to foraging
on aggregated prey. The identification of different habitat uses, namely transiting and foraging areas, by
analysing the spatial distribution of the dive profiles is of great importance to the recognition of key marine
habitats. Thus, the ability to identify such critical habitats, by combining data from many different species
including large pelagic predators, may be a valuable tool when identifying potential marine protected
areas. Here we analysed high resolution data (10s) on depth and temperature experienced by satellite
tagged blue sharks Prionace glauca in the eastern Atlantic Ocean and obtained a detailed description of
their vertical movements. A total of 2890 dives by 4 blue sharks were recorded. Five dive types,
previously described for other species, were found to be commonly performed by blue sharks. Type 1 (U-
shaped) and 2 (V-shaped) dives were the most frequently performed by blue sharks (ca. 48% and 32% of
the total number of dives, respectively) with all other dive types each representing &lt;6% of the total.
Dives that did not conform to the generic classiﬁcation scheme represented 9.8% of total dives. Further
analyses examined spatial and temporal patterns of diving profiles in the eastern Atlantic Ocean.



Vinnikov, Kirill (University of Hawaii at Manoa);

Phylogenetic relationships and morphological diversity of Awaous and Stenogobius species
(Gobiidae)

Amphidromous gobies are the common representatives of native freshwater fish fauna in tropical and
subtropical islands and in a coastal zone throughout the whole Indo-Pacific region. These fishes are
similar by having a marine larval stage that presumably allows them to spread out from one island to
another. After recent morphological and molecular studies, most genera of amphidromous gobies were
combined into one monophyletic subfamily Sicydiinae. However, phylogenetic relationships of some other
amphidromous genera of gobies remained unresolved due to a lack of sampling. In the present study I
aimed to analyze the phylogenetic relationships between two genera Awaous and Stenogobius, which
were not included to Sicydiinae, as well as to check taxonomic validity of their species by using both 62
morphological characters and COI mitochondrial gene sequences. Several sicydiine gobies were used as
the ingroup sister taxa and two genera, Gnatholepis and Acanthogobius, were added as the outgroup to
the current phylogenetic analysis. Small samples of each species from the different geographic locations
including South Africa, Hawaiian Islands, French Polynesia, Society Islands, Solomon Islands, Guam,
Vanuatu, Fiji and New Caledonia were used as taxonomic units in maximum parsimony, maximum
likelihood and Bayesian approaches. Most trees, which resulted from the reconstructions with
morphological data, showed higher statistical support for the relationships between different genera, while
the analyses with only nucleotide sequences gave better evidence for the species and intraspecific
relationships. All phylogenetic approaches revealed paraphyly for Awaous species. The genus
Stenogobius was placed as the basal group for subfamily Sicydiinae. Although there was a divergence
within Stenogobius group with high support values, the branch lengths of all species were relatively short
in comparison with species from the other genera that indicates recent colonization events and
presumably high migration rates in some cases, where support was not significant. The latter may be the
reason of very high morphological similarity between all Stenogobius species. On the contrary,
remarkable morphological differences between males and females as well as between different age
groups were observed in Stenogobius hawaiiensis from the one stream on Oahu Island (Hawaii).
Obtained results also support the evidence that species with longer marine larval period have the largest
range of their distribution.




                                                                                                           752
Vitt, Laurie (Sam Noble Museum);

Walking the Natural History Trail

Nearly all, if not all, conceptual studies and hypotheses that we test in biology begin with natural history
observations. Nevertheless, Natural History has almost become a bad word in biological sciences.
Funding agencies do not have a category for Natural History studies. The last Professor of Natural
History that I know of was Dr. Ken Norris of the University of California, Santa Cruz. I trace my history as
a herpetologist, pointing out how basic natural history studies led me to ask conceptual questions. I begin
with childhood observations on garter snakes, rattlesnakes, and scorpions and travel from the open
sagebrush lands of Montana to the Sonoran Desert, the swamplands of South Carolina, then to the New
World Tropics with natural history stories and their implications for conceptual biology. I end with a few
comments on what I view as particularly exciting frontiers that take advantage of modern technologies
and methods.



Vojar, Jirí (Faculty of Environmental Sciences, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague); Dolezalová,
Jana (Faculty of Environmental Sciences, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague, Prague, Czech
Republic); Solský, Milic (Faculty of Environmental Sciences, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague,
Prague, Canada)

Technical reclamation and spontaneous succession produce different water habitats: A case
study from Czech post-mining sites

Despite the ecological value of unreclaimed post-mining areas, in the Czech Republic, however, rigorous
technical reclamation still prevails. Such approach usually leads to a more uniform environment and
destroys the habitat diversity of successional sites, including the variety of water bodies that are crucial
habitats for many aquatic and semiaquatic species. The aim of our study was to assess the water
environment on reclaimed and unreclaimed post-mining sites from an ―amphibian point of view‖. We
compared the proportion of water habitat area, the number of ponds and their habitat features on 14
technically reclaimed and 6 unreclaimed sections of spoil banks in the North Bohemian brown coal basin
in the Czech Republic. The proportion of water area, number of ponds per hectare of spoil bank, and
number of ponds in a vicinity of 300 m were significantly higher on successional sections than on
reclaimed sections of spoil banks. We also found on successional areas a higher proportion of smaller
shallow ponds, with gentle shore slopes, partial insolation of water surface and partial vegetation cover.
The ponds on technically reclaimed parts of spoil banks were larger and deeper, with steeper shore
slopes, full insolation and partial vegetation cover. We conclude that primary succession leads to a more
preferable environment for amphibians than does technical reclamation, and it should be considered as
an equal type of post-mining site restoration.




                                                                                                        753
von May, Rudolf (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California, Berkeley); Pitman, Nigel
(Center for Tropical Conservation, Duke University, Canada); Catenazzi, Alessandro (Department of
Biology, Gonzaga University, Canada); Koo, Michelle S. (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of
California, Berkeley, Canada); Rodríguez, Lily O. (Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad Nacional
Mayor de San Marcos, Lima, Perú, Canada); Yánez-Muñoz, Mario H. (Museo Ecuatoriano de Ciencias
Naturales, Quito, Ecuador, Canada); Mueses-Cisneros, Jonh Jairo (Fundación para la Investigación en
Biodiversidad Amazónica (FIBA), Colombia, Canada); Venegas, Pablo J. (Centro de Ornitología y
Biodiversidad (CORBIDI), Lima, Perú, Canada); Knell, Guillermo (Ecologística Perú, Lima, Perú,
Canada); Rivera, Dani (Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Lima,
Perú, Canada); Markel, Jon; Vriesendorp, Corine (Environment, Culture, and Conservation (ECCo), The
Field Museum, Canada); Gordo, Marcelo (Departamento de Biologia/ICB, Universidade Federal do
Amazonas, Manaus, Brasil, Canada)

An evaluation of the impact of a rapid inventories program on amphibian conservation in the
Andes-Amazon region of Peru, Ecuador, and Bolivia

The Environment, Culture, and Conservation Department of the Field Museum (ECCo) is best known for
its rapid inventories of remote, poorly known forests in the Andes-Amazon region
(http://fm2.fieldmuseum.org/rbi/). During these two-to-three week inventories, international teams of
biologists survey the flora and fauna of sites that have been identified by host nations as high
conservation priorities but have often never before been visited by biologists. While the biologists survey
forests and rivers, sociologists and anthropologists visit nearby communities to explore conservation
opportunities with local residents. Over the past 12 years, ECCo has conducted 16 inventories in the
Andes-Amazon region. The information collected in these expeditions has so far helped create new
protected areas covering several million hectares. What is often overlooked is these surveys‘ impact on
the conservation of specific taxonomic groups. ECCo‘s rapid inventories have catalyzed the
establishment of 12 new parks, which together protect more than 4 million hectares of high-quality
amphibian habitat. Protection has been strengthened for a similarly sized area. The newly protected
habitats are focused in the Andes-Amazon region, home to the most diverse amphibian communities on
Earth. These habitats range from windswept Andean grasslands above 3000 m elevation to Amazonian
swamps only a few dozen meters above sea level, from white sand forests to peat bogs to savannas, all
of them crisscrossed by rivers, streams, lakes, and pools that are home to literally millions of rare,
threatened, and poorly known amphibians. We evaluated the impact of ECCo‘s rapid inventories
program on the conservation of amphibians in Peru, Ecuador, and Bolivia. We conducted a
comprehensive review of the datasets generated during these inventories and found that over 220
amphibian species live in the survey areas. About 10-12 of these species were new to science; four of
them have been formally described whereas the others are currently being described. The new parks
protect a significant portion of the habitat of approximately 200 amphibian species. While only 10 of these
species



von May, Rudolf (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California, Berkeley); Angulo, Ariadne
(Departamento de Herpetologia, Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos,
Lima, Peru, Canada); Catenazzi, Alessandro (Department of Biology, Gonzaga University, Canada);
Aguilar, César (Departamento de Herpetología, Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad Nacional Mayor
de San Marcos, Lima, Perú, Canada); Siu-Ting, Karen (Molecular Evolution and Bioinformatics Unit,
National University of Ireland, Canada); Morales, Víctor R. (Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas y Museo de
Historia Natural, Universidad Ricardo Palma, Lima, Perú, Canada); Chaparro, Juan C. (Museo de Historia
Natural, Universidad Nacional de San Antonio Abad del Cusco (MHNC), Cusco, Perú, Canada);
Gagliardi, Giussepe (Peruvian Center for Biodiversity and Conservation (PCB&C), Iquitos, Perú, Canada);