ophyly of the Rhombosoleidae (Pisces; Pleuronectiformes) with notes on
Psammodiscus ocellalus and Oncopterus darwinii. A.-C. Guibord and F. Chapleau, University of Ottawa,
Department of Biology, 30 Marie-Curie, Ottawa, Ontario KIN 6N5; J.M. Diaz de Astarloa, Departamento de Ciendas
Marinas, FacuKad de Ciendas Exadas y Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata, Funes 3350, 7600 Mar
del Plata, Argentina.
The family Rhombosoleidae is composed of nine genera distributed in Australia, New Zealand and South America.
We have examined the phylogenetic status of two genera: the Indo-Paoilic Psammodicus and the South American
Oncopterus. The former genus shows a caudal skeleton that is typical of what is observed in the Samaridae while
the latter has a series seconded canals perpendicular to the lateral line which resembles the series found in the
South American achirines (Achindae). A complete osteological sunrey of all rhombosoleid species and outgroups
combined with a review of the morphological characters used in past studies will be used to clarify the phylogentic
status of these two genera and examine the monophyletic status of the family Rhombosoleidae.




   432                          13:00 Monday                                  .CA3                               ..AXL
Effects of the presence of fish on the suitability of breeding sites to Ambystoma maculatum. D. Cunnington,
R.J. Brooks and J. Edmonds. University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, NIG 2W1.
The presence of predatory fish is thought to restrict successful breeding by many amphibians, including Ambystoma
maculatum (the spotted salamander), to temporary ponds. Evidence is accumulating, however, that A. maculatum
sometimes breeds successfully in the presence of fish. I investigated the co-occurrence of breeding A. maculatum
and fish in 11 lakes in Algonquin Park, Ontario. Stepwise multiple regression was used to determine the relative
importance of the effects of the presence/absence of fish, pH, Secchi depth, lake area, and the forest type
surrounding the lakes on the density of egg masses in lakes. Variation in egg mass density among the lakes was
significantly related to the presence/absence of fish (excluding Salvelinus fontinalis}, but was not related to any of the
other habitat variables. The lanrae were palatable to fishes, but lanrae successfully reached metamorphosis in at
least one lake despite the presence of fish. Although presence of fish was the most important factor in the suitability
of a breeding site to A. matxrlatum, fish did not completely exclude A. maculatum. The use of refuges, spatially
complex habitats, and a bet-hedging life history, are potential ways in which A. maculatum can reproduce despite the
presence of fish.  433                         .13:15 Monday                               CA3                           .     AXL
Diel activity patterns of the sympatric Poison Dart frogs Dendrobates auratus and D. pumilio in Costa Rica.
B.M. Graves. Department of Biology, Northern Michigan University, Marquette, Ml 49855.
Activity of Dendrobates auratus and D. pumilio in Northeastern Costa Rica was monitored at 45 min intervals
throughout daylight hours on nine days in late-June and eariy-July 1997. Activity of D. pumilio peaked early m the
morning, declined steadily to mid-day, then remained at relatively low levels through the afternoon. A<*vity of p.
auratus peaked later in the day, and was more consistent throughout the day than was activity of p. pumilio.
Dendrobates auratus was usually found on the ground, and no association was found between percent of individuals
on elevated perches and observation time. In contrast, there was a clear peak in use of elevated perches by D.
pumilio which occurred shortly after sunrise. A significant positive relationship between rainfall and activity was
evident for D. pumilio, but not for D. auratus. These data demonstrate differences in activity patterns between these
congeners, in spite of many ecological similarities




   434                         13:30 Monday                                 CA3            .                 JA^
A telemetric study of the home ranges and movement patterns of the mountain yellow-legged frra Rana
muscosa in Dusy Basin. Kings Canyon National Park. K.M. MaHhews. K.L. Pope''’ and D.B. Court, 'US Forest
Service Pacific Southwest Research Station, P.O. Box 245, Berkeley, CA 94701, USA; California Polytechnic State
University, San Luis Obispo, Department of Biology, San Luis Obispo, CA 93407, USA.
Rana muscosa was once common throughout high elevation areas of the Sierra Nevada but has declined pnmarily
due to widespread stocking of non-native trout. To understand Rana muscosa habitat needs, we initiated a
telemetric study in 1997 to determine home ranges and movement patterns during the summer and fall when their
high elevation habitats (>3000 m) are accessible. We used radio transmitters and GPS to map the ocations of 24
frogs in Dusy Basin. During the summer frogs were distributed throughout the basin in a variety of lakes, m August
12 tagged frogs showed no movement away from the small lakes where they were originally captured and tagged,
and their home ranges were small (within 50 m). In September 8 of 9 frogs moved up to 200 m away from their
original capture lakes. By October, when lakes began freezing, frogs were found in only two lakes along the
shoreline in deep crevices or under rock ledges. This initial telemetry study of Rana muscosa indicates they are
more widely distributed during the summer, and become more restricted in their distribution as the lakes freeze.
Future restoration strategies should ensure their access to their summer and winter habitats.




   435                         13:45 Monday                                CA3                        ...      AXL
Mountain yellow-legged frog habitat use and movement patterns In a high elevation basin in Kings Canyon
National Park: a mark-recapture study. K.L. Pope*’*’ and K.R. Matthews, “US Forest Service Pacific Southwest
Research Station, P.O. Box 245, Berkeley, Ca 94701, USA; ‘■California Polytechnic State University, San Luis
Obispo, Department of Biology, San Luis Obispo, CA 93407, USA.
We are studying the movement patterns of Rana muscosa to determine seasonal habitat use relied to
hibernation, breeding activity and feeding. Passive integrated transponders (PIT tags) were inserted into 471 adult
froqs in Dusy Basin, Kings Canyon National Park (elevation 3470m) during the summer of 1997. Recapture surveys
were conducted between August and October when the activity cycle ended and lakes began to freeze. Throughout
August all recaptured frogs remained in the same water body where they were originally fagged. Frogs were
observed feeding and sunning in daylight hours during this period. By mid September, a high percentage of frc^s
were recaptured in different water bodies than where they were originally tagged. Frogs moved froni the 12 water
bodies ttiey were found during the summer feeding period to only 2 lakes in the basin. One of the lakes was small
and shallow (<.2 ha, <2 m deep) while the other was the largest lake in the basin (4.3 ha, 9 m deep). Above-water
activitv greatly declined after this movement period. This study will be continued in 1998 to gain information about
movement between overwintering habitats and breeding sites and movement between brewing and feeding sites.
Because Rana muscosa has declined throughout the Sierra Nevada, understanding their habitat requirements will be
crucial in managing remaining populations.




   •439                         14:4iS Mangay .                             CAS                                AXL
 Herpetological communities in four watersheds under different silvicultural management in the Ouachita
 llflountains, Arkansas, USA. P.A. Shipman*-*’ and S.F. Fox, “Department of Zoology, 430 LSW, Oklahoma Slate
 University, Stillwater, OK 74078 U.S.A; ‘■Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, U.S. Geological Survey
 Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078 U.S.A; R. Thill, Wildlife Habitat and Silvicultural Lab, Nation^
 Forest Service, Nacogdoches, TX 75962 U.S.A; P. Tappe, School of Forest Resources, University of Arkansas -
 Monticello, Monticello, AR 71656 U.S.A.
We summarize preliminary results of the mid-point data collection for a large- scale, long-term field study of herp
communities and the influence of habitat and landscape environmental variables in the Ouachita Mountains of west­
central Arkansas, USA.. This study is one component of Phase III of the Ouachita Mountains Ecosystem
Management Research Project and is a cooperative effort involving the Ouachita National Forest, Weyerhaeuser
Coiraany, the National Couricil of the Paper Industry for Air and Stream Improvement, Oklahoma Stale University,
the Oklahoma Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, the University of Arkansas Monticello, and the Souftem
Forest Experiment Station of the National Forest Service. The primary objective is to strengthen our knowledge of
habitat relationships of amphibians and reptiles at both the stand and landscape level using four 1500 to 3800 ha
watersheds with different histories of silviculture and intensity of timber management. Thus far, the most intensively
managed watershed is lower in diversity per plot (a - diversity) for both amphibians and reptiles, whereas ordination
indicates that this watershed is greater in diversity among plots (p - diversity) tor both taxa.

  436                          14:00 Monday                                CA3                   ..           AXL
Use of discarded aluminum beverage cans by selected North American amphibians and leptiles.                     M-R.
Jennings*-^. ®U.S. Geological Survey, Biological Resources Division, , 39913 Sharon, Avenue, Davis, CA 95616,
USA; “Research Associate, Dept, of Herpetology, California Academy of Sciences, Golden Gate Park, San
Francisco, CA 94118, USA.
Over the past 35 years, discarded aluminum beverage cans have become a common item of litter in niar^ parts of
North America. Although the shape, volume, and opening of these caris have changed many times over the years,
there use as shelter by selected invertebrates, fishes, amphibians, reptiles, and small mammals indicates that these
anthropogenic items may provide suitable hiding places In otherwise desolate habitats. Over the p^t 2 years, I
have collected over 10,000 discarded aluminum beverage cans under a wide variety of conditions in California,
Nevada, Oregon, and Washington. Although a significant number of cans contained dead invertebrates, most were
found to be devoid of amphibians and reptiles. However, a small number of cans were found to house Pacific
treefrogs (Hyta regilia}, southern alligator lizards {Elgan'a multicarinata}, western skinks {Eumeces skinonianu^,
western fence lizards {Sceloponjs cxxidentalis}, and side-blotched lizards (Uta stansbunana). Some of the lizards
observed in these cans were found to be in various stages of decomposition. The individual preferences of
amphibians and reptiles for selected beer and soft drink cans will be discussed.




   437                         14:15 Monday                                CA3                   .            AXL
Abundance and age distribution of three species of Ranid amphibians in Algonquin Provincial Park,
Canada. R.J. Brooks. K.A. Judge and J.C. MacDonald, University of Guelph, Department of Zoology, Guelph,
Ontario, NIG 2W1; L.J. Shirose, Canada Centre for Inland Waters, P.O. Box 5050, Burlington, Ontario, L7R 4A6.
There has recently been concern that amphibians are declining in abundance and diversity on a global scale &nce
1985, the population dynamics of three species of Ranid amphibians (Rana catesbeiana, Rana clamitans and Rana
septe’ntrionalis) have been investigated using intensive mark-recapture techniques. The focus of this long-term study
is to test whether these species are experiencing declines in the relatively pristine environment of the Wildlife
Research Area of Algonquin Provincial Park, Ontario. To date, the study indicates that population sizes of all three
species of Ranids fluctuate from year to year. However, there is no evidence of significant decreases in abundance
or mean body size, or of shifts in the age distribution over the 10-year sampling period. This suggests that over the
time scale of our study, broad environmental factors such as increased ultraviolet radiation or global warming, are
not important determinants of amphibian abundance in this region.




   438                         14:30 Monday                                 CA3 .                              AXL
Overwintering habitats of radio-impianted green frogs, Rana clamitans. V.S. Lamoureux and D.M. Madison,
Department of Biological Sciences, Binghamton, N.Y. 13902-6000 USA.
Winter's freezing temperatures exert a major selective force on temperate frogs and toads. The selection of an
overwintering site that provides protection from freezing is critical forthose species without freeze tolerance. Many
freeze intolerant frogs, such as the green frog (Rana clamitans}, are commonly assumed to overwinter at the bottom
of shallow, eutrophic, breeding ponds. Although anurans overwintering in pond bottoms would avoid freezing, these
environments are highly anoxic for the majority of winter. Since adult ranids cannot tolerate anoxia for even limited
periods of time, it is unlikely that pond bottoms would be suitable overwintering sites. Anurans may need to undergo
extensive movements in search of suitable overwintering sites that remain unfrozen and provide adequate oxygen for
survival We used radio implants to determine overwintering habitats of the green frog in southern New York state.
In late fall, green frogs moved 80-480 m from their summer breeding ponds to streams and seeps that remained
flowing and unfrozen throughout winter. We suggest that these sites are chosen because they remain unfrozen and
remain well oxygenated.




   442 ..      ..              13:30 Monday                                GS1                               MCN
How vsnom-conductlng fangs are formed. K, Jackson, Museum of Comparative Zoology. Harvard University
Cambndge,, MA 02138, U.S.A.

Venom-delivery systems occur in at least four families of snakes. In viperids, elapids, and atractaspidids, the venom-
aehvery system is front-fanged, and consists of a hollow fang and a venom gland associated with compressor
muscles, which squeeze venom into a duct, which cam’es it to the proximal end of the fang, where it enters the
wnom canal. In venomous colubrids the fang is grooved rather than hollow, and positioned at the posterior end of
me maxilla. It is not known how many times the venom-delivery system has been independently derived in snakes.
This study was initially undertaken to determine how venom-conducting fangs form during development in differerit
groups of snakes, in the hope that fois might shed light on the question of how venom-conducting fangs were arrived
at evolutionarily. It was found that published descriptions of fang formation in snakes disagree about how fangs are
formed. This disagreement is discussed along with developmental differences between fangs in embryonic snakes
and replacement fangs in adult snakes, and their implications for reconstructing the evolutionary history of snakesW^ar^studyiri^he movement patterns of Rana muscosa to determine seasonal habitat use related to
hibernation, breeding activity and feeding. Passive integrated transponders (PIT tags) were inserted into 471 adult
frogs in Dusy Basin, Kings Canyon National Park (elevation 3470m) during the summer of 1997. Recapture surveys
were conducted be^een August and October when the activity cycle ended and lakes began to freeze. Throughout
August all recaptured frogs remained in the same water body where they were originally tagged. Frogs were
observed feeding and sunning in daylight hours during this period. By mid September, a high percentage of frogs
were recaptured in different wafer bodies than where they were originally tagged. Frogs moved from the 12 wafer
bodies they were found during the summer feeding period to only 2 lakes in the basin. One of the lakes was small
and shallow (<.2 ha, <2 m deep) while the other was the largest lake in the basin (4.3 ha, 9 m deep). Above-water
activity greatly declined after this movement period. This study will be continued in 1998 to gain information about
movement between overwintering habitats and breeding sites and movement between breeding and feeding sites.
Because Rana muscosa has declined throughout the Sierra Nevada, understanding their habitat requirements will be
crucial in managing remaining populations.




Herpatological communities In four waterstwds under different silvicultural management in the Ouachita
Mountains, Arkansas, USA. P.A. Shipman*-** and S.F. Fox, “Department of Zoology. 430 LSW, Oklahoma State
University, Stillwater, OK 74078 U.S.A; **Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, U.S. Geological Survey,
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078 U.S.A; R. Thill, Wildlife Habitat and Silvicultural Lab, National
Forest Service, Nacogdoches, TX 75962 U.S.A; P. Tappe, School of Forest Resources, University of Arkansas -
Monticello, Monticello, AR 71656 U.S.A.
We summarize preliminary results of the mid-point data collection for a large- scale, long-term field study of herp
communities and the influence of habitat and landscape environmental variables in the Ouachita Mountains of west­
central Arkansas, USA.. This study is one component of Phase III of the Ouachita Mountains Ecosystem
Management Research Project and is a cooperative effort involving the Ouachita National Forest, Weyerhaeuser
Company, the National Council of the Paper Industry for Air and Stream Improvement, Oklahoma State University,
the Oklahoma Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Researr^h Unit, the University of Arkansas Monticello, and the Southern
Forest Experiment Station of the National Forest Service. The primary objective is to strengthen our knowledge of
habitat relationships of amphibians and reptiles at both the stand and landscape level using four 1500 to 3800 ha
watersheds with different histories of silviculture and intensity of timber management. Thus far, the most intensively
managed watershed is lower in diversity per plot (a - diversity) for both amphibians and reptiles, whereas ordination
indicates that this watershed is greater in diversity among plots (|5 - diversity) for both taxa.




   440                          13:00 Monday                                GS1                               MCN
Application of a modified index of biotic integrity to detect changes in fish assemblages in a historically
de^aded river system. R.B. Evans. The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996 USA.

The New River, a tributary of the Big South Fork of the Cumberland River in northeast Tennessee, has been
degraded by siltation associated with coal mine drainage. Electrofishing samples from 42 localities in 1996 revealed
recent increases in ths range of intolerant species and the return of extirpated fishes to the river system. A modified
index of biotic integrity (IBI), relative to the New River, was compiled using components of fish assemblages
(metrics) that reflect the impacts of siltation. Replicate fish samples were obtained by using a bootstrap resampling
algorithm that enabled tests for significant differences among IBI scores. Comparisons of IBI scores from 13
electrofishing samples completed in 1977 and repeated during 1996 indicate that the health of fish assemblages and
water quality have improved during the past two decades.




   441                         13:15 Monday.        .    .   ,              GS1                               MCN
Cryptic though not concealed: phylogenetic relationships of Aslan leaf-litter frogs revealed through
mitochondrial DNA sequences (Anura: Megophyridae). A. Lathrop. Royal Ontario Museum, Centre for
Biodiversity and Conservation Biolo^, 100 Queen's Park, Toronto, Ontario, Ml E 4W9.
Ths family Megophryidae is distributed throughout Southeast Asia and includes more than 85 species among its
seven genera. At present, there is virtually nothing known about the inter-generic relationships of the family. Some
ideas have been put forth for some of the genera or for the group as a whole, but these hypotheses have been
largely based on intuition, and not supported by a phylogenetic analysis. I will discuss the results of a phylogenetic
analysis of DNA sequences from 21 species, representing 6 of the 7 genera of Megophryidae, The parsimony
analysis was preformed using 1624 base pairs from mitochondrial genes 12S and 16S in which 650 sites were
infonnative. The data from the two genes were analyzed separately and in a combined analysis. The results from
the two data sets are highly congruent. There is strong support for the subfamily Leptobrachiinae (Dubois) and
Megoph^inae (Noble) as has been suggested from morphological data. Patterns of relationships within these
subfamilies will be discussed.

UVerWinieniig sue iriai pruviues piuiouiiuil liuill          lO vnuvai                  wniiv^ut homo ivretwiuw. mwij
freeze intolerant frogs, such as the green frog (Rana clamitans), are commonly assumed to overwinter at the bottom
of shallow, eutrophic, breeding ponds. Although anurans overwintering in pond bottoms would avoid freezing, these
environments are highly anoxic for the majority of winter. Since adult ranids cannot tolerate anoxia for even limited
periods of time, it is unlikely that pond bottoms would be suitable ovenwintering sites. Anurans may need to undergo
extensive movements in search of suitable ovenwintering sites that remain unfrozen and provide adequate oxygen for
survival. We used radio implants to determine ovenwintering habitats of the green frog in southern New York state.
In late fall, green frogs moved 80-480 m from their summer breeding ponds to streams and seeps that remained
flowing and unfrozen throughout winter. We suggest that these sites are chosen because they remain unfrozen and
remain well oxygenated.




How vonom-conducting fangs are formed.                K. Jackson. Museum or Comparative Zoology, Harvard University.
Cambridge,, MA 02138, U.S A.

Venom-delivery systems occur in al least four families of snakes. In viperids, elapids, and atractaspidids, the venom­
delivery system is front-fanged, and consists of a hollow fang and a venom gland associated with compressor
muscles, which squeeze venom into a duct, which carries if to the proximal end of the fang, where it enters the
venom canal. In venomous colubrids the fang is grooved rather than hollow, and positioned at the posterior end of
the maxilla. It is not known how many times the venom-delivery system has been independently derived in snakes.
This study was initially undertaken to determine how venom-conducting fangs form during development in different
groups of snakes, in the hope that this might shed light on the question of how venom-conducting fangs were arrived
at evolutionarily. It was found that published descriptions of fang formation in snakes disagree about how fangs are
formed. This disagreement is discussed along with developmental differences between fangs in embryonic snakes
and replacement fangs in adult snakes, and their implications for reoonstrocting the evolutionary history of snakes.




   443                            13:45 Monday                                GS1                                MCN
A description of flight in the flying snake, Chrysopelea paradisi. J.J. Socha. Department of Organismal Biology
and Anatomy, University of Chicago, 1027 East 571h St., Chicago, IL 60637 USA.
Passive (gliding) flight has been studied in some vertebrate fliers, but is essentially unexplored in the flying snakes of
the genus Chrysopelea. Four specimens of Chiysopelea paradisi were videotaped in flight from a height of 11
meters. Seventy-five total flights were recorded. For comparison, locomotion of the snake in water and on land were
also recorded. Chrysopelea is capable of beginning its flight either in mid-air or from a controlled launch. In a
launch, the body is coiled back against the substrate, then sprung forward horizontally. By the end of the launch, the
body is flattened dorsoventrally from head to venL In Hight the snake undulates laterally in a swimming-like motion
with the body in a plane parallel with the ground. The amplitude of undulation in air is more than twice that of
undulation in water. Over the course of a flight, the frequency of undulation decreases. Upon landing, the snake
contacts the ground tail first, then body, and head last. The snake is capable of extensive maneuvering in flight, able
to turn ninety degrees within a meter. Video clips of the flight will be shown.




   444                          14:00 Monday                                  GS1                                MCN
Phylogenetic relationships of the Kinostemon flavescens species group Inferred from complete
mitochondrial control region sequences. J.M. Serb. Illinois Natural History Survey, 607 E. Peabody Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820 USA.
Subspecifio designations within the wide ranging yellow mud turtle, Kinostemon flavescens, have been
controversial. Identification of the four subspecies of K. flavescens (K. f. flavescens, K. f. arizonense, K. f.
durangoense, and K. f. spoonerij, have been based on nondiscrete morphological characters and biogeography.
Three previous phenetic studies of the K. flavescens species group, using morphometric characters, resulted in
conflicting taxonomic conclusions. In order to assess evolutionary relationships among pdpulations of K. flavescens,
complete gene sequences (1100 base pairs) of the mitochondrial control region were analyzed using parsimony,
maximum likelihood, and distance methods. Historical biogeographic patterns, inferred from the generated
phylogeny, were used to test hypotheses of climatic change during the Pleistocene (e.g. the Prairie Peninsula
regiori). The structure and evolution of the control region in Kinostemid turtles was characterized and compared to
other vertebrate taxa, including fish, birds, and mammals.   445                         14:15 Monday . .                            'GS1             .               MCN
Diet overlap and parasite assemblage structure In Atchafalya River Basin fishes.               B.J. Wright and D.A.
Rutherford, School of Forestry Wildlife and Fisheries. Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, 70803.
We collected adults of seven fish species from lake, canal, and flooded swamp sites to determine trophic overlap
and tacfos structuring parasite assemblages. White bass Morona chrysops, are specialists for normoxic ( Dissolved
Oxygen >4 mg) lake and riverine habitats while warmouth Lepomis gulosus, spotted gar Lepisosteus occulatus and
bowfin, Amia calva, are hypoxic ( DQ.< 2 mg) wafer specialists preferring bayous and swamps. Crappies, Pomoxiso
nigromaculatus and P. annularis and largemouth bass. Microptenis salmoides, are considered to be generalists for
habitat and feeding guilds. Bluegill, L. macrochirus, was considered an invertivore habitat generalist. Fish diets and
trophically transmitted parasites were examined to determine diet similarity among species and the importance of
host phylogeny, diet and habitat in stoicturing parasite assemblages. Host ecology was a more important
determinant of parasite assemblages than phylogeny, and parasite distributions indicated some resource partitioning
among fishes examined. Generalist parasites did not occur in all host species they are known to infect These
results suggest fine scale resource partitioning within fish trophic guilds and stronger partitioning by habitat
preference.




   446                        14:30 Monday               ..                GSI                                  MCN
Evolutionary enodcrinology of accelerated metamorphosis bi spadefoot toads. D.R. Buchholz and T.B. Hayes,
Department of Integrative. Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California. Berkeley, CA 94720 USA.
Spadefoot species in Scaphiopus and Spea have short larval periods compared to their closest relatives in
Pelobates. We examined two potential explanations for differences in length of the lan/al period between genera.
First, histological examination of thyroid gland development in representatives of all spadefoot genera. Scaphiopus
couchii, Spea multiplicata, and Pelobates syriacus, showed that colloid appeared earlier in Sp. multiplicata and later
in Sc. couch//compared to Ph. synacus, suggesting differences in differentiation of the thyroid axis. Second, tissue
sensitivity and responsivity to thyroid homione was examined using an in vitro tail tip assay, where tail shrinkage
was measured in response to exogenous thyroid homnone. Total area and perimeter of four tail tips in each of six
thyroid hormone concentrations (0, 0.5,1,2, 4, 8nM) at three developmental stages (Gosner stages 28, 33, and 37)
per species (Sc. couchii, Sp. multiplicata, and Ph. syriacus} were measured daily for fourteen days. Sc. couchiitails
shrank in response to 2-8 nM tri-iodothyronine, compared to 4-8 nM for Sp. multiplicata and Pb. syriacus tails. At 4
and 8nM, Sc. couchii and Sp.multiplicata tails shrank faster than P. synacus tails. Scaphiopus and Spea may have
achieved higher metamorphic rates from increased responsivity to thyroid hormone, and Scaphiopus may have
improved upon this mechanism by increasing its sensitivity to thyroid hormone.




   447                         14:45 Monday                                GS1                  .      .        MCN
Tale of two puffers: Do motor patterns change with a shift in muscle insertion?                     J.E. Austin and P.C.
Wainwright, Dept, of Biological Sciences. Florida State, University, Tallahassee, FL 32306 USA.
Durophagous fishes of the order Tetraodontiformes use stalwart teetii and jaws to process prey. Idiosyncratic in their
reliance on oral manipulation and crushing during feeding, they possess a relatively complex adductor mandibulae
musculature as compared to those fishes of the ancestral, pharyngeal jaw-processing persuasion. A1 and A2
adductor mandibulae muscles orchestrate the closing and biting forces. Dog-faced pufferfishes in the genus Arothron
possess a plesiomorphic insertion of the A2 muscle on the lower jaw. Southern puffers of the genus Sphoeroides, in
contrast, have a novel shift in A2 insertion from the dentary to the maxilla. Lack of linkage between anatomical
change and subsequent functional consequence serves to reinforce motor pattern conservation during muscle
evolution. Electromyographic recordings of jaw muscles from both genera were taken as puffers fed on prey of
varying texture (fiddler crabs and shrimp). Quantified with EMG variables Including burst duration, relative onset and
intensSy, motor pattern differences were manifest only in an across-the-board earlier onset of adductor firing in
Southern puffers.




                                 16:15 Monday                                 GSI                                MCN
Variation in offspring characteristics of SIstrunis mlllarlus, Slstrurua catenatus, Thamnophis sirtalls,
Thamnophb la'oxlmua, and Nerodia rhombHer. implications for studies of optimal offspring size. MA.
Pilgrim, University of Arkansas. Department of Biological Sciences, Fayetteville, AR, 72701 USA; T.M. Farrell and
P.G. May, Stetson University, Department of Biology, DeLand. FL, 82720 USA; R.A. Seigel, Southeastern Louisiana
University, Department of Biological Sciences, Hammond. LA, 70402 USA.
When studying snake reproductive ecology, offspring characteristics are one of the most difficult reproductive traits
to quantify in a natural setting. Field enclosures allow an investigator to house gravid females in a semi-natural
setting; this provides critical data on offspring characteristics as well as the relationship between a mother’s
characteristics and those of her offspring. During the summers of 1992-1996, we used field enclosures to house 94
gravid Sistrurus miliarius until parturition. During the summers of 1996-1997, we used field enclosures to house
gravid Sistrurus catenatus (N=24), Thamnophis sirtalis (N=36), Thamnophis proximus (N=19) and Nerodia rhombifer
(N=14) until parturition. Data collected from these females and their offspring were used to examine within and
among litter variation in offspring characteristics. In addition, we used these data to evaluate a number of
hypotheses generated by optimal offspring size theory.

   448                       , 15:30 Monday                                    GS1                        . .     MCN
A field population of bullfrog tadpoles with a highly female-biased sex ratio. L.C. Rania and C.R. Propper,
Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff. Arizona 86011, USA.
The timing of the occurrence of sex differentiation is variable among anuran amphibians. While some frog species
erdiibit sexual differentiation after metamorphosis, others differentiate during the larval period. In order to determine
the timing of sexual differentiation in the bullfrog, Rana catesbeiana, we collected 82 tadpoles from a fish hatchery in
northern Arizona. Upon histological examination we found that differentiation was evident by Gosner Stage 35.
Furthermore, among differentiated animals, 88,6% of the popijlation was female, with only 11.5% of the population
being male. Two of the male specimens had poorly organized seminiferous tubules with oocytes embedded within
the testicular tissue. One female had a polynuclear oocyte. We cannot say what may have affected this population
of bullfrog tadpoles, but our histological results suggest that these animals may have been exposed to some form of
xenobiotic contamination.




   449                          15:45 Monday                                  GSI .. .                    MCN
The effects of xenobiotics on larval development in the bullfrog (Rana catesbeiana}.         S.G. Faraoher, L.C.
Rania and C.R. Propper, Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona University. Flagstaff, Arizona 86011,
USA.
Xenobiotic compounds have been hypothesized to disrupt normal growth and development and induce gross
morphological mutations and abnornialities. Embryonic exposure to endocrine disnjpting compounds may alter the
formation of endocrine tissues, leading to abnormalities in the timing or outcome of the sexual differentiation of
gonadal tissue. Previous research demonstrated the occurrence of gonadal abnormalities in juvenile alligators
collected from a contaminated lake site (Guillette, Crain, and Rooney, 1997). In a study examining the
developmental timing of sexual differentiation of Rana catesbeiana from a local fish hatchery, we were surprised to
find a highly skewed, female biased sex ratio (Rania, ef al., personal txjmmunication). Histological preparations
revealed abnormalities in the differentiation of the gonadal tissue of many of these individuals. One hypothesis from
this result is that some xenobiotic compounds may be affecting sexual differentiation in R. catesbeiana. Vie
conducted two experiments to test this hypothesis. First, we treated larval R. catesbeiana with endosulfan, a locally
sprayed pesticide that is known to be weakly estrogenic. We found significanf differences in weight and mortality
among 4 treatments (3 concentrations anti a control) over a three week period. Next, we treated larval fl.
catesbeiana with zineb, a commonly used herbicide in the U.S.. We found no statistical differences in weight or
length among 5 treatments (4 concentrations and a control), although there were significant differences in mortality.
These data suggest that larval bullfrogs exposed to pesticides may suffer deleterious effects.




    450                          16:00 Monday                                  GSI                                 MCN
Reef fishes from Parcel Manuel Luis Marine State Park, MaranhSo, NE Brazil.                    L.A. Rocha and I.L. Rosa,
Universidade Federal da Paraiba, CCEN - Departamento de Sistematica e Ecologia, Joao Pessoa, PB - 58059-900,
Brazil.
The Parcel Manuel Luis Marine State Park (PEM), off MaranhSo State. NE Brazil, is a large reef (18 km by 6 km)
virtually unstudied biologically. Due to difficulty of access, a still unknown fish fauna is found in the area. This work Is
being developed in collaboration with the Maranhao State Environmental and Hydric Resources Bureau. It's main
gois are to determine the composition and stnjcture of the fish community, and to contribute to the management
plan of the PEM. Data are being obtained through undenvater obsenrations, photographs and spear fishing. The
method used to determine the community structure is the stationary visual census. In three expeditions (between
August 1997 and January 1998) 103 species belonging to 47 families were recorded. The purple chromis, Chromis
scotti, previously known only from the Caribbean and United States coasL was collected at PEM, where juveniles
and aoults were frequently seen close to the bottom in depths between 18 and 30m. Regarding the commijnity
structure, the herbivores most frequently seen, especially in the shallower areas, were Scanjs coelestinus,
Sparisoma viride and Kyphosus sectatryx. In the deeper areas (below 20m) the most common fishes were Chromis
scotti. Gramma aft. loreto, and Halichoeres bivittatus.




   454                          09:00 Tuesday                                                            .          THN
Seasonally variable frxid availability constrains the timing of reproduction by herbivtx'ous coral reef fishes
K.B. Clifton, Biology, University of California, 1156 High St., Santa Cmz, CA 95064; R.D. Robertson, Smithsonian
Tropical, Research Institute, Unit 0948, APO. AA 34002-0948.

To date, few studies have examined how food availability may constrain the reproduction, growth and mortality of
coral reef fishes in their natural habitat. To address this issue, we compared the life history tactics of supplementally
fed. wild, adult beaugregory damselfish tStegastes leucosbctus} with those of control fish during a series of 90-day
experimental trials. These herbivorous fish showed both seasonal and lunar patterns of repr^uction in the study
area off the coast of Panama. During the study, patterns of reproductive output and growth of control fish varied
temporally and spatially, apparently in response to natural patterns of food availability. Growth rates, though
variable, did not correspond well with levels or reproductive output. Mortality was generally high, though soma what
reduced during periods of low reproduction.Protein rich food supplements greatly increased reproduction and growth
of experimental fish and substantially lowered rates of mortality, itresperrtive of season. These results strongly
suggest that food limitation plays a critical role In determining both the seasonal timing and intensity of reproduction,
growth, and mortality in this speciesTale of two puffers: Do motor patterns change with a shift In muscle insertion?             J.E. Austin and P.O.
Wainwright, Dept of Biological Sciences, Rorida State, University, Tallahassee, FL 32306 USA.
□urophagous fishes of the order Tetraodontiformes use stalwart teeth and jaws to process prey. Idiosyncratic in their
reliance on oral manipulation and cnjshing during feeding, they possess a relatively complex adductor mandibulae
musculature as compared to those fishes of the ancestral, pharyngeal jaw-processing persuasion. Al and A2
adductor mandibulae muscles orchestrate the closing and biting forces. Dog-faced pufferfishes in the genus Arothron
possess a plesiomorphic insertion of the A2 muscle on the lower jaw. Southern puffers of the genus Sphoeroides, in
contrast, have a novel shift in A2 insertion from the dentary to the maxilla. Lack of linkage between anatomical
change and subsequent functional consequence serves to reinforce motor pattern consenration during muscle
evolution. Electromyographic recordings of jaw muscles from both genera were taken as puffers fed on prey of
varying texture (fiddler crabs and shrimp). Quantified with EMG variables including burst duration, relative onset and
intensity, motor pattern differences were manifest only in an across-the-board earlier onset of adductor firing in
Southern puffers.




  451                      -16:15 Monday                     . .   GS1                       MCN
Variation In offspring characteristics of SIstrurus mtHartus, SIstrurua catenatus, Thamnophls airtalla,
Thamnophia proximua, and Nerodla rhomblfer. Implications for studies of optimal offspring size. MA.
Pilgrim. University of Arkansas, Department of Biological Sciences, Fayetteville, AR, 72701 USA; T.M. Fanell and
P.G. May, Stetson Universi^, Department of Biology, DeLand, FL, 82720 USA; R.A. Seigel, Southeastern Louisiana
University, Department of Biological Sciences, Hammond, LA, 70402 USA.
When studying snake reproductive ecology, offspring characteristics are one of the most difficult reproductive traits
to quantify in a natural setting. Reid enclosures allow an investigator to house gravid females in a semi-natural
setting; this provides critical data on offspring characteristics as well as the relationship between a mother's
characteristics and those of her offspring. During the summers of 1992-1996, we used field enclosures to house 94
gravid Sistrurus miliarius until parturition. During the summers of 1996-1997, we used field enclosures to house
gravid Sistrurus catenatus (N=24), Thamnophis sirtalis (N=36), Thamnophis proximus (N=19) and Nerodia rhombifer
(N=14) until parturition. Data collected from these females and their offspring were used to examine within and
among litter variation in offspring characteristics. In addition, we used these data to evaluate a number of
hypotheses generated by optimal offspring size theory.




   452                         08:00 Tuesday                                 SE                               THN
Physiology and migratory behavior under different environmental conditions during the parr-smolt
transformation of Atlantic salmon. G.P. Baibin. S.D. McCormick and A.J. Haro, Ccxite Anadromous Fish
Research Center, BRDAJSGS, 1 Migratory Way, Turners Falls, MA 01376 USA.
Timing of physiological changes asscxriated with the parr-smolt transformation has been intimately linked with
changes In photoperiod and temperature. However, there is little direct evidence concerning environmental control
of downstream migratory behavior. Seasonal timing of physiological and behavioral changes associated with
increased temperatures was examined. Atlantic salmon parr and pre-smolts were tagged with passive integrated
transponders (PIT) in March, placed in simulated stream conditions and monitored continuously from April through
July. Water temperature was increased 1°C every 3 d (ambient), 1°C every other day (advanced), or 1°C every 9 d
(delayed). The number of downstream passages of smolts peaked in May. Downstream movements of pan- were
two-orders of magnitude lower than of smolts. Rsh maintained under ambient and advanced conditions ceased
activity by mid-June. Rsh exposed to the delayed temperature regime sustained downstream movements through
July. In late June gill Na+, K+ -ATPase activity (an index of osmoregulatory physiology) had decreased in smolts
maintained under ambient and advanced regimes, whereas it remained elevated in the delayed group. Temperature
regimes dramatically affect smolt physiology, behavior, and migratory timing. Ructuating water temperature and its
influence on migration must be considered when contemplating survival of hatchery and wild smolts to the marine
stags.




   453                        08:30 Tuesday                           .   .. SE                               THN
Declining temperature Influences the osmoregulatory physiology of American shad, Alosa sapldissima,
restricting the timing of seaward migration. J. Zydlewski‘° and S.D. McCormick’-*', "Conte Anadromous Rsh
Research Center, BRDAJSGS, 1 Migratory Way, Turners Falls, MA 01376 USA; ‘University of Massachusetts,
Department of Biology, Amherst, MA , USA.
Osmoregulatory abilities of American shad must be coordinated with migrations between fresh water (FW) and
seawater (SW). Shad develop the ability to tolerate SW at larval-juvenile transition (26-45 d post-hatch) coincident
with 3.5 and 10-fold increases in chloride cell (CC) number and gill Na’,K*-ATPase activity respectively. Although
only early development is limited to low salinities, shad remain in FW for 5-6 months (until autumn). During autumnal
migration juveniles lose the ability to osmoregulate in FW, evidenced by a decline in plasma chloride (20%). Shad
kept in the laboratory through Dec. experience large declines in plasma chloride (68%) and high mortality. Gill
Na+,K*-ATPase activity increases 3-fold and gill CC's on the primary and secondary lamellae Increase 2-fold and 1.5-
fold; these are likely to be compensatory mechanisms for increasing ion uptake. Changes in plasma chloride, gill
Na'',K-’-ATPase, and CC's are reduced and delayed if shad are maintained at 24°C versus a natural decline in
temperature. Impaired osmoregulatory ability, as influenced by temperature, may serve as a proximate cue for
migration. Changes In temperature (e.g. global warming) will likely alter the timing of migration.

Reef fishes from Parcel Manuel Luis Marine State Park, Maranhao, NE Brazil.        L.A. Rocha and I.L. Rosa,
Universidade Federal da Paraiba, CCEN - Departamento de Sistematica e Ecologia, Joao Pessoa, PB - 58059-900,
Brazil.
The Parcel Manuel Luis Marine State Park (PEM), off MaranhSo State, NE Brazil, is a large reef (18 km by 6 km)
virtually unstudied biologically. Due to difficulty of access, a still unknown fish fauna is found in ths area. This work is
being developed in collaboration with the Maranhao State Environmental and Hydric Resources Bureau. It's main
goals are to determine the composition and structure of the fish community, and to contribute to the management
plan of the PEM. Data are being obtained through underwater observations, photographs and spear fishing. The
method used to determine the community structure is the stationary visual census. In three expeditions (between
August 1997 and January 1998) 103 species belonging to 47 families were recorded. The purple chromis, Chrmis
scotti, previously known only from the Caribbean and United States coast, was collected at PEM, where juveniles
and adults were frequently seen close to the bottom in depths between 18 and 30m. Regarding the community
structure, the herbivores most frequently seen, especially in the shallower areas, were Scarus coelestinus,
Sparisoma viride and Kyphosus sectatryx. In the deeper areas (below 20m) the most common fishes were Chromis
scotti. Gramma aff. loreto, and Halichoeres bivittatus.




  454 .             . • . - . 09:00 Tuesday                            SE                  .          THN
Seasonally variable food availability constrains the timing of reproduction by herbivorous coral reef fishes.
K.B. Clifton. Biology, University of California, 1156 High St., Santa Cruz, CA 95064; R.D. Robertson, Smithsonian
Tropical, Research Institute, Unit 0948, APO, AA 34002-0948.
To date, tew studies have examined how food availability may constrain the reproduction, growth and mortality of
coral reef fishes in their natural habitat. To address this issue, we compared the life history tactics of supplementally
fed, wild, adult beaugregory damselfish (Stegastes leucostictus) with those of control fish during a series of 90-day
experimental trials. These herbivorous fish showed both seasonal and lunar patterns of reproduction in the study
area off the coast of Panama. During the study, patterns of reproductive output and growth of control fish varied
temporally and spatially, apparently in response to natural patterns of fcxxf availability. Growth rates, though
variable, did not correspond well with levels or reproductive output. Mortality was generally high, though some what
reduced during periods of low reproduction.Protein rich food supplements greatly increased reproduction and growth
of experimental fish and substantially lowered rates of mortality, irrespective of season. These results strongly
suggest that fcxxf limitation plays a critical role in determining both the seasonal timing and intensity of reproduction,
grovrth, and mortality in this species




   455.                         09:30 Tuesday                                    SE                                 THN
Size-based delaying tactics In breeding schedule by brook trout: a removal experiment. P.J. Blanchfield.
Dept. Biology, York University, North York Ontario M3J 1P3; M.S. Ridgway, Aquatic Ecosystems Science Section,
3rd Fl. N. 300 Water St.,, Peterborough, Ontario K9J 8M5.
Among salmonines (trout, salmon, char), there is a consistent trend for large females to spawn before small ones
within a breeding season. This pattern may be related to competition for limited spawning sites or, alternatively,
small females may delay reproduction as an adaptive tactic to minimise brood loss. Females routinely lose broods
through the subsequent use of nest sites by other females. Broods of small females are more likely to be lost by this
distuitiance because nest depth is related to body size. We tested these alternative hypotheses by detaining the
largest females in a marked population of lake-spawning brook trout (Saivelinus fontinalis). The competition
hypothesis predicts small females would breed earlier in the absence of large females, whereas the adaptive tactic
hypothesis predicts delayed breeding. Consistent with our second hypothesis, small females spawned significantly
later during the experimental year (1996) compared to the previous two years. Furthermore, brood loss was
significantly reduced. Within seasons, brood loss was significantly higher for small than large females. Site choice
may also play an important role in reproductive success. We show that small females increase reproductive
success by delayed reproduction and suggest that this adaptive tactic may be socially mediated.




   456                           10:30 Tuesday                         .        SE                                 THN
The effects of population structure on the timing of reproductive    activity In male fathead minnows
(Pimephales promelas): Individual    and population-level implications A.J. Danylchuk and W.M Tonn,
Department of Biological Sdenoes, University of Alberta,, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2E9.
Size-dependent asynchrony in the seasonal timing of reproduction has been well documented tor fish in temperate
regions. A common explanation of this phenomenon is that small fish are physiologically forced to postpone the
allocation of enerpy to reproduction, resulting in a delay in the seasonal timing of reproductive activity. However, for
male fathead minnows we suggest that the timing of seasonal reproductive activity is regulated by social
interactions. In an endosute and a pond experiment, small males advanced their reproductive condition, held
nesting territories, and spawned only when isolated from large males or once large males were removed from the
pi^ulation. Small males were of similar size in all experimental treatments, suggesting that size-dependent
differences in eriergy allocation do not account for differences in their phenology. Preliminary analyses also indicate
that the production and size of young produced by small 'uninhibited' males was not significantly different from the
production and size of young produced by large dominant males. Thus, the release of small males from social
control may expedite population recovery following a size-dependent disturbarxie such as winterkill.   457                          11:00 Tuesday                                 SE ,                             .. THN
Seasonal aspects of resource allocation In Ambystoma opacum: Implications for population dynamics. D.£_
Scott, Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, Drawer E, Aiken, SC 29802 USA.
Marbled salamanders (Ambystoma opacum') inhabit woodlands throughout much of the easterri United States.
Adults typically migrate to temporary pond breeding sites en masse in early autumn, where courtship, breeding, arid
terrestrial oviposition occur over a 3-4 week period. Energetically "spent" adults leave the site with virtually all lipid
stores depleted. Experimental manipulations of food level suggest that adult reproductive frequency is dependent on
prior food acquisition; thus food availability in the terrestrial habitat may partly explain the wide
among-individual variation in year-to-year breeding patterns.
Larval success is highly dependent on the timing of pond filling and drying: hydroperiod directly affects mortally
and strongly influences competitive and predatory interactions. Per-capita food resources in the larval stage
determine larval growth rates, larval period, body size at metamorphosis, and a suite of post-metamorphio adult
traits Although variation in larval period can be substantial, there is surprisingly little vanation in the absolute date
of metamorphosis. Larvae from eggs hatched 3-mo apart generally metamorphose within a few weeks of each other,
regardless of whether the aquatic habitat remains suitable for growth. Later-hatching larvae therefore metarnorphose
at a smaller size in spite of the strong relationship between body size at metamorphosis and traits related to adult
fitness.
Food resources available to individuals in both the aquatic and terrestrial stages of the life cycle affect the resource
allocation “decisions' a salamander makes. Understanding allocation decisions is critical to modeling the population
dynamics of Ambystoma opacum.

   458    .                     11:30 Tuesday                                  SE                              .. THN
Differential timing of maturation and reproduction the salamander, Ambystoma talpoldeum.                     T.J. Byan*'.
■Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, Drawer E, Aiken SC 29802 USA; R.D. Semlitsoh, ‘■Divsion of Biological
Sciences, Univeristy of Missouri, Columbia MO 65211 USA.
Variation in abiotic parameters determines the timing of reproduction in many semi-aquatic amphibians; hence, ^e
timinq of first reproduction is constrained by extrinsic (e.g., temperature and rainfall) rather than intrinsic (e.g., the
rate of qametogenesis) factors. Adaptations that release organisms from extrinsic factors may have important
Individual- and population-level implications. We describe the pattern of metamorphosis and maturation in natural
and experimental populations of the salamander Ambystoma talpoideum. Prior to first reproduction (usually at 1-yr
post-hatching), individuals that metamorphose are sexually immature when leaving the aquatic envirorimerjt, and
must mature in the terrestrial environment. Maturation, however, may precede metamoyhosis. Individuals, that
mature prior to metamorphosis remain in the aquatic environment (i.e., become "paedomorphic ), are physiologically
capable of breeding at the start of the breeding season, In the early fall. Terrestrial adults, however, must wait for the
proper suite of environmental conditions to initiate migration to the aquatic breeding habitats, which may be delayed
until mid to late winter. The result is a potentially large difference in the timing of reproduction be^een the two
morphs. The consequences of differential maturation and reproduction among individuals may collectively have
larger population-level effects.




   459                          08:30'Tuesday                                  CR7                                 AXL
Overwintering strategies of the timber rattlesnake (Crotalus horridus), corn snake (Elaphe guttata), northern
pine snake tPituophis melanoleucus), eastern king snake (Lampropeltls getula), and northern black rarer
(Coluber constrictor) in the Pine Barrens of southern New Jersey. R.T. Zappalorti, M.E. Torocco arid F.L.
Peterson, Herpetological Associates, Inc, Plant and Wildlife Consultants., 536 Seaman Avenue. Beachwood, New
^e rem sreke, northern pine snake, and eastern king snake reach the northern limit of their range in the Pine
Barrens of southern New Jersey. The timber rattlesnake and northern black racer are within the eastern core of their
range in the Pine Barrens. These species have developed different strategies to cope with harsh winter
temperatures. Radio-telemetry was used to locate hibernacula. Drift fences were used to determine dates of
emergence and ingress for 113 pine snakes (6 dens). 66 black racers (5 dens), 61 rem snakes (6 dens), and 4 king
snakes (1 den). Physical characteristics of the underground den structure and the depth at which the snakes
hibernated was observed by excavating 3 timber rattlesnakes (2 dens), 1 king snake (1 den), 12 com snakes (3
dens), 196 pine snakes (8 dens), and 41 black racers (6 dens). Rattlesnakes (N=45) and king snakes (N-6) were
observed to hibernate in shallow, water-filled cavities and tunnels along-the edge of stream comdors. The snakes
were found beneath the roots of Atlantic white cedar, black gum, or red maple trees and Sphagnum mats, at an
average depth of 30 cm, and were partially submerged in water. Com snakes, pine snakes, and black racers otteri
share the same upland hibernacula, which are generally located In stump holes or abandoned mammal burrows at
an average depth of 1.0 meter. The earliest dates for emergence and latest dates for ingress to dens are: pine make
 emeraence = March 25, return = November 27; com snake emergence = March 14, return = November 16, black
 racer omeraence - March 20. return = November 11; timber rattlesnake emergenco^= April 20,




                                 09:30 Tuesday                                  CR7                                AXL
 Biomass relationships In a snake community. H.S. Fitch. University of Kansas Natural History Reservation, 2060
 E., 1600 Road, Lawrence, Kansas 66044-9460 USA.
 A snake community was studied in mixed prairie-woodland habitat in NE Kansas, near the junction of Douglas,
 Jefferson, and Leavenworth Counties, 1948-1997. The ophifauna of 18 species attained a mean of 1350 snakes/ha
 and was dominated by the prairie ringneck, with an estimated 94.3% of the snakes and 53% of total biomass. The
 ringneck and western worm snake feed almost entiFely on earthworms-about 54% of snake prey biomass. Other
 species of ecological significance and their biomass are: racer 18.9%, garter snake 11.2%, copperhead 8.9%, black
 rat snake 3.3%, bmber rattlesnake 1.6%, worm snake 1.4%. Other than earthworm(s), prey consisted of vole, 40.3%
 (eaten by 7 species), cottontail 8.6% (4 species), deer mouse 7.7% (6 species), frog 7.4% (4 species), squirrel 4.7%
 (1 species), toad 3.1% (2 species), and glass lizard 2.8% (3 species).

   460                         08:45 Tuesday                 ..                CR7    .                             AXL
Soil composition and moisture influence the cold hardiness of hatchling painted turtles (Chrysemys picta).
J.P. Costanzo and J.D. Litzgus. Department of Zoology, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio 45056, USA; J.B. Iverson,
Department of Biology, Earlham College, Richmond, Indiana, 47374, USA; R.E. Lee(Jr.), Department of Zoology,
Miami University, Oxford, Ohio 45056, USA.
Painted turtles [Chrysemys picta) hatch in late summer but usually remain in the nest during winter. Hatchlings earn
survive subzero temperatures in the nest either by tolerating the freezing of their body tissues, at temperatures ,,-4
°C, or by avoiding ice nucleation and remaining supercooled (unfrozen) to temperatures at least as low as '12 °C.
We investigated the effects of soil composition and soil moisture on susceptibility to ice inoculation in hatchling
turtles endemic to the sandhills of Nebraska, where soil moisture in winter is variable (range 4-14%). Turtles cooled
in frozen, native soil (predominantly sand) froze at -1.6 °C, whereas turtles cooled iri frozen soil to which clay or peat
was added supercooled to -13 °C before freezing. Avoidance of inoculation by environmental ice in turtles exposed
to frozen native soil was possible only when the soil contained liffle moisture (<4%). Thus, survival of relatively low
nest temperatures, by supercooling, may be greater for turtles hibernating in sandy soils containing little moisture, or
in soils containing clay or organic matter. However, the winter microenvironment contains numerous ice nuclei (e.g.,
inorganic particulates, microorganisms) that may nevertheless promote inoculative freezing.




   461                         09:00 Tuesday                              ..   CR7                                   AXL
Field and laboratory studies on active and resting body temperatures of a nocturnal, tropical snake (Boiga
irregularis). N.L. Anderson. B. Coupe. G. Perry, T. Hetherington and J. Williams, The Ohio State Universrty,
Department of Zoology. 1735 Neil Ave., Room 104 Botany and Zoology Building. Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.
Although studies of body temperature (Tb) are extensive for snakes living in temperate regions, few studies have
focused on tropical, nocturnal snakes. Temperature sensitive radiotransmitters were used to record coelomic
temperatures of 11 brovm tree snakes (BTS) on Guam and 5 captive animals held in a thermal mosaic. Copper
models of snakes were used to characterize the climate space of BTS. Preliminary analysis suggested that captive
BTS at rest chose cooler temperatures (21 - 23 °C) than those experienced by inactive wild snakes (27 - 32 °C).
Free living snakes did not raise Tb by basking. Diurnal temperature profiles of resting wild snakes were similar to
those of copper models placed in refugia. This suggests that, in contrast to temperate snakes, resting BTS do not
actively thermoregulate. The situations for active snakes is unclear. Captive snakes with access to temepratures
between 22 - 43 °C attained greater Tb while active al night (30 - 33 °C) than free ranging snakes (25 - 26 °C) limited
to ambient temperatures between 24 - 26 °C. The difference in Tb might represent selection of a 30 - 33 °C Tb by
captive snakes or be an artifact of movement patterns through the thermal mosaic.




   462                          09:15 Tuesday                      ..          CR7                                   AXL
Constraints on life histories of temperate-zone snakes: is the price of viviparity very high?                  P,T. Gregory,
Dept, of Biology, University of Victoria, P.O. Box 3020 STN CSC, Victoria B.C. V8W 3N5.
In the highly seasonal environments of the north temperate zone, ectothermic animals such as snakes suffer
significant temporal constraints on their annual cycles, with consequences for their life histories and demographies.
For example, cold winters prohibit any activity at all, but summers also may be cool, further restricting activity. In
presumed evolutionary response to this, most temperate-zone snakes are viviparous; gravid feipales exhibit precise
behavioural thermoregulation, apparently providing optimal developmental conditions for their young. Howevec
thermoregulation often conflicts with other activities such as feeding. In fact, in many species, gravid females feed
liffle or not at all, even in captivity. The main demographic consequences of this are reduced future reproductive
output, especially through decreased reproductive frequency of individual females. Nonetheless, this tradeoff may be
relatively unimportant in the long run because many snakes are long-lived “bet-hedging" species and compensate for
low reproductive output in one year by surviving to reproduce at a later date. I illustrate these ideas with data for
garter snakes (Thamnophis) and rattlesnakes (Crotalus).




    466        .                 09:00 Tuesday                                 CF13                       ..        CHM
 Gene duplication differences suggest polytypy in the Chinese sucker, Myxocyprinus asiaticus
 (Cypriniformes: Catostomidae). D.G.K Buth. UCLA Dept, of Biology, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1606 USA.

 The Chinese sucker, Myxocyprinus asiaticus, is the only allotetraploid cafostomid fish that is endemic to Asia. Little
 is known about this species and specimens have been unavailable for genetic comparisons with North American
 species. Since about 1989, it has been imported in the pet trade as the “Chinese high-fin shark." Tsoi et al. (1989)
 first reported gene duplication characters of Myxoc^rinus, documented their findings with zymograms, and
 compared their results with the gene duplication literature on North American catostomids. Specimens I obtained
 commercially were compared elecfrophoretically (products of about 70 loci) to close catostomid relatives in the
 genera Cycleplus and Ictiobus, very few allozymes were shared. Gene duplication differences at Ak-A and Pgm-B
 suggest that Tsoi et al. and I have been examining different species because these characters have not been
 reported to vary within any catostomid species.range in the Pine Barrens. These species have deveioped different strategies to cope with harsh winter
temperatures. Radio-telemetry was used to locate hibernacula. Drift fences were used to determine dates of
emergence and ingress for 113 pine snakes (6 dens), 66 black racers (5 dens), 61 corn snakes (6 dens), and 4 king
snakes (1 den). Physical characteristics of the underground den structure and the depth at which the snakes
hibernated was observed by excavating 3 timber rattlesnakes (2 dens), 1 king snake (1 den), 12 com snakes (3
dens), 196 pine snakes (8 dens), and 41 black racers (6 dens). Rattlesnakes (N=45) and king snakes (N=6) were
observed to hibernate in shallow, water-filled cavities and tunnels along-the edge of stream corridors. The snakes
were found beneath the roofs of Atlantic white cedar, black gum, or red maple trees and Sphagnum mats, at an
average depth of 30 cm, and were partially submerged in water. Com snakes, pine snakes, and black racers often
share the same upland hibernacula, which are generally located in stump holes or abandoned mammal burrows at
an average depth of 1.0 meter. The earliest dates for emergence and latest dates for ingress to dens are: pine snake
emergence = March 25, return = November 27; com snake emergence = March 14, return = November 16; black
racer emergence » March 20, reton = Noyernbw 11;,                         wnergOTOg = April= November




 Blomasa relationships In a snake community. H.S. Fitch. University of Kansas Natural Historv Reservation 2060
 E. , 1600 Road, Lawrence, Kansas 66044-9460 USA.                                                        ’

 A snake community was studied in mixed prairie-woodland habitat in NE Kansas, near the junction of Douglas
 Jefferson, and Leavenworth Counties, 1948-1997. The ophifauna of 18 species attained a mean of 1350 snakes/ha
 Euid was dominated by the prairie ringneck, with an estimated 94.3% of the snakes and 53% of total biomass. The
 ringneck and western worm snake feed almost entirely on earthworms-about 54% of snake prey biomass. Other
 species of ecological significance and their biomass are: racer 18.9%, garter snake 11.2%, copperhead 8.9%, black
 rat snake 3.3%, timber rattlesnake 1.6%, worm snake 1.4%. Other than eatthworm(s), prey consisted of vole, 40.3%
 (eaten by 7 species), cottontail 8.6% (4 species), deer mouse 7.7% (6 species), frog 7.4% (4 species), squirrel 4.7%
 (1 species), toad 3.1% (2 species), and glass lizard 2.8% (3 species).




   464     ...                 08:30 Tuesday                                CF13                             .,CHM
Examination of inter- and Intra-specific variation within the central Asian sturgeon genus
Pseudoscaphirhynchus (Actinopterygii, Acipenserldae). B.R. Kuhaida and R.L. Mayden, University of Alabama,
Box 870345, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0345, USA; V.J. Birstein, The Sturgeon Society, 331 West 57th Street, Suite
159, New York, NY 10019, USA.
Among the most critically endangered sturgeon species worldwide are those in the genus Pseudoscaphirhynchus
(Scaphirhynchinae), which are endemic to the Syr Darya (P. fedtschenkoij and Amu Darya (P. kaufmanni and P.
hermanni) rivers of the Aral Sea in central Asia. All three species exhibit considerable intra-specific morphological
variation. Significant differences (P < 0.05) among the three species (n = 187) were found in 15 of 17 meristic and
48 of 50 mensural characters. Principal component analysis (PCA) of meristic data and sheared PCA of mensural
data provided complete or almost complete separation of these species. Eleven meristic and at least 19 mensural
characters were significantly different between the narrow- and wide-snout forms of P. kaufmanni. The short- and
long-snout forms of P. hermanni and P. fedfschenkor differed significantly for 1 and 4 meristic and 37 and at least 23
mensural characters, respectively. Differences included number of fin rays, dermal plates, snout spines, and gill
rakers, as well as snout, plate, fin, caudal peduncle, and barbel measurements. Sheared PCA gave complete
separation between the two forms of P. fedtschenkoi, with snout, caudal peduncle, and fin measurements loading
heavily. Results indicate that there are potentially six rather than three species in the genus Pseudoscaphirhynchus.




   465                        08:45 Tuesday                                CFIS .                            CHM
Lake Nipigon ciscoes species flock (Coregonus spp.): an ecomorphological and microsatellite assessment.
J, Turgeon and L. Bematchez, Departement de biologie. Universite Laval, Sainte-Foy, Quebec, G1K 794; A. Estoup,
Laboratoira de genetique des poissons, INRA-Jouy-en-Josas, Jouy-en-Josas 78352 France.
Studies on north temperate fish species indicate that new habitat availability following the last glacial retreat has
promoted ecological speciation in post-glacial lakes. The extensive ecophenotypio polymorphism observed among
Great Lakes ciscoes suggests that they have radiated through trophic adaptation and reproductive isolation. This
study aims al relating the ecomorphological and genetic polymorphisms expressed by the Lake Nipigon ciscoes
assemblage in order to evaluate the likelihood of an intralacustrine divergence driven by ttie exploitation of
alferriative resources. Morphological variation, trophic and spatial niche are characterized and contrasted among four
putative species (N>200). Genetic variation at 10 microsatellite loci is analysed to appraise the extent of genetic
structuring and reproductive isolation among species. Our results reveal various levels of niche overlap and indicate
that Coregonus artedi is more generalist than C. nigripinnis, C. hoyi and C. zenethicus. Surprisingly, trophic and
morphological specialization were not as congruent as expected. Significant but low proportion of genetic variance
can be attributed to differences among species allelic arrays. Globally, the results suggest that C. zenethicus and C.
artedi are probably the initial colonisators of Lake Nipigon and that C. nigripinnis and C. hoyi are diverging from C.
artedithrough intralacustrine trophic specialization and spatial segregation.

behavioural thermoregulation, apparently providing optimal developmental conditions for their young. However,
thermoregulation often conflicts with other activities such as feeding. In fact, in many species, gravid females feed
little or not at all, even in captivity. The main demographic consequences of this are reduced future reproductive
output, especially through decreased reproductive frequency of individual females. Nonetheless, this tradeoff may be
relatively unimportant in the long njn because many snakes are long-lived "bet-hedging" species and compensate for
low reproductive output in one year by sunriving to reproduce at a later date. I illustrate these ideas with data for
garter snakes (Thamnophis) and rattlesnakes (Crofa/us).




 S?"®. duplication difterances auggeat polytypy in the Chinese sucker, lUyxocyprinus aslaticua
 (Cyprlnlformes: Catostomidae). D.G.B. Both. UCLA Dept, of Biology, Los Angeles. CA 90095-1606 USA.
The Chinese sucker, Myxocyprinus asiaticus, is the only allotetraploid catostomid fish that is endemic to Asia. Little
IS known about this species and specimens have been unavailable for genetic comparisons with North American
species. Since about 1989, it has been imported in the pet trade as the "Chinese high-fin shark." Tsoi et al. (1989)
first reported gene duplication characters of Myxocyprinus, documented their findings with zymograms, and
compared their results with the gene duplication literature on North American catostomids. Specimens I obtained
commercially were compared electrophoretically (products of about 70 loci) to close catostomid relatives in the
genera Cycleptus and Ictiobus; very few allozymes were shared. Gene duplication differences at Ak-A and Pgm-B
suggest fliat Tsoi et al. and I have been examining different species because these characters have not been
reported to vary within any catostomid species.




   467                         09:15 Tuesday                               CF13                              CHM
Phylogeny and biogeography of ricefishes (Beloniformes,Adrianichthyidae) L.R. Parent!. National Museum of
Natural History,, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., 20560.
Ricefishes, known best by the medaka, Oryzias iatipes, are classified in the family Adrianichthyidae in the
atherinomorph order Beloniformes. The approximately twenty-five ricefish species range throughout fresh and
brackish waters of eastern Eurasia, Southeast Asia, the Indian subcontinent, across the Indo-Australian archipelago,
crossing Wallace's Line, to Timor. Throughout most of their range, ricefishes are small, reaching about 40 mm SL; in
the tectonic lakes of Sulawesi, however, ricefishes are relative giants, reaching about 200 mm SL. Ricefishes are
monophyletic and comprise two monophyletic subgroups or lineages, one large bodied and one small, diagnosed
here by morphological characters. Outgroup comparison using traditional morphology supports a transformation
from large to small, whereas preliminary molecular data supports a transformation from small to large. Sulawesi
ricefishes are not monophyletic but, instead, include members of each of the two lineages. As expected, the sister
taxa have an area of overlap, or sympafry, in Sulawesi. This distribution pattern is found in other fish taxa,
supporting the idea that neither lineage is primitive to the other, but that there was a widespread ancestral taxon,
and, once sister lineages diverged, some members of one or both lineages dispersed into the range of the other.




   468.                        09:30 Tuesday                               CF13                             CHM
Phylogeographic and genetic relationships of spotted sand bass (Paratabrax maculatofasciatus) from the
Gulf of California versus the outer Pacific Coast and its congeners: -A comparison of mtDNA control region
sequences and allozymes. A.I. Brokaw and C.A. Stepien, Dept, of Biology, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH 44106-7080 USA; R.H. Rosenblatt, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California, San
Diego, San Diego, CA 92093 USA.

Systematic relationships among three sympatric serranid sea basses from the warm temperate eastern Pacific coast;
Paralabrax ctathratus, P. nebuiifer, and P. macutatofasciatus, are analyzed from mitochondrial DNA control region
sequences and 40 allozyme loci. Phylogeographic and genetic divergences of P. macutatofasciatus from two outer
Pacific coast and three Gulf of California populations are tested to evaluate whether the warm tropical waters of the
southern tip of the Baja Peninsula constitute a barrier to gene flow. The three species are distinguished by many
fixed allozymic and sequence differences, corresponding to an estimated 8 million years of divergence. Allozyme
and sequence divergences estimate the separations of P. nebuiifer and P. maculatofasciatus as 4 to 5 million years,
and the Pacific coast and Gulf of California populations of P. maculatofasciatus as 750,000 years. The Pacific and
Gulf populations are distinguished by two fixed mtDNA sequence differences and three significant allozymic
frequency differences. Three mtDNA haplotypes and three unique allozyme alleles are identified along the Pacific
coast, and the Gulf houses four haplotypes and six unique allozyme alleles. The tropical barrier of the southern Baja
Peninsula limits gene flow, resulting in divergence of the Pacific coast and Gulf of California populations.                              09:45 Tuesday                                CF13                               CHM
  469
The Apogon erythrinus complex: not all little red fishes are the same. D,W. Greenfield, Department of Zoology,
University of Hawaii, 2538 The Mall, Honolulu, Hl 96822 USA.
In Hawaii, a small, red, semitranslucent species of cardinalfish was described as Apogon                   Similar
cardinalflshes from other areas of the Indo-Pacific have been identified as this species, or E cr^hnnus h:as been
synonomyzed with A. crassiceps or A. coccineus. In addition, other similar species such as A. ^°Vssa and A.
kominatoensis have been involved. These fishes form two phenetic groups defined by scale pattem and snoirt
structure: one group contains A. coccineus described from the Red Sea as well as other specres, and the second
group contains A. erythrinus from Hawaii.       The A. erythnnus complex appears to be composed of several
unde^ribed species in lhe Pacific and Indian oceans, with A. erythnnus being endemic to Hawaii.




                               10:30 Tuesday                                CF13                              CHM .
   470
Phylogenetic significance of the ontogeny of structures related tp sexual rnaturation M maleTree inae
(Cyprirredontiformes: Poeciliidae). C.M. Rodngugz, Museo Naoional de Histona Natural, Plaza de la Cuflura
Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic; E. Sdnchez-Bencosme, Museo de Zoologia de Grupo Jaragua, Inc El Vergel
#33, El Vergel, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic.
A search for characters was aimed at inferring phylogenetic relationships of Poepfliinae■ on fte basis iof^ppenio
changes in several structures during male maturation. Informatiori relevarit to the
discovered in the modification and migration oephalad of the pelvic fins, ana fin, and         P’®"9'°Ph9res |acb^^^
as well as the histolysis of the first hemal spine. That migrates antenorly in almost all genera dI Poecihinae (w'‘h
exception of at least two genera) to form a small bone of the suspensonum of the gonopodium Jelled the
Transformation of the second through the third, fourth or fifth hemal spines into stniotures called the gorrapophjrees,
    along with the gonaotinosts, the ligastyle, and muscles supports the gonopodium. New hypothe®es of ^^0'097
and phylogenetic relationships in the cladistics sense are proposed. Sfabstiod ®9?*X®®®j
Principal Component Analysis, applied to ontogenetic transformabons. show significant differences among group that
were hypothesized previously to be close relatives.




                                10:45 Tuesday                                CF13                             ■CHM
    471
 Systematics and gonadal morphology: discovering a relationship.            H J. Gngr, Stock Enhancemont Research
 Facility.Florida Manne Research Institute, 14495, Harilee Road Port M^atee, FL, 34221-9620, L.R. Pae                 .
 National Museum of Natural ,Hisfoty. Smithsonian Institution,, Washington. D.C. 20560.
 A comparative histological survey of gonad structure in higher bony fishes revealed that the Jobul^ ^e^al
 compartments in testes of all Atherinomorpha surveyed are thei restricted testis type; spemmtogoroa are l^tecI only
 at the distal termini of lobules. In addition, oocyte yolk in the atheimomotphs isaqianulY- These deiwed chara<^ers,
 along with numerous others, support atherinomorph monophyly. Spermatogonia in the lobular testes of o^er ^gto
 teleosts are distributed along the length of the lobules (unrestricted testis type) as in. for example, the percomorph
 SpXsundedma/is, snook, and the mugilomorph Mug,7 cephalus; black mu let. Mu^,l
 cosmopolitan species of importance as a food fish and for aguaculture. Stock declines of this species have o^rred
 in Rorida but a recent net ban curtailing the commercial catch is expected to result in a rebound in the b ack mullet
 population. Mullets are of worid-wide commercial importance, yet their systerrvitic 9?®'’'°"
 been proposed as close relatives of atherinomorphs. Ongoing surveys of testicular and °°cyte morphotogy in
 atheririomorphs and their postulated close relatives will help danfy the taxonomic position of mullets as well as
 demonstrate the value of gonadal morphology in teleost systematics.




  ReaponM* of buKfrog larvae to hypoxic and load-contaminated water. T.M. Rk:e. B.J. Blackstone, W.L. NIxdorf
  and D.H. Taylor, Miami University, Department of Zoology, Oxford. Ohio 45056 USA.
 Amphibians are exposed to lead (Pb) around mining sites, areas with extensive automobile traffic, and skeet ranges.
 Because Pb decreases hemoglobin synthesis, Pb-e^osed amphibians might display responses such as air-gulping
 and increased buccal ventilation similar to subjects in hypoxic water. We exposed bullfrog larvae to either 0 or 775
 ppb Pb and either 3.50 or 7.85 ppm oxygen for 7 days. General activity (movements greater than one body length)
 was decreased in larvae exposed to low oxygen compared to those in high oxygen, but was not influenced by
 exposure to Pb. Pb-exposed larvae made more trips to the surface (air-gulping) compared to unexposed larvae
 even under high oxygen conditions. Lanrae exposed to both Pb and low oxygen displayed increased buccal
 ventilation compared to larvae exposed to either treatment separately. Pb-exposed larvae decreased in mass during
 the exposure period whereas unexposed larvae decreased in mass. The combined effects of Pb exoosure anil

                               11:00 Tuesday                                CF13                              CHM
  472
Are Coregonus of the central alpine lakes species-flocks? M.R, Douglas and P.C. Brunner, Zool^ical Museum,
University of Zurich-Irchel, Switzerland; L. Bernatchez, Department of Biology, University of Laval, Sainte Foy, QU,
Canada.
Divergent forms of Coregonus, with uncertain taxonomic status, co-exist in sympatiy within Central Alpine lakes.
Molecular, morphological and ecological data, generated for 533 specimens from 19 populations in 8 lakes, were
compared amongst themselves, against three evolutionary and two geographic models, and again^ four^ putative
taxonomic arrangements. Data matrices were based on six microsatellite loci, five menstic, and four gualitalnre
characters pertaining fin and body coloration. Two- and three-way Mantel tests were used to compare and contrast
data and models. Allele freguencies and non-parametric discriminant analysis of genetic data supported distinctness
of each population. Mantel tests revealed that genetic pattern was best explained wi^ a species-flock mMel, while
the phenotype supported a model which invoked multiple invasions. However, similar phenotypes have bem
produced again and again among different lakes through convergent evolution. Thus, inorphological data are
homoplasious and their application in various taxonomies has confused an interesting and unigue situation.




                               08:00 Tuesday                                CA10 .                           . MCN
   473
Distribution of androgen receptors In the brain of two anuran amphibians.               SX, Boyd and T.J. Ebersole,
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame. IN 46556 UbA.
The distribution of neuronal nuclei that concentrate 3H-labeled androgens has been described for a few amphibians
Location of androgen receptors in anuran amphibian brain has not been reported howev®r using any ^her
technique. We used immunocytochemistry to locate androgen receptor-like staining m the brain of rn^e wd fem^
bullfrogs (Rana catesbeiana) and South African clawed frogs (Xenopus laevis} The antibody (PG-21 f^ G
Prins) was raised against the rat androgen receptor. Brains of both species contamed specific, nudear androgen
receptor-like immunoreactivity (AR-ir). Staining was broadly distnbuted across the brain and was found, for example,
in the olfactory bulb, amygdala, preoptio area, hypothalamus, thalamus, optic tectum, torus semicirculans arid
medulla. The percent of AR-positive nuclei in individual brain areas vaned greater (range from 5/o to 94/o) both
within and across species. Significant sexual differences in the percent of AR-positive nudei were seen iri both
species in several brain areas. Brain areas containing androgen receptor-like immunoreaotivity may represent sites
of control of reproduction or behavior in these amphibians.
Supported by NSF #IBN95-14305.




                                08:15 Tuesday                                CA10                              MCN
    474 . .
 Calling in the chilly tropics: Does temperature affect call characteristics in hig^levation eurythermic
 frogs? C.A. Navas. Department of Physiology, University of Sao Paulo Sao Paulo SP,. Brasi; C.R. Bevier, School
 of Science and Health, Philadelphia College of. Textiles and Science, Philadelphia, PA 19144 USA.
 A few species of frogs representing four families (Bufonidae, Dendrobatidae, Hylidae, and Ireptodactylidlae) inhabit
 elevations above 3000 m in the tropical Andes, an environment that is charactenzed by dramatic thermal
 fluctuations. Although nocturnal temperatures are consistently low, diurnal temperatures are rnore variable,
 sometimes changing as much as 20°C in one hour at soil level. This degree of thermal vanabon forces u'umal
 Andean frogs to^ be eurythermic. One species in particular. Coiostethus subpunctatus, ® "’•"Buing b^^ «
 remains active year-round, calls from dawn to dusk, and expenences temperatures dunng calling activity that range
 from 6 to 25°C. This frog, therefore, represents an excellent research model for ^udying the effects ofternperature
 on patterns of natural tehavior of ectothermic vertebrates. In this study we recorded vocalizations of
 mafes from which we estimated body temperature by taking the temperature with a thermcKOuple themometer
 where the calling male was found. We selected at least 5 calls at random from each individual and ana^zed caH
 characteristics such as calling rate, duration, and freguency. At least one parameter, calling rate, is indeed affected
 by temperature. Other characteristics are more variable and the effects of temperature on these will be discussed.




                                             id:                             CA10                               MCN ■
 Assessment of the nutritional status of Japanese anchovy larvae from four hydrographic regions in southern
 margin of the East China Sea - as examined by RNA/DNA ratio and otolith fluctuating asymmetry. T.-S. Chiu
 and J.-B. Huang, Dept, of Zoology, Natl. Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 106, ROC.
 During the spring bloom of Japanese anchovy (EngrauHs japonica}, we assessed the nutritional status of the larvae
 in four hydrographic regions identified in the southern margin of the East China Sea - the southern East China Sea
 (SECS), mixing zone (MIX), upwelling water (UWW) and Kuroshio (KUR), and the fitness of the species was thus
 inferred. The nutritional status was assessed by means of nucleic acid and otolith fluctuating asymmetry analysis.
 The amounts of RNA and DNA, and the radius, perimeter and surface area of right and left otoliths were measured in
 individual lanra basis. RNA/DNA ratio and fluctuating asymmetry (FA) from IR-LI of otolith measurement were
 evaluated to indicate their nutritional status. Samples were obtained in cruises from 1994 to 1997. Larvae from thesystemanc^an^gonaoannorphoioov^iseo^lna a relationship. HJ. Grier. Stock Enhancement Research
Facility,Florida Manne Research Institute, 14495, Hartlee Road, Port Manatee, FL, 34221-9620; L.R. Parent!,
National Museum of Natural ,History, Smithsonian Institution,, Washington, D.C. 20560.
A comparative histoiogical survey of gonad structure in higher bony fishes revealed that the lobular germinal
compartments in testes of all Atherinomorpha surveyed are the restricted testis type; spermatogonia are located only
at the distal temnini of lobules, in addition, oocyte yolk in ths atherinomorphs is agranular. These derived characters,
along with numerous others, support atherinomorph monophyly. Spermatogonia in the lobular testes of other higher
teleosts are distributed along the length of the lobules (unrestricted testis type) as in, for example, the percomorph
Centropomus undecimalis, snook, and the mugilomorph Mugil cephalus, black mullet. Mugil cejihalus is a
cosmopolitan species of importance as a food fish and for aquaculture. Stock declines of this species have occurred
in Rorida, but a recent net ban curtailing the commercial catch is expected to result in a rebound in the black mullet
population. Mullets are of world-wide commercial importance, yet their systematic position is unclear. Mullets have
been proposed as dose relatives of atherinomorphs. Ongoing sunreys of testicular and oocyte morphology in
atherinomorphs and their postulated close relatives will help darify the taxonomic position of mullets as well as
demonstrate the value of gonadal morphology in teleost systematics.




  475                         Q8 3Q Tuesday . .                         .CAIO                        MCN
ResTCnass of bullfrog larvae to hypoxic and lead-contaminated water. T.M. Rice. B.J. Blackstone, W.L. Nixdorf
and D.H. Taylor, Miami University, Department of Zoology, Oxford, Ohio 45056 USA.

Amphibians are exposed to lead (Pb) around mining sites, areas with extensive automobile traffic, and skeet ranges.
Because Pb decreases hemoglobin synthesis, Pb-e^osed amphibians might display responses such as air-gulping
and increased buccal ventilation similar to subjects in hypoxic water. We exposed bullfrog larvae to either 0 or 775
ppb Pb and either 3.50 or 7.85 ppm oxygen for 7 days. General activity (movements greater than one body length)
was decreased in larvae exposed to low oxygen compared to those in high oxygen, but was not influenced by
exposure to Pb. Pb-exposed larvae made more trips to the surface (air-gulping) compared to unexposed lanrae
even under high oxygen conditions. Larvae exposed to both Pb and low oxraen displayed increased buccal
ventilation compared to larvae exposed to either treatment separately. Pb-exposed larvae decreased in mass during
the eiiposure period whereas unexposed larvae decreased in mass. The combined effects of Pb exposure and
hypoxia could decrease survival of lanrae in the field. Not only might lanrae experience physiological problems from
decreased oxygen intake, but they might also experience greater predation pressure due to increased presence at
the surface and reduced size.




   4.76                        08:45 Tuesday                                 CA10                               MCN
Daily body temperature variation of western toads (Sirfo boreas} in forested habitats in southeastern Idaho.
P.E. Bartelt. Waldorf College, Forest City, lA 50436 USA; C.R. Peterson, Idaho State UniversiN, Pocatello, ID
83209 USA.
Understanding the thennal biology of ectotherms is fundamental for understanding factors that affect their
movements and habitat use. For wet-skinned amphibians, one of these factors is different rates of evaporative water
loss among habitats. Comparing botty temperature variation of amphibians to variations in the thermal and hydric
conditions among habitats will help biologists to better understand how habitat modifoation may affect amphibian
movements and habitat use. For a one month period during 1995, we monitored the body temperatures (Tb) of adult
western toads and used physical models to monitor the environmental conditions of fore^ed habitats they used. We
surgically implanted temperature-sensitive transmitters into four toads and used an automated data recording system
to record Tb every five minutes. We used an array of physical models and single-channel dataloggers to measure
operative temperatures every 15 minutes and calculated rates of evaporative water loss over four hour blocks of
time, in shaded and exposed microsites among four habitats. Nighttime toad Tb's were higher than model
temperatures, suggesting that toads remained under cover or in burrows at night. Daytime toad Tb's were warmest
in the shrub habitat, rather than in the regenerating clearcut, and coolest in the forest canopy.




   477 .                       09:00 Tuesday                              . .CA10 . .                          MCN
Economy of predator avoidance by salamanders responding to chemical cues. D.M. Madison. Department of
Biological Sciences, State University of New York at Binghamton. Binghamton, New York 13902-6000; J.H.
McDarby, Siena College, Loudonville, NY 12211-1462; J.C. Marez, Department of Biological Sciences, State
University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York 13902-6000.
Determining how much time and energy to commit to predator defense is a fundamental problem for animals. Prey­
specific chemical cues in the scent ofpredators may allow other prey to economize defense. We show that during
the day salamanders (Plathodon cinereus) avoid the chemical traces of all individuals of a snake predator
(Thamnophis sirtalis}, but at night avoid only those traces from snakes that had fed on conspecific salamanders. Our
daU show predator recognition, diet discrimination, and the use of predator activity schedules in risk assessment.
This sophisticated, chemosensory mechanism of diet assessment and avoidance economy in a common amphibian
may have broad relevarrce to interpreting and manipulating the way higher terrestrial vertebrates respond to their
environment.

Calling In the chilly tropics: Does temperature affect call characteristics In high-elevation eurythermic
frogs? C.A. Navas. Department of Physiology, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, Brasil; C.R. Bevier, School
of Science and Health, Philadelphia College of, Textiles and Science, Philadelphia, PA 19144 USA.
A few species of frogs representing four families (Bufonidae, Dendrobatidae, Hylidae, and Leptodactylidae) inhabit
elevations above 3000 m in the tropical Andes, an environment that is characterized by dramatic thermal
fluctuations. Although nocturnal temperatures are consistently low, diurnal temperatures are more variable,
sometimes changing as much as 20°C in one hour at soil level. This degree of thermal variation forces diurnal
Andean frogs to be eurythermic. One species in particular, Colostethus subpunctatus, is intriguing because it
remains active year-round, calls from dawn to dusk, and experiences temperatures during calling activity that range
from 6 to 25°C. This frog, therefore, represents an excellent research model for studying the effects of temperature
on patterns of natural behavior of ectothermic vertebrates. In this study we recorded vocalizations of more than 50
males from which we estimated body temperature by taking the temperature with a thermocouple thermometer
where the calling male was found. We selected at least 5 calls at random from each individual and analyzed call
characteristics, such as calling rate, duration, and frequency. At least one parameter, calling rate, is indeed affected
by temperature. Other characteristics are more variable and the effects of temperature on these will be discussed.




  478 .               .       09 15 Tuesday                               CA1Q      ..             MCN
Assessment of the nutritional status of Japanese anchovy larvae from four hydrographic regions in southern
margin of the East China Sea - as examined by RNA/DNA ratio and otolith fluctuating asymmetry. T.-S. Chiu
and J.-B. Huang, Dept, of Zoology, NaB. Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 106, ROC.

During the spring bloom of Japanese anchovy (Engraulis Japonica'), we assessed the nutrifional status of the larvae
in four hydrographic regions identified in the southern margin of the East China Sea - the southern East China Sea
(SECS), mixing zone (MIX), upwelling wafer (UWW) and Kuroshlo (KUR), and the fitness of the species was thus
inferred. The nutrition^ status was assessed by means of nucleic acid and otolith fluctuating asymmetry analysis.
The amounts of RNA and DNA, and the radius, perimeter and surface area of right and left otoliths were measured in
individual lanra basis. RNA/DNA ratio and fluctuating asymmetry (FA) from IR-LI of otolith measurement were
evaluated to indicate their nutrifional status. Samples were obtained in cniises from 1994 to 1997. Lanrae from the
KUR showed a significantly lower RNA/DNA ratio than those from the SECS, MIX and UWW. FA measured by IR-LI
of otolith surface area also exhibited a significant higher variation by larvae from the KUR. Therefore, the larvae
occurred in the KUR was judged to be in poor condition. As a result we may hypothesize that the western edge of
the Kuroshio current acts as a border line preventing the oceanic dispersal of Japanese anchovy in the waters of the
southern East China Sea area.




   '479                         09:30 Tuesday .,                               CA10                                MCN
Energetics of northern pike: from laboratory to field and back again.                M.C. Lucas. University of Durham,
Department of Biological Sciences, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK; J.D. Armstrong, Freshwater Rsheries
Laboratory, Pitlochry, Perthsire PHI 6 5LB, UK; L.D. Simms, University of Durham, Department of Biological
Sciences, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK.
A good deal of Ed Crossman's research has been devoted to the study of the Esocidae or pikes. In Europe only
northern pike. Esox ludus, are present; but the wide importance of this species as a top predator in slow-moving
rivers and lakes throughout the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere means that Ed's work on this and other
species of esocid has stimulated research by many scientists worldwide. We chart our group's progress in the study
of pike energetics over the last 15 years, demonstrating how the northern pike's respiratory capacity is adapted
towards sprint activity and digestion of large meals; how tracking and heart rate telemetry have been used to
ex^ine behaviour, estimate meal size and partition energy expenditure in the natural environment; and how
variations in basal metabolic rate may be closely related to individual strategies of growth and survival, we conclude
with an assessment of the direction of future work on the behaviour and energetics of esocids.




   480                          09:45 Tuesday                                 CA10                                MCN
Flow visualisation and kinematics of the body and pectoral fin during swimming In sturgeon. C.D. Wilga and
G.V. Lauder, Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697 USA.
Negatively buoyant fishes have been observed to adopt a tilted body attack angle relative to swimming direction at
low speeds. Sturgeon are negatively buoyant and, unlike the actinopferygians studied previously, possess pectoral
fins that are rela^ely fixed and oriented parallel with the longitudinal axis of the body. Swimming behavior was
studied in the white sturgeon, Adpenser transmontanus, using 3-D kinematics, electromyography, and quantitative
flw visualization. Sturgeon swam using continuous undulations of the body with a positive body tilt that increases
with decreasing swimming speed (3.0-0.5 B.L.s-1). Thus, sturgeon appear to supplement total lift by altering body
attack angle over a range or swimming speeds. This increased lift may ba necessary to overcome their negative
buoyancy. Sturgeon also vary body attack angle from positive to negative while changing position in the water
column from rising to station holding to sinking. In addition to altering body tilt, sturgeon also actively alter the angle
of the pectoral fins. As the sturgeon changes position from rising to station holding to sinking, the angle of the
posterior portion of the pectoral fin increases. Thus, pectoral fins appear to actively assist changes in body position.   481                         10:15 Tuesday                                CA10                               MCN
A field study of metabolism during terrestrial spawning in the grunion fish. K.L. Martin and R.C. Van Winkle,
Department of Biology, Pepperdine University, Malibu, CA 90263-4321.
Gnjnion fish (Leuresthes tenuis} exit the ocean to spawn on sandy beaches. Both males and females move about
actively during terrestrial spawning. In a previous study, grunion that were removed from water in the laboratory and
forced to be active showed increased lactate concentrations in white muscles and blood. In this study, grunion of
both sexes were caught in the field before spawning, and following completion of normal spawning activity. These
were compared with grunion that had not emerged from water, and with a group of fish that had emerged but not
spawned, then were exercised to exhaustion in air. Lactate concentrations from white muscle and the heart were
measured for males and females in all four treatments. There were no significant differences between males arid
females in the field, before or after spawning, in lactate in white muscle and heart muscle. Values were within
nomial field or resting ranges for ectothermic vertebrates. Fish exercised to exhaustion in air showed significantly
higher lactate in both white muscle and heart than other fish. We suggest that grunion do not employ anaerobiosis
during normal emergence and spawning out of water.




   482                         10:30 Tuesday           . . .                CA10      .                        MCN
Crushing performance of stripped burrfish (Chllomycterus schoepfi): Modulation of muscle patterns in
production of crushing force. W.L. Korff and P.C. Wainwright, Department of Biological Science, Florida State,
University, Tallahassee, FL 32306-4340 USA,.
The relationship between force production and patterns of muscular activation were investigated for striped burrfish
IChilomycterus schoepli). We were particularly interested in how these fish modulated adductor mandibulae muscle
activity in response to prey of varying hardness. Periwinkle snails (Littorina irrorata) of a known size were fed to
starved burrfish and electromyograms (EMG) were recorded from four muscles that are recruited during feeding
(Al B, A2 alpha and A2B of the adductor mandibulae complex (AM), and the levator operculi). Snail size was used to
quantity force exerted by burrfish based on a linear relationship found between the length of the snail shell and force
necessary to crush the shell in previous experiments. We quantified muscle activity patterns by measuring bur^
duration integrated rectified area of burst, and burst intensity (area/duration) from EMGs. Correlation, multiple
regression, and analyses of covariance (ANCOVA) were used to decipher the relationship between prey size (force)
and muscle activity. In general, individuals modulated force production by increasing duration and area of EMG
bursts tor all muscles in the AM complex. Intensity measures varied both by individual and by muscle suggesting
that a variety of motor patterns can produce similar crushing forces.




   483                          10:45 Tuesday                               CA10                                MCN
Lipid storage and composition in tropical surgeonfishes (Teleostei:Acanthuridae).                    W.L. Montgomery,
Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5640 USA; H. Nakagawa and
T Umino, Faculty of Applied Biological Science, Hiroshima University, Higashi-hiroshima 739-8528, Japan; T.
Shibuno, IshigaW Tropical Station, Seikai National Fisheries Research Institute, Ishigaki 907-04, Japan.
Lipid composition of tropical marine reef fishes is poorly known, despite their use as human food and interest in
health-related benefits of fish lipids. We examined composiUon of lipids from epaxial muscle, liver, and two storage
sites (intraperitoneal fat, IFF; retroperitoneal fat bodies [FB] posterior to the peritoneal cavity) in three species of
surgeonfishes from Ishigaki Island, Japan: Acanthurus bariene, A. lineatus, Naso liluratus. Triglycerides dominated
all samples of neutral lipid and constituted > 99% of IPF and FB. Cl 6 fatty acids prevailed in both neutral and polar
lipids although C18 and C20 acids were also common. Saturated fatty acids, dominated by palmitic acid (16:0),
comprised 38.7-50.7% of acids from neutral lipids and 30.8-41.1% from polar lipids. Polyunsaturated acids (PUFA)
were prevalent in polar lipids (especially 20:4n6, 20:5n3, 22:2n3, 22:5n3, 22:5n6 and 22:6n3). Common PUFA of
neutral lipids were 18:2n6,18:4n3, several n-3 and n-6 C20 acids, and 22:2n3 and 22:5n3. IPF and FB were almost
identical across species. The FB appears to be an accessory storage site which overcomes constraints on lipid
storage imposed by a small, inflexible abdominal cavity which contains both viscera and consistently voluminous gut
contents. Fatty acid signatures indicate that largely overlooked epiphytic or epilithic diatoms contribute significantly
to lipid acquisition.




    487                        .1.1:45 Tuesday                               CA10                               MCN
.Aromatase activity in ths neural tissues of the Canadian red-sided garter snake (Thamnophls sirtalis
 parietalis) under hibernaculum temperatures. R.W Krohmer. Department of Science, Saint Xavier University,
 3700 W. 103rd Street, Chicago, IL 60655 USA.

 Numerous studies have indicated that the initiation of spring courtship behavior and mating in the male Canadian ibd-
 sided garter snake, unlike most vertebrate species, is independent or circulating androgens. Recently, however, field
 data has shown that circulating levels of testosterone (T), elevated in the fall, remain elevated throughout hibernation
 and upon emergence. Even though T levels are elevated in the spring, to date, the only known stimulus initiating
 courtship behavior is a period of low temperature dormancy followed by the onset of warm temperatures. In the field,
 winters (and subsequently hibernation) can begin as early as October and extend into May. In the laboratory,
 courtship behavior can be initiated after as few as seven weeks under hibernaculum conditions (total darkness at 4-
 5C). However, as the duration of the dormancy period was increased (up to 17 weeks) courtship behavior
 intensified. Similar to other vertebrates, the neural pathways critical for the Initiafion and maintenance of courtship
 behavior in the Canadian red-sided garter snake have been shown to contain sex steroid concentrating neurons.
 However, while these neurons respond to seasonal variations in T, the role of testosterone in the initiation and
 maintenance of courtship behavior In the male red-sided garter snake has continued to elude investigators. Recent
 studies have identified aromatase activity {AA} within specific ares of the pathway closely associated with the steroid
 concentrating neurons. The presence of AA within the areas controlling courtship, suggests T may play an indirect
 role In 'setting up" this neural pathway during the protracted hibernation in the field, mis study was designed to
 investigate AA in neural tissues maintained under conditions of hibernation

   484                        11:00 Tuesday                                CA10                               MCN
Vitamin D photobiosynthetic opportunity and ability of free-living Texas spiny lizards and house geckos: a
preliminary study E. Carman and G.W. Ferguson, Dept. Biol., Box 298930, Texas Christian University, Fort Worth,
Texas , 76129, ; W.E. Gehrmann, Sci. Dept. Tarrant Co. Junior Coll., Fort Worth TX; M.F. Holick and T. Chen,
Vitamin D, Skin, Bone Laboratory, Boston Univercity Medical, Center, Boston, MA.
The ability and opportunity to photobiosynthesize vitamin D utilizing ultraviolet light were compared in free-living
Texas spiny lizards Sceloponis olivaceous and house geckos Hemidactylus turcicus. Focal observations of each of
ftree individuals of each species throughout an entire diel activity cycle allowed measurement of relative
photobiosynthetio opportunity by providing a map for retracing the time and location pattern of each lirard with in-
vitro provitamin D models. The models, when exposed to ultraviolet light, convert their contained provitamin D to
previtamin D in proportion to the UV dose. As expected, photobiosynthetic opportunity was greater for Ihe diurnal
Sceloporus than for the crepuscular/nocturnal Hemidactylus. In contrast, when excised dorsal skins of field-caught
lizards were exposed to moderately high (90 microwatt^cm squared) UV-B irradiance in the laboratory, the more-
sensitive Hemidactylus skins converted provitamin D to previtamin D to a significantly greater degree than those of
Sceloporus. The approach shows great promise for studying patterns of photobiosynthesis within a species and
surveying opportunity and ability in various herp taxa.




   485                         11:15 Tuesday                               CA10                              MCN
Sexual dimorphic nuclei In the brain of the Canadian red-sided garter snake (Thamnophls sirtalis sirtalis):
Role of hormones and/or environment. D. Baleckaitis and R.W. Krohmer, Science Department, Saint Xavier
University, 3700 W 103rd Street, Chicago, IL 60655 USA.
The Canadian red-sided garter snake has been reported to exhibit a dissociated reproductive pattern, mating at a
time when the gonads are quiescent. To date, the only known stimulus initiating courtship behavior in the male red­
sided garter snake is a period of low temperature dormancy followed by exposure to warm temperatures. Numerous
studies have delineated the neural pathway critical for the initiation and maintenance of courtship behavior in the
male red-sided garter snake. Similar to other vertebrates, neural regions that comprise this pathway have been
shown to contain sex steroid concentrating neurons. Many vertebrate species exhibit sexual dimorphic areas in their
neural tissue. In addition, these changes have been shown to be in response to variations in the concentration of
sex steroids hormones. To determine if neural tissues in the red-sided garter snake are sexually dimorphic due to a
possible response to seasonal and/or hormonal fluctuations, brain areas were measured in animals of both sexes
following hormonal and environmental manipulation.




   486                        11:30 Tuesday                                CA10        .     .                MCN
Aromatase activity In the brain of the Canadian red-sided garter snake (Thamnophls sirtalis parietalis):
Specific area punch analysis. M.H. Boyle and R.W. Krohmer, Science Department, Saint Xavier University, 3700
W. 103rd Street, Chicago, IL 60655 USA.
During the past 15 years, research has delineated the neural pathway critical for the initiation and maintenance of
courtship behavior in the Canadian red-sided garter snake. Similar to other vertebrates, the nerual regions that
comprise this pathway have been shown to contain sex steroid concentrating neurons. Seasonal actiyation of
courtship behavior in the male red-sided garter snake, however, has been described as independent of circulating
testosterone (T) levels. While these neural areas have been shown to be critical for the initiation and control of
courtship behavior in the male red-sided garter snake, the role of T, if any, continues to elude investigators.
Recently, we have Identified aromatase activity {AA} in various regions of the garter snake brain by quantifying the in
vitro formation of pH]esttone from androst-4-ene-3, 17-dione,[1,2,6,7-=H(N)]- precursor. To determine if AA was
intensified in areas containing sex steroid concentrating neurons, areas associated with courtship behavior were
isolated using a specific-area micro dissection punch technique. Specific areas investigated included the anterior-
hypothalamus preoptio area (AHPOA), nucleus sphericus (NS), and the septum (S). Punches were taken from the
cortex (C) as a possible control. There was no significant difference in AA in animals collected in the spring or fall.
There was a significant overall gender difference in AA, with females exhibiting higher levels of AA in the AHPOA
and NS. In mates, the AHPOA and septum exhibited significanly greater AA than the nucleus sphericus and cortex,
while the AHPOA exhibited significantly elevated AA when compared to the other neural areas.




   490.,                       16:00 Tuesday                   .             P4                               PCH
 Food habits of the european wall lizard, Podarcis sicula, introduced to Long Island, New York. N. Patel and
 R.L. Burke, Department of Biology, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY, USA, 11549.

We studied the stomach contents of 150 European wall lizards, Podarcis sicula, collected from several populations in
western Long Island, New York, throughout their active season in 1997. Their diets were made up of a wide variety
of ants, insect lanra, beetles, spiders, and millipedes. The list of prey included many introduced species. We
compared our results to those reported for this species and conspecifics in their native habitaL
We found a correlation between prey size and head width, which suggests that head width or a morphological factor
associated with head width, may constrain the size of prey that individual lizards can consume. We further noted
that some individuals had eaten several prey hems of the same species, which is surprising in cases of prey species
that do not normally congregate. This suggests that individual lizards may specialize on particular prey species, and
actively forage for that species. We also tested for differences in food habits of males and females, independent of
body size.surgeonfishes from Ishigaki Island. Japan: Acanthurus bariene, A. lineatus, Naso lituratus. Triglycerides dominated
all samples of neutral lipid and constituted > 99% of IPF and FB. C16 fatty acids prevailed in both neutral and polar
lipids, although C18 and C20 acids were also common. Saturated fatty acids, dominated by palmitic acid (16:0),
comprised 38.7-50.7% of acids from neutral lipids and 30.8-41.1% from polar lipids. Polyunsaturated acids (PUFA)
were prevalent in polar lipids (especially 20:4n6. 20:5n3, 22:2n3, 22:5n3, 22:5n6 and 22:6n3). Common PUFA of
neutral lipids were 18:2n6,18:4n3, several n-3 and n-6 C20 acids, and 22:2n3 and 22:5n3. IPF and FB were almost
identical across spedes. The FB appears to be an accessory storage site which overcomes constraints on lipid
storage imposed by a small, inflexible abdominal cavity which contains both viscera and consistently voluminous gut
contents. Fatty acid signatures indicate that largely overlooked epiphytic or epilithic diatoms contribute significanfly
to lipid acquisition.




Aromatase activity in the neural tissues of the Canadian red-sided garter snake (Thamnophla slrtalh
parivtalls) under hibernaculum temperatures. R.W Krohmer. Department of Science, Saint Xavier University,
3700 W. 103rd Street. Chicago, IL 60655 USA.

Numerous studies have indicated that the initiation of spring courtship behavior and mating in the male Canadian red­
sided garter snake, unlike most vertebrate species, is independent of circulating androgens. Recently, however, field
data has shown that circulating levels of testosterone (T), elevated in the fall, remain elevated throughout hibernation
and upon emergence. Even though T levels are elevated in the spring, to date, the only known stimulus initiating
courtship behavior is a period of low temperature dormancy followed by the onset of warm temperatures. In the field,
winters (and subsequently hibernation) can begin as early as October and extend into May. In the laboratory,
courtship behavior can be initiated after as few as seven weeks under hibernaculum conditions (total darkness at 4-
5C). However, as the duration of the dormancy period was increased (up to 17 weeks) courtship behavior
intensified. Similar to other vertebrates, the neural pathways critical, for the initiation and maintenance of courtship
behavior in the Canadian red-sided garter snake have been shown to contain sex steroid concentrating neurons.
However, while these neurons respond to seasonal variations in T, the role of testosterone In the initiation and
maintenance of courtship behavior in the male red-sided garter snake has continued to elude Investigators. Recent
studies have identified aromatase activity (AA) within specific ares of the pathway closely associated with the steroid
concentrating neurons. The presence of AA within the areas controlling courtship, sug^sts T may play an indirect
role In "setting up" this neural pathway during the protracted hibernation in the field. This study was designed to
Investigate AA in neural tissues maintained under conditions of hibernation




   488                          16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                                PCH
Applied Herpetology: a new Journal proposed. M.R.K. Lambert. Environmental Sciences Department, Natural
Resources Institute , (University of Greenwich), Central Avenue, Chatham Maritime, Kent ME4 4TB, England.

Applied amphibian and reptile research covers natural products development [toxinology (snake and lizard venoms),
pharmacology (amphibian skin secretions), reptile leather and tortoiseshell industries); environmental monitoring
[amphibian teratology from incidence of abnormalities, and herpetofaunal ecotoxicology and contamination
bioindicatoia); farming [captive breeding and husbandry techniques for restocking populations, exhibition, teaching
and experimentation], and conservation and wildlife management [species consenration, biodiversity assessment
and sustainable utilization]. Papers in applied herpetology are often published in non-herpetological journals, or in
the world's heqietological journals, which are in effect subsidising governmental, international agency and
commercial sponsors of such work. There is a case for publication of peer-reviewed papers in applied research to
be funded by these sponsors, especially since relatively little research in herpetology is now financed that is not
applied. Such sponsors should include an allocation in projects proposed for the funding of publications.




   489                  ..     16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                                PCH
Herpetofauna of the Albany Pine Bush. K.C. Hunsinger, The University at Albany, Albany, New York.

The Albany Pine Bush is a unique ecosystem characterized by sandy soils, vernal pools and pitch pine / scrub oak
forests located in the towns of Colonie, Guilderland and the city of Albany, New York. Using historic and current data,
Stewart and Rossi (1981) reported the presence of 30 species of herpetofauna in the Albany Pine Bush. Since that
time, there has been a significant commercial and residential development in and around the Pine Bush. This study
represents a re-survey of the area to determine what species of amphibians and reptiles are present today, estimate
their relative abundance and draw on Stewart and Rossi's work to estimate the impact that 20 years of development
has had upon the ecosystem and its inhabitants.

testosterone (T) levels. While these neural areas have been shown to be critical for the initiation and control of
courtship behavior in the male red-sided garter snake, the role of T, if any, continues to elude investigators.
Recently, wo have identified aromatase activity (AA) in various regions of the garter snake brain by quantifying the in
vitro fonnation of (®H]estrone from androst-4-ene-3, 17-dione,[1,2,6.7-^H(N)]- precursor. To defemiine if AA was
intensified in areas containing sex steroid concentrating neurons, areas associated with courtship behavior were
isolated using a spedfic-area micro dissection punch technique. Specific areas investigated included the anterior-
hypothalamus preoptic area (AHPOA), nucleus sphericus (NS), and the septum (S). Punches were taken from the
cortex (C) as a possible control. There was no significant difference in AA in animals collected in the spring or fall.
There was a significant overall gender difference in AA, with females exhibiting higher levels of AA in the AHPOA
and NS. In males, the AHPOA and septum exhibited significanly greater AA than the nucleus sphericus and cortex,
while 9ie AHPOA exhibited significantly elevated AA when compared to the other neural areas.




Food tiabfts of the european wall lizard, Podardt slcuta. Introduced to L.ong Island, New York. N. Patel and
R.L. Burke, Department of Biology, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY, USA, 11549.

We studied the stomach contents of 150 European wall lizards, Podarcis sicula, collected from several populations in
western Long Island, New York, throughout their active season in 1997. Their diets were made up of a wide variety
of ants, insect larva, beetles, spiders, and millipedes. The list of prey included many introduced species. We
compared our results to those reported for this species and conspecifics in their native habitat

Wo found a correlation between prey size and head width, which suggests that head width or a morphological factor
associated with head width, may constrain the size of prey that Individual lizards can consume. We further noted
that some individuals had eaten several prey items of the same species, which is surprising in cases of prey species
that do not normally congregate. This suggests that individual lizards may specialize on particular prey species, and
actively forage for that species. We also tested for differences In food habits of males and females, independent of
body size.




   491                           16:00 Tuesday                                  P4.                               PCH
A comparison of the movements of indigenous and displaced long-term captive ornate box turtles
(Terrapene omata) in the Sand Hills of Nebraska. D.L. Claussen. T. Luncan and K. Zemko, Dept, of Zoology,
Miami Univ., Oxford, OH, USA 45056.

Herpetologists often release animals after laboratory study in a laudable attempt at conservation. However, the
subsequent fates of such animals are generally unknown. We hypothesized that the behavior of these animals
would be markedly altered, possibly compromising their survival. We compared movements of turtles, captured in
the field and fitted with thread-trailers, with a matched group released simultaneously after one year of captivity. We
trailed each animal for 200 m (two or three days) and we subsequently mapped these trails, computing for each the
minimum convex polygon area, the maximum recorded speed, and three measures of trail sinuosity (the square root
of area divided by trail length (L), the greatest distance between two points divided by L, and the fractal dimension
(D)). The variance of the captive turtle data was significantly greater than that for the native turtles for trail area and
for two of the three sinuosity measures. However, contrary to expectations, none of the mean values differed
significantly between these groups, nor were there any obvious trends. Although we have no survivorship data, long­
term captivity and release in an unfamiliar location does not appear to markedly affect the short-term movement
patterns of ornate box turtles.




   492     ..        .   ..    16:00 Tuesday                                   P4                                 PCH
A mark-recapture analysis of the eastern garter snake population at the Mosquito Hill Nature Center, New
London, Wl. ATsoukatos and R.W. Krohmer, Science Department, Saint Xavier University, 3700 W. 103rd Street,
Chicago, IL 60655.

Since the spring of 1996, we have been gathering specific life history parameters on the eastern garter snake
(Thamnophis sirtalis sirtaiis) population at the Mosquito Hill Nature Center, located along the Wolf River just outside
of New London, Wl. Animals were collected at the denning site in the spring and fall. The sex, weight and snout-vent
length were recorded and each animal was given a unique clipping pattern on their ventral scutes for ftjture
Identification. All animals recaptured were again weighed, measured and reclipped with their original clipping.
Between spring ‘96 and fall '97, 391 males and 131 females were collected, marked and data recorded. As of &1
■97, 23% of the males and 11% of the females marked had been recaptured al least once with 9% of the males and
0% of the females recaptured In two or more of the collecting periods. Recapture data demonstrates a remarkable
growth rate during the active season (spring to fall). As a population, males (n=22) gained 49.4+7.1 mm in length
and 18.3±1.3 grams in weight. While the single female, measured under the same conditions. Increased its' length
by 73 mm and gained 51.1 grams. During hibernation, animals exhibited a reduced growth rate with males (n=21)
gaining 1.4+0.5 mm in length and losing an average of 5.0+1.0 grams, while females (n=2) increased an average of
4.0+3.0 mm and lost 7.0+1.0 grams.   493                         16:00 Tuesday                                   P4                                PCH
Scales of diversity: the role of parks in conserving genetic population structure of threatened snakes. KA,.
Prior. Endangered Species Division, Canadian Wildlife Service, Hull, Quebec KOH 1A3; H.L. Gibbs, Department of
Biology, McMaster, University, Hamilton, Ontario L8S 4K1; P.J. Weathertiead, Department of Biology, Carleton
University, Ottawa, Ontario K1S5B6.
We used DNA sampled from black rat snakes {Elaphe o. obsoleta} and eastern massasauga rattlesnakes (Sistnjrus
c. catenalus) in Ontario to investigate genetic population structure at several spatial scales. Our findings based on
RAPD markers indicate that geographically-isolated populations of rat snakes may not be genetically distinct, and
that sub-structuring within regional populations might be attributable to reduced snake movement and gene flow due
to ecological barriers. As such, park agencies should develop cooperafivo management strategies for regional
populations that span multiple jurisdictions. Data from rrucrosatellite markers indicate that isolated massasauga
populations are highly divergent and that regional populations may be comprised of inbred local populations. Thus,
fine-sc^e genetic structuring may be the norm for massasauga populations, rather than a corisequence of recent (<
300 years) anthropogenic effects. These data support the view that individual populations of massasaugas
associated with parks have high consenration genetic value since many populations probably contain a unique
portion of sub-specifio variation. This research has helped direct conservation efforts by providing parks with a
means of assessing the relative distinctiveness of remnant populations, sm empirical basis for identifying appropriate
scales of management, and a method for testing the efficacy of conservation actions.




   494                          .16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                               P.CH
Preliminary life history analysis of the European wall lizards, Podarcis sicula, introduced to Long Island,
New York. M. Sabatino. B. Spar and R.L. Burke, Department of Biology, Hofsfra University, Hempstead, NY, USA,
11549.
We collected European wall lizards, Podarcis sicula, from separate but similar populations in western Long Island,
New York, throughout the spring and summer of 1997, and assessed their reproductive condition. Diagnosable adult
females ranged in size from 44 to 77 mm SVL; the smallest female with eggs was 57 mm SVL. Of the 57 adult
females caught, 13 had eggs, clutch size ranged from 1 to 9 eggs, mean clutch size was 5.5 eggs, and median
clutch size was 6 eggs. Females were first found with eggs on 30 April; females were last found with eggs on 11
July.
The presence of fully shelled eggs in four females that also had a similar number of post-ovulatory but unshelled
eggs suggests that some females of this species may double clutch, at least in some years. This ability to produce
large numbers of eggs may help explain the fact that this species is rapidly expanding from its introduction site in just
30 years.




   495                        .16:00 Tuesday                                  P4                                PCH
Reproductive biology of the male eastern garter snake (Thamnophls sirtalis sirtalis) at the Mosquito Hill