aps were significantly shorter and higher, respectively, than in the closed forest, thus proving the
importance of rearing sites in the colonization of treefall gaps. I discuss these results in the light of
possible benefits for the development and survival of tadpoles and of how selection could favour the best
parental decisions. These results offer new insights to our general understanding of thebiology of
invasions.




                                                                                                          607
Roje, Dawn (American Museum of Natural History);

Phylogenetic placement of flatfishes (Percomorpha: Pleuronectiformes) and the phylogenetic
utility of three new molecular markers

Flatfishes (order Pleuronectiformes) are a group of approximately 650 species in 14 families that, like
most other marine teleosts, begin life as bilaterally symmetrical larvae. As they mature, they undergo a
remarkable metamorphosis in which one eye migrates across the dorsal margin of the cranium resulting
in their definingThe placement of Pleuronectiformes within the species-rich Percomorpha has been
elusive. To test both the monophyly of flatfishes, as well as the phylogenetic placement of flatfishes within
Percomorpha, a phylogenetic analysis was carried out on a molecular dataset. DNA sequences (totaling
approximately 5,200 bp) from the nuclear protein-coding loci Rhodopsin 1 (Rho), ring-finger protein 213
(RNF213), trans-membrane protein 22 (TMEM22), suppressorof cytokine signaling 6 (SOCS6) and beta-
1,3-galactosyltransferase 6 (B3GALT6) were generated for 140 species from 10 flatfish and 26 non-
flatfish families. TMEM22, SOCS6 and B3GALT6 are all single-exon genes (SEGs) that have not been
used as phylogenetic markers. To test for congruence six phylogenies (one for each marker and a
concatenated, total-evidence dataset) were analyzed using maximum likelihood methods and compared
using the approximately unbiased (AU) and Shimodaira-Hasegawa (SH) topology tests. The results of
those tests suggest that the signal provided by Rho is incongruent with those from the other datasets.
The recovered topologies suggest that Pleuronectiformes is not monophyletic, and comprises two major
lineages: one most closely related to the monotypic Nematistiidae (rooster fish), and another to Toxotidae
(archerfishes). The implications of this topology on the evolution of bilateral asymmetry will be discussed,
as will the potential for characters of larval morphology to provide additional support for the phylogenetic
placement of flatfishes.



Romagosa, Christina (Auburn University); Guyer, Craig (Auburn University, Canada)

Global wildlife trade and biotic homogenization

The wildlife trade is an important economic activity that creates global movement of millions of individuals
annually. This anthropogenic transport of wildlife is a major threat to biodiversity by depleting wild
populations and introducing invasive species, disease, and parasites. As a major pathway for species
introductions and depletions, the live vertebrate trade contributes to this process of biotic homogenization.
The transport, introduction, and extinction of species have been shown to be non-random processes
among higher taxonomic groups. Use of data describing trade in live vertebrates, lists of species of global
conservation concern, and records of successful vertebrate introductions provide a framework to explore
the relationship between trade and species introductions and extinctions. Data on vertebrate species
transported to and from the United States were used for a synthetic review of US trade in live vertebrates
over 30 years and its contribution to biotic homogenization. Trade-related dynamics have led to changes
in species used for trade, individual quantities of those species traded, and their geographic origin.
Vertebrate families that are traded preferentially are also more likely to contain species that have
established nonindigneous populations or are threatened with extinction. The importance of trade in
homogenization of vertebrates suggests that additional efforts should be made to prevent introductions
and extinctions through this medium.




                                                                                                         608
Roosenburg, Willem (Ohio University);

Should I Stay or Should I Go: Facultative Neonate within Nest Overwintering in the Diamondback
Terrapin

I studied facultative neonate within nest overwintering in the Diamondback terrapin, Malaclemys terrapin,
in Chesapeake Bay.        The Poplar Island Environmental Restoration Project is rebuilding an island in
Chesapeake Bay where raccoons and foxes are absent.              Therefore, nest survival rates exceed 80%
annually and we can evaluate hatchling emergence strategies in a natural setting.                Our project
documents approximately 200 nests per year and 20-35% of nests overwinter as live hatchlings that
emerge in the spring; the remainder emerge in the fall.         Within nest survivorship and hatchling lipid
levels do not differ between fall and spring emerging nests.          We also evaluated the effect of nest
oviposition date, soil composition, soil bulk density and the presence of ice-nucleating agents between fall
and spring emerging nests. Only soil bulk density and the presence of ice nucleating agents differed,
with fall emerging nests having higher freezing points (more ice nucleating agents) and lower bulk
density. Interestingly, the difference in freezing temperatures between fall and overwintering nests was
on either side of the survival threshold for prolonged exposure to freezing temperatures for terrapins
(Baker et al., 2006). Our findings suggest that hatchling terrapins use environmental cues to determine
emergence timing.



Rose, Jonathan (Graduate Group in Ecology, UC Davis); Todd, Brian (Dept. Wildlife, Fish &
Conservation Biology, UC Davis, Canada)

Predicting invasion risk of non-native watersnakes in western North America using environmental
niche models

When introduced outside their native range, snakes are capable of having devastating impacts on
ecological communities throughpredation on, and competition with, native species. The northern
watersnake ( Nerodia sipedon ) and the banded watersnake ( N. fasciata ) are both generalist, semi-
aquatic snakes native to eastern North America and have been introduced to California where they are
currently established. These species pose an additional threat to California‘s endangered fish and
amphibians as a novel predator, and may inhabit a niche similar to that of threatened gartersnakes of the
genus Thamnophis . We geo-referenced over 1,000 occurrence points for these species from the
scientific literature and online databases, and used Maxent to create ecological niche models to project
areas of suitable climate in western North America for these two species. We also measured the spatial
overlap of the projected range and similarity of the climatic niches inhabited by these two species to those
of California‘s native gartersnakes, to assess the risk they pose as potential competitors for these
species. We found that both N. fasciata and N. sipedon have the potential to spread in the west, due
to extensive climatic similarity between their native and invaded ranges. Based on our model results, we
suggest that N. fasciata is likely to spread throughout the Central Valley of California where it may
compete with the threatened giant garter snake, T. gigas .            N. sipedon is more likely to spread
throughout northern California and the Pacific Northwest. We discuss the implications of our models for
the management of these introduced species, and recommend immediate action to prevent further
spread from their current, localized populations.




                                                                                                        609
Rosen, Philip (Universityof Arizona); Schwalbe, Cecil (USGS Southwest Biological Science Center,
Canada); Caldwell, Dennis (Caldwell Design, Canada); Hall, David (University of Arizona, Canada)

Collaborative conservation successes for native leopard frogs of the southwestern USA

Ranid frog conservation in the American Southwest faces 3 primary biological challenges: (1)eliminating
harmful non-native animals; (2) finding warm waters or non-susceptible populations for chytridiomycosis (
Bd ) resistance; and (3) sustaining landscape scale metapopulations. Dispersal of non-native animals and
pathogens puts a premium on landscape-level efforts and thus cooperation with multiple landholders,
public and private. Regulatory issues can limit and facilitate efforts, particularly with special-status
amphibians. Conflicts and synergies exist with sportfish and other native species. However, most land-
use modes can be reconciled with ranid conservation. We focus on 4 case studies from Arizona involving
Chiricahua Leopard Frog ( Rana [ Lithobates ] chiricahuensis ; CLF; a federally threatened species) that,
over two decades, provide successful models and cautionary notes: Case 1 (San Bernardino Valley)
demonstrated that private ranches are suitable conservation areas, benefitting ranchers and frogs, while
highlighting concerns that discouraged private participation. Case 1 also highlighted difficulties with
bullfrog control in complex environments; international boundaries; leopard frog disease and dispersal;
and complications with native fish needs. In Case 2 (Altar Valley), a large National Wildlife Refuge
facilitated landscape-scale success with CLF recovery, while highlighting bullfrog dispersal from adjoining
ranches. Initially contentious public-private and public agency disagreements imposed heavy costs on
participants, even as recovery succeeded. Fortuitous funding and perseverance reversed this, yielding
total elimination of exotics from valley waters and a robust CLF metapopulation. In Case 3
(EmpireValley), a large National Conservation Area is facilitating landscape-scale recovery
implementation for native aquatic vertebrates. Challenges include Bd management; bullfrog removal;
increased non-native fish populations on private ranchettes; and permitting and timeliness issues for
cooperating conservationists and public agencies. Cooperation of private entities reflects successes in
Cases 1 and 2. In Case 4 (Pajarito Mountains), extensive public agency cooperation is facilitating bullfrog
eradication across a landscape with large aquatic complexes. This ongoing effort by NGO, university,
state, and federal agencies‘ personnel is enlarging successful recovery zones that facilitate
metapopulation function of native frogs and defeat bullfrog metapopulation dynamics. Private assistance
has been strong, but sportfish and crayfish challenges remain on public lands. Success throughout the
Case 4 region would meet federal criteria for Recovery Unit 1 (of 7) of the Chiricahua Leopard Frog, a first
step toward de-listing. Similarly active restoration efforts are occurring in other recovery units.



Rosenblatt, Adam (Florida International University); Heithaus, Michael (Florida International University,
North Miami, FL, United States)

Ecological roles and individual specialization of American alligators revealed by stable isotope
analysis and movement patterns

Understanding the movement and feeding patterns of top predators is crucial for understanding their
ecological roles and how these roles may become altered as climate change continues. However, the
movement and feeding patterns of top predators have been primarily examined at the population scale,
assuming that all of the individuals in a population behave similarly. Recent research has shown that
individual behavioral specialization is more common than usually assumed and that specialization could
affect population, community, and ecosystem dynamics, ecological roles, and require novel conservation
strategies for proper management. Using stable isotope analysis and movement tracking we studied the
prevalence of individual specialization in a population of American alligators ( Alligatormississippiensis)
and how it could impact the ecological roles of these toppredators in a subtropical estuary. We found that



                                                                                                        610
individual alligators were capable of long distance movements over short time periods and adopted one of
three distinct movement tactics that were linked to variation in diets. The adoption of a particular tactic
was associated with tradeoffs between access to food resources and likely salt stress. Also, one of the
movement/feeding tactics indicated that alligators may act as vectors of nutrient transport between
marine and brackish waters. The use of this tactic, however, varied with salinity of the estuary, suggesting
that anthropogenic changes to freshwater delivery likely have modified, and will continue to modify, their
ecological role. We further found that alligators consumed prey at lower trophic levels than we
hypothesized, and that this may have been caused by past human impacts. Ultimately, our results show
that alligators can vary widely in their movement and feeding patterns, with some possibly transporting
nutrients within ecosystems and acting as simultaneous stabilizing top-down forces in disparate habitats.
However, other individuals may fill different roles in the environment. These varied roles will most likely
change as habitat restoration (in the form of increased delivery of freshwater to theestuary) and sea level
rise continue, but the degree and direction of change will be difficult to predict on an individual level.



Ross, Julie (Florida Gulf Coast University); Allman, Phil (Florida Gulf Coast University, Fort Myers,
United States); Winters, Colleen (Towson University, Towson, United States)

Genetic structure of a gopher tortoise, Gopherus polyphemus, population on a barrier island in
southwest Florida, USA

This study examines the genetic structure of an island gopher tortoise population in southwest Florida.
Understanding the genetic structure of this threatened species is becoming increasingly important since
development pressures continue to fragment populations and force individuals to be relocated. This
project uses species specific microsatellite analyses to determine the genetic structure of the Marco
Island population as well as gene flow across the island. Marco Island is a barrier island in southwest
Florida (USA) approximately 1 km from the adjacent mainland. Zooarchelogical evidence suggests that
gopher tortoises have inhabited the island since before the island became separated from the mainland
approximately 4000 years BP (Frantz and Quitmeyer 2005). We hypothesized that the Marco Island
population will be a single population with no evidence of a bottleneck. Our results indicate that the Marco
Island population is a single population that does not show evidence of subdivision within the population.
We found significant deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in six of the loci. An FIS of 0.412 was
determined using FSTAT which suggests evidence of a bottleneck in the population (FIS =0 no
inbreeding; FIS=1 inbreeding). However MICRO-CHECKER detected null alleles in several loci which
may explain the deviations from HWE rather than a bottleneck event. The island population will later be
compared to an adjacent mainland population for a greater understanding of the genetic structure of the
gopher tortoise populations in southwest Florida.



Rothermel, Betsie (Archbold Biological Station); Castellon, Traci (Archbold Biological Station, Venus, FL,
United States)

Contrasting patterns of Gopher Tortoise habitat use and burrow size distributions in Florida scrub
and mesic flatwoods

In peninsular Florida, pine flatwoods and xeric scrub comprise the majority of suitable upland habitat for
the Gopher Tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus), which is a candidate for listing under the U.S. Endangered
Species Act. Relatively little is known about the factors influencing densities, habitat use, and
demography of Gopher Tortoises in these non-sandhill habitats. We surveyed burrow densities and



                                                                                                        611
assessed vegetation cover in scrub and flatwoods (including pine plantations) at a 42,900-ha military
training range in south-central Florida. Despite a history of frequent fires, the cover of grasses and forbs
was significantly lower in scrub than in flatwoods. However, the density of active burrows was higher in
scrub than in flatwoods, where food was abundant but burrows were patchily distributed and often
flooded. The overall densities of non-abandoned burrows in scrub (1.96/ha) and flatwoods (1.37/ha) were
comparable to other scrub and flatwoods sites in Florida, but generally much lower than reported for
sandhill sites. The relatively low abundance of food may explain low population densities in scrub, via
potential effects on clutch size, growth rate, age at maturity, and/or juvenile survival. To clarify patterns of
habitat use, we mapped burrows and monitored 45 adult tortoises with radio telemetry in two reference
populations over a 22-month period. Tortoises in scrub tended to occupy the same burrows for longer
periods and used fewer burrows overall. Contrary to our expectations based on food availability, female
home ranges were smaller in scrub (mean minimum convex polygon size 2.39 ha ± 0.73 SE) than in
flatwoods (4.96 ha ± 2.47 SE). In flatwoods, tortoises switched burrows frequently and multiple tortoises
used the same burrows, suggesting saturated soils and seasonal flooding may hinder construction of new
burrows. Importantly, burrow sizes in the flatwoods monitoring site were highly skewed toward older age
classes; only 5% of burrows in flatwoods were juvenile-sized (< 14 cm), compared to 29% of burrows in
scrub. Our results raise intriguing questions regarding Gopher Tortoise ecology and source-sink
dynamics in these sub-optimal and poorly studied habitats. Research is especially needed to investigate
nest success in relation to flooding, abundance of fire ants, and other conditions in mesic flatwoods.



Roussos, Stephanos (Texas Tech University); Tomovic, Ljiljiana (University of Belgrade, Canada);
Dimaki, Maria (Goulandris Natural History Museum, Canada); Strauss, Richard; Densmore, Llewellyn
(Texas Tech University, Canada)

Morphology and genetics of the nose-horned viper (Squamata:Viperidae) in the Cycladic
archipelago, Greece

The nose-horned viper ( Vipera ammodytes ) is distributed throughout the Balkan Peninsula, and in
Greece there are 14 insular populations in the Cyclades which were all connected at the end of the last
glacial maximum. Combining morphometrics and genetic analyses allowed us to assess the evolutionary
effects of insular isolation and fragmentation on these insular viper populations and consequently it
supports that they be considered evolutionary significant units that need to be preserved and monitored.
Using multivariate statistics we analyzed seven taxonomically important morphological features from 744
adult specimens from across the species‘ range, to investigate the morphological variation between the
three subspecies V. a. ammodytes, V. a. montadoni, V. a. meridionalis and the insular populations in the
Cyclades. Preliminary analyses of genetic variation, using mitochondrial DNA from 35 insular specimens
representing 11 islands, allowed us to assess relationships among the insular populations, and to the
mainland conspecifics. Our morphometric analyses show that the Cycladic individuals are dwarf forms,
and they possess taller horns and snouts than the mainland conspecifics. Further studies of population
genetics, morphology, and ecology of V. ammodytes are warranted to unveil more complex evolutionary
effects of insular isolation and fragmentation on old world viperids.



Rovito, Sean (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, UC Berkeley); Parra-Olea, Gabriela (Instituto de Biología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Canada); Wake, David (Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, UC
Berkeley, Canada)




                                                                                                            612
Unraveling the history of a radiation: systematics of tropical bolitoglossine salamanders from
multilocus sequence data

Only a single clade of salamanders, the bolitoglossines (family Plethodontidae) reached the Neotropics,
yet this lineage now contains 44% of world salamander species diversity. To date, phylogenetic
hypotheses for this group have been based primarily on mtDNA, and relationships among the twelve
genera were not well resolved. We sequenced over 5000 bp of mitochondrial DNA together with portions
of three nuclear exons (POMC, RAG1, SLC8A3) to generate a new phylogenetic hypothesis for the clade.
Our phylogeny includes all genera and over half of the species of the possibly paraphyletic genus
Pseudoeurycea and representatives of each subgenus of Bolitoglossa , the largest genus. We employed
maximum likelihood and Bayesian phylogenetic methods, including species tree estimation methods. The
large, morphologically diverse Pseudoeurycea is paraphyletic, and recognition of its relatives,
Parvimolge and Ixalotriton , is supported. Recognition of these genera requires that a large clade of
species currently assigned to Pseudoeurycea be recognized as a new taxon. This clade, composed of
the Pseudoeurycea bellii and P. cephalica groups, is only found north and west of the Isthmus of
Tehuantepec and reaches areas of northern Mexico not occupied by other Pseudoeurycea , while the
remainder of Pseudoeuryea occurs on both sides of the Isthmus. The new phylogeny identifies a
morphologically diverse clade of exclusively Central American genera; within this clade, the small,
arboreal ecomorph has evolved several times. Paraphyly of the former genus Lineatriton is supported, in
agreement with previous mtDNA results, confirming parallel origins of the fossorial ecomorph. These
results clarify the biogeographic context in which the largestradiation of salamanders evolved, and
highlight the deep history of the group within Central America.



Rowley, Jodi J. L. (Australian Museum); Ng, Connie Ka-yan (Agriculture, Fisheries and Conservation
Department, The Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Kowloon, Hong Kong);
Le, Duong Thi Thuy (University of Science-Ho Chi Minh City, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam); Kusrini, Mirza
D. (Bogor Agricultural University, Bogor, West Java, Indonesia); Chan, Simon Kin-fung (Agriculture,
Fisheries and Conservation Department, The Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region, Kowloon, Canada); Hoang, Huy Duc (University of Science-Ho Chi Minh City, Ho Chi Minh City,
Vietnam)

Stream amphibian population declines in Southeast Asia?

Southeast Asian amphibians are relatively poorly known, face the highest deforestation rate on the
planet, and are under pressure from over-harvesting. In addition, the pathogen responsible for the
potentially devastating amphibian disease chytridiomycosis has recently been detected in the region and
is known to infect amphibians at a relatively high prevalence and infection intensity at some sites. While
there is little evidence of enigmatic amphibian population declines having occurring in Southeast Asia,
declines may have gone undetected given the paucity of data on amphibian population trends in the
region. To assess evidence for both historical and current enigmatic population declines and extirpations
in Southeast Asian stream amphibians, we repeated surveys at historically surveyed sites and monitored
amphibian populations at sites in Hong Kong, Indonesia and Vietnam. While amphibian diversity has no
doubt been, and continues to be, irreversibly eroded due to habitat loss, we found little evidence of
enigmatic amphibian population declines at our survey sites. In particular, long-term data from territory-
wide stream amphibian surveys in Hong Kong reveal no obvious declines in amphibian abundance or
diversity. However, declines may have occurred or be ongoing at other sites, and there is an urgent need
for long-term amphibian population monitoring throughout Southeast Asia in order to detect and respond
to any population declines.



                                                                                                      613
Rowlison, Tricia (Mississippi State University); Kouba, Andrew (Memphis Zoo, Memphis, TN, United
States); Calatayud, Natalie (Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, United States); Langhorne,
Cecilia; Willard, Scott (Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS, United States)

The Effects of Arginine Vasotocin on Amplexus and Calling Behavior in the Boreal (Bufo boreas
boreas) and Fowler's (Bufo fowleri) toad.

Arginine vasotocin (AVT) is a neuropeptide that can induce reproduction in certain amphibian species.
The aim of this study was to compare the effects of AVT administration in the boreal toad (Bufo boreas
boreas) and Fowler‘s toad (Bufo fowleri). The boreal toad is a declining species from the southern Rocky
Mountain region and the Fowler‘s toad is a common species located in the eastern US region. Male
Fowler‘s toads produce a loud mating call during the breeding season while the boreal toads exhibit no
mating call. The objectives of this study were to determine if AVT could elicit: 1) calling, and 2) amplexus
behaviors in each of these toad species. Toads were paired into single male:female groups and
administered AVT at varying concentrations: 0.1, 1.0, 5.0, 10.0 and 25.0 µg/g. Administration of
phosphate buffered saline solution alone served as a control. AVT treatments were compared when
administered in different combinations including: 1) only the male was injected, 2) only the female was
injected, and 3) both male and female were injected. Reproductive behaviors including calling, amplexus,
phonotaxis, and egg deposition were recorded using motion-activated video. Urine samples were also
collected at various time points post hormone administration (30min, 1, 3, 5, 7 and 24hr) to examine the
effects of AVT on male spermiation response. AVT failed to stimulate any breeding behavior in the boreal
toad which may be due to the absence of calling behavior in the wild. Administering 10µg/g AVT to both
male and female B. fowleri elicited the greatest behavioral response with 100% of males calling and 60%
of pairs eliciting amplexus. Administering AVT to both genders significantly affected the length of
amplexus (p<0.0347). In addition, the concentration of AVT also significantly affected the length of
amplexus (p<0.0347) and call frequency (p<0.0294). AVT was unable to elicit spermiation in either
species. To the author‘s knowledge this is the first time AVT has been reported to induce amplexus in any
anuran species. It is also one of the first studies conducted that compared the behavioral effects of AVT
when administered to both male and female anurans and found that the stimulation of both genders was
necessary to elicit the most successful reproductive response. These results will be valuable for
amphibian breeding programs where animals are failing to show any natural reproductive behaviors.



Royer, Mark (Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology); Nosal, Andrew (Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
University of California - San Diego, Canada); Lankford, Thomas (Center for Marine Science, University
of North Carolina Wilmington, Canada); Cartamil, Daniel; Wegner, Nicholas; Graham, Jeffery (Scripps
Institution of Oceanography, University of California - San Diego, Canada)

Foraging Ecology of the Leopard Shark (Triakis semifasciata) in the La Jolla Ecological Reserve
using Non-Destructive Dietary Analysis

 Leopard sharks ( Triakis semifasciata ) are a common inshore benthic predator that is found along the
west coast of continental North America with a range extending from Oregon (USA) to the Gulf of
California (Mexico). While the feeding habits of northern populations in the bays and estuaries have been
examined, little is known about the southern populations that reside in coastal habitats. Every year
hundreds of mature female leopard sharks aggregate at the south end of the La Jolla Shores beachwithin
the San Diego-La Jolla Ecological Reserve (SDLJER). This marine protected area consists of a variety of
coastal habitats including sandflats, rocky surfgrass beds, kelp forests, and a submarine canyon.
Tracking studies have revealed fine-scale movement patterns of leopard sharks inside the reserve
between the different habitats. Insight on the foraging behavior of these sharks could explain their



                                                                                                        614
movement behavior and their functional role in these coastal habitats. Stomach contents were obtained
non-lethally using the gastric lavage technique from sharks sampled (n=87, 116-169 cm TL) in the
surfgrass bed and sandflat at the mouth of La Jolla Submarine Canyon inside the reserve from July 2010
to July 2011. Of the 87 sharks sampled, 46 (54.7%) contained prey items which were identified to the
lowest possible taxon. The percent index of relative importance (%IRI) was calculated for each food type
to facilitate comparisons between prey groups and other reported diets from northern populations. The
composition of major prey groups in T. semifasciata was heterogeneous, consisting mostly of decapod
crustaceans (%IRI =14%), teleost fish (%IRI=27%), squids (%IRI=20%), octopi (%IRI=19%), gastropods
(%IRI=4%) and mixed vegetation (%IRI=10%) with 8% as unidentified digested matter. When the %IRI
was examined on the species level, it was found that the market squid ( Loligo opalescens ) which uses
the submarine canyon as a spawning ground had the highest index of relative importance (18.8%). The
association of specific prey items to the habitat types they reside in indicates that leopard sharks utilize
each habitat type within the SDLJER as a foraging ground. The prey composition of leopard sharks
sampled in the San Diego-La Jolla Ecological Reserve was entirely different from the reported prey
compositions of north populations with Cancer gracilis being the only prey item overlap. This study helps
gain insight on the movement patterns of leopard sharks between habitats for foraging and the role they
have in trophic exchange between coastal habitats. Broader ecosystem based modeling for the southern
California coast and the designation of important locations for Marine Protected Areas can utilize this
information on the functional role of leopard sharks.



Ruane, Sara (College of Staten Island); Bryson, Robert (UNLV, Canada); Pyron, A. Robert (George
Washington University, Canada); Burbrink, Frank (CUNY, Canada)

Speciation in the Milksnake (Lampropeltis triangulum)

Studying organisms in a phylogeographic context yields a better estimation of diversity and, at the same
time, permits questions regarding processes and patterns of speciation to be addressed. Additionally,
hypotheses that test whether gene flow between lineages occurs during speciation at particular
geographic barriers and how populations change through time given fluctuating environmental conditions
are made possible by examining phylogeographic patterns and understanding modes of speciation (e.g.,
allopatric, parapatric, etc.). Here we examine the widest-ranging New World squamate species, the
milksnake ( Lampropeltis triangulum ) in a phylogeographic context. Using a dataset composed of 12
independent loci, we quantify the diversity within milksnakes in a Bayesian framework and use
coalescent-based methods to determine under what conditions speciation occurred (with or without gene
flow between lineages) and infer the historical demography of lineages. Due to their large range, which
covers both the Nearctic and Neotropical zoogeographic zones, milksnakes present us with a unique
opportunity to compare historical demographic responses between temperate and tropical taxa.
Furthermore, this large range permits us to examine whether the geographical barriers responsible for
diversification in other snakes also impact milksnake lineages. The results of this study contribute to the
understanding of diversity of a New World snake, as well as speciation/lineage formation and population
demography in both temperate and tropical organisms.v




                                                                                                        615
Rubio-Rocha, Laura C. (University of Tennessee); Bock, Brian; Páez, Vivian (Universidad de Antioquia,
Medellín, Columbia)

Continuous reproduction under a bimodal precipitation regime in a high elevation anole (Anolis
mariarum) from Antioquia, Colombia

Comparison of the reproductive ecologies of lizard species with small fixed clutch sizes, such as geckos
or anoles, offers an opportunity to examine hypotheses concerning the factors that contribute to the
evolution of seasonal vs. continuous reproduction. Total annual precipitation at a site has been found to
be significantly related to reproductive phenology in Neotropical lizards, and more important than duration
of dry season. Most of the studies in reproductive phenology of anoles have been conducted in places,
such as Central America, where a well defined primary dry season occurs and the second dry season
never approaches the intensity or duration of the primary dry season. However, as latitude decreases
towards the equator, genuinely bimodal patterns of precipitation occur and there is evidence of
continuous reproduction in this genus despite a comparable total annual precipitation as in Central
America, suggesting that selection acts differently on reproductive phenology in Anolis species from this
region. We described the reproductive phenology of two populations of Anolis mariarum (Polychrotidae)
located in Antioquia, Colombia, where there is a bimodal precipitation regime, to further examine the
effects of the amount and distribution of precipitation on the reproductive phenology of Anolis lizards.
Minimum size at maturity was comparable at the two sites for both males and females. At the population
level, reproduction was continuous, with the majority of adult males and females reproductively active
even during the dry season months. Juvenile size distributions also were uniform across seasons,
consistent with the conclusion that recruitment is not pulsed in these populations. However, there was
some evidence that certain females may lower their reproductive rates during the dry season, especially
at the site receiving the least total annual precipitation (1700 mm). These results further support
accumulating evidence that populations of Anolis species inhabiting the equatorial climatic region, where
the annual precipitation regime is bimodal, are capable of maintaining continuous reproduction even
when annual precipitation amounts are relatively low. In contrast, Anolis populations in areas receiving
comparable amounts of annual precipitation during a single rainy season tend to cease reproductive
activity during the longer dry season each year.



Rubio-Rocha, Laura C. (University of Tennessee); Alzate, Esteban (Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín,
Columbia); Echternacht, Arthur C. (University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, United States)

Geographic variation in the lower temperature tolerance in the invasive brown anole, Anolis sagrei
and the native green anole, Anolis carolinensis

Invasive species are considered to be the second greatest threat to native biodiversity and several factors
have been identified as contributing to the success of introduced species, including their initial genetic
variation and the ability of populations to adapt to a new environment. The brown anole Anolis sagrei is
remarkable for its colonizing ability. The species is thought to have evolved in Cuba and appears to have
arrived on the mainland of South Florida by 1940, as the result of introductions from both Cuba and the
Bahamas which subsequently interbred. It has exhibited an exponential range expansion since its
introduction and now occurs throughout the southeastern United States; A. sagrei is considered highly
invasive and negatively impacts populations of the native green anole, A. carolinensis. Temperature has
a significant impact on reptilian ecology and distribution since they ordinarily rely on external heat sources
for the maintenance of body temperatures suitable for normal activity. Body temperature affects
performance in these organisms given its importance for all aspects of behavior, locomotion, courtship
and rates of feeding and growth. Critical thermal tolerances therefore, can give an indication of the range



                                                                                                          616
of climatic conditions that can be tolerated and which may be the causal range limit in some cases. We
studied the cold tolerance (Critical thermal minimum) of female and male invasive A. sagrei and native
A. carolinensis in four populations along a latitudinal gradient from south Florida to northern Georgia, in
field conditions and after a period of acclimation, to identify whether there is variation in this characteristic
as latitude increases as a result of differential selection for lower temperature adaptation or as result of
phenotypic plasticity, and whether there is a difference in cold tolerance between the native and invasive
species. We found at all four sites sampled that A. carolinensis has a lower field cold tolerance (CTMin)
than A. sagrei , and for both species, male CTMin is lower than female CTMin. For males and females of
both species, the lowest CTMins were exhibited by those anoles from the northern-most population
(Savannah, GA). However, after controlling for thermal history, there were no significant differences in
CTMin among populations or between sexes of either species, suggesting a notable capacity for both
species to acclimate to local conditions.



Ruby, Douglas (UMES); Middendorf, George (Howard University, Canada)

Communication through Calisthenics: Displays in Yarrow's Spiny Lizard Sceloporus jarrovii
Communicating information about status is an important component of behavioral interaction between
organisms.      Stereotyped visual displays performed through rhythmic leg extensions, head nods and
expansion of throat dewlaps by many species conveys information useful in announcing territorial,
reproductive, and species status. Comparison variation in visual signaling among isolated populations
within a species distribution provides an opportunity for understanding the relationships among
populations but also about how display signals change over evolutionary time.            A montane lizard,
Sceloporus jarrovii jarrovii , occurs in the mountains of southeastern Arizona, southwestern New Mexico
and adjacent areas of Mexico.         Populations are currently isolated from one another by stretches of
inhospitable, lowland desert.      Displays of adult males in 10 isolated populations in Arizona and New
Mexico were filmed in the field using tethered encounters and then analyzed for pattern similarities and
differences.     We found limited variation in display patterns within a specific mountain range, but
distinctive, population-specific patterns between mountain ranges.          More significant differences in
display pattern were observed between groups of mountains in the eastern and western part of the
distribution.   Populations in the eastern regions of the range (N=8) showed relatively simple displays
with two peak units while western populations (N=2) showed more extended, multi-peaked displays with
longer plateau units.     In the east, the two display peaks differ in timing and relative height but not
consistent with a hypothesis of adjacent mountains have more similar displays. The division into eastern
and western regional displays is geographically delineated by the San Pedro River in Arizona.           We
hypothesize that this low elevation drainage served as a geographical barrier to dispersal from east to
west—even during the wettest pluvial periods.         Possible dispersal corridors between the mountain
ranges, predicted through elevational analysis, further support similarities between adjacent mountains
ranges with potential connections during more mesic, pluvial times.



Rucker, Matthew (UW-Stevens Point);

Are there two species of blue-spotted salamanders in Wisconsin?

Biodiversity is a vital element necessary to maintain a healthy ecosystem. However, even in well-studied
fauna, some unidentified biodiversity remains cryptic. This may be the case with Wisconsin salamanders.
A single ―blue-spotted‖ salamander species, Ambystoma laterale, is currently recognized. Historically,




                                                                                                             617
purported polyploid hybrids within the A. laterale-jeffersonianum (l-j) complex have been documented in
the state (Vogt 1981, Petranka 1998).           However, no Wisconsin record for non-hybridized A.
jeffersonianum currently exists. Recent studies have examined the phylogeography of a unisexual
kleptogen ambystomatid. This kleptogen is often sympatric with the sexual A. laterale, but these studies
have not included individuals collected from Wisconsin. It has been hypothesized that Wisconsin may be
suitable for either the kleptogen or A. jeffersonianum to maintain persisting populations. Our field work
has recently uncovered additional morphologically unusual A. laterale specimens that could represent
non-hybridized A. jeffersonianum, hybrids within the l-j complex, or kleptogens. Using nonlethal
molecular analyses (utilized by Ramsden, et. al.) of tissue samples taken from broad state transects, we
are attempting to further characterize blue-spotted salamander populations in Wisconsin. We are initially
examining mitochondrial control region DNA. Further examinations will use microsatellite loci or other
nuclear markers. Our long-term goals are to identify the actual species present, evaluate any patterns of
hybridization among species, and assess any potential evidence of kleptogenesis. As more samples are
analyzed, and a more fully resolved picture emerges regarding the diversity of blue-spotted salamander
forms in Wisconsin, future questions concerning the conservation status of these species in the state may
need to be addressed.



Rumschlag, Samantha (Miami University); Boone, Michelle (Miami University, Oxford, OH, United
States); Fellers, Gary (U.S. Geological Survey, Point Reyes, CA, United States)

The Effects of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis, Insecticides, and Temperature on Pacific Treefrog
(Pseudacris regilla) and Grey Treefrog (Hyla chrysoscelis) Metamorphosis and Survival

 Chytridiomycosis, caused by the fungal pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), has been
implicated as a leading cause of amphibian declines. Diseases outbreaks can be influenced by
alterations to the environment including climate change and ecological contamination through increases
in susceptibility. The interactions of temperature, pesticides, and Bd may be important for understanding
patterns of population declines in amphibians. We looked at the long-term effects of Bd, insecticides
(carbaryl or malathion), and static and variable temperature (15 C, 20 C, 25 C, or 15 to 25 C 72:72 hour
cycle) on metamorphosis and survival of Pacific tree frog ( Pseudacris regilla ). In addition, we studied
the short-term effects of Bd and temperature (15 C, 20 C, or 25 C) on grey treefrogs ( Hyla chrysoscelis ).
Our results showed that temperature can interact with Bd to have greater than expected negative effects
on larval survival and development and that insecticides appear to have a positive effect on Bd exposed
amphibians‘ late metamorphic development. For Pacific treefrogs, survival to metamorphosis decreased
at high and variable temperatures when tadpoles were exposed to Bd, and time to tail absorption
decreased when tadpoles were exposed to carbaryl or malathion and Bd. For grey treefrogs, survival
decreased when tadpoles were exposed to Bd at 25 C. Our study suggests that high and variable
temperature may contribute to increased susceptibility to Bd and could put amphibians at greater risk in
nature and that environmentally relevant levels of pesticides might inhibit the infectivity of Bd.



Russell, Anthony (University of Calgary); Hynes, Sabrina (University of Calgary, Canada)

Resource partitioning in caudal regeneration : assessing the impact of dietary intake on tail and
body growth in the leopard gecko (Eublepharis macularius).

The ability to cast off the tail to avoid predation is well-known among lizards. The locomotor
consequences of the absence of a tail , and the potential impact of tailessness on fecundity, have also



                                                                                                       618
been quite extensively considered. When the tail is dropped, however,the lizard is also faced with the
energetic demands of regeneration, which may have long-term consequences. Relatively few studies
have explored the effects of the demands of tail regeneration on body growth, and even fewer have
contemplated the trade-offs that may occur when dietary resources are limiting. Potential implications
may differ depending upon : whether the tail serves as a major site of lipid storage; the life history stage
at which tail loss occurs; and the availability of food. To investigate the relative impact of these effects we
raised and maintained juvenile leopard geckos under controlled conditions to dissect out the additive
influences of the demands of growth, food availability, and metabolic responses. Firstly we investigated
how growth is impacted by differential caloric availability and intake. We then investigated the impact of
tail loss on growth (of the body and tail) under ad libitum dietary conditions. We employed these
baseline data to further explore the additive effects of reduction of dietary resources and the demands of
somatic growth on caudal regeneration. Our results reveal that the regenerating tail receives priority over
somatic growth when resources are limiting. Furthermore, animals undergoing caudal regeneration
suppress their metabolic rate at the point in caudal regeneration when volumetric increase is greatest,
diverting resource allocation to the tail while maintaining linear growth of the tail.



Russell, Ron (Saint Mary's University); Gilhen, John (Nova Scotia Museum of Natural History, Canada)

Stable Isotopic Relationships Among Forest Salamanders

Natural communities are structured by a number of biotic and abiotic mechanisms. Analysis of stable
isotope ratios of carbon and nitrogen can be used to describe diets and thus ecological relationships
among organisms. In this work, we use stable isotope ratios of 13 C and 15 N to describe the ―isotopic
niche‖ in a guild of five caudate amphibian species native to Nova Scotia, Canada. We analyzed
terrestrial and aquatic forms of Ambystoma maculatum and Notophthalmus viridescens , and terrestrial
forms of Hemidactylium scutatum , Ambystoma laterale , and Plethodon cinereus . Of the terrestrial
caudates, A. maculatum, P. cinereus, and N. viridescens (red eft) exhibited strongly overlapping δ 13 C
and δ 15 N values indicating similar dietary and habitat preferences. H. scutatum showed similar 15 N
signatures as the above group but depleted 13 C signatures, possibly due to the complex habitat
requirements of this amphibian. There were significant differences in both δ 13 C and δ 15 N values
between A. laterale and A. maculatum , consistent with differences in diet and habitat. Movements from
the aquatic to terrestrial environment, and converse were accompanied by dramatic shifts in δ 13 C and δ
15 N isotopic ratios. Extreme disturbance of the forest canopy resulted in changes in ground cover and
soil conditions ultimately affecting the isotopic signatures of salamanders.



Russello, Michael (UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA); Jensen, Evelyn; Madsen, Jeanette (The
University of British Columbia, Kelowna, BC, Canada); Govindarajulu, Purnima (BC Ministry of
Environment, Victoria, BC, Canada)

Extirpation by Introgression?: Investigating the genetic consequences of released painted turtle
pets on endangered Chrysemys picta bellii in British Columbia

Introduction of non-native species has long been recognized as a threat to biological diversity. When
native and non-native species retain the ability to interbreed, introgressive hybridization can lead to
genetic pollution of the local gene pool. One such case may be the western painted turtles ( Chrysemys
picta bellii ) of Burnaby Lake, British Columbia. In 2010, a monitoring study at Burnaby Lake found five
individuals displaying     morphological characteristics intermediate between C. p. bellii and C. p.



                                                                                                           619
marginata or C. p. picta. These subspecies are known to hybridize naturally wherever their ranges
overlap, but the presence of the other subspecies in British Columbia is likely due to human release of
pets. As part of a larger study investigating phylogeography and population history of Western painted
turtles , here we used mitochondrial control region and nuclear oncogene sequence, as well as
microsatellite data to investigate the presence of hybridization and extent of introgression that may have
occurred in Burnaby Lake between native and putatively introduced individuals. From a management
perspective, Western painted turtles in the coastal region of British Columbia are listed by Committee on
the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada as endangered, despite, in many cases, having an uncertain
origin. Our work will help quantify the degree to which genetic pollution from the introduced turtles may
compromise the conservation value of the Burnaby Lake population, highlighting the importance of
educating the public on the evolutionary consequences of intentional releases of unwanted pets.



Russello, Michael (UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA); Poulakakis, Nikos (University of Crete,
Iraklion, Greece); Garrick, Ryan (University of Mississippi, University, MS, United States); Benavides,
Edgar (Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States);
Caccone, Adalgisa (Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States)

Unraveling the Peculiarities of Island Life: Vicariance, Dispersal and the Diversification of Giant
Galápagos Tortoises

In isolated oceanic islands, colonization patterns are often interpreted as resulting from dispersal rather
than vicariant events. Such inferences may not be appropriate when island associations change over time
and new islands do not form in a simple linear trend. Further complexity in the phylogeography of oceanic
islands arises when dealing with endangered taxa as extinctions, uncertainty on the number of
evolutionary ‗units‘, and human activities can obscure the progression of colonization events. We have
conducted a series of studies to address these issues through a reconstruction of the evolutionary history
of giant Galapagos tortoises, integrating DNA data from extinct and extant species with information on
recent human activities and newly available geological data. Our results show that only three of the five
extinct or nearly extinct species should be considered independent evolutionary units. Dispersal from
mainland South America started at approximately 3.2 Mya after the emergence of the two oldest islands
of San Cristobal and Espanola. Dispersal from older to younger islands began approximately 1.74 Mya
and was followed by multiple colonizations from different sources within the archipelago. Vicariant events,
spurred by island formation, coalescence, and separation contributed to lineage diversifications on Pinzon
and Floreana dating from 1.26 and 0.85 Mya. In addition, human-mediated movement of tortoises may
have inadvertently preserved the genetic legacy of presumed extinct ( Chelonoidis elephantopus
endemic to Floreana) and nearly extinct ( C. abingdoni endemic to Pinta) species, genetic signatures of
which were detected within living hybrid descendents on the northern island of Isabela. This work
provides an example of how to reconstruct the history of endangered taxa in spite of extinctions and
human-mediated dispersal events, and highlights the need to take into account both vicariance and
dispersal when dealing with organisms from islands whose associations are not simply explained by a
linear emergence model.




                                                                                                       620
Ruyle, Leslie (University of GA/ TAMU ABS); Todd, Brian (University of CA- Davis, Canada); Maerz,
John (University of GA, Canada)

Life history traits, behavior, parasite load, and density reveal the effects of anthropogenic impacts
on a critically endangered micro-endemic species

Threatened and endangered species living in protected areas with human populations pose a different set
of conservation challenges than protected species in exclusionary zones. Demographic and life history
characteristics of these populations may be influenced directly and indirectly by human activities. Direct
effects can result in non-lethal injuries such as tail loss Indirect effects may include resource subsides,
altered habitats, and perturbations in behaviors affecting foraging time and social interactions. The Black-
chested Spiny-tailed iguana ( Ctenosaura melanosterna ) is a critically endangered lizard species living
on a protected archipelago off the northern coast of Honduras. We used a three-year study, consisting of
585 captures of C. melanosterna among four sites (two with high levels of human activity and two with
low levels of human activity) to describe the relationship between human activity and variation in
ctenosaur body size, sexual size dimorphism, sex ratio, parasite load, body condition, tail loss, behavior,
and density. Ctenosaurs showed a negative response to high human density and domestic animal
presence, which was manifested as a decline in body size, changes in sexual size dimorphism, and
higher tail loss frequency. Sex ratios were relatively stable, except for at one site, where we believe
females may be drawn to nesting habitat. Parasite loads varied from being absent at the highest human
density site to heaviest at the highest ctenosaur density site. Wariness varied among sites and age
classes providing evidence that much of the behavior is learned. Ctenosaur density was highest at the
site with high human density and without domestic animals. Ctenosaur density was lowest where there
was high human activity and presence of domestic animals. Our results show that human activities within
protected areas affect ctenosaur populations, but the effect of human presence depends on the type of
human activity. Management plans for C. melanosterna should account for patterns of human habitation
and activity on the archipelago.



Ruyle, Leslie (University of Georgia); Miles, Donald (Ohio University, Athens, United States)

Parasite load covaries with sex, body condition and anthropogenic perturbation

As a consequence of higher titres of testosterone, males are hypothesized to have higher parasite loads
as a consequence of immune suppression. However, species whose distributions overlap human
settlements may also have higher stress levels as a consequence of habitat alteration and anthropogenic
perturbation, which results in immunosuppression. The Black-chested Spiny-tailed iguana ( Ctenosaura
melanosterna ) is a critically endangered lizard species living on a protected archipelago off the northern
coast of Honduras. We used a three-year study, consisting of 585 captures of C. melanosterna among
four sites (two with high levels of human activity and two with low levels of human activity) to test the
hypothesis that parasite loads are high not only among males, but also lizards that inhabit environments
adjacent to human settlements. For all captured lizards, we recorded body size (snout-vent length, SVL)
to the nearest millimetre and weighed to the nearest gram. We counted all ectoparasites (ticks). We also
measured the dewlap length and width in millimetres. We derived a measure of body condition by
retaining the residuals from the regression of body mass against snout-vent length. We used a poisson
regression to model count variables. We ran three analyses.        First, we ran a poisson regression that
compared tick loads among sites and between sexes.               Second, we tested the hypothesis that
differences in tick load among sites and between sexes was a consequence of body condition. Finally,
because males have larger dewlaps than females we tested the hypothesis that parasite load increased




                                                                                                        621
with dewlap area. A significant three-way interaction revealed that tick load varied across sites and
between sexes, but was conditional on sex. Parasite loads did not differ between the sexes at body
sizes less than 200 mm SVL. However, males above 200 mm had tick counts exceeding females. Tick
loads were highest on Isla Menor. Males in poorer condition had higher tick loads. Females and males
with high condition scores had lower tick counts. Tick counts were positively correlated with dewlap
length, but negatively correlated with dewlap width.     Our results suggest that males have a higher
parasite load than females, but the pattern depends on the density of lizards. Highest tick counts were
obtained at sites with the highest relative density of ctenosaurs (Ruyle unpublished). However, high
ctenosaur densities are also a consequence of resource subsidies from human sources. Thus, elevated
tick loads may be an indirect consequence of human activities.



Ryan, Maureen (University of Washington); Hamlet, Alan; Lee, Se-Yeun (University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, United States); Palen, Wendy (Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada); Adams,
Michael (US Geological Survey, Corvallis, OR, United States)

Amphibian Squeeze: synergistic impacts of climate change and introduced fish on amphibians in
the US Pacific Northwest mountains

Amphibians in the mountains of western North America are ―squeezed‖ between two synergistic
anthropogenic threats: rapidly changing climate and introduced fish. Exotic fish (primarily trout) exclude
amphibians from many deep, perennial lakes and ponds. However, the shallow fishless ponds and
wetlands on which many populations now rely may be disproportionately vulnerable to climate-induced
drying. This situation presents both opportunities and challenges. Fish removals from mountain lakes
have been successful in restoring aquatic habitat for amphibians, thus may represent a viable option for
building resilience to climate change. However, the intensity of synergistic effects, and hence the
effectiveness of fish removals for preventing declines, will vary among landscapes and species based on
the amount and quality of fishless habitat and the proportion of habitats that are likely to become
unsuitable for amphibians in future climates. Evaluating vulnerability to these factors across broad
landscapes requires a new generation of hydrologic modeling approaches specific to wetlands, an
understanding of geographic variation in the distribution of existing wetland habitats, and an assessment
of life history sensitivity for a range of species. The intention of our talk is to synthesize the magnitude of
this problem, and to support this overview with preliminary results from an ongoing interdisciplinary
collaborative effort, which suggest that variable infiltration capacity (VIC) climate-hydrologic models can
be successfully adapted to link climate models and landscape-specific amphibian species occurrence
data, enabling informed vulnerability assessment and climate adaptation planning.



Ryan, Travis (Butler University);

Effects of size, distance, age, and upland habitat on turtle occupancy of created urban wetlands

One of the major impacts of urbanization is the loss of wetlands and other habitats used by amphibians
and reptiles. More recent patterns of urbanization, however, have resulted in the creation of a significant
number of urban wetlands in the form of storm water detention ponds. These ponds may be inhabited
by urban wildlife populations, but occupancy may be significantly affected by the attributes of any
particular pond. This study focuses on factors influencing whether created urban wetlands are occupied
by aquatic turtles in Indianapolis, Indiana, the 14 th largest city in the United States. During the summer
of 2009, I sampled for the presence or absence of turtles in 65 haphazardly-selected urban ponds in



                                                                                                           622
Washington Township, a region of Indianapolis that has undergone significant urbanization over the last
60 years. In 2010, I used a randomized selection protocol to evaluate an additional 65 urban ponds in
Washington Township. I used GIS to determine (1) the size (surface area and perimeter) of each pond,
(2) the ages of ponds using historical aerial photography, and (3) the straight line distances between each
pond and potential sources of colonists (e.g., White River and its tributaries), the nearest body

of water, the nearest road, and the nearest major road. I compared the characteristics of occupied and
unoccupied wetlands using multivariate analysis of variation (MANOVA) and component single factor
ANOVAs, and found that size and ages of ponds were more significant than distance elements; turtles
were found in ponds that were significantly older and larger than unoccupied ponds.         The majority of
previous studies on urban wildlife, and for turtles in particular, tends to focus on individual species, a
particular site, or the effect of a particular disturbance. Only recently have ecologists begun adopting a
broader landscape view of the urban habitat; this research represents one of the first such study for
turtles.



Ryberg, Wade (Texas A&M University); Fitzgerald, Lee (Texas A&M University, College Station, TX,
United States)

Applying a landscape community concept to lizards of the Mescalero Sands

Local community diversity is a function of both regional-scale processes (speciation, extinction) that
determine the size of colonizing species pools and local-scale processes (competition, predation) that
limit community membership. Recently, research has focused on spatial population processes occurring
at the mesoscale, including mass effects, source-sink, and colonization-extinction dynamics of
metapopulations, that link such local- and regional-scale processes. The population processes of these
metacommunities jointly influence the diversity of local communities and are sensitive to the composition
and spatial geometry of different habitat types across landscape mosaics. Indeed, the surrounding
landscape can influence the diversity of local communities in ways that may not be predicted by local-
and regional-scale factors alone. As such, the spatial relationships of different landscape features at the
mesoscale represent essential determinants of local community diversity, and provide the context
necessary for a more thorough understanding of community organization. One complication, however, is
that there are many landscape features found within the vast spatial and temporal extent of the
mesoscale, and community organization may need to be examined through many different spatial
contexts. We used a hierarchical approach to describe how spatial relationships of landscape features
calculated at different spatial extents determine the composition of 59 local communities of lizards
occupying Shinnery Oak sand-dune habitats within the Mescalero Sands ecosystem of New Mexico. We
evaluated characteristics of lizard species‘ distributions, including coherence, species turnover and range
boundary clumping, to distinguish among idealized patterns of metacommunity structure. We observed a
nested subsets pattern of diversity with clumped species loss, which indicates these lizard species co-
occur in discrete communities with groups of species replacing each other along a latent environmental
gradient. We then used regression tree analyses to quantify associations between site scores from the
primary ordination axis (reciprocal averaging) and the spatial geometry of different landscape features
calculated at 20, 100, and 1000 hectare spatial extents. Ordination scores for sites and therefore
metacommunity structure were primarily dependent on the number and geographic arrangement of
different landcover types. We observed scale-dependence, however, in the specific landcover types and
spatial relationships among them that best explained variation in ordination scores across sites. From
these observations, we therefore conclude that multiple spatial contexts are needed to comprehensively
understand community structure in this lizard assemblage.



                                                                                                       623
Sabaj Pérez, Mark (Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia); Watkins-Colwell, Gregory (Yale
Peabody Museum of Natural History, Canada)

Can the Americas' oldest continuously operating natural history museum survive another 200
years?

In 1812, The Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia was founded ―for the encouragement and
cultivation of the sciences, and the advancement of useful learning‖. The not-for-profit Academy has been
the architect of its own fortune (and misfortune) for nearly two centuries as the oldest standing natural
history museum in the Western hemisphere. Despite a constant flow of biological specimens (now est. at
17 million), recent decades mark the ebb of annual budgets (deficits of 0.5–1 million for over a decade)
and curatorial staff (down 50% from 14 in the 1990s). On the eve of its Bicentennial, the Academy
                                                                          th
affiliated with Drexel University, founded in 1891 and now the nation‘s 14 largest private university. The
partnership is intended to enable the Academy ―to grow and prosper into our 3 rd century, enhancing our
programs of scientific research and education with our combined resources‖. The affiliation also joins
Academy researchers with Drexel faculty into a new university department (Biodiversity, Earth &amp;
Environmental Sciences) that will accept its first students in Fall 2012. Many are optimistic that this
alliance will expand successful Academy research programs and resuscitate those dormant, as well as
promote the importance of natural history collections to a new populace of students and stakeholders.
Long and passionately heralded by insiders, the irreplaceable nature of collections and their necessity to
taxonomic and systematic research are in some ways gaining recognition beyond the museum
community. In 2010, the US National Research Council identified ―understanding biological diversity‖
among five ―Grand Challenges‖ at the intersection of the biological and physical sciences. In response,
NSF‘s Directorate for Biological Sciences will focus investments on research to address these challenges.
Despite such prudence, anxious straits persist for many museums, and the FY 2013 budget request for
NSF may add rocks to the waters (e.g., funding for Collections in Support of Biological Research may be
effectively halved). The next century will be one of adaptation for The Academy and other museums,
marked by many tests of putatively anodyne solutions to decidedly unsustainable futures. In addition to
concluding remarks, this talk will identify models of university-museum alliances, explore the ―Grand
Challenges‖ facing natural history museums, and celebrate A Glorious Enterprise (1st complete history
of the Academy by Peck &amp; Stroud, 2012).



Sacerdote, Allison (Lincoln Park Zoo);

Smooth Green Snake (Opheodrys vernalis) recovery in northern Illinois

Lincoln Park Zoo partnered with Lake County Forest Preserve District in Illinois to develop a recovery
plan for smooth green snakes. Despite habitat restoration, remnant populations are isolated, limiting
colonization. We monitored populations and collected founders for zoo breeding and headstarting. From
2010-2011, we hatched 124 neonates. We evaluated headstarting and release techniques comparing in
situ and ex situ headstarting, brumating versus skipping brumation, and use of soft versus hard
releases. We compared survival, growth, and reproductive potential across treatments. Survival from
hatching to winter 2010 was 89% for ex situ headstarts and 63% for in situ headstarts. All ex situ
snakes survived the winter. Spring recaptures of in situ headstarts were low with survival estimated at
7%. Mean growth rate from hatching to one year of age did not differ between brumated and active
snakes. Brumated snakes compensated for lost mass with accelerated growth rates following warm-up.
We compared reproductive potential via fecal hormone analysis, production of spermatozoa, and egg
production. Testosterone and estrogen concentrations did not differ, but corticosterone concentration in




                                                                                                      624
active snakes was greater than in brumated snakes. Cloacal smears allowed detection of spermatozoa
from wild-caught adult males and brumated one-year olds, but not from active one-year olds. Five
brumated females produced unfertilized eggs in 2011 while active females did not produce eggs. We
supplemented a founder site with 18 headstarts; 12 were brumated and six were kept active. Nine
headstarts were soft released and nine were hard released. Fifteen headstarts and five wild adults were
externally radio-transmittered to monitor survival and movements following release. Estimated survival
was 78% with no effect of brumation, release type, or sex. Headstarts and wild snakes had mean daily
movements of 1.9 m (+ 1.1) and 4.9 m (+3.6), respectively. Population and habitat viability models were
produced to guide reintroduction planning.



Sadek, Riyad (Biology Department, American University of Beirut); Hraoui-Bloquet, Souad (Faculty of
Science, Lebanese University,, Canada)

Structure of the habitats of three sympatric populations of the lizards Trachylepis vittata,
Phoenicolacerta kulzeri and Parvilacerta fraasii in Lebanese mountains.

Phoenicolacerta kulzeri (Müller &amp; Wettstein, 1932) and Parvilacerta. fraasii are small lacertid
lizards endemic to the Lebanese mountains at high altitudes. Phoenicolacerta kulzeri is found between
1400m and 2100m while Parvilacerta fraasii (Lehrs 1910) , is observed at altitudes between 1900-
2400m. The skink Trachylepis vittata (Olivier, 1804) is sympatric with both lizards but its range extends
from sea level to altitudes higher than that for both lacertid species. These lizards are active mainly during
the warmer months, depending on weather conditions and snow cover. Field studies were conducted on
these lizards regarding their habitat use, microhabitat preferences and predator avoidance. Pa. fraasii
and T. vittata are ground-dwelling, seeking refuge inside vegetation, under stones and in some ground
level rock crevices. Ph . kulzeri is scansorial and seeks refuge in rock crevices at various heights. Ph.
kulzeri ‘s habitat comprises rocky slopes with sparse vegetation and cedar trees in a few locations. Due to
the scarcity of its habitat, Ph. kulzeri is found in widely-spaced patches over its distribution range while
the habitats of P. fraasi and T. vittata are more continuous and connected. Principal component
analysis was conducted on several habitat variables for the three lizards and for the available habitats.
There was clearer separation between the two lacertids but with some habitat overlap of both with T.
vittata. Populations of the three species are associated with heavy livestock grazing activity in some
locations.



Saenz, Daniel (Southern Research Station); Fucik, Erin; Kwiatkowski, Matthew (Stephen F. Austin State
University, Canada)

Synergistic effects of climate and the invasive Chinese tallow on larval amphibians

Chinese tallow, Triadica sebifera , is an exotic deciduous tree that has invaded the southeastern United
States. Larval amphibian occurring in environments invaded by Chinese tallow may be negatively
impacted as autumn leaf litter decomposes in natal areas. In a previous controlled experiment, tallow
leaf litter was found to negatively impact two anuran species that breed in winter, but not two species that
breed later in the year. These results suggested that the impact of invasive Chinese tallow on anuran
larvae may be dependent on when leaf litter enters aquatic habitats and when amphibians are present in
the water which, in turn, may be influenced by local weather and climate change. The objectives of this
study were to determine whether the timing of leaf fall from Chinese tallow and the timing of anuran
breeding influence survival of frog larvae. Tadpoles were raised in five mesocosm treatments, each



                                                                                                          625
treatment with Chinese tallow leaf litter at different stages of decomposition. Tadpoles in treatments with
shorter decomposition times had significantly lower survival.        Dissolved oxygen levels and pH were
significantly lower in the treatments where larvae survival was low. Our results suggest that when larvae
and Chinese tallow leaf litter enter aquatic habitats at similar times, anuran mortality may be high.     If
tallow leaf litter enters the water considerably earlier than anuran larvae, dissolved oxygen levels and pH
may have time to return to levels that allow larvae to survive. These results demonstrate the importance
of understanding how invasive plant species affect anuran larvae in the context of local weather and
climate change.



Salerno, Patricia (University of Texas at Austin); Cannatella, David (University of Texas at Austin,
Canada); Senaris, J. Celsa (Fundacion La Salle, Venezuela, Canada)

Ancient tepui summits harbor young rather than old lineages of endemic frogs

The flattop mountains (tepuis) of South America are ancient remnants of the Precambrian Guiana Shield
plateau. The tepui summits, isolated by their surrounding cliffs that can be up to 1000m tall, are thought of
as 'islands in the sky,' harboring relict flora and fauna that underwent vicariant speciation due to plateau
fragmentation. High endemicity atop tepui summits supports the idea of an ancient 'Lost World' biota.
However, recent work suggests that dispersal between lowlands and summits has occurred long after
tepui formation indicating that tepui summits may not be as isolated from the lowlands as researchers
have long suggested. Neither view of the origin of the tepui biota (i.e., ancient vicariance vs. recent
dispersal) has strong empirical support owing to a lack of studies. We test diversification hypotheses of
the Guiana Shield highlands by estimating divergence times of an endemic group of treefrogs, Tepuihyla.
We find that diversification of this group does not support an ancient origin for this taxon; instead,
divergence times among the highland species are 2–5 Ma. Furthermore, the species Tepuihyla edelcae ,
proposed to be the only species in the genus to have a disjunct distribution between two tepuis highlands
(Chimanta and Auyan) is known only at altitudes above 1800m (with no occurrence reported in the 60km
of lowlands or foothills that separate them). Preliminary results from our expanded molecular dataset
suggests not only that each tepui holds a different species, but also that this recently diverged group has
a complex genetic and evolutionary history.



Salo, Pälvi (University of Turku);

Detrimental impacts of alien American mink on two native snake species in the archipelago of the
Baltic Sea, SW Finland.

Introduced predators have negative impacts on native prey populations all around the world, but evidence
of alien predator impacts on terrestrial ectothermic vertebrates, especially snakes, is still scarce. In
Europe one of the most widespread invasive predators is the American mink ( Mustela vison ; hereafter
mink), a North American mustelid introduced as a fur animal. Across its novel range mink has been
accused of the decline of many native species, e.g. water voles ( Arvicola terrestris ) and several colonial
seabirds in the UK and the native European mink ( Mustela lutreola ) in Estonia. One of the best-studied
ecosystems affected by mink is the outer archipelago of the Baltic Sea, SW Finland, where alien mink is
the only resident terrestrial mammalian predator. Mink have been shown to reduce population densities of
all its terrestrial prey groups on the islands, including voles, amphibians and several species of breeding
birds. Mink share these prey with two native snake species, European adders ( Vipera berus ) and Grass
snakes ( Natrix natrix ). Snakes in the outer archipelago may suffer from resource competition with mink



                                                                                                         626
and mink are also occasionally known to prey on snakes. I used an experimental setup to evaluate the
impact of alien mink on native snake populations, whereby snakes and prey populations were surveyed
on five islands in four different study areas. Two of the study areas are a part of a large-scale mink
eradication effort while the two other areas serve as controls, where mink are still present. Preliminary
results from years 2011 and 2012 indicate that both European adder and Grass snake population
densities are higher in mink removal areas compared to control areas. Densities of amphibians and
breeding passerines were also higher in the mink removal areas while, contrary to expectations, vole
populations were higher when mink were present. These results suggest that mink presence has a
negative impact on snake populations but the exact mechanism (predation or resource competition) is still
unknown.



San Mauro, Diego (University of Barcelona); Gower, David (The Natural History Museum, London,
United Kingdom); Zardoya, Rafael (Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales, Madrid, Spain); Wilkinson,
Mark (The Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom)

The Tree of Life of caecilian amphibians: from mitogenomics to multilocus

Caecilians (Gymnophiona), along with frogs and salamanders, are one of the three orders or extant
amphibians. They are a highly specialized group with elongate, annulated and limbless bodies, and
sensory tentacles in the head. Most of the nearly 200 currently recognized species have a secretive
fossorial lifestyle, but members of one family are secondarily adapted to aquatic habitats. Although they
are a relative small group, they have a remarkable morphological, ecological, and reproductive diversity.
There are 10 currently recognized families of caecilians (35 genera) distributed in tropical regions of
Africa, Central and South America, India, and South East Asia. During the past 10 years, we have used
complete mitochondrial genomes to unravel the phylogenetic relationships and systematics of the major
lineages of caecilians. This mitogenomic approach has eventually yielded a robust phylogenetic
framework for 45 caecilian taxa representing most described genera (over 80%), including some for
which molecular data had never been collected before. More recently, we have moved on a multilocus
approach in order to reconstruct the caecilian tree of life at a finer level. We have sequenced six nuclear
(four protein-coding, one ribosomal, and one intron) and six mitochondrial (four protein-coding and two
ribosomal) markers for an expanded taxon sampling of 70 caecilians representing virtually all the diversity
in Gymnophiona. Preliminary phylogenetic results of this multilocus dataset are robust and definitively
promising. We are now using both the mitogenomic and the multilocus phylogenetic frameworks to study
morphological and reproductive evolution, as well as historical biogeography and diversification patterns
in caecilians.



Sánchez Solís, Jorge Fernando (Instituto de Biología); Gabriela, Parra-Olea (Instituto de Biologia,
Mexico, Mexico)

Molecular Systematics of the complex of Pseudoeurycea cephalica (Caudata: Plethodontidae)
Cope, 1865.

In recent years, molecular tools have helped clarify the phylogenetic relationships and resolve those
species complexes that present taxonomic uncertainties. In Mexico, many cryptic species have been
found lately, showing that mexican amphibian but especially salamander biodiversity is underestimated.
Pseudoeurycea is almost endemic of Mexico (having only four species reported outside the country).
Species of Pseudoeurycea have restricted distributions except for three species complexes: P. bellii ,



                                                                                                       627
P. leprosa and P. cephalica , the latter, consisting of four species ( P. cephalica, P. galenae, P.
scandens and P. quetzalanensis). P. cephalica is widely distributed throughout the Tranversal Volcanic
Belt and southern Sierra Madre Oriental, with two subspecies, P. c. manni and P. c. rubrimembris , from
Hidalgo. The taxonomic problem is based on the fact that paratypes of P. c. manni and P. c.
rubrimembris were collected from the same locality, and apparently the morphological differences don‘t
justify their separation from P. cephalica . For this study, we collected a total of 81 individuals which were
sequenced for mitochondrial fragment, (L2) and nuclear genes (POMC and RAG1). In a preliminary
phylogenetic analysis we found that P. c. manni and P. c. rubrimembris are not subspecies, and
actually they are well genetically caracterized species. However several new species within the complex
are yet to be described.



Sanchez, Barbara (California State University, Northridge);

A comparison of growth and fecundity of Paralabrax nebulifer (barred sand bass) from polluted
and unpolluted sites in Southern California

Organic pollutants and trace metals are environmentally persistent in the marine realm, they have
carcinogenic and mutagenic properties, and they can accumulate in tissues of marine organisms and in
sediments. These environmental stressors can have detrimental effects on fish populations by limiting the
abilities of individuals to acquire resources for growth, reproduction, and survival. Pollutants such as
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and heavy metals can cause
physiological stress in fishes, especially in areas of high pollutant concentrations, like harbors. This study
evaluated the impacts of pollutants on growth and fecundity of a common coastal marine fish in Southern
California. This study was conducted at four sites: two polluted sites within harbors and two relatively
unpolluted sites located outside of harbors. Measures of growth and condition (weight-at-age, weight-at-
length, and hepatosomatic index (HSI)) were compared between the polluted and unpolluted sites.
Reproductive potential was measured by three different methods: gonadosomatic index (GSI), batch
fecundity in hydrated eggs and size range ratio in mature eggs between polluted and unpolluted sites.
Concentrations of pollutants such as PAHs, PCBs, and chlorinated pesticide were compared between the
polluted and unpolluted sites. Measures of growth and physiological condition did not differ between the
polluted and unpolluted sites, implying that concentrations of pollutants in the harbors studied were not
high enough to affect growth rates. Reproductive potential did not differ between the polluted and
unpolluted sites, confirming that these pollutants have little affects on this multiple batch spawning
species.



Sandkam, Benjamin (Simon Fraser University); Watson, Corey; Joy, Jeffrey; Breden, Felix (Simon
Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada)

Color vision is influenced by genomic and lighting environments in guppies

Guppies are small freshwater fish native to South America and are considered one of the best known
examples of sexual selection in that females prefer to mate with more colorful males. This raises
questions of how do guppies see color and why is color so important to them. Color vision is mediated by
transmembrane proteins in the retina called opsins. The peak spectral sensitivity of an opsin is a function
of its genetic sequence. Understanding how guppies see and perceive color requires knowing the genetic
sequence of the opsins that make up their opsin repertoire in addition to how they use that repertoire.
Aquatic systems further complicate color vision as water can differentially transmit wavelengths of light,



                                                                                                          628
shifting the distribution of light available to the visual system. The opsin loci of guppies and 15 other
species in the Poeciliidae family were sequenced to determine the evolutionary history of guppy color
vision. High gene conversion activity was found to occur between two long-wavelength sensitive loci
throughout the Poeciliidae family. This is most likely due to the genomic environment of these genes,
which occur in an inverted orientation within a tandem array of multiple homologous genes. The extent to
which the lighting environment influences color vision was determined by measuring the lighting
environment (abundance and distribution of different wavelengths of light) of natural populations in
Trinidad. Guppy tissue samples were collected simultaneously with light readings and color vision was
assessed using quantitative PCR to determine opsin expression profiles. Understanding the visual
system of guppies will allow future work to investigate the mechanisms of mate choice that result in
sexual selection.



Sandmeier, Fran (University of Nevada, Reno); Tracy, C. Richard; Weitzman, Chava; DuPre, Sally;
Hunter, Kenneth (University of NV, Reno, Canada)

Ecological immunology, climate, and pathogen loads in Mojave desert tortoise populations

Historically, health and the prevalence of pathogenic disease in populations of the threatened Mojave
desert tortoise ( Gopherus agassizii ) has focused on the seroprevalence of Mycoplasma agassizii ,
known to cause a chronic respiratory disease. Here, we quantified the prevalence and average loads of
M. agassizii in more than 20 populations, and simultaneously quantified innate immunocompetence via
bacteriocidal assays (a measure of natural antibody and complement activity) and differential white blood
cell counts (a measure of long-term fluctuations in levels of physiological stress). Multiple regression
models (assessed via Akaike Information Criterion) were used to assess the importance of these
measurements of disease and immunocompetence, as well as the importance of climatic variables, in
predicting known differences in disease-prevalence in these populations. In our models, colder thermal
regimes proved to be correlated with decreased immunocompetence. Previously, colder thermal regimes
have also been associated with increased disease prevalence in this host-pathogen system. This and
other patterns emerging from these models led us to develop new hypotheses describing the ecology of
chronic respiratory diseases in these populations of desert tortoises.



Santos, Eduardo Jose dos (Universidade Federal do Paraná); Conte, Carlos Eduardo (Universidade
Federal do Paraná, Canada)

Diversity of anuran amphibians in dry forest fragments from Brazil

Habitat loss and fragmentation currently correspond to the biggest threat to the survival of all living
species. Beyond that, sensitive organisms like amphibians have to cope with other barriers, such as
climate variation. The patterns and processes involved in areas with these characteristics, such as dry
forest (Mesophytic Semideciduous Forest) fragments, still need more focus. Herein, we describe the
richness and abundance of anuran amphibian species occurring in 22 sites, distributed in four dry forest
fragments from the northern state of Parana, Southern Brazil. Data was obtained in ten campaigns from
September 2011 to February 2012, through the method of sampling at breeding sites. The obtained data
was then evaluated and compared in the alfa, beta and gamma diversity levels. A total of 4.962
individuals, distributed in 18 species, belonging to seven families, were recorded. They are: Bufonidae (2
spp); Centrolenidae (1 sp); Cycloramphidae (1 sp); Hylidae (9 spp); Leiuperidae (1 sp); Leptodactylidae
(3 spp); Microhylidae (1 sp). Two more species (Proceratophrys avelinoi and Scinax berthae) had been



                                                                                                      629
recorded in a previous campaign, totaling 20 species in the region. The most abundant species was D.
nanus, with 3.060 individuals registered (61% of the total). Temporary ponds at the forest edge were the
sites with highest diversity (13 spp), while forest transects were the poorest (1 sp). The number of
habitats used by species ranged from one to 14. The fragments were fairly similar in their composition but
the richest one was also the largest in area and had a greater variety of habitats. A clustering analysis of
similarity (Coefficient of Sorensen) was performed to compare the composition in the four fragments
studies with 12 other sites, being 10 within dry forest domains, one within Araucaria forest domains and
one within rainforest domains. The analysis showed a pattern expected, both in a gradient of similarity
and in the division of forest domain. Difference in vegetation physiognomy seems to be the main
separator of composition, followed by distance between fragments. However, one of the fragments
sampled did not show high similarity with the others, possibly because it was the only one without a
temporary pond associated in the region. Further analyses and comparisons may clarify the patterns of
diversity shown in the area and in dry forest fragments.



Santos, Eduardo Jose dos (Universidade Federal do Paraná); Oliveira, Adriele Karlokoski Cunha de
(Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, PR, Brazil); Foerster, Nathalie Edina (Universidade Federal
do Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil); Conte, Carlos Eduardo (Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, PR,
Brazil)

Key of identification for the families of anuran amphibians occurring in Brazil: An attempt to
integrate molecular and morphological datasets

Anura has been the aim of several taxonomic studies throughout the past decades, and many
classifications have been proposed, based either on morphological or molecular characteristics. However,
attempts to unify these two approaches are scarce, and the most recent studies are based mainly on
molecular data. Genetic classification may cause problems when identifying taxa in field or museum
studies, because DNA approaches are not very accessible and identification is generally done through
morphological analysis beforehand. For Brazilian species, the problem becomes even bigger due to the
high richness and morphological diversity entailed to the impossibility of studying all species genetically.
The most recent phylogenetic classification for Amphibia was published by Pyron and Wiens (2011),
leading to drastic changes in taxonomy, decreasing the number of occurring families in Brazil from 19 to
17, and relocating several genera in different families. We developed a dichotomic key based on a
previous one created by Vizotto (unpublished data), the current classification of families and
morphological characters. The aim was to facilitate practical activities and evaluate whether the new
phylogeny can be applied or not. The key has 17 steps and comprises all the occurring families of Anura
in Brazil. The most general, observable and diagnostic characteristics were used, such as
presence/absence and type of tongue; shape and structures present in and between the phalanges; type
and thickness of skin; size of body, head and mouth; shape of pupils. When external traits could not be
verified or distinguished between groups, we used osteology and color as differentiators. Overall, the new
classification allowed a satisfactory grouping of taxa, because even though several of them were
relocated and altered, the procedure remained similar. The main difficulties were met with families
Cycloramphidae, Hemiphractidae and Hylidae, which contain quite morphologically distinct genera,
hardening the generalization of family traits. Regardless of classification used, anurans still hold relations
too problematic to be solved through just one approach, which makes attempts of integration urgent and
necessary.




                                                                                                          630
Santos, Eduardo Jose dos (Universidade Federal do Paraná); Crivellari, Lucas Batista; Oliveira, Adriele
Karlokoski Cunha de; Oliveira, Igor Soares de; Conte, Carlos Eduardo (Universidade Federal do Paraná,
Canada)

The influence of environmental heterogeneity on the composition and distribution of anuran
amphibians in dry forest fragments

The main objective when studying the ecology of communities is to predict how living organisms interact
with each other through complex associations. For anuran amphibians, habitat heterogeneity may have
huge force in structuring their communities both in local and landscape scales. Hypothetically, more
diverse and heterogeneous sites will enable the occupation of more species and more individuals. We
tested this by surveying 12 ponds associated with four dry forest fragments in Southern Brazil, and then
measuring 14 environmental variables to analyse the contribution of each in different levels. Samples
were carried from September 2011 to February 2012 through the method of sampling at breeding sites. In
order to evaluate the data obtained, the analyses used were the

variance inflation factors (VIF), to choose the best variables, the generalized linear models (GLM), to
evaluate the influence of local and landscape factors on richness, the model selection of Quasi-Akaike
(AICc), to choose the best model, the hierarchical partitioning analysis, to elucidate which environmental
variables best explained distribution and abundance, and the null model analysis, to check potential
degrees of niche overlapping and competition. A total of 4.866 individuals, distributed in 17 species,
belonging to six families were recorded. Through the application of VIF, five variables were chosen. The
GLM and AICc methods showed that the heterogeneity of vegetation in the interior of the pond, and minor
distances from the nearest pond, enhance richness in the area. These variables explained 71% of
variation on the richness in ponds. The hierarchical partitioning explained from 27 to 58% of abundance
variance of eight species. Species from the families Bufonidae, Hylidae and Leptodactylidae were more
influenced by the percentage of vegetation inside and outside the ponds, the types of vegetation inside
the ponds, and minor distances from the nearest fragment. The family Leiuperidae was more influenced
by the distance from the nearest pond. The null model tests run showed great niche overlapping and no
significant evidence of competition, illustrating that species occur mainly because of variation in
heterogeneity. The data obtained showed that higher complexity of vegetation associated with the pond
and minor distances between them enhance richness in dry forest fragments, which is an additional
motivator to conserve and manage the ponds and the forests around them.



Santos, Juan (NESCent (National Evolutionary Synthesis Center));

Molecular evolution and metabolic rates in poison frogs

Molecular evolution is simultaneously paced by mutation rate, genetic drift, and natural selection. Life
history traits also affect the speed of accumulation of nucleotide changes. For instance, small body size,
rapid generation time, production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and high resting metabolic rate
(RMR) are suggested to be associated with faster rates of molecular evolution. However, phylogenetic
correlation analyses failed to support a relationship between RMR and molecular evolution in ectotherms.
In addition, resting metabolic rate might underestimate the metabolic budget (e.g., digestion, reproduction
or escaping predation). An alternative is to test other metabolic rates, such as active metabolic rate
(AMR), and their association with molecular evolution. Here, I present comparative analyses of the
associations between life history traits (i.e., AMR, RMR, body mass, and fecundity) with rates of
molecular evolution of nuclear and mitochondrial loci in the poison frogs (Dendrobatidae). My results
support a strong positive association between mass-specific AMR and rates of molecular evolution for



                                                                                                       631
both mitochondrial and nuclear loci. In addition, I found weaker and genome-specific covariates such as
body mass and fecundity for mitochondrial and nuclear loci, respectively. No direct association was found
between mass-specific RMR and rates of molecular evolution.



Santos, Marcella (Universidade de Brasília); Giugliano, Lilian; Colli, Guarino (Universidade de Brasília,
Brasília, Brazil)

Phylogeography of Micrablepharus atticolus in the Brazilian Cerrado

We conducted a phylogeographic analysis of Micrablepharus atticolus, an endemic lizard from the
Cerrado of Brazil. We investigated a possible genetic structuring within the species, and confronted it with
hypotheses related to differentiation on plateaus/depressions, historical stability/instability areas derived
from potential distribution models from the Pleistocene and Holocene, and centre/periphery regions of the
Cerrado distribution. Occurrence records for M. atticolus were compiled and georeferenced. We
compared the species elevational occurrence with its sister species M. maximiliani to investigate a
possible segregation on elevational gradient. Current and past distributional models (6, 21, and 130 kyr
BP) were constructed. We conducted a logistic regression analysis to investigate past and current
variables associated with M. atticolus distribution. A cytochrome b fragment was sequenced for 116
samples from 30 localities. We obtained population genetics indexes, haplotype networks, a Bayesian
phylogenetic analysis, and molecular dating for haplotypes observed. Spatial genetic structure was
investigated, and we verified the existence of association between genetic and geographical distances.
We traced elevational records on the phylogeny and calculated genetic diversity indexes for well sampled
localities to investigate plateaus/depressions, stability/instability, and centre/periphery hypotheses. There
was no segregation between Micrablepharus species on elevational gradient. The strong association of
M. atticolus with Cerrado was confirmed by distribution modelling and logistic regression. Past climatic
models revealed noticeable changes on suitable areas for the occurrence of the species through the last
130 kyr BP. There was high genetic diversity and structuring, with a main differentiation among northeast
and southwest localities. We suggest three geographical groups, that diverged around 3.5 to 1.5 Ma.
There was association between geographical and genetic distances. Tree topology revealed a complex
history of occupation of high and lowlands and genetic diversity indexes were in general against
hypotheses predictions. It is clear that there is strong structuring and high diversity among sequences
sampled. Yet, there was no evidence for the hypotheses investigated. Our results suggest the existence
of a mechanism still unexplored acting on diversification the Cerrado‘s biota, nevertheless supporting the
high diversity on the region.



Santoyo-Brito, Enrique (Oklahoma State University); Anderson, Matt; Fox, Stanley (Oklahoma State
University, Stillwater, OK, United States)

Sex ratio and morphological development according to incubation temperature in the collared
lizard, crotaphytus collaris

Two modes of sex determination occur in squamates: genotypic sex determination (GSD) and
environmental sex determination (ESD). An example of ESD is temperature sex determination (TSD).
Temperature sex determination is well known in many reptiles and has evolved multiple times within a
given taxon, for example, in iguanidae. Collared lizards, Crotaphytus collaris, are oviparous diurnal
crotaphytids distributed in the southwestern United States and northern Mexico. It is not known with
certainty if this species has GSD or TSD. Although no sex chromosomes have been identified, the



                                                                                                         632
species is generally regarded as having GSD. In a previous preliminary study in which sex was
determined after incubation of eggs at different temperatures in the laboratory, the authors considered
their results inconclusive. Thus, the exact sex determination mechanism in C. collaris is unknown.
Incubation temperature may also affect an embryo´s development, survival, and phenotype. Incubation
temperature can also influence an individual´s post-hatch growth. The objective of this study was to
measure the effect of incubation temperature on sex and morphology of Crotaphytus collaris hatchlings,
as well as its effect on subsequent morphological development. We incubated eggs at six constant
temperatures: 20°, 21°, 26°, 30°, 32°, and 35°C. We obtained 103 eggs from 17 females from a
population located at the Glass Mountains, Oklahoma. Forty-three eggs hatched. To increase sample
size, we also included the results of treatments (27°, 28°, 30°, and 32°C) reported in Viets et al. (1994) for
the same species. Statistical analysis suggested a difference in the sex ratio among treatments, and the
number of males was significantly lower in the 32°C treatment. No subject hatched at the lowest
temperature, 20°C. The eggs in this treatment were kept inside the incubator for a mean of 130 days. By
contrast, all subjects hatched at the highest temperature, 35°C, and the mean number of days of
incubation was 37.1. We assessed overall differences in 8 morphological traits (snout-vent length, tail
length, mass, head width, head length, head height, forelimb and hindlimb length using Discriminant
Function Analysis of individuals hatched at 21°, 26°, 30°, 32°, and 35°C. There was no statistically
significant difference in morphology on the day of hatching between the sexes, but there was a significant
difference among treatments. There also was no significant difference in morphological development
during the first 60 days of life between the sexes, but there was a significant difference among
treatments. Incubation period was different by treatment, with a significant inverse relationship between
temperature and duration of incubation. We tentatively suggest that fewer males are produced at
intermediate incubation temperatures, but more data are needed to be certain.



Saporito, Ralph (John Carroll University); Jennifer, Stynoski (University of Miami, Coral Gables, United
States); Yaritbel, Torres-Mendoza (John Carroll University, University Heights, United States); Sasa-
Marin, Mahmood (Instituto Clodomiro Picado, San Jose, Costa Rica)

Ontogeny of alkaloid-based chemical defenses in the strawberry poison frog (<I>Oophaga
pumilio</I>)

Many organisms use chemical defenses in various life stages to reduce predation risk. Chemical
defenses can be manufactured or sequestered, such as in some dendrobatid frogs that obtain alkaloid-
based chemical defenses from an arthropod diet. A wealth of studies on alkaloids in dendrobatids is thus
far largely limited to adults. Herein, we identified and quantified the alkaloids in all life stages of a
dendrobatid frog, Oophaga pumilio , that displays complex parental care; at hatching, O. pumilio
tadpoles are transported to water pools called phytotelmata, and then for at least 6 weeks, mother frogs
return to supply tadpoles with an obligate diet of unfertilized nutritive eggs. We collected adults, juveniles,
tadpoles, and nutritive and ovarian eggs, as well as early-stage tadpoles hand-reared with eggs of an
alkaloid-free heterospecific frog. We detected alkaloids in mid- and late-stage tadpoles, juveniles, and
adults, and found that the quantity and diversity of alkaloids increase with size. No alkaloids were
detected in early-stage tadpoles or tadpoles fed with heterospecific eggs, perhaps because these
tadpoles do not yet possess any form of granular glands. We also did not detect alkaloids in nutritive
eggs, although alkaloids were variably detected in ovarian eggs in this and other studies. In frogs, alkaloid
quantity increased dramatically at sexual maturity, which is ontogenetically timed with a similar increase in
granular gland size. Because the same alkaloids derived from terrestrial arthropods were detected in
adults and phytotelm-dwelling tadpoles, this frog may be the first known to actively provision its posthatch
offspring with chemical defenses.



                                                                                                           633
Sapsford, Sarah (James Cook University); Alford, Ross; Schwarzkopf, Lin (James Cook University,
Townsville, Australia)

Transmission, demography, and environment all affect the prevalence of infection by
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in Australian rainforest stream tadpoles

Tadpoles may serve as intraspecific reservoir hosts for the amphibian chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium
dendrobatidis ( Bd ), transmitting the infection to terrestrial frogs when they contact water. Understanding
the dynamics of Bd infections in tadpoles may therefore be crucial to understanding and ultimately
managing the impact of the disease. The prevalence of infection by Bd in adult and juvenile frogs is
usually higher in winter in species associated with Australian tropical rainforest streams. In these
systems, many species have prolonged breeding periods centered on summer, and tadpoles are present
throughout the year. Prevalence could thus increase over winter due to increasing cumulative risk in
tadpoles, then decrease as infected tadpoles either metamorphose or die and uninfected hatchlings enter
the system. Tadpole demography could thus play a key role in driving prevalence of Bd throughout the
year. Our aim was to determine the importance of transmission, demography, and thermal environment
and its seasonal changes in determining prevalence of Bd throughout the year in Australian tropical
rainforest streams. We sampled tadpoles at six different streams at three different types of sites: high and
low elevation sites in contiguous blocks of rainforest, where the low elevation sites are likely to receive
Bd zoospores from higher elevation sites, and low elevation sites in isolated blocks of rainforest.
Tadpoles were swabbed for Bd throughout the year. Prevalence fluctuated seasonally and was usually
highest in winter. We used our data to model how prevalence should change if only demography affected
it, and if it was affected both by tadpole demography and seasonal environmental effects. We compared
the predictions of both model types with observed data, and found that demography alone can account
for a substantial proportion of seasonal fluctuations, and that seasonal environmental effects account for
a substantial additional fraction. There were also effects of site elevation and degree of site isolation
Prevalence was higher in contiguous low elevation sites than in isolated low elevation sites, indicating
that transmission may also affect prevalence. Finally, prevalence was also clearly influenced by historical
effects specific to each individual site. Our detailed understanding of what drives prevalence in tadpoles
in these systems will be incorporated in plans to manage the impacts of possible future outbreaks of
chytridiomycosis.



Sarre, Stephen (University of Canberra); Ezaz, Tariq; Georges, Arthur (University of Canberra, Canada)

How many transitional pathways between sex-determining systems in reptiles and amphibians?

 Important technological advances in genomics are driving a new understanding of the evolution of sex
determination in vertebrates. When this new understanding is combined with the widespread distribution
of genetic and temperature-dependent sex-determination mechanisms among reptiles, it is apparent that
transitions between modes have occurred many times, as they have for amphibians. It is also likely that
thermosensitivity in sex determination is a key factor in those transitions in reptiles, and possibly in
amphibians. A number of recent models have addressed the idea that movement in thresholds provides a
potent force in transitions among sex-determining modes where transitions in sex determination are
facilitated by the interaction between genes and the environment. The central question arising from these
models and from the sparse data currently available is whether transitions in reptiles and amphibians
between the modes of sex determination have been affected by the evolution of independent and
fundamentally unique genetic mechanisms or by more subtle and possibly reversible modifications of
some conserved underlying mechanism. They suggest that it is likely that homologous or nonhomologous




                                                                                                        634
states for sex chromosomes among sister and more distantly related taxa may be arrived at by a number
of different pathways. We identify seven such routes with the best understood being the ancestrally
homologous sex chromosomes, such as the XY system seen in most mammals. Although the potential for
temperature influences on sex determination in reptiles and amphibians has been known for some time,
investigation of sex-determination transitions has really become possible only since the arrival of modern
genomics. The key to those investigations lies in the identification of homology among sex chromosomes,
and in the identification and characterization of sex-determining genes in multiple taxa. Only with such a
mechanistic approach can we hope to tease apart the different possibilities for the types of sex-
determining mechanisms in reptiles and amphibians.



Savage, Anna (Smithsonian Institution); Zamudio, Kelly (Cornell University, Canada); Fleischer, Robert
(Smithsonian Institution, Canada)

Comparative transcriptomics of of frogs with divergent responses to a pathogenic fungus

Amphibians are declining worldwide at an unprecedented rate due to the emerging fungal disease
chytridiomycosis. To date, immunological and genetic correlates of chytridiomycosis susceptibility are
poorly understood. We used 454 pyrosequencing to characterize whole transcriptomes of immune
tissues from a declining amphibian species, Lithobates yavapaiensis , that shows natural variation in
chytridiomycosis susceptibility. Comparison with the model frog Silurana and with the NCBI Gene
Ontology database reveals a high proportion of immune-related genes are expressed in all sampled L.
yavapaiensis individuals. The complement of genes expressed in spleen and skin from uninfected,
susceptible and resistant frogs sampled in the wild varies across tissues, individuals, and disease status.
This preliminary study will enable us to identify the transcriptomic hallmarks of frog immune responses to
chytridiomycosis , with the ultimate goal of identifying resistance genes and improving amphibian
conservation strategies.



Sawaya, Ricardo (Universidade Federal de São Paulo - UNIFESP); Martins, Marcio (Universidade de
São Paulo - USP, Canada); Fausto, Barbo; Felipe, Grazziotin (Museu de Zoologia da Universidade de
São Paulo - MZUSP, Canada); Otavio, Marques (Instituto Butantan, Canada)

Repeated and parallel evolution of dwarf lanceheads of the Bothrops jararaca complex in
continental islands along the Brazilian coast

Continental islands of the Brazilian coast have a complex history of connections with the adjacent
mainland during the Pleistocene. These islands house subsets of the Atlantic forest biota and can be
considered as natural experiments for the study of the evolution of isolated populations. The common
lancehead B. jararaca is a medium sized pitviper, with a geographic distribution congruent with the
Atlantic forest. Juveniles of B. jararaca feed upon centipedes, amphibians, and lizards, whereas adults
are diet generalists, consuming mostly mammals. At least two insular forms of the B. jararaca complex
have been recognized as full species ( B. alcatraz and B. insularis ), but additional forms of this complex
are waiting to be described. Gigantism and dwarfism are relatively well known phenomena in island
vertebrates. One possible explanation for the body size change in island snakes is the diet alteration
hypothesis, in which snake body size is a consequence of prey availability. Here we use five insular
populations of the B. jararaca complex to explore this hypothesis related to body size changes in island
snakes. None of the islands inhabited by these species has natural populations of small mammals.
Juveniles of two island species, B. insularis and Bothrops sp. 1, feed upon ectothermic prey, like the



                                                                                                       635
mainland form, but are bird specialists when adults. Both species are slightly smaller than the mainland
B. jararaca and show some changes in body form apparently related to the more arboreal habits. The
other three island species, B. alcatraz , Bothrops sp. 2, and Bothrops sp . 3 are dwarf forms within
the B. jararaca complex. Bothrops alcatraz feeds mainly on centipedes, but also on lizards, Bothrops
sp. 2 feeds mainly on lizards, but also on centipedes and conspecific snakes, and Bothrops sp. 3 feeds
on frogs. The three dwarf forms are terrestrial and show a body form similar to that of young B. jararaca
from the mainland. Our data corroborate the diet alteration hypothesis and suggest an adaptive plasticity
of B. jararaca regarding body morphology and diet. Indeed, unpublished data on altitudinal variation in
the biology of mainland B. jararaca indicate that variation in prey availability is associated to variation in
size and morphology. This plasticity may have played an important role in body form and size shifts in this
snake complex, perhaps facilitating the persistence of insular forms in depauperate habitats.



Schalk, Christopher (Texas A&M University);

Community structure of tadpoles along environmental gradients in the Bolivian Gran Chaco

Communities of tadpole species are assembled in association with multiple environmental gradients, in
particular pond hydroperiod and canopy cover, resulting in non-random distribution of species in
breeding ponds and across entire landscapes. The relative strengths of these abiotic and biotic factors
that constrain species‘ distributions often change along environmental gradients. Species distibutions
often reflect their ability to cope with these abiotic and biotic constraints. I studied the role of
environmental gradients contributing to assembly of tadpole communities in the Bolivian Gran Chaco, a
semiarid thorn forest that receives approximately 450 mm of rainfall annually. Rainfall is sporadic and
results in a highly dynamic pond presence across the landscape. Ponds in this region not only contain
invertebrate and fish predators, but the carnivorous tadpoles of Ceratophrys cranwelli . I sampled 35
ponds to determine community composition and species abundance of tadpole species associated with
these environmental gradients across the landscape. At each pond, I quantified abiotic variables (pond
dimensions, physiochemical factors, and canopy cover) and predator abundance and diversity. A
Canonical Correspondence Analysis and Cluster Analysis showed that community structure was primarily
associated with abiotic factors, specifically forest canopy cover, pond depth, and pond area. Both
tadpole richness and abundance increased with increasing pond area and pond depth, but decreased
with increasing canopy cover. These results suggest greater species diversity and abundance in these
ponds is dependent on large, open canopy ponds. These species may be unable to cope with increasing
canopy cover due to the low productivity within these pond types. Tadpole richness and abundance had
weak associations with predator abundance and diversity. Tropical dry forests, such as the Bolivian Gran
Chaco, are currently threatened with habitat loss and among the most endangered ecosystems in the
world. The implications for conservation of this study are that both species diversity and variation in
community structure depends on pond structure. Conservation strategies may be developed that take
into account the environmental factors associated with community assembly as well as maintenance of
species diversity.



Schiller, Nicole (Thompson Rivers University); Larsen, Karl (Thompson Rivers University, Canada)

Life in fluctuation: the ecology of western painted turtles in a northern reservoir

Hydroelectric operations have increased in response to growing energy demands, and are often
considered a ‗green‘ energy source. However, the catchment of hydroelectric reservoirs and fluctuations



                                                                                                          636
in water levels (drawdown zone) can have significant impacts on aquatic ecosystems. For herpetofauna
that live in cold climates these human-induced alterations may affect their ability to manage and tolerate
their environment. Our objective was to investigate the ecology of an extreme northern population
(Revelstoke, British Columbia) of western painted turtles ( Chrysemys picta bellii ) that inhabits an
environment constantly fluctuating due to hydroelectric operations. Our data suggest that all age and sex
classes utilize the drawdown zone. Telemetry and early spring surveys revealed that adult and juvenile
turtles overwinter within the drawdown zone and it appears that there is a communal hibernating site
within a floating mass of vegetation (island). Nest inundation as a result of reservoir operations was not a
significant threat to the animals, simply because all nesting sites detected, thus far, lay above the high-
water mark. Similarly, no incidents of mortality to turtles could be attributed to the reservoir operation.
However, changes in water levels affect habitat availability. Areas of use and basking sites during early
spring are lost as water levels rise, while as other areas flood, more ‗usable‘ habitat becomes available
for turtles than would normally be accessible. Comparisons between turtle movements and water levels
(elevation in meters) may suggesthat variations in movements increase, and that larger movements are
made when water levels rise. Differences in movements may be related to changes in available habitat
(including temperatureranges) and/or other resources (e.g. food availability, cover from predation, nesting
and overwintering locations, shelter) or they may be affected by changes in water levels. This potentially
could lead to higher energetic costs or predation risks for those turtles that are moving greater distances.
Perhaps most interesting is that the size-frequency distribution of the turtles appears consistent with that
reported for other northern turtle populations, yet there is a very strong female bias (1♂ : 6 ♀). Possible
reasons for this bias will be discussed. Overall, this project provides the foundation for a long-term
monitoring program for these animals, and suggests that the population seems stable in this extreme
environment. However, some life-history attributes (e.g. movements) may in part be explained by
differences in exposure to reservoir levels, changes in water temperature, and habitat availability.



Schloegel, Lisa (EcoHealth Alliance);

Wildlife trade: species introductions and disease vectors

The transport of live wildlife across geographic boundaries has allowed for the co-mingling of disease
vectors and potential hosts contributing to the emergence and global spread of emerging pathogens (e.g.
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Ebola Reston virus, and HIV-2). A series of data analyses, field
sampling, laboratory experimentation and molecular techniques have shown a clear link between the
transport of anurans for the food and pet trades with the spread of two lethal amphibian pathogens (
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis and ranaviral disease). Data indicate the international transport of
vectors could not only introduce pathogens into new regions, but could also facilitate the mixing of
pathogen genotypes and the inadvertent spread of strains of unknown virulence that could negatively
impact animal health. In 2008, data collected were instrumental in the decision to list the first and only
amphibian diseases to the World Organization for Animal Health‘s Aquatic Animal Health Code,
providing guidelines to limit the spread of these pathogens through the trade (e.g. quarantine
procedures). The evidence that will be presented reinforces the need for urgent action to minimize the
potential spread of diseases through international trade routes, for the benefit of wildlife health and
sustainability.




                                                                                                        637
Schmidt, Benedikt (University of Zurich);

Use of state-space models to analyse amphibian time series collected by volunteers

During spring, many amphibians migrate to the breeding sites. On the way to the breeding sites, the
amphibians often must cross roads where they may get killed by cars. At many sites, volunteers have
used drift fences for years or decades to capture amphibians and to reduce road mortality. Such
conservation activity thus yields long-term time series of amphibian populations from many sites that
could be used to estimate large-scale population trends. However, the methods used by volunteers differ
among sites and there is observation error. State-space models are a relatively new statistical tool to
analyse data collected by volunteers because they take observation error into account. Here, I will
present the results of an analysis of the amphibian time series data in the Swiss national amphibian data
base. The aim is to assess the reliability of the data (i.e., observation error) and to test whether there are
population declines.



Schneider, Christopher (Boston University); Crawford, Nicholas; McGreevy, TJ; Messana, Nick (Boston
University, Canada)

The genetic basis of phenotypic variation and divergence in Anolis marmoratus

Understanding the process of population divergence and speciation is a central goal of evolutionary
biology. Ultimately, understanding this process requires that we link phenotypic variation to underlying
genetic variation. Traditionally, such analyses were restricted to model organisms. However, advances in
genomic technology, and complete genome sequences of phylogenetically diverse vertebrates, have
opened the opportunity to link phenotype to genotype in non-model organisms. Here we examine the
genetic basis of phenotypic variation in Anolismarmoratus, a polytypic species complex from the
Caribbean islands of Guadeloupe. We examine genetic variation on a genome-wide scale with RAD-tag
and bulk-segregant analyses and identify loci that show signatures of divergent natural selection. We are
able to relate variation at many of those loci to patterns of phenotypic variation among populations,
providing candidate loci for studies of adaptive divergence. Interestingly, on a genome-wide scale, there
is little evidence for restricted gene flow among populations and, while portions of the genome show
signatures of adaptive divergence, most of the genome remains homogeneous. This suggests that the
genome is porous, with segments of the genome (adaptive islands) maintained at alternate states by
divergent selection while the rest of the genome is homogenized by gene flow and recombination. We
discuss the implications of these results for understanding the genetics of adaptation and speciation in
Anolis .



Schock, Danna M (Keyano College); Soos, Catherine (Environment Canada, Canada); Machin, Karen
(University of Saskatchewan, Canada); Pauli, Bruce (Environment Canada, Canada)

Health of amphibian populations as indicators of ecosystem health in the Oil Sands region of
northeast Alberta.

 Several economically important projects related to oil sands mining and upgrading are taking place in the
boreal forest ecosystem in northern Alberta. Although substantial economic benefits are derived from this
natural resource, the poorly understood ecological costs of these operations have drawn scrutiny. Our
research is evaluating the health of wild amphibian populations in north-eastern Alberta. Amphibian
populations are integral components of boreal ecosystems, linking terrestrial and aquatic food webs by



                                                                                                          638
virtue of their lifecycles, and may also serve as valuable indicators of ecosystem health in general.
Amphibians may be especially vulnerable to organics and heavy metals from mining processes because
their breeding ponds are primarily filled by snowmelt in the spring. Previous studies have shown that
snowmelt contains particularly high levels of toxic organic compounds such as polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAH). Thus, amphibians in the boreal forest may be receiving high doses of oil sands
related substances when their breeding ponds fill in the spring. Specifically, we are using wood frog (
Lithobates sylvaticus = Rana sylvatica ) populations in northeast Alberta to test for correlations between
proximity to oil sands operations and: prevalence of infectious diseases (ranavirus, chytrid fungus),
malformation rates, biomarkers of chronic stress (metabolomics), and concentrations of priority
substances (heavy metals, PAH, naphthenic acids) in amphibian tissues and breeding pond water. The
suite of parameters we are investigating will shed light on effects of oil sands mining on amphibian
populations in particular, and the boreal forest ecosystem in general. The new knowledge being
generated by our research is providing tractable parameters that can be measured and interpreted by
regulatory agencies, industry, and other groups responsible for monitoring and managing land in the
boreal forest of Alberta.



Schock, Danna M (Keyano College);

Infectious diseases as a threat to Canadian amphibian populations.

Infectious diseases are a normal component of all ecosystems. However, they can threaten the long-term
persistence of host populations under several circumstances. For example, situations that compromise
host immune defences can be expected to intensify or prolong the impacts of pathogens. Consequently,
environmental stressors such as contamination and altered environmental conditions can interact with
pathogens in ways that tip disease dynamics in directions that promote the collapse of host populations.
The spread/translocation of novel pathogens (or novel strains of pathogens) into new geographic areas
can also threaten host populations (or species) with no innate immune defences to the pathogen.
Sublethal effects of infectious diseases can also present serious threats to host populations. Although
mass mortality events of hosts are often recognized for the potential effects that they may have on host
population ecology, sublethal effects are often overlooked. Growth rates, predator avoidance, and
fecundity rates can all be affected by infectious diseases, and the effects are much more difficult to
detect, particularly in the absence of long-term monitoring. A key characteristic of most pathogens,
including amphibian pathogens, is the fact they are capable of infecting and completing their lifecycles in
multiple species. Another characteristic of many amphibian pathogens is that there can be marked
differences among amphibian species in the levels of disease that results from infection. As a result,
some amphibian species may serve as reservoirs of infection for other species. This can become a critical
challenge for conservation measures when a widespread, resistant host species can harbour pathogens