ltiple different types of habitats. In Chile there are three related species previously
considered as Homonota : Garthia gaudichaudii , G. dorbignyi , G. penai . Several morphological
systematic studies have been completed, but for three widely distributed species in Argentina (
Homonota darwini , H. underwoodi &amp; H. fasciata ), few data are available. No phylogeographic
studies or molecular phylogenetic hypotheses are available for the genus. The objective of this work is to
present a molecular phylogenetic hypothesis for most of the described species in the genus, plus eight
candidate species. We sequenced two mitochondrial genes (cyt- b &amp; 12S) and seven protein
nuclear coding and four nuclear anonymous loci, and implemented traditional concatenated analyses as
well as species tree approaches. We discuss the taxonomic implications of these results and how the
future integration of phylogeographic and morphological approaches will allow further testing of
demographic and biogeographic hypotheses.




                                                                                                       492
Morando, Mariana (CONICET-CENPAT); Avila, Luciano (CONICET-CENPAT, Canada); Baker, Eric;
Sites, Jack W (Brigham Young University, Canada)

Molecular phylogeny of the endemic South American lizard clade Leiosaurae

The clade Leiosaurae is distributed mainly in southern Argentina, with few representatives in Chile. This
poorly-known group includes three genera: Pristidactylus , Leiosaurus and Diplolaemus . Pristidactylus
includes ten species, four of which are associated with Nothofagus forests in Chile, while the six
Argentinean species range from along the eastern side of the Andes to the mountains of Cordillera and
Precordillera, extending across the flat dry Monte habitats, and along the Atlantic coast and reaching the
isolated meadows atop the Sierra de la Ventana. Significant differences in meristic characters distinguish
Argentinian from Chilean species of Pristidactylus . The genus Leiosaurus includes four described
species, three in northwestern Argentina ( L. catamarcensis , L. paronae, L. jaguaris ) and one in
Patagonia ( L. bellii ). The genus Diplolaemus includes four species, D. bibronii in coastal regions and
arid mesetas of southern Patagonia, D. darwinii also in southernmost Argentina and reaching small area
in Chile, D. sexcinctus in north- central Patagonian Argentina, and D. leopardinus associated with the
Andean slopes in northern western Argentina and a small area in Chile. Natural history knowledge of
these species is very scarce, and unresolved taxonomic problems remain. Some phylogenetic
hypotheses have been proposed based on morphological and mitochondrial characters, but with very few
representatives (Frost et al 2001), and morphological and myological characters (Abdala et al 2009). In
this work we include most of the described species (14 of 18) with representatives from their type
localities, and we use Urostrophus vautieri as the outgroup. W e used two mitochondrial and eight
nuclear genes (7749bp) to infer phylogenetic relationships. The phylogenetic hypotheses of the Bayesian
tree shows that Diplolaemus is monophyletic, with Diplolaemus darwinii as the most basal and very
distinct lineage, and D. bibronii sister to D. leopardinus . Leiosaurus is strongly supported as
monophyletic, with L. bellii as the most basal species and L. catamarcensis sister to L. jaguaris . While
we found evidence for the monophyly of the Argentinean Pristidactylus species, P. torquatus from Chile
is not recovered within this clade and is the sister taxon of Leiosaurus .     We discuss the taxonomic
implications of our results.



Morey, Steven (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service); Westphal, Michael (Bureau of Land Management,
Hollister, CA, United States)

Lure-choice tests reveal possible association between color preference and breeding season in
live-bearing surfperch.

Sensory biases are non-mating related preferences that can predispose an individual to choose mates on
the basis of color pattern alone. Studies on livebearing surfperch of the family Embiotocidae have
suggested the existence of sensory biases towards phenotypic traits that share aspects in common with
food items. We sought to extend the investigation into surfperch sensory biases by asking whether fish
will show color preferences for artificial lures in the wild. We conducted tests of lure choice on sand-
dwelling surfperch of the subfamily Amphistichinae, focusing on two closely-related sympatric species,
Amphistichus rhodoterus and Hyperpropospon ellipticum . Two lures that varied only in coloration were
presented simultaneously in 62 hour-long bouts in surf habitat. Colors were red, black, yellow, and
orange, and a composite color we called ―pumpkinseed‖. Lures were assayed by spectrophotometry to
determine the source of variation in color. For each capture we recorded species and color of the lure.
Initial analysis of 162 captures revealed a slight trend towards a preference for orange. However, when
data were analyzed from breeding season alone, we saw a dramatic increase in captures on orange.
Spectrally, orange most resembled yellow in reflectance, showing a translation in wavelength only. Red,



                                                                                                      493
black and pumpkinseed varied from orange both in reflectance and wavelength, complicating comparison.
Because orange is a disproportionately represented pigment in both species and in their potential prey
items, it is possible that we are detecting a sensory bias. While the breeding-period shift in color
preference suggests an interaction between mating and color choice, the relationship may be indirect,
e.g. fish foraging strategies may shift during the breeding season due to new energetic requirements.
Therefore more work is required to establish whether a true sensory bias exists. One shortcoming of our
method is low power to detect choice, requiring large sample sizes. Our spectral data suggests that we
can increase power by narrowing lure choices, e.g. to orange vs. yellow exclusively. Our ultimate goal is
to understand the evolutionary processes that underlie the radiation of the sand-dwelling surfperch and in
particular the role of color pattern and color preference in that radiation. Rigorously testing for an
association between lure preference, sexual preference and color pattern is one step towards that goal.



Morgan, Ray (UMCES-AL);

Stream nutrients: Relationships to fish and benthic assemblages in Maryland streams

One of the most pressing environmental problems for the 21 st century is the presence of excess nutrient
loading in aquatic ecosystems throughout the world, often resulting in ecosystem collapses, economic
damages and human health concerns. Small freshwater stream systems (first through third order) are not
immune to nutrient loading, resulting from anthropogenic influences such as agricultural practices and
runoff, wastewater discharge, atmospheric deposition, and both urban/suburban point and non-point
sources. I used the Maryland Biological Stream Survey (MBSS) database to examine both nutrient and
benthic macroinvertebrate data collected during the MBSS Spring Index period and fish assemblage data
from the MBSS Summer Index period for Maryland. Statistical analyses indicated that stream nutrient
levels (TN, NO 3, NO 2, NH 3 and TP) minimally affected fish assemblages in first, second and third order
non-tidal streams.     However, there were strong statistical relationships of nutrient effects to several
benthic macroinvertebrate parameters, including EPT numbers (especially Ephemeroptera density), with
significant biotic reductions when TN levels exceed 4-6 mg/L. Although multiple stressors are often
present in Maryland streams, nutrients remain an important stressor to biotic assemblages, and need
increased consideration in conservation of intolerant Maryland fish species and stream biodiversity. Best
management plan development, along with implementation for nutrient management, requires
acceleration in Maryland, and potentially the Chesapeake Bay watershed.



Mori, Akira (Kyoto University); Toda, Mamoru (University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara, Okinawa, Canada)

Live long with a small body: Growth and longevity of a Japanese pitviper, Ovophis okinavensis, in
the field

As a general rule, life span of mammals and birds increases with body size. This rule has been
interpreted as the physiological consequence of warm-blooded animals based on the concept of
physiological time, which is correlated with their metabolic rate. In the case of ectotherms, it is not so
simple because metabolic rate of cold-blooded animals largely varies with their body temperature.
Snakes comprise a specious taxon of ectotherms, having approximately 3000 species with the range of
the maximum body size from less than 200mm to more than 5m. Thus, snakes would be ideal subjects to
test the concept of physiological time in ectotherms in relation to body size. We investigated growth and
longevity of a Japanese pitviper, Ovophis okinavensis, based on a long-term, mark-and-recapture study
on Okinawa-jima, a subtropical island in the Ryukyu Archipelago. Ovophis okinavensis is a small, docile



                                                                                                       494
snake: mean snout-vent length of males and females in the study site are 430mm and 481mm,
respectively. This snake is a typical ambush forager, feeding on a variety of vertebrates. Our previous
study showed that O. okinavensis is active under low temperature with mean body temperature of 16.1 C.
We marked 248 males and 202 females during a 15-year survey. Among them 100 males and 98 females
were recaptured at least once, and a total of 321 and 263 recapture records were obtained for males and
females, respectively. Thirty-seven males and 33 females were collected over more than five years. The
longest span of recapture records within a single individual was 15 years and 2 months. We estimated
that both males and females take approximately 10 years to attain the mean body size of the population.
Average growth rate during this stage was 20-30mm per year. Both males and females continued to grow
for more than additional 15 years with a less growth rate (less then 10mm per year) until attaining
approximately 500mm and 600mm, respectively. Even after attaining these sizes, some individuals
survived for nearly 10 more years with a very slow growth rate (less than 5mm per year). Consequently,
we estimated the longevity of males and females as more than 30 and 35 years, respectively. Our results
indicate that O. okinavensis, which is categorized as a relatively small-sized species among snakes, has
comparatively long life span with very slow growth. The low preferred body temperature and the ambush
hunting method of O. okinavensis, which imply low metabolic rate of this snake, may be related to this
slow life style.



Moritz, Timo (Deutsches Meeresmuseum); Rüber, Lukas (Natural History Museum, Bern, Switzerland);
Britz, Ralf (The Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom); Schliewen, Ulrich K. (The Bavarian
State Collection of Zoology, Munich, Germany)

Young living fossils? - the age of the family Polypteridae

Cladistians, the family Polypteridae, represent the most basal branch of the actinopterygians. We
conducted the first phylogenetic analyses combining mitochondrial (2096 bp) and nuclear (2634 bp) data.
Both datasets are principally in accordance, with nuclear markers giving less resolution for phylogenetic
relationships. A possible mitochondrial introgression event revealed by cytonuclear discordance is
discussed. The presence of four major clades within the genus Polypterus is confirmed, as well as the
untenable nature of the currently applied sub-species concept. We subjected the data set to molecular
clock analyses in order to estimate node ages of the evolutionary history of this lineage with very limited
fossil record. Different sets of single or combined markers in various analyses yielded drastically
inconsistent results, with nuclear data producing node ages up to ten times younger than mitochondrial
data. A combined data set under a strict molecular clock model resulted in an age of 85.7 million years for
the family Polypteridae and 52.6 million years for the genus Polypterus. Even considering the high level
of uncertainty of the results, diversification of recent Polypteridae is dramatically younger than the
separation of the cladistians from the remaining actinopterygians.



Mougey, Krista (Texas Tech University); Perry, Gad (Texas Tech University, Canada); Lazell, James
(The Conservation Agency, Canada)

Ecology and Life History Characteristics of the Repatriated Rock Iguana Population of Guana
Island, BVI

The stout iguana (Cyclura pinguis) is a critically endangered West Indian rock iguana endemic to the
British Virgin Islands. The distribution of C. pinguis was limited to the single island of Anegada until
conservation concerns in the 1980s prompted the founding of several artificially reestablished populations




                                                                                                       495
on the islands of Guana, Necker, Norman, and Little Thatch. Despite their potential conservation value,
little is known about the natural history of these reestablished populations. For the past 9 years, we have
been studying the repatriated C. pinguis population of Guana Island. As part of this long term monitoring
effort, we have been conducting a mark-recapture study, tracking population trends and recording the
demographic, morphometric, and life history characteristics of this population. The Guana population was
founded with only 8 iguanas but has grown markedly in the past several decades. Since 2003, we have
captured, measured, and PIT tagged over 300 individuals. The sex ratio of captured adults is near 1:1,
with a slight female bias. Adults are known to be territorial, but it appears that following the initial nest
dispersal movement, juveniles and yearlings exhibit some degree of site fidelity as well. The height of the
daily active period is between 9:30 and 14:30, although larger individuals tend to begin sunning earlier
and stay active later than smaller individuals. Both within- and between- year growth rates are
significantly higher in the Guana population than in the head-started Anegada population. Hatchlings
found on Guana gain an average of 115 mm snout-vent-length within the first year of development, but
growth rates decrease with increased body size. The success of the Guana population offers insights
into the importance of island management and control of introduced mammals and provides a
geographically distinct conservation hedge for this critically endangered species.



Mougey, Krista (Texas Tech University); Anderson, Wesley; Henry, Emily; Perry, Gad (Texas Tech
University, Canada)

Ecology of the Texas Horned Lizard (Phrynosoma cornutum) Across Three Ecoregions of Texas

Over the past several decades, the Texas horned lizard ( Phrynosoma cornutum ) has undergone
precipitous population and range declines. The variation in life history characteristics reported in the
literature for P. cornutum suggests that geographically localized data may be critical to understanding
the ecology of the species and elucidating the causes of these declines. For the past eight years, we
have been monitoring three populations of Texas horned lizards from understudied portions of the
species‘ range. Two of these populations are located in central Texas, the first within a Texas Army
National Guard facility in the Cross Timbers ecoregion and the second on a private ranch within the
Edwards Plateau ecoregion. Our third study population is located in the panhandle region of western
Texas near the High Plains to Rolling Plains ecotone. We have measured and marked almost 700 lizards
across the three sites, but horned lizard densities at the two sites in central Texas appear to be much
lower than those of the west Texas population. Despite similarities in search effort, annually, an average
of seven times as many individuals are captured in west Texas. We noted a relationship between annual
precipitation and number of individuals captured on the west Texas site that is not as apparent in the
central Texas populations. Average snout-vent length (SVL) of adults varies among the three sites, as
does the magnitude of sexual dimorphism. Contrary to the published literature, we observed a trend of
increasing body size along the latitudinal gradient. Unsurprisingly, growth rate is significantly correlated
with SVL on all sites, with smaller lizards exhibiting higher growth rates than mature lizards. The timing of
various life history events such as spring emergence, mating, egg laying, and hatching is similar across
the three sites.




                                                                                                         496
Mougey, Krista (Texas Tech University); Cheek, Chris; Hlavaty, Shay (Texas Tech University, Canada);
Perkins, Becki (Texas Tech Univeristy, Canada); Peyton, Mark (Texas Tech University, Canada); Ryan,
Caitlin; Zavaleta, Jennifer (Texas Tech Univeristy, Canada); Boal, Clint (USGS Texas Cooperative Fish
and Wildlife Research Unit, Canada); Perry, Gad (Texas Tech University, Canada)

Vertical Structure Use of the Stout Iguana (Cyclura pinguis) on Guana Island, BVI

The stout iguana ( Cyclura pinguis ) is a critically endangered species endemic to the British Virgin
Islands. Until the 1980s, the distribution of the species was confined to the single island of Anegada, but
during that time, efforts began to restore populations of C. pinguis to other islands of the BVI such as
Guana, Necker, Norman, and Little Thatch. Little is known about the behavior or life history
characteristics of these reestablished populations that are found in localities with vastly different
landforms and vegetation than on Anegada. We therefore studied habitat utilization of the thriving Guana
population. We used the spool-and-thread technique to track the movements and vertical habitat use of 4
adult and 11 juvenile iguanas in October 2011. For each individual we tracked, we recorded the
categorical type of structures utilized (tree, rock, cement, and other vegetation), the heights attained, the
linear distance between structures, and the diameter at breast height for applicable vertical structures
more than 15 cm high. Our results showed that trees comprised a greater proportion of the structures
used by juveniles than adults (P&lt; 0.001) whereas rocks comprised a greater proportion of structures
used by adults than juveniles (P&gt;0.001). Juveniles climbed to a mean height of 2.38± 0.16 m while
adults climbed to a shorter mean height of 0.85± 0.22m. Our study revealed that stout iguanas use
vertical structures more frequently than was previously assumed, which suggests that vertical structure
composition should be a part of future management considerations regarding conservation efforts for this
critically endangered species.



Mucientes, Gonzalo (IIM-CSIC); Queiroz, Nuno (CIBIO, Vairão, Portugal); Humphries, Nicholas (MBA,
Plymouth, United Kingdom); Saborido, Fran (IIM-CSIC, Vigo, Spain); Sims, David (MBA, Plymouth,
Canada)

Movements, behaviour and habitat preferences of pop-up satellite tracked shortfin mako sharks
(Isurus oxyrinchus) in the North Atlantic

The shortfin mako shark (Isurus oxyrinchus) is a highly migratory, pelagic species with circum-global
distribution in tropical and temperate seas. This shark is commonly found in the Atlantic Ocean and are
taken as bycatch in longlining and gillnetting operations for tuna and swordfish (Xiphias gladius), activities
that have expanded rapidly during the last 20 years. High demand for fins and its good-quality meat mean
makos are now highly prized by fishers. But despite the high prevalence, economic importance, and
vulnerability of this species, little is known about its population dynamics and habitat-use. There is some
evidence from conventional tagging and fishery studies that complex population structuring and
movements may be contributing to recorded declines in the western Atlantic Ocean. Shortfin mako sharks
may remain faithful to particular regions, which together with males and females apparently segregating
into different regions for at least part of the year may result in differential exploitation of vulnerable
components of the population (e.g. mature females, juveniles) exacerbating declines. The aim of this
study is to elucidate for the first time the movements and behaviour of shortfin mako sharks from satellite-
linked electronic tagging and relate this to remotely sensed environmental fields to identify fine-scale
habitat preferences in the Atlantic Ocean. Pop-up archival transmitting (PAT) tags were deployed,
recording vertical and horizontal movements and temperature preferences of mako sharks tagged in
oceanic waters. Satellite tags were programmed to detach 30, 60, 90, 120 or 180 days after deployment.
A total of 16 makos (8 males, 8 females) were caught and tagged in North Atlantic waters, specifically, in



                                                                                                          497
northwest, southwest and east of the Azores islands from 2009 – 2011. Tagged sharks ranged from 120
– 255 cm (fork length). Mako sharks displayed different movement and residency patterns, including a
trans-Atlantic migration into western Iberia waters. Satellite tracked sharks also displayed deep diving
behaviour into cold water, with maximum recorded depths of 1064 m (5.8 ºC) with temperature
preferences ranging from 5.8 and 27ºC.



Muletz, Carly (University of Maryland); Lips, Karen (University of Maryland, Canada); Fleischer, Robert;
McDiarmid, Roy (Smithsonian Institution, Canada); Yarwood, Stephanie; Caruso, Nicholas (University of
Maryland, Canada)

It's a small world: geographic and taxonomic variation in the cutaneous microbiome of Plethodon
salamanders

Diverse communities of symbiotic         bacteria and      fungi thrive on the moist, nutrient rich skin of
amphibians. The fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) is a widely recognized skin pathogen that
causes disease, mortality and population declines in many amphibian species worldwide. Recent studies
have shown that the resident microbial community and certain cutaneous bacterial species can protect
the amphibian host from Bd. However, the geographic and taxonomic distribution of cutaneous bacteria
and fungi across amphibian species is not known. As part of a larger project we are quantifying changes
in Plethodon populations, the presence of Bd and the distribution of cutaneous microbes. We
hypothesized that the richness of cutaneous microbes would differ among amphibian species and that Bd
presence would be correlated with a less diverse skin microbial community, as low microbial diversity is
positively correlated with disease presence in several other systems. At each of our sites, spanning a
geographic range of 767 km in the Appalachian Mountains, we attempted to sample the microbial
community from members of both the P. cinereus species group and P. glutinosus species complex
using both culture and culture-independent (i.e., pyrosequencing) methods. In 2011, we sampled five P.
serratus , four P. teyahalee and six P. glutinosus in Great Smoky Mountains N.P., TN and three P.
glutinosus and ten P. cinereus at Catoctin Mountain Park, MD. We cultured a total of 97 bacterial
colonies and 33 fungal colonies from the 27 individuals; many of these morphospecies were found among
multiple individuals and populations. Plethodon cinereus had significantly fewer bacterial colonies (µ =
1.4, range 0-5) than either P. teyahalee (µ = 5.3, range 3-7: p = 0.030) and P. serratus (µ = 5.4, range
2-7: p = 0.013), but did not differ from P. glutinosus (µ = 3.9, range 0-7: p = 0.087). The number of fungal
colonies did not differ significantly among species across all sites (µ = 1, range 0-3: p = 0.095). We
detected Bd on two P. cinereus from Catoctin at low intensity (µ = 12.4 ZSE). Although sample size is
low, the low richness of bacterial morphospecies on P. cinereus supports the idea that diverse microbial
communities may offer protection from disease. We have begun genetic analyses to better characterize
the microbial communities, and will compare microbial communities among species, sites and seasons
with traditional culturing and new genetic methods. Our results will contribute to understanding how
microbial communities influence disease in amphibians.



Mull, Christopher (Simon Fraser University); Yopak, Kara (University of Western Australia, Canada);
Dulvy, Nicholas (Simon Fraser University, Canada)

Reproductive Strategy, Brain Size and Structure in Chrondrichthyans

Chondrichthyans have the most diverse array of life-history and reproductive strategies of any vertebrate
group, and also exhibit broad variability in the size and complexity of the brain and its major components



                                                                                                        498
(olfactory bulbs, telencephalon, diencephalon, mesencephalon, cerebellum and medulla). In vertebrates
brain tissue is expensive to produce and maintain and represents a major energetic constraint particularly
during development, and increased encephalization may be related to maternal investment. In mammals,
larger brains are correlated with increased maternal investment in the form of longer gestation time and
the duration of lactation. This leads to a hypothesis that brain size is related to maternal investment in
offspring. Here, we test whether additional maternal investment, beyond the provisioning of a yolk, is
associated with larger brain size across 146 species from 6 orders of chondrichthyans using classic and
phylogenetic comparative analyses. We have previously shown that body size has a profound influence
on brain size. Controlling for body size, we find that both reproductive mode (lecithotrophy and
matrotrophy) and reproductive investment (development time and litter size) can partially explain variation
in overall adult brain size. Matrotrophic species have larger brains across all body sizes, however,
contrary to the expectation derived from mammals, gestation length had negative influence on brain size
such that species with longer gestation typically had smaller brains and litter size had a positive influence
such that species with larger litters tended to have larger adult brain sizes. Reproductive investment had
a significant influence on the scaling of most major regions (telencephalon, mesencephalon, medulla and
olfactory bulb), while diencephalon and cerebellum were best predicted by brain mass alone. Our results
suggest a tentative link between reproductive mode and investment and brain size and organization that
is worth investigating further. We suggest the development of a more refined phylogeny, detailed
estimation of maternal investment, analysis of neonatal brain size and organization and measurement of
ontogenetic patterns of brain growth may strengthen our understanding of the reproductive investment-
brain development hypothesis.



Müller, Hendrik (Jena University, Department of Comparative Zoology and Evolutionary Biology);
Wilkinson, Mark (Department of Zoology, The Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, London SW7
5BD, United Kingdom, Canada)

Caecilian amphibians and neoteny

Neoteny is a widespread phenomenon in caudates, with nine out of the ten recognized families having
neotenic, or at least paedomorphic members. In contrast, neoteny is conspicuously absent in anurans
and the reasons for this have been frequently speculated upon. In anurans, neoteny seems to be
precluded by a lack of gonadal maturation before metamorphosis. In the few exceptions where tadpoles
with mature gonads have been reported, behavioural constraints have been put forward as likely
precluding a successful reproduction at the larval stage. Besides anurans, caecilian amphibians also lack
any obligate or facultatively neotenic forms and the reasons for an absence of neoteny are unclear. The
majority of caecilian species are either direct developing or viviparous, which most likely precludes
neoteny in any case. For species with aquatic larvae, it has been speculated that the larval period is too
short to allow for the evolution of neoteny. Available evidence, however, indicates that several species
have long larval periods of at least one year. Larvae of some species attain furthermore considerable
sizes and we have observed specimens of Ichthyophis sp. With fully developed ova that show indication
of only recent metamorphosis, which seems to indicate that developmentally, the evolution of neoteny
seems at least possible. We argue that the absence of neoteny in caecilians is best explained by
caecilian life history. All caecilians are characterized by internal fertilization and even species with aquatic
larvae are characterized by terrestrially deposited eggs guarded by the female, and the need for
terrestrial egg deposition seems to preclude successful reproduction at the larval stage.




                                                                                                            499
Müller, Hendrik (Jena University, Department of Comparative Zoology and Evolutionary Biology);

Questions and (some) answers in caecilian development and evolution

Compared to frogs and salamanders, caecilians show a remarkably rich diversity in different
developmental modes, ranging from the presumably ancestral condition of biphasic development with an
aquatic larva to different forms of direct development and viviparity. Especially over the last decade, a
number of new studies on caecilian reproduction and development have provided new and exciting
information. In my talk, I summarize the current state of knowledge on caecilian development, with an
emphasis on morphological development, and discuss the implications concerning caecilian evolution.



Müller, Hendrik (Jena University, Department of Comparative Zoology and Evolutionary Biology); Lukas,
Paul (Institut für Spezielle Zoologie und Evolutionsbiologie, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena,
Erbertstrasse 1, 07743 Jena, Germany, Canada); Beckmann, Felix (Helmholtz Zentrum Geesthacht,
Institute of Materials Research, Max-Planck-Straße 1, 21502 Geesthacht, Germany, Canada)

Skeletal development and metamorphosis in the shovel-nosed frog Hemisus marmoratus (Anura:
Hemisotidae)

The majority of exotrophic, biphasic developing anurans show a similar pattern of skeletal formation.
Chondrification usually commences during late embryonic or early larval development. The onset of
ossification however is more variable and seems to be influenced by phylogenetic and functional
constraints. The majority of taxa are characterized by a boost of skeletal ossification during late larval and
metamorphic stages. Some anurans, such as bufonid, are characterized by delayed ossification and a
shift of the ossification of cranial bones into the postmetamorphic period. Other species, like
Pyxicephalus edulis, exhibit a substantial degree of cranial ossification at the end of metamorphosis,
which is thought to be an adaptation to the extreme dietary habits in this particular species. To investigate
the influence of functional demands on skeletal ossification in anurans, we investigated skeletal
development in the shovel-nosed frog, Hemisus marmoratus . Also known as pig-nosed or snout-
burrowing frogs, species of Hemisus are found throughout sub-Saharan Africa in a number of different
habitats. All Hemisus are highly specialized, burrowing frogs and, in contrast to most other burrowing
frogs, burrow head first into the substrate and this behaviour is already present in freshly metamorphosed
froglets. We present first data on skeletal development in larval and metamorphic H. marmoratus .



Müller, Johannes (Museum f. Naturkunde Berlin); Hipsley, Christy (Museum f. Naturkunde Berlin,
Canada)

Uncovering amphisbaenian origins with fossils and genes

The Amphisbaenia is a clade of burrowing reptiles with snake-like bodies, reduced limbs and a highly
reinforced skull adapted for head-first digging. Due their highly autapomorphic morphology, the
evolutionary relationships of amphisbaenians have been historically difficult to decipher. A long-standing
phylogenetic hypothesis is a sistergroup relationship with Serpentes, based on their superficially snake-
like morphology. However, this view has been ruled out by molecular studies which instead propose a
closer relationship between Amphisbaenia and Lacertidae, an Old-World clade of terrestrial, fully limbed
lizards. We recently added fossil support to the latter hypothesis with the discovery of the Eocene lizard
Cryptolacerta hassiaca from the Messel Pit World Heritage Site in Germany. Cryptolacerta groups as




                                                                                                          500
sister taxon to Amphisbaenia, possessing a mosaic of lacertid and amphisbaenian features, indicating
that head-first burrowing evolved prior to limb loss and body elongation in this clade.

In addition to their controversial squamate affinities, molecular investigations also challenge previous
views of the ingroup relationships of Amphisbaenia. Morphological characters place Bipedidae, the only
amphisbaenian taxon with forelimbs, as sister to all other members of the clade. In contrast, molecular
studies propose the fully limbless Rhineuridae as the basal most group, implying that limbs either
reevolved in bipedids or that limb reduction occurred several times independently. Interestingly, the
molecular hypothesis is in accordance with the fossil record, which shows rhineurids as the oldest known
taxa. Current reinvestigations of well-preserved fossil amphisbaenians reveal that not only has limb loss
occurred several times within the clade, but that other features previously considered unique, such as the
fusion of orbitosphenoid bones in the skull and the reduction of bones around the eye, are homoplastic.
These findings emphasize the need for integrating data from extant and fossil amphisbaenians to gain a
comprehensive picture of the evolutionary history of this engimatic clade.



Murphy, Alexander (Ohio University); Morris, Molly (Ohio University, Canada)

Plasticity of Growth Rate in the High-Back Pygmy Swordtail, Xiphophorus multilineatus, in
Response to Social Context and Maternal Effects

Plasticity of Growth Rate in the High-Back Pygmy Swordtail, Xiphophorus multilineatus, in Response to
Social Context and Maternal Effects Alexander D. Murphy and Molly R. Morris Department of Biological
Science Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701

Growth rate is an important life history trait that is influenced by both genetics as well as environmental
factors. By examining the mechanisms that produce variation in growth rate, it is possible to determine
the extent to which variation in growth rate is adaptive. We analyzed plasticity of growth rate in the High-
Back Pygmy Swordtail, Xiphophorus multilineatus to determine the extent to which maternal effects
and/or social environment influenced juvenile growth rates as well as age and size at sexual maturity.
Virgin females that had been raised on either high (HQ) or low quality (LQ) diets were bred with males
from the largest size class of X. multilineatus males (Y-L). Fry were raised in individually isolated tanks
on the LQ diet. Broods were split by treatment, with 4 siblings placed in the ―control‖ treatment, and four
siblings in the ―exposed to larger male‖ treatment. Male fry were larger than female fry, and male fry with
moms on the high quality diet were larger at 14 days than male fry with moms on the low quality diet.
Exposure to large males influenced male age at sexual maturity but not size at sexual maturity, and this
influence of social environment was only detected for males whose mom‘s were raised on a low quality
diet. Females appear to have a similar pattern of maturing earlier if exposed to large courting males. Our
results suggest that mothers on LQ diets may be investing more in male offspring, and that both maternal
effects and social environment influenced age at sexual maturity. As individuals were more plastic in their
response to social conditions if they were raised on the same diet as their mothers, we discuss the results
in the context of transgenerational plasticity across two different environmental factors (i.e. diet and social
environment).




                                                                                                           501
Murray, Chris (Auburn University);

Diagnostic cranial variation between independent lineages of alligator snapping turtle
(Machrochelys temminckii)

The alligator snapping turtle (Macrochelys temminckii) has been under studied from an evolutionary
perspective until recently. Severe harvesting pressure has resulted in low densities across the species‘
distribution. Since recovery has been made possible, the species has been extensively examined from an
ecological perspective; however, recent investigations have elucidated the potential for independent
evolutionary lineages within the taxon. Current evolutionary investigations using molecular and
morphological datasets are underway. This study attempts to diagnose cranial synapomorphic characters
unique to independent lineages within the taxon and assist morphological description and identification as
these unique lineages are diagnosed. Here, a geometric morphometric approach is used to expound
upon traditional mensural and morphometric characters. Preliminary analyses reveal variation in maxilla
and palatine width, basisphenoid shape, and head length. Character variation among specimen groups is
consistent with previously hypothesized biogeographic barriers. Results need to be compared to
traditional molecular and morphological data analyzed in a phylogenetic context.



Musick, John (Va Inst Mar Sci); Cotton, Charles (Va Inst Mar Sci, Gloucester Pt, United States)

Bathymetric limits of chondrichthyans in the deep sea

Chondrichthyans are largely absent in abyssal (>300m) habitats in in most regions of the world ocean are
uncommon below 2000m. The deeper-living chondrichthyans include certain rajids, squaliforms and
holocephalans. Several hypotheses have been erected to explain the absence of chondrichthyans from
the abyss. These are mostly based on energetics: Deep-sea food webs are impoverished due to their
distance from primary production, and chondrichthyans, occupying the highest trophic levels, cannot be
supported due to entropy among trophic levels. We examine this hypothesis by comparing trophic levels,
calculated from dietary data, of deep-sea chondrichthyans with those of deep-sea teleosts.
Chondrichthyans were mostly above trophic level 4, whereas all the teleosts examined were below that
level. The potential prey field for both chondrichthyans and teleosts declines in biomass and diversity with
depth, but teleosts appear to have more flexibility in their feeding mechanisms and food habits.



Muths, Erin (US Geological Survey); Scherer, Rick (Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, United
States); Bosch, Jaime (Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales, Madrid, Spain)

Skipped breeding in common toads

Intensive monitoring can yield data that are useful in examining hypothesis-driven questions about
particular sites or populations of amphibians. Demographic data collected from apex site monitoring in the
western U.S. led to collaboration with Spanish colleagues to compare                       data from high
elevation toad populations at sites on two continents. Breeding is limited by energetic or environmental
constraints and in long-lived species it is sometimes prudent to skip breeding opportunities because of
current conditions. Environmental conditions may vary considerably across the geographic and
elevational range of a species and species whose life history strategies can respond variably to
environmental constraints are likely to maintain populations at the extremes of their ranges. Decisions as
to whether or not to breed offer such an opportunity to adjust life history to circumstances. We use
capture-recapture data to estimate the probabilities of survival and temporary emigration (i.e., skipped



                                                                                                        502
breeding) in a high-elevation population of common toads (Bufo bufo). We compared estimates within
species, to existing data on common toads at low elevations, and between toad species that share a
common and similarly stressful environment. We found that common toads at high elevations sites tend
to have high survival probability and high probability of skipping breeding relative to common toads at low
elevations, providing preliminary evidence of variability in this component of the common toad life history
strategy.



Myers, Edward (City University of New York, College of Staten Island); Burbrink, Frank (City University
of New York-College of Staten Island, Canada)

Comparative Phylogeography Across the Cochise Filter Barrier

The Western Continental Divide at the Cochise Filter Barrier has been shown to be a phylogeographic
break across a diversity of taxa within the warm deserts of North America. It is hypothesized that this
region is a contact zone between closely related species that were previously isolated from one another
during Quaternary glaciation in desert refugia. In spite of this barrier‘s importance in North American
biogeography and biodiversity, no study has simultaneously examined multiple species spanning this
region to investigate phylogeographic histories. Here we test for simultaneous divergence across four co-
distributed snake sister taxa ( Crotalus atrox lineages, Lampropeltis califoroniae - L. splendida ,
Trimorphodon vikinsonii - T. lambda , and within the genus Hypsiglena ) using mtDNA and hierarchiacal
approximate Bayesian computation models. Additionally we have utilized next generation sequencing, on
the Illumina GAIIx platform, to generate 100‘s of loci within the Lampropeltis getula complex group to
test for the timing of divergence as well as to address whether gene flow has accompanied speciation
across the Cochise Filter Barrier.



Nagy, Zoltan T. (Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences); Chifundera Kusamba, Zacharie (Centre de
Recherche en Sciences Naturelles, Lwiro, Dem. Republic of Congo); Loetters, Stefan (Trier University,
Trier, Germany); Kielgast, Jos (University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Canada)

Diversity of snakes and frogs in the DR Congo, the green heart of Africa

During the last two years, two major expeditions were conducted in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In 2010, four field sites between Kisangani and Bumba were surveyed along the Congo river and
tributaries. In the Congo basin we visited a wide variety of habitats; such as tropical rainforests, inundated
swamp forests and savannah-shrub land mosaics. In 2011, the Upemba and Kundelungu National Parks
were surveyed. This region is a patchwork of plains and plateaus varying from 700 to 1800 m in altitude,
dominated by grassland savannah, gallery forest and miombo woodland including a vast number of
springs, swamps and streams. In total, more than 1300 specimens of amphibians and reptiles were
collected representing around 60 and 70 species, respectively. Tissue samples were taken for genetic
analyses. As the first step in these extremely poorly known faunas, we used a DNA barcoding approach
to assist the survey of herpetological diversity. DNA barcoding was applied for species delineation
complementing morphological identification. Furthermore, we analyzed intraspecific diversity and tested
the possible isolating effect of large rivers on reptiles. In general, reptile species proved to be well
diverged and easy to delineate using mitochondrial sequences while intraspecific variation is usually low.
However, remarkable intraspecific divergence was found in skinks and in some snakes, notably in
scolecophidians. We also report the rediscovery of several frog species which were not encountered for
several decades.



                                                                                                          503
Nakae, Masanori (National Museum of Nature and Science); Shinohara, Gento (National Museum of
Nature and Science, Tsukuba, Japan); Miki, Katsuhiro; Abe, Masaaki (Kagawa Prefectural Fisheries
Experimental Station, Takamatsu, Japan); Sasaki, Kunio (Kochi University, Kochi, Japan)

Lateral line system in Japanese Spanish mackerel Scomberomorus niphonius (Perciformes:
Scombridae)

The lateral line system in Scomberomorus niphonius (Scombridae) was examined in detail to estimate
morphological adaptations for life in an oceanic environment. The canal system is composed of 6
cephalic canals (supraorbital with 6 canal neuromasts, infraorbital with 2 neuromasts, otic with 9 or 10,
preopercular with 5 or 6, mandibular with 12 or 13, postotic with 1, and supratemporal with 5 or 6) and a
single trunk canal with 234−243 neuromasts. Although the basic topographies of these canals are typical
of teleosts, the branching pattern of cutaneous tubes (i.e., secondary lateral line canals) becomes
extremely complex with growth. Ten groups of superficial neuromasts, comprising 9 cephalic and 1 trunk,
were recognized: nasal (1 neuromast), nostril (10−12), cheek (6−10), opercular (7or 8), preopercular
(7−10), postocular (3 or 4), parietal (4−6), supratemporal (1), predorsal (10 or 11), and trunk accessory
(36−43). Proliferation of superficial neuromasts in this species indicates that the neuromasts are not
always linked to a sedentary habit, and can be functional even in a rapidly swimming species.



Nakayama, Naohide (Kochi University);

Systematic Revision of the Deep-Sea Fish Genus Pseudonezumia (Gadiformes: Macrouridae), with
Comments on a Related New Genus

Pseudonezumia Okamura, 1970, a rare and poorly known genus of the family Macrouridae, occurs in
bathyal to abyssal depths of the world ocean. Because of their close resemblance, the genus has been
confused with Paracetonurus Marshall, 1973, and several species have been transferred back and forth
between the two genera. Examination of 137 specimens, representing almost all museum material known
to us, revealed that Pseudonezumia is a senior synonym of Paracetonurus, including five described
species and one undescribed form: P. cetonuropsis (Gilbert and Hubbs, 1916) distributed from Japan to
the South China Sea in 1651–2074 m; P. flagellicauda (Koefoed, 1927) distributed in the North Atlantic
and the southwestern Indian Ocean in 2085–3120 m; P. japonica Okamura, 1970 known only from Japan
in 1690–2005 m; P. parvipes (Smith and Radcliffe in Radcliffe, 1912) distributed in the Western Pacific in
1992–2308 m; P. pusilla (Sazonov and Shcherbachev, 1982) widely distributed in the Indo-West Pacific in
1380–2000 m; P. sp. represented by a single specimen collected from Mozambique Strait in 2220–2140
m. Pseudonezumia sp. is most similar to P. parvipes, but differs in having a lower count of 1st dorsal fin
rays (II, 7 vs. II, 8–11) and a first dorsal pterygiophore inserted between 1st and 2nd neural spines (vs.
between 2nd and 3rd neural spines). A nominal species, Echinomacrurus occidentalis Iwamoto, 1979,
was recently classified under Pseudonezumia (as a species of Paracetonurus), but it was moved back to
Echinomacrurus owing to its unique body scale structure and lateral line system. Additionally, a new
genus and species of grenadiers that is most similar to Pseudonezumia was discovered based on three
specimens collected from the Eastern Atlantic and the southwestern Pacific off the Kermadec Islands in
4500–4600 m. This undescribed genus is unique among the family in having the following combination of
features: orbit huge (39–43% of HL); anus situated immediately before anal fin origin; no light organ;
pelvic fin far forward of pectoral fin base, with 5 or 6 soft rays; first dorsal fin rays II, 6; spinules on body
scales rudimentary; branchiostegal rays 7.




                                                                                                             504
Nali, Renato Christensen (São Paulo State University); Prado, Cynthia (São Paulo State University,
Jaboticabal - SP, Brazil)

Call properties and social functions of notes in a gladiator treefrog endemic to the Brazilian
Cerrado

Studies on sexual selection and male territoriality using playback experiments are much more common
for temperate frogs, although the tropics harbor the greatest anuran diversity. The gladiator frog
Bokermannohyla ibitiguara is a hylid endemic to the Brazilian Cerrado and has a mixed advertisement
call, composed by long and short notes. Vocalizations and social contexts of their emissions have never
been studied before. Thus, herein, we describe the influence of male size and temperature on call
properties, and investigate the social contexts of the different notes of the call through direct observations
and playback experiments conducted in the field. Dominant frequency correlated negatively with male
body size, whereas long note duration correlated positively, and there was a weak correlation between
pulse rate and male body size. Air temperature correlated negatively with long note duration and
positively with pulse rate. Playback experiments with males showed that that they did not change the
proportion of long to short notes in the presence of an intruder (= playback), but rather they exhibited a
modulated call, where short notes become longer, with lower dominant frequency and more pulsated. We
interpreted this call as a territorial call. Our results suggest that dominant frequency and long note
duration might be under sexual selection by females, as they could potentially choose larger males with
better territories relying on such parameters. Our observations suggest that the long notes are more
attractive to females while the short notes seem to be the territorial component of the mixed call.
Moreover, the territorial call is a variation of the short notes of the mixed advertisement call. We also
describe the fight call emitted by males engaged in a combat, each one emitting one type of note. This is
the first description of a fight call for the genus Bokermannohyla.



Narayan, Edward (Griffith University); Molinia, Frank (Landcare Research, New Zealand, Auckland, New
Zealand); Cockrem, John (Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand); Hero, Jean-Marc (Griffith
University, Gold Coast, Q, Australia)

Amphibian corticosterone stress responses: applications for understanding global amphibian
declines

Studies on inter-individual variation in baseline and short-term corticosterone responses can provide a
great deal of information on animal‘s physiological reactiveness to environmental stressors. This field of
research has been lacking for amphibians. We describe and quantify variation in baseline and stress
induced urinary corticosterone metabolite concentrations in several amphibian species subjected to
experimental stressors. We applied adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) challenge in endangered Fijian
ground frogs (Platymantis vitiana), cane toads (Rhinella marina) and two native Australian frog species
(Great barred frogs, Mixophyes fasciolatus, and Stony Creek frogs, Litoria wilcoxii). We found strong
inter-individual differences between species in adrenocortical responses. Short-term capture and handling
caused significant rises in urinary corticosterone metabolites within 2-3 hours in both captive and free-
living frogs and toads. This allowed us to quantify the inter-individual variation in urinary corticosterone.
Corticosterone responses is generally a stable trait, evidenced from high statistical repeatabilities of
hourly and integrated corticosterone responses in captive adjusted toads that were subjected to repeat
handling (for 24 h on four separate occasions). Furthermore, integrated corticosterone responses were
also repeatable under field conditions. Using entirely novel concept of glucocorticoid thermal reaction
norms, we have recently discovered that both baseline and short-term corticosterone responses of toads
are affected by temperature. Both baseline and integrated corticosterone responses of the toads were



                                                                                                          505
lowered after thermal adjustment at 15oC while these response variables were much higher at 35oC. In
conclusion, non-invasive stress endocrinology studies have enormous ecological applications and these
tools can be integrated with evolutionary biology and disease ecology for understanding the dilemma of
global amphibian declines.



Nascimento, Juliana (Departamento de Biologia Funcional e Estrutural, Instituto de Biologia,
Universidade de Campinas, Brazil); Dias Lima, Jucivaldo (Centro de Pesquisas Zoobotânicas e
Geológicas, Instituto de Pesquisas Científicas e Tecnológicas do Estado do Amapá (IEPA), Brazil,
Canada); Suárez, Pablo (Laboratório de Citogenética, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade
Federal do Pará, Brazil, Canada); Bolsoni Lourenço, Luciana (Departamento de Biologia Funcional e
Estrutural, Instituto de Biologia, Universidade de Campinas, Brazil, Canada)

A high level of cytogenetic variation in Physalaemus ephippifer (Anura: Leiuperidae)

Physalaemus ephippifer is a leiuperid species that is found at the mouth of the Amazon River in Brazil
and possibly in Guyana. However, some questions regarding the geographic distribution of this species
exist, and the potential presence of undescribed species cannot be ruled out. Cytogenetic analyses of P.
ephippifer specimens from Belém-PA have shown an interesting heteromorphism of the nucleolar
organizer region (NOR) and C-banding in chromosome pair 8 that is exclusive to females. The presumed
Z and W chromosomes had a terminal NOR on the long arm, but the W chromosome differed from the Z
chromosome by the presence of an additional segment on the short arm. To provide additional
cytogenetic data for P. ephippifer ,        male specimens from Pará localities (Monte Alegre, Óbidos,
Alenquer, Curuá, Cedere I, Prainha) and Viruá-Roraima were analyzed cytogenetically. Chromosome
preparations were obtained from intestinal cell suspensions and subjected to conventional staining using
Giemsa, C-banding, DAPI-staining of C-banded metaphases, silver staining and FISH with the repetitive
DNA probe Pep194. All of the male karyotypes in the study were very similar, but a differential NOR
distribution pattern in the presumed sex chromosome pair 8 was observed among the populations. In the
karyotypes of the 6 males from Cedere I an NOR was located terminally on 8q , as in the karyotypes
already described for this species. In addition, a second NOR adjacent to the first was also present in this
chromosome pair.         The karyotypes of specimens from Prainha, Monte Alegre, Óbidos and Alenquer
showed an additional pericentromeric NOR on 8p that was not reported for the population of Belém
studied previously.       In the karyotypes of 1 male from Curuá and 4 males from Viruá, no terminal NOR
was present on 8q , but the pericentromeric NOR on the short arm of this chromosome was always
present. The FISH assays mapped the Pep194 repeat to the pericentromeric NOR of chromosome 8 in
the specimens from Prainha and Curuá and to the interstitial NOR on chromosome 8 in the specimens
from Cedere I. Interestingly, the distal NOR on 8q of specimens from the latter locality was not detected
by this probe, suggesting that the dynamics of the repetitive DNA Pep194 might differ between the
terminal and interstitial NORs of this karyotype. All of the variations described herein suggest a high level
of divergence among the populations currently identified as P. ephippifer.



Navas Iannini, Carlos Arturo (Department of Physiology - University of São Paulo);

Physiological ecology and conservation of amphibian anurans

Understanding the impact of environmental change on amphibians requires disciplinary integration and
bidirectional dialog between environmental, ecological and physiological sciences. This interaction is
important to unveil underlying mechanisms responsible for effects, detecting effects of environmental




                                                                                                         506
change before patterns emerge, evaluate potential for dispersion among fragments in remnant forest
matrixes, understand the role of physical variables as limiting factors, and modeling effects of climatic
change. In the specific context of physical variables as limiting factors, a typical approach has focused
physiological tolerances and safety margins which are used to predict impacts of environmental change.
Temperature has been a main variable studied in this context and work with lizards has been
inspirational, but research with anurans requires some caveats, some of which gain importance given that
scenarios of climatic change often combine increased temperatures and reduced rainfall. Some issues
are: i) temperature information at scales compatible with microhabitat are essential and not readily
available from databases ant broad scales, ii) hydroregulation is important to many species but that the
relative role of physiology and behavior may vary substantially, iii) thermoregulation in anurans is unique
an intimately linked to hydric balance, and iv) water balance interacts with thermal effects to affect
ecological performance. In this talk I illustrate briefly various contexts in which the interaction between
ecology and physiology may enhance theoretical basis for anuran conservation, and then focus more
specifically on issues i and ii above, as they will not be discussed in other talks of this symposium. I use
specific examples coming from two contrasting extreme environments, the Colombian paramos and the
Brazilian semi-arid Caatingas. I discuss the problem of scale in inferring data on anuran body
temperatures using as an example elevation gradients in the tropical Andes. In this context, I highlight the
role of elevation as a physical barrier in terms of exposure to extreme climatic events such as freezing. I
also highlight the interplay between water and temperature by illustrating strategies of hydroregulation
(water finding, water uptake and water conservation) in the anurofauna of the semi-arid Caatingas of
Brazil. In addition to the specific conclusions regarding these ecological settings, I conclude that much
more data is necessary to understand the role and scope of behavioral and physiological adjustments in
amphibian anurans.



Nelson, Nicola (Victoria University of Wellington); Miller, Kimberly (Monash University, Clayton, VIC,
Australia); Miller, Hilary (Monash University, Australia); Moore, Jennifer A. (Michigan State University,
East Lansing, United States); Mitchell, Nicola (University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia);
Cree, Alison (University of Otago, Dunedin, Canada); Allendorf, Fred (University of Montana, Missoula,
MT, Canada); Sarre, Stephen (University of Canberra, ACT, Australia); Keall, Susan (Victoria University
of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand)

Climate change and the role of assisted colonisation in the conservation of tuatara

Climate change poses a particular threat to species with fragmented distributions and little or no capacity
to migrate. Assisted colonization, moving species into regions where they have not previously occurred,
aims to establish populations where they are expected to survive as climatic envelopes shift. However,
adaptation to the source environment may affect whether species successfully establish in new regions.
Assisted colonization has spurred debate among conservation biologists and ecologists over whether the
potential benefits to the threatened species outweigh the risks to recipient communities. In our opinion,
the debate has been distracted by controversial examples, rather than cases where assisted colonization
may be a viable strategy. We present a case study for assisted migration of tuatara, an endemic New
Zealand reptile, including using extant populations as references, optimizing genetic variation, targeting
knowledge gaps through research, and considering host and recipient communities, while emphasizing
the importance of including the human community in the planning stage. When strategically planned and
monitored, assisted colonization programs could meet conservation, research, and advocacy goals, and
ultimately result in the establishment of long-term sustainable populations capable of persisting during
rapid changes in climate.




                                                                                                        507
Nestler, Jennifer (University of Iowa Department of Geoscience);

Identification of cryptic species using geometric morphometrics: an analysis of African
Crocodylus

The Nile crocodile Crocodylus niloticus currently has an extensive range throughout the African
continent and Madagascar, though fossils reveal a larger historical range included parts of the Sahara
Desert, Mediterranean coast, and Arabian Peninsula. Recent molecular studies have yielded genetically
distinct populations of C. niloticus , dividing African Crocodylus into C. niloticus and C. suchus .
However, morphological variation remains unassessed. A geometric morphometric analysis of cranial
variation in African Crocodylus demonstrates two distinct morphological groups are present. These
groups are more morphologically distinct from each other than they are from other members of the genus
Crocodylus , which supports the presence of a cryptic species complex. The morphometric analysis is
coupled with a geographic analysis that reveals the morphological variation is broadly bound by river
basins, with one group located in Northern and Western Africa and another in Southern Africa. However,
cluster analyses indicate that the two species overlap considerably in Central Africa. These results are
congruent with molecular analyses, supporting the methods employed herein as an effective way to
distinguish cryptic species. Because the vast majority of the skulls included in this analysis were collected
prior to the mid-20th century, this analysis provides insight to past population structure and can be used
to inform conservation efforts. The greatest potential for the survival of these species lies in a thorough
understanding of their evolutionary history, interrelationships, and biogeography.



Neuman-Lee, Lorin (Utah State University); French, Susannah (Utah State University, Logan, UT,
United States)

Effects of prenatal exposure to a flame retardant on survival and growth in juvenile Western
Terrestrial Gartersnakes (Thamnophis elegans)

Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), a flame retardant, are ubiquitous throughout the environment,
human, and animal tissues. While this contaminant has been examined in lab studies, little research has
been performed on wildlife. Few studies have focused on the impact these chemicals have in on offspring
due to in utero exposure or on reptilian species. Here, we present results on the effects of one of the most
bioaccumulative congeners, 2, 2‘, 4, 4‘ brominated diphenyl ether (BDE-47) on gravid Thamnophis
elegans and their resulting offspring. Gravid females were dosed every other week throughout the
gestation period. We subsequently examined the number of neonates born live, the sex ratio, their mass
at birth, and growth rate and survival over a three month period. This study provides evidence that BDE-
47 can negatively impact reptiles when exposed in utero.



Newby, Jennifer (Grice Marine Laboratory, College of Charleston); Shedlock, Andrew (College of
Charleston, Canada)

An examination of population genetic and social structure in the spotted eagle ray (aetobatus
narinari) found seasonally off coastal sarasota, fl

Recent global declines in chondrichthyan populations have risen as a major concern due to amplified
pressure from fisheries. The spotted eagle ray, Aetobatus narinari , is a cosmopolitan myliobatoid
recognized as near-threatened by the World Conservation Union however is not protected in U.S. federal
waters. A decreasing population trend, K-selected life history and primarily inshore, coastal habitat



                                                                                                         508
renders this species susceptible to over-exploitation by targeted fisheries, drift netting, and capture as
bycatch. Since 2009 large seasonal aggregations have been observed in the Gulf waters of Sarasota, FL.
Modest ecological data is available for A. narinari but almost no studies of fine-scale genetic structure
exist. We are presently investigating the molecular ecology of this A. narinari population using fin clips
from individuals sampled non-invasively across the region through the Mote Marine Lab, Sarasota, FL,
from April through November 2011. Genotypes of allele frequencies for 9 independent eagle-ray-specific
microsatellite loci are being employed currently to elucidate the population genetic structure and social
structure of eastern Gulf of Mexico (GOM) A. narinari . Standard tests for Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium,
null alleles and linkage disequilibrium as well as statistically significant patterns of geographic structure,
direction and scale of gene flow, and kinship among possible parent-offspring associations will be
discussed based on ecological, demographic and genetic data available.                 Synthesis of baseline
molecular data from the present study in the eastern GOM and comparison to subpopulations in the
Central Atlantic is expected to advance our global understanding of A. narinari vulnerabilities in this
region.



Newell, David (Southern Cross University);

Movement patterns of an endangered stream frog from sub-tropical eastern Australia

The conservation of threatened frogs is often hampered by a poor understanding of their movement
behaviour. Available knowledge for some species is entirely focused on their use of breeding sites.
Fleay‘s barred frog ( Mixophyes fleayi ) is one example where this needs to be resolved. This endangered
frog is restricted to rainforest streams in subtropical Australia. We used a combination of mark-recapture,
radio-telemetry and spool-tracking to describe its movement patterns and habitat use. This combination of
methods can provide insight into the movement of individual frogs over different temporal scales. Mark-
recapture revealed that male frogs displayed a high degree of site fidelity, remaining in close proximity to
the stream (mean 2.9 m ± 0.1). Seventy percent of recaptured males remained within 27 m of their initial
capture location over periods spanning more than 6 years. Spool-tracking revealed that males foraged
widely within the riparian forest (up to 55 m in a single night) but returned to the approximate location of
initial capture. Radio-telemetry revealed that females moved away from streams (up to 300 m) when not
breeding and were capable of large movements (&gt;400 m). Females often moved along roads and
walking tracks, and did not return to their initial capture location in the short-term. The pronounced use of
stream breeding sites by male barred frogs provides a robust basis for population monitoring. In stark
contrast, females spent relatively brief periods at the stream (for breeding) before dispersing into
surrounding forest. Indeed, they were rarely re-encountered after tagging. Conservation efforts that focus
only on breeding habitats may be inadequate for this highly endangered frog.



Nichols, Krista (NOAA, National Marine Fisheries Service);

What can genomics tell us about phenotypic plasticity in rainbow/steelhead trout?

In recent decades, advances in molecular biology and computational genetics and genomics have
enabled the interrogation of whole genomes to ask the questions of the genetic architecture of and gene
expression underlying complex traits. In non-model species of plants and animals, questions of both the
genetic architecture of complex traits and the response of organisms to environmental change or
differences are equally important in understanding how environmental perturbations could influence the
evolutionary trajectories of populations. In salmonid fishes, we are only just beginning to get a glimpse of



                                                                                                          509
the genetic architecture of complex traits such as rate of development, life history (age at sexual maturity,
migratory life history, and disease resistance), but very few studies have been focused on how genetics
and environment play a dual and interactive role in shaping expressed phenotypes. Arguably, the
consideration of and inclusion of environmental variables into genomics studies can be difficult. In this
review and perspective presentation, I will give an overview of work to date on the genetic architecture of
complex developmental phenotypes in Oncorhynchus mykiss (rainbow and steelhead trout), while
considering the way forward in answering the more complicated question of the genetic architecture of
plasticity in these types of ecologically relevant traits.



Nicholson, Abbigail (Southeast Missouri State University); Trauth, Stanley (Arkansas State University,
State University, United States); Beran, Bradley (Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau,
Canada); Rabe, Brian; Siegel, Dustin (Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau, United
States)

The Genital Kidney in Salamanders: Emphasis on Plethodontidae

Male salamanders utilize the cranial portion of their kidneys to transport sperm from the testis to the
Wolffian duct. In most salamanders (e.g., ambystomatids, cryptobranchids, rhyacotritonids, salamandrids,
and sirenids) the path of sperm is easily traced from the testicular duct, through the vasa efferentia, and
to the renal corpuscle, where sperm then traverse through the nephron and are stored in the Wolffian
duct until mating. In general, most of the regions of the nephron can be identified in these ―sexual‖
nephrons. Plethodontids are a little more perplexing. The majority of the plethodontid specimens we have
examined only have one vasa efferentia that exits the most cranial portion of the testis. In species where
more than one vasa efferentia exists, the more caudal duct terminates blindly. Contrary to previous
reports in spelerpines, this sperm transport duct does not appear homogeneous along its entire length.
The non-ciliated vasa efferentia clearly transitions into a ciliated duct in all plethodontids examined
histologically. A renal corpuscle with a glomerulus is often present adjoining the vasa efferentia with this
ciliated duct (e.g., Hemidactylinae). However, in some specimens (particularly bolitoglossines) the renal
corpuscle is often ―free-floating‖; i.e., the renal corpuscle is juxtaposed to where the vasa efferentia
transitions to a ciliated duct, but is not actually incorporated into the sperm transport apparatus. It could
be safely assumed that in these specimens the renal corpuscle in the cranial portion of the kidney is no
longer functioning, at least in terms of filtration of fluids into a urinary tubule. Moreover, the opposite
extremes also present themselves in taxa such as Dicamptodontidae, where the majority of nephrons
adjacent to the testes appear fully functional and have no connection to the testis. Consequently, in
ambystomatids and salamandrids, every vasa efferentia connects to a renal corpuscle, which then
transports sperm to the Wolffian duct via a nephron.



Nielsen, Stuart (University of Mississippi); Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University, Canada); Tolley, Krystal
(South African National Biodiversity Institute, Canada); Noonan, Brice (University of Mississippi, Canada)

Comparative phylogeography of three rock dwelling lizard species gives unparalled insights into
the speciation process in southern Africa.

We explored how geology, geography and changing climate have affected the distribution of organisms in
southern Africa, particularly for species spanning the arid/semi-arid Karoo biome. Using comparative
phylogeography, we explored patterns within three co–distributed yet distantly related, rock-dwelling
lizard species: the southern rock agama, Agama atra ; Bibron‘s gecko, Chondrodactylus bibronii ; and




                                                                                                         510
the Karoo girdled lizard, Karusasaurus polyzonus . All three taxa are saxicolous, greatly utilizing the
geologically complex, ancient, rock formations found throughout the subcontinent, yet differ in period of
daily activity, social structure, and microhabitat use, (although C. bibronii has been observed inhabiting
the same rock cracks with either K. polyzonus or A. atra ). In many regards C. bibronii could be
considered a ―rock generalist,‖ often living in rocky habitat unsuitable for either A. atra or K. polyzonus .
This habitat ―leniency‖ could potentially erase significant, informative genetic signal, as it would allow for
better individual dispersal throughout this species‘ range. In light of this, we theorized that there would be
a degree of shared evolutionary history across the subcontinent between the three, particularly at
recognized barriers of gene flow for other rock-dwelling organisms (e.g. the Knersvlatke plain) due to
shared distribution and gross ecological requirements. Employing multiple sources of genetic data (i.e.
mtDNA, ‗fast-evolving‘ nuclear DNA and single nucleotide polymorphisms) we asked: what is the structure
of ‗populations‘ within a species, and what are the geographic boundaries of those groupings; 2) are
these clusters/populations isolated (or conversely, is gene flow ongoing between them), and for how long;
and 3) how have climatic shifts affected species/population distributions? The species-specific patterns
granted unique insight into the processes of speciation in the poorly understood arid zones of the
southern hemisphere.



Niemiller, Matthew (Yale University); Fitzpatrick, Benjamin (University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN,
United States)

Speciation in subterranean plethodontid salamanders of the genus Gyrinophilus

The origin of cave-dwelling species has long intrigued students of evolutionary biology, as the roles of
isolation, selection, and gene flow during subterranean speciation are difficult to resolve. Two primary
hypotheses have been proposed to describe speciation in subterranean organisms: a climate-relict model
that posits allopatric speciation and climate change as the primary factor initiating divergence, and an
adaptive-shift model that proposes parapatric speciation driven by divergent selection between
subterranean and surface habitats. Our studies of obligate cave-dwelling species of Gyrinophilus
salamanders ( G. palleucus , G. gulolineatus , and G. subterraneus ) show that each form arose
independently from the primarily surface-dwelling G. porphyriticus . Morphological and phylogenetic
evidence support recent divergence of each cave form during the late Pliocene and Pleistocene
implicating a role for climate change. However, short branch lengths and discordant gene trees are
consistent with a complex history that also involves gene flow during divergence. Coalescent-based
analyses support continuous or recurrent gene flow between diverging subterranean lineages and their
surface-dwelling progenitor. Although subterranean founder populations may have originally been
isolated from surface source populations, we propose that surface and subterranean forms have
experienced repeated bouts of secondary contact, gene flow, and isolation during the Pleistocene, a
scenario we term the ―periodic isolation‖ hypothesis. These bouts continue today and have had varying
impacts on each subterranean lineage.



Niemiller, Matthew (Yale University); Miller, Brian (Middle Tennessee State University, Murfreesboro,
TN, United States)

The ecology of cave-dwelling Gyrinophilus salamanders (Caudata: Plethodontidae)

Aspects of the ecology and life history are not well known for most troglobitic (obligate cave-dwelling)
salamanders, which is due in part to difficulties in accessing their habitat and, in some cases, rarity of



                                                                                                          511
these species. Cave-dwelling populations of the plethodontid genus Gyrinophilus are no exception. This
genus includes three troglobitic species endemic to the Interior Plateau and Appalachian Ridge and
Valley of the eastern United States: the Tennessee Cave Salamander ( G. palleucus ), Berry Cave
Salamander ( G. gulolineatus ), and West Virginia Spring Salamander ( G. subterraneus ). Because of
relatively small distributions, presumed small population sizes, low reproductive output, and vulnerability
of habitat to alteration or degradation, all three of these species are of conservation concern. In contrast
to the strict troglobites, the congeneric Spring Salamander ( G. porphyriticus ) has a relatively large
distribution, and is not of similar conservation concern. This latter species frequently inhabits caves in
these regions, but is more often found in and around springs (thus, on the surface). Here, we present
information on demography, habitat use, diet, growth rate, life span, community associates, and
reproductive biology for each of the troglobitic species and for subterranean populations of G.
porphyriticus .     In addition, we discuss how the ecology and life history of each species relates to its
conservation status. Lastly, we suggest conservation practices that should be implemented to ensure
survival of these rarely seen species.



Niiro, Michael (Northern Illinois University); King, Richard (Northern Illinois University, Canada)

Predicting Climate-Change Induced Distributional Shifts in Great Lakes Region Reptiles

Climate change presents unique challenges to biodiversity policy makers and managers due to potentially
significant shifts in the geographic distribution of environmental conditions suitable for population
persistence. Reptiles may be especially vulnerable to the effects of climate change because of their
thermal dependence sometimes limited dispersal ability. The objectives of this project are to determine
the degree to which the distributions of 12 Great Lakes region reptile species are associated with climatic
variables and use this information to identify the projected future location of climatically suitable areas
under exiting climate change projections. Ecological niche modeling was performed in the program
Maxent using a subset of bioclimatic variables from WorldClim selected to reduce overfitting. Climate
layers were restricted geographically so that background localities included only areas adjacent to
occupied habitat. Presence data for the modeling were obtained from specimen records through
HerpNET, museum requests, and requests to state inventories. Models were based on current climate
data from WorldClim, and projected into the future using the HadCM3 climate change scenarios. Models
were generated for all 12 species, including Regina septemvittata, a natricine snake which currently
occurs throughout much of the eastern USA. Minor variations appeared between climate change
scenarios, but all scenarios showed the same trend of diminishing habitat suitability as time progresses.
By year 2080, much of the western portion of the current range is predicted to become climatically
unsuitable for R. septemvittata.



Noble, Daniel (Macquarie University); Wechmann, Kerrie (Macquarie University, Sydney, N, Australia);
Keogh, Scott (The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia); Whiting, Martin (Macquarie
University, Sydney, N, Australia)

Interactions between behavioral and morphological traits creates a complex fitness landscape for
the evolution of alternative reproductive tactics in a lizard

Alternative reproductive tactics (ARTs) are the result of correlational disruptive selection on suites of
morphological, physiological and behavioral traits. ARTs are most obvious when they occur in discrete
morphs with concomitant behavioral tactics. However, ARTs driven by behavior, in nondescript species



                                                                                                        512
lacking obvious phenotypic differences, are rare and poorly understood. Nonetheless, it is predicted that
disruptive selection for behavioral traits should occur in systems with strong sexual selection. We tested
for disruptive selection by establishing six breeding populations using 216 (108 males, 108 females)
individually marked lizards (Eulamprus quoyii), which we followed through the entire breeding season. We
quantified reproductive fitness for each male using 7 microsatellite DNA loci from 227 offspring born to 57
females. We found strong evidence for correlational disruptive selection between two behavioral traits
and one behavioral and morphological trait. Body size was the greatest contributor to the number of
offspring sired, however, all our behavioral traits (display rate, home range area, total days active and the
proportion of time moving and displaying) also significantly contributed to male reproductive success. Our
study demonstrates how correlational disruptive selection can generate mating polymorphisms and
underscores the important role of behavior in driving the evolution of ARTs.



Noble, Virginia (University of British Columbia); Stynoski, Jennifer (University of Miami, Canada);
Srivastava, Diane (University of British Columbia, Canada)

The effects of Oophaga pumilio tadpoles on bromeliad insect and protozoa communities

Phytotelmata collect rainwater and debris that provide nutrients for the organisms within. Some frogs
place tadpoles in phytotelmata, but the impact of tadpole presence on other members of the phytotelm
faunal community is not well understood. One anuran, Oophaga pumilio, feeds tadpoles for 6 weeks with
unfertilized eggs. Tadpole feces may provide additional nutrients that could augment protozoan
populations and consequently enhance the growth and development of their invertebrate predators. Here,
we investigated the effects of the presence of O. pumilio tadpoles on communities of mosquito larvae
(Culix jenningsi) and ciliates at La Selva, Costa Rica.      We predicted that nutrient inputs from tadpole
eggs and feces could increase ciliate abundance and therefore hasten development of mosquito larvae.
We manipulated the presence of mosquito larvae (present, absent) and tadpoles (large present, small
present, absent) in a factorial experiment in phytotelm-sized plastic cups filled with rainwater and a
constant amount of detritus (6 treatments, n=10). We considered the effect of tadpole development stage,
dividing tadpoles in to those below (―small‖) or above (―large‖) Gosner stage 30. For 6 weeks, we
collected ciliate samples and pH, took photos to measure growth of tadpoles and mosquitoes, and
monitored mosquito survival. Mosquito survival was higher in treatments with tadpoles, suggesting that
mosquito larvae benefitted from the nutrients provided by tadpoles. Surprisingly, we found that tadpoles
occasionally ate mosquito larvae, contrary to previous reports that O. pumilio tadpoles eat only eggs.
Large tadpoles ate more larvae than small tadpoles, suggesting that tadpole predation is developmentally
or size limited. Water pH and ciliate communities were also affected by the presence or absence of large
tadpoles and/or mosquito larvae. This study indicates that anurans may benefit mosquito larvae via
nutrient inputs, but that this effect can reverse when tadpoles become large enough to prey on the larvae.



Nopper, Joachim (University of Hamburg); Braskamp, Enzo (University of Hamburg, Hamburg, South
Africa); Lauströer, Balten; Ganzhorn, Jörg (University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany)

Habitat affinities and population characteristics of reptiles from arid south-western Madagascar

South-western Madagascar is exceptional in its reptile species richness with more than sixty species
occurring in the Tsimanampetsotsa National Park and its surroundings. The vegetation is very diverse,
depending on soil and land use type. The region is characterized by a mosaic of different forms of land
use growing into formerly undisturbed areas with growing needs of people living in the area. The mosaic



                                                                                                         513
contains areas of grazing (zebus and goats), agriculture (slash and burn), and charcoal production. We
aim to understand the origin of the mosaic for reptile distributions and population dynamics to arrive at
sustainable conservation (i.e. sustainable land use that will lead to a preservation of natural
communities). This also incorporates the determination of suitable indicator species of habitat
transformations. In this talk we will present results on the affinities of reptile species (including fossorial
species) towards certain (micro-) habitats and the role of land use systems on species distributions along
a transect of 60 km, stretching from west to east, covering agricultural used land, littoral forest, dry spiny
bush, dry forests and savanna. We will provide information on the constitution of certain reptile species by
analyzing morphometric data, and their variation between habitat types. These morphometric measures
might provide additional insights on the effects of habitat degradation and land use impacts on possible
indicator species that are not reflected in species compositions yet and thus might serve as an early
warning system.



Noronha, Carolina (University of São Paulo); Kohlsdorf, Tiana (University of São Paulo, Canada)

Muscle physiology and activity patterns in two closely-related species of gymnophthalmid lizards
endemic from Brazilian Caatingas

Morphology, physiology and behavior affect individual performance in specific ecological contexts.
Lizards from the Gymnophthalmidae family occupy a variety of habitats and exhibit remarkable
morphological and behavioral variation. Derived fossorial species present digit/limb reduction, snakelike
morphology, undulation as a major locomotor mode, and a shift to a nocturnal activity pattern. These
diverge from epigeal species, which present a full-limbed lizard-like morphology and are diurnal. Little is
known about the evolution of physiological aspects, especially related to muscle physiology, that correlate
with locomotion and behavior in specific ecological settings. In this scenario, we first performed a
preliminary investigation with two closely related species collected in the same area of the caatinga biome
(Bahia, Brazil): Vanzosaura rubricauda , a diurnal, epigeal, full-limbed species; and Calyptommatus
leiolepis, a fossorial snakelike species. Muscle physiology was accessed through quantification of the
maximal activity of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), an enzyme from the glycolytic pathway, from the axial
muscles, at 18, 24, 30, 36 and 42°C. Results were tested by an ANOVA with species and temperature
as factors. Enzyme activity increased with temperature in both species. LDH activity was greater in V.
rubricauda at 36 and 42°C, but Q10 values did not differ between species (Student‘s t-test). Furthermore,
we performed a video monitoring at constant temperature (24°C) with a 12:12h light/dark cycle, in order to
better describe the locomotor activity pattern of these two species. V rubricauda displayed a diurnal
(acrophase = 11h34) and intermittent daily activity pattern, while C. leiolepis was crepuscular
(acrophase = 17h57) with a lower amplitude but more continuous daily pattern. Previous studies reported
a higher running speed in V .rubricauda compared to C. leiolepis , which could be enhanced by a
greater proportion of glycolytic fibers, and therefore a greater LDH activity. An intermittent type of
locomotion, with fast burst, would also be favored by an enhanced anaerobic activity. Experiments with
different aspects of the muscle physiology and with more gymnophthalmids will allow a comparative
analysis of the physiological evolution associated with morphological, ecological and behavioral variation
in the clade.




                                                                                                           514
Nosal, Andrew (Scripps Institution of Oceanography); Lewallen, Eric (University of Toronto Scarborough,
Toronto, ON, Canada); Burton, Ronald (Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, CA, United States)

Low incidence of multiple paternity in leopard sharks (Triakis semifasciata) sampled from a
predominantly female aggregation in southern California, USA

Knowledge of reproductive behavior is critical for understanding population dynamics of elasmobranch
fishes. However, the ultimate and proximate causes of apparent mating systems are largely unresolved.
Here, the percentage of litters sired by multiple males (frequency of multiple paternity, FMP) was
determined for a sample of leopard sharks (Triakis semifasciata; n=19) captured from a predominantly
female (97.1%) aggregation in La Jolla, California, USA. Four polymorphic microsatellite markers were
isolated and developed from an enriched library constructed exclusively for T. semifasciata. These loci
were amplified in a population sample of 138 presumably unrelated individuals (including 19 mothers) and
found to exhibit moderate to high allelic diversity (9, 14, 16, and 18 alleles per locus, respectively) without
deviating from Hardy-Weinberg expectations. The probability of detecting multiple paternity (PrDM)
exceeded 0.99 for litters of 10 or more pups under varying degrees of paternal reproductive skew. That
is, the probability of a multiply sired litter not having at least three unique paternal alleles at any locus
(therefore being incorrectly identified as singly sired) was <0.01, thus demonstrating the power of the
developed suite of microsatellite markers. A total of 380 pups were genotyped from 19 litters (mean litter
size ± SD [range] = 21.6 ± 6.1 [11 – 33] pups). Only three of the 19 litters exhibited multiple paternity
(FMP = 15.8%), each with no more than two sires having equal reproductive success. These results
demonstrate that multiple paternity, and thus some degree of sperm storage is possible in this species.
However, the observed FMP is among the lowest reported for any elasmobranch fish. The low FMP for
T. semifasciata is not necessarily selectively advantageous or disadvantageous, but may rather be the
inevitable consequence of sex-biased reproductive behaviors: females avoid harassment (superfluous
mating attempts) by retreating to aggregation sites where males are largely absent.



Novosolov, Maria (Tel Aviv University); Meiri, Shai (Tel Aviv University, Canada)

Effect of island type on reproductive traits in lizards

Islands play a major role in understanding evolutionary processes and studying ecological changes. The
different geological origins of islands affect the characteristics of the new home of colonizing species.
Islands can be divided into three main geological types: (i) Oceanic (Volcanic & Coral); (ii) Continental;
(iii) Land bridge. Island types likely affect the nature of adaptation and speciation processes that take
place on it. Continental and land-bridge island environments are often similar to that of the continent they
were once part of. This makes them easier to populate and adapt to. On the other hand, Oceanic islands
start with a chaste environment. Some characteristics are shared between oceanic and continental
islands (lower rates of predation and lower number of competitors than corresponding mainland areas).
This allows successful colonizers to expend their niches. We hypothesized that species will show
difference in reproductive traits between different types of islands. To test this we assembled a database
containing 813 lizard species when 271 of them are insular endemic and 542 of them are mainland. We
collected their phylogenetic relationship, geographical ranges and the following life history traits: female
or adult mass, clutch size, brood frequency, hatchling mass and productivity. We tested for the effect of
geological type of the island on these traits controlling for mass, latitude. In addition we tested the effect
of island area and island age on reproductive traits. We then repeated the analyses accounting for
phylogenetic non-independence. We found that insular endemic lizards have smaller clutch size and
larger hatchlings than mainland lizards. However, no significant difference was found between the




                                                                                                           515
multiple geological types of islands. Brood frequency was found higher on continental than on oceanic
and land bridge islands. Productivity of insular endemic lizards was not effected by island type and wasn‘t
significantly different than productivity of mainland lizards. Moreover, we found that none of the
reproductive traits can be explained by island age. We found that evolution of reproductive traits of lizards
occurs regardless of island origin or its age of creation, this is in contrast of our hypothesis. It is possible
that lizard species which successfully colonize an island go through rapid change in reproductive traits in
order to accommodate it to the isolated environment. Between these changes we can find smaller clutch
size and larger brood frequency than found on the mainland. This may explain the lack of difference in
reproductive traits when comparing different types of islands. This may also be the reason why no change
was witnessed even on land bridge islands, which are the youngest islands of all types. These results
indicate that the different environments which are assembled due to islands‘ origin have no effect on
reproductive traits.



Nowak, Erika (Colorado Plateau Research Station); Sullivan, Brian (Arizona State University, Phoenix,
AZ, United States); Schuett, Gordon (Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, United States); Kwiatkowski,
Matthew (Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches, TX, United States)

How not to compare apples and oranges: terminology matters in translocation and re-introduction
programs

Translocation is a commonly utilized conservation method, primarily aimed at mitigation of human-animal
conflict by removal of an individual and its release in suitable nearby habitat. Over the past two decades
there have been a number of reviews of this method, from both theoretical and empirical perspectives.
There has been considerable confusion surrounding the definition of translocation, and related terms (re-
introduction; repatriation; relocation), in spite of generally recognized differences among conservation
biologists practicing re-introduction (i.e., movement of multiple individuals for conservation purposes) and
those practicing translocation (i.e., removal of a single, typically ―nuisance‖ individual, and its subsequent
release in historic habitat with a resident population of the target species). After reviewing semantic
aspects of all forms of introductions, including translocation, we present a simplified taxonomy of terms
aligning both theory and practice in this domain of conservation. We provide a perspective documenting
outcomes of these contrasting approaches, and the historical separation, in many instances, of the
respective paradigms within this subarea of conservation. We conclude that translocation as a
management practice has a low success rate when judged by effects on individuals, and by mitigation of
human-animal conflicts. We detail factors influencing low success rates in light of recent research on and
syntheses of squamate physiology and behavior, and suggest guidelines for both considering and
improving future translocation projects.



Nussear, Kenneth (US Geological Survey); Tracy, C. Richard (University of Nevada, Reno, Canada);
Medica, Phil (US Geological Survey, Canada); Field, Kim (US Fish and Wildlife Service, Canada); Esque,
Todd; Drake, Kristina; Corn, Steven (US Geological Survey, Canada); Marlow, Ron (University of
Nevada, Reno, Canada)

Experimental translocation of desert tortoises spanning two decades and three states

The southwestern United States is increasingly being impacted by human activities, fueled both by urban
development and associated infrastructure, and more recently with utility‑scale renewable energy
development. The Mojave Desert is the focus of much of this development, and is also home to many




                                                                                                            516
sensitive species, including Agassiz's desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii), which is threatened
throughout its range. Development disturbances within desert tortoise habitat create a management
dilemma, which balances the conservation of the species against the reality of habitat losses.
Translocation is frequently proposed as a minimization/mitigation strategy to move individual tortoises to
areas away from harm, although translocation has remained controversial due to a paucity of peer-
reviewed research on the topic, and also negative opinions of many stakeholder groups and the popular
press. Beginning in 1997, we initiated a coordinated research program designed to increase our
understanding of the conditions under which translocation could be conducted successfully for this
species. Our research has spanned nearly the entire range of the tortoise, with field sites extending from
St George Utah, to Barstow California, and a variety of habitat types and abiotic conditions. We have
progressively asked questions from the survivorship, reproductive behavior, and habitat use and site
fidelity of desert tortoises, whether time and treatment in captivity influenced success of translocation,
whether tortoises can be translocated to areas outside of typical habitat, and finally whether translocation
induces measurable physiological stress. Importantly we have simultaneously studied the responses of
resident and control populations of tortoises as well as translocated individuals. Collectively the results of
this research indicate that by all near-term measures, that translocation can be conducted successfully.
Translocated tortoises have similar survivorship, reproduction, and stress levels as compared to residents
and controls, and neither time in captivity, nor pre-release conditions of providing water and forage
influence these responses. Importantly, we did find that habitat use, and movements of translocated
tortoises differed from resident and control animals, sometimes dramatically, yielding important
management considerations for translocations of this species.



Nydam, Randall (Midwestern University);

Juarassic and Cretaceous-aged squamates of North America: initial experiments in diversity and
complexity

Much of the microvertebrate fauna known from the late Mesozoic of North America is based on
fragmentary/isolated remains recovered from bulk collection of fluvial-based deposits in Western Interior.
The identified fossil remains of squamates are mostly jaws, though other cranial and postcranial elements
are also present as are the rare articulated/associated skeleton. These remains are sufficient to assess
taxonomic and morphological diversity of the squamates and to evaluate the changes in faunal
composition and morphological complexity during the approximately 85 million years from the Late
Jurassic through the end of the Late Cretaceous. The earliest known squamate faunas are a ―Jurassic-
type‖ and are primarily composed of paramacellodid/cordylid-grade scincomorphans and primitive
anguimorphans. The dentitions of these taxa are relatively simple and the morphological diversity is low.
This ―Jurassic-type‖ fauna was relatively stable both taxonomically and morphologically from the Late
Jurassic through the Early Cretaceous. Near the beginning of the Late Cretaceous (following the
establishment of an intercontinental connection with Asia and the rise of angiosperms) there was a rapid
change in the North American squamates resulting in the establishment of a more taxonomically and
morphologically diverse ―Cretaceous-type‖ fauna. These taxa include the continued presences of
paramacellodid/cordylid-grade scincomorphans as well as new scincomorphans with highly specialized
dentitions (e.g., heterodonty in highly diverse chamopsiids, herbivory as well as mammal-like insectivory
adaptations in polyglyphanodontines, and apical specializations in contogeniids). Also present were
anguids (primarily the chisel-toothed Odaxosaurus spp.), xenosaurs (Exostinus and like taxa), several
taxa of helodermatid-grade and varanid-grade platynotans, snakes, and rare occurrences of iguanians.
With regard to distribution it appears that chamopsiids, contogeniids, and iguanians favored northern
latitudes, polyglypanodontines and snakes preferred the south with occasional northern incursions of both



                                                                                                          517
groups. Anguids, platynotans, and paramacellodid/cordylid-grade scincomorphans had no discernable
latitudinal preference. At the K/T boundary the



O'Connor, David (McGill University);

Phylogeographic trends among northeastern North American amphibians

Along an evolutionary and geological time scale, current species distributions across eastern North
America are a very modern occurrence. The Pleistocene Glaciation across the majority of North America
limited species to southern unglaciated refuges. I performed a review of phylogeographic studies of
amphibian species from across Eastern North America in order to assess and explore common trends of
historical dispersal and to highlight areas in which further research is required to improve our
understanding. In unglaciated regions of Eastern North America many anuran species are divided by the
Mississippi river, however there remained sufficient exceptions that this could not be classified as a
general trend. Current distributions likely arose from historical allopatric events, and not due to gene flow
reduction by the Mississippi river or Appalachian Mountains. For caudates, the primary barrier appears to
be the Appalachian Mountains and the Apalachicola river, not the Mississippi. This pattern does appear to
be significant however it may have arisen much earlier than the Pleistocene glaciation and be the result of
the Apalachicola river basin and not the Appalachian Mountains. For anurans in areas of North America
that were glaciated both the Mississippi and the Appalachians acted as geographic barriers. However the
east-west clade divisions likely did not arise from this reduced gene flow, but are the result of northward
expansion by populations from isolated southern refugia. As populations expanded northward, the Great
Lakes were a significant barrier, but once this had ben bypassed or traversed, many lineages made post-
glacial secondary contact. Furthermore, some anuran species demonstrated north-south patterns of
lineage distribution that is the result of post-glacial expansion. In this review of phylogeographic patterns,
we elucidate several challenges that must also be assessed. The first is that due to hybridization between
species, mitochondrial DNA may move between species in areas of range overlap, emphasizing a need
for multiple lines of evidence when determining species. While phylogeographic analyses have identified
several patterns of post-glacial dispersal and distribution, the generality of these patterns remains
questionable. Furthermore, despite being areas of post-glacial secondary contact, there is a general lack
of knowledge as to phylogeographic patterns in high latitudes and at the northern limits of species‘
ranges.



Oddone, Maria Cristina (Universidade Federal do Rio Grande); Bianchini, Adalto (Universidade Federal
do Rio Grande, Canada)

Inferences on in situ egg-laying behavior in genus Sympterygia from the Southwestern Atlantic
Ocean and implications on embryonic development

Oocyte encapsulation is a fundamental process that was conserved in Chondrichthyes after the
evolutionary divergence in so diverse and contrasting reproductive modes. Rajoids are strictly oviparous
producing substantially complex egg capsules for embryos protection during development. Genus
Sympterygia is endemic to the Southern Atlantic and Pacific South American shelves. Morphology of its
egg capsule is rather particular because of the presence of extremely long tendrils instead of regular
posterior horns, as in other skates. Females fix the sticky tendril ends to marine debris and immediately
swim around them to firmly entangle one paired egg capsules after the other, forming a capsule ―nest‖.
However, the reproductive behavior (as well as the embryonic development) of the genus has been



                                                                                                          518
poorly studied. In October 2009, a sampling program for skate egg capsules was started to quantify the
occurrence and diversity at Cassino Beach, a 220 km long beach in Southern Brazil. Every week, dry and
embryo-bearing egg capsules have been collected; the latter have been transferred and kept at the
Animal Care Room of the Physiological Sciences Building (FURG). Egg capsules of Rioraja agassizi
(monospecific genus) were the most abundant, followed by those of Sympterygia acuta and S.
bonapartei . Psammobatis and Dipturus were scarcely represented. Nests of S. acuta and S.
bonapartei bearing live embryos have been often found washed ashore over the Cassino Beach after
storms or during intense windy days. They are complex structures representing a microhabitat for a
significant number of invertebrates [Mollusca (Mytilidae, Donacidae and Mactridae); Crustacea (Cirripedia
and Caprellidae); Cnidaria (Campanulariidae)], macrophytes (Cyperaceae), macroalgae (Ulvaceae) and
even a temporary substrate for the development of vertebrate eggs [Pisces (Atherinopsidae:
Odontesthes sp.)]. Egg capsules in the nest assume the aspect of flowers in a bouquet, with most
capsules oriented vertically in the water column. This was proved to be more advantageous for the
developing embryos than capsules of other genera laying horizontally on the sea floor. In the nests, more
proper capsule ventilation and consequently better oxygen influx into the capsules occur. Parental care is
uncommon among chondrichthyans, but the egg-laying behavior described for Sympterygia may be
considered as such. A similar degree of complexity in the reproductive behavior has only been reported in
oviparous sharks.



O'Donnell, James L. (University of California Santa Cruz);

A multi-locus phylogeny of the anemonefishes (Pomacentridae: Amphiprioninae)

Coming Soon!



O'Donnell, Katherine (University of Missouri); Thompson III, Frank (USFS Northern Research Station,
Columbia, United States); Semlitsch, Raymond (University of Missouri, Columbia, United States)

Investigating the effects of prescribed fire on terrestrial salamanders in oak-hickory forests

Prescribed fire and timber harvest are anthropogenic disturbances that can have substantial effects on
forest ecosystems. Timber harvest often causes drying of the soil and leaf litter, making forests less
capable of supporting amphibian populations. Effects of prescribed fire on wildlife in general, and
amphibians specifically, are inadequately understood. Terrestrial salamanders are thought to play an
integral role in nutrient cycling and forest productivity, but may be negatively affected by disturbances that
alter their microhabitat due to their limited movement capacity and dependence on moisture. With
prescribed fire becoming common in forest management, it is essential to understand its effects on
wildlife. Thus, we investigated the effects of prescribed fire and timber harvest on terrestrial salamanders.
We were particularly interested in robustly determining the pre-treatment population size, and identifying
which factors best predict the abundance and detection of terrestrial salamanders. In spring and fall 2010-
2011, we conducted 5 repeated samples of 20 5-hectare experimental plots that were harvested or
burned in early 2012. We will continue sampling for 2 years post-treatment. We performed area-
constrained searches of natural cover and leaf litter, measured (SVL), and recorded the capture location
of salamanders (primarily Plethodon serratus). Terrestrial salamanders have notoriously low detectability;
thus, we used program unmarked, which fits hierarchical models of abundance for species subject to
imperfect detection. We recorded 1883 captures of P. serratus and 21 captures of other Plethodontid
salamanders (P. albagula, Eurycea longicauda). The average number of captures per 3m x 3m sample



                                                                                                          519
ranged from 1.6 (fall 2011) to 2.9 salamanders (fall 2010). Most salamanders (75%) were found
within/under leaf litter; the rest were either under rocks (11.4%) or woody cover (13.6%). Captures were
strongly correlated with recent rainfall; approximately 45% of the variation in captures-per-plot was
explained by the number of days since rain. Rainfall had the strongest influence on detection, while slope
and aspect contributed considerably to variation in abundance. Our results illustrate the importance of
accounting for imperfect detection when sampling wildlife. They also suggest that including leaf litter in
searches for terrestrial salamanders allows us to better understand their microhabitat choices. This
sampling method will enable us to detect any changes in microhabitat preference after prescribed fire and
timber harvest. Understanding responses of amphibians to prescribed fire and timber harvest is important
for developing more effective forest management plans; our results will enhance our ability to protect
forest biodiversity and improve wildlife habitat.



Ofori-Boateng, Caleb (Forestry Research Institute of Ghana); Oduro, William (Kwame Nkrumah
University of Science and Technology, Canada); Norris, Ken (Centre for Agri-environmental Research,
University of Reading, Canada); Rödel, Mark-Oliver (Museum für Naturkunde, Berlin, Canada)

Differences in the Effects of Selective Logging on Amphibian Assemblages in Three West African
Forest Types

Making generalizations about the impact of commercial selective logging on biodiversity has so far
remained elusive. Species responses to logging depend on a number of factors, many of which have not
been studied in detail. These factors may include the natural forest conditions (forest types) under which
logging impacts are investigated; but this question has so far remained unexamined. In a large-scale
replicate study we aimed at clarifying the relationship between logging and forest types on frog richness,
diversity, and assemblage composition. We contrast three distinct and naturally occurring forest types,
including wet evergreen, moist evergreen and semi-deciduous forests. Selectively logged sites were
compared with primary forest sites for each forest type. We found that the response of frog communities
to logging varies in different forest types. In the wet evergreen forest, richness was higher in logged forest
than primary forest, while diversity measures were not different between logged and primary forest sites.
In the moist evergreen forest, richness and diversity were higher in selectively logged areas compared to
primary forest habitats. In the semi-deciduous, logged forests were characterized by drastic loss of forest
specialists, reduced richness and diversity. These results indicate that the net effect of logging varies with
respect to forest type. Forest types that are characterized by adverse climatic conditions (i.e., low rainfall
and protracted dry seasons) are more likely to produce negative effects on leaf litter anuran communities.
For comparisons of the impact of logging on species to be effective, future research must endeavour to
include details of forest type, rainfall patterns, logging intensities, and rotation cycles.



Ogoanah, Sylvia (University of Benin, Benin City. Nigeria); Ehiosu, Kingsley (University of Benin, Benin
City. Nigeria, Canada)

Distribution of Anuran species in Iyanomo Rubber Research Institute, Benin City , Nigeria

Distribution of anuran species in Iyanomo Rubber Research Institute, Nigeria was studied by a
combination of handpicking and visual encounter survey method between March and October 2011.
Twelve species belonging to four families and ten genera were recorded. These include Bufo maculatus,
Afrixalus dorsalis, Hyperolius concolor, Leptopelis viridis, Hemisus marmoratus, Ptychadena bibroni, P.
mascareniensis, P. pumilio, Chiromantis rufescens, Silurana tropicalis, Hoplobatrachus occipitalis and



                                                                                                          520
Arthroleptis poecilonatus. The most abundant species was Bufo maculatus             (18.4%) while H.
marmoratus and P. mascareniensis recorded the least (5%). The species were distributed within four
sites situated in the Rubber plantation – pond, rubber, oil palm and plantain farms. The plantain farm
had the highest diversity (2.3) while the oil palm farm had the least (1.09). There was a significant
difference between pond and rubber and oil palm plantations (P &lt;0.05). Cluster analysis showed two
main clusters and one outlier. The work aims to reduce the gap in the knowledge of anuran species
diversity in Nigeria.

Key words: anuran diversity, distribution, Iyanomo, Nigeria



Ohmer, Michel E. (University of Otago); McKenzie, Kate; Daglish, Lisa (Department of Conservation,
New Zealand, Canada); Bishop, Phillip J. (University of Otago, Canada)

Long-term monitoring of the effects of endemic disease and predator exclusion on survival in a
population of threatened New Zealand amphibians

We have witnessed a dramatic decline in amphibian populations globally. While we can identify many
factors contributing to those declines, there is comparatively less evidence for the combined effects of
multiple stressors, particularly in wild populations. In New Zealand, two introduced threats have been
considered to be the leading causes of declines in endemic frog species: the fungal pathogen,
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), and mammalian predators (e.g. rats and mice). Utilizing a 5-year
mark-recapture dataset from a population of the endemic species Leiopelma archeyi , we investigated
the combined effects of disease and introduced predators on individual survival and population dynamics.
We applied multistate models in the program MARK to four 10 x 10 m grids of equal habitat quality re-
sampled twice yearly, all of which experience endemic levels of Bd infection and two of which were
predator excluded. Initial analyses indicate a reduction in survival probability (approximately 13%) in
infected frogs within predator-accessible grids. A similar reduction in survival was not observed in infected
frogs within predator-excluded grids. Analyses incorporating individual and time-varying environmental
covariates are currently underway. Recent work indicates New Zealand‘s endemic Leiopelmatid frogs
experience low susceptibility to Bd infection in the laboratory. However, the interaction of multiple
stressors, such as introduced predators and disease, may lead to reduced immunocompetence in this
species. Thus, investigations of the effects of multiple stressors within threatened populations, such as
this one, can better focus management decisions.



Okada, Sumio (Tottori University); Fukuda, Yukihiro; Yuki, Etsuko (TopOutImages, Canada); Okada,
Tamami (Mt.Hyonosen Forest Museum, Canada)

Field observations of parental care of egg masses by male Japanese giant salamanders, Andrias
japonicus

Although it is well-documented that male parental care occurs in Andrias japonicus and other
Cryptobranchid salamanders, no one has described how males actually care for eggs in breeding nests.
We recorded parental care behavior of male Andrias japonicus in one natural and one artificial nest in
Tottori and Hyogo Prefectures using a video camera between August and November, 2010. We analyzed
den masters‘ behavior over 6 days (34hrs total) and 5 days (29 hrs total) in the natural and artificial nest,
respectively, as percentage of total time observed displaying a given behavior per day. Parental care
behaviors were classed into four main categories: agitation (moving of eggs with head or body), tail




                                                                                                         521
fanning, feeding (eating of eggs, skin, etc.) and swaying (side-to-side male body movements). Agitation
was observed at a similar frequency in both nests (artificial nest: 9.6-19.8%, natural nest: 2.2-19.8%). In
the artificial nest, tail fanning was frequently observed, and averaged 30.6% (range: 12.6-46.2%). In
contrast, in the natural nest, tail fanning was observed an average of 0.2% (range: 0-1.2%). We observed
denmasters taking eggs out of masses with their mouths and we think that this behavior functions to
remove undeveloped eggs. We estimated water quality of both nests three times between July and
September, 2011. DO (dissolved oxygen) in the artificial nest was noticeably lower than in the center of
the adjacent stream (nest: 4.6-5.9 mg/L, stream: 8.6-9.2 mg/L), whereas DO in the natural nest was only
slightly lower than the center of the adjacent stream (nest: 7.7-8.5 mg/L, stream: 8.8-9.7 mg/L). We
hypothesize that lower DO levels in the artificial nest resulting from low levels of water inflow from the
adjacent stream led to the high frequency of tail fanning behavior by males. These behaviors likely help
facilitate the diffusion of oxygen into the egg mass, thereby preventing yolk adhesion and spread of fungi.
Our observations also indicate the need for future experimental studies of relationships between male
behavior and DO levels and egg mortality, and also for observation of post-hatching male behaviors.



Okada, Sumio (Tottori University); Okada, Tamami (Mt.Hyonosen Forest Museum, Canada); Felix, Zach
(Reinhardt University, Canada)

Natural History and Conservation Status of the Japanese giant salamander, Andrias japonicus in
the Chugoku Mountains

The Japanese giant salamander ( Andrias japonicus ) is one of the largest extant amphibians in the world.
Western Honshu Island, especially the Chugoku Mountains contains a major portion of A. japonicus ‘s
range. Although A. japonicus is threatened with extinction as a consequence of habitat degradation,
baseline data on population structure, size, and density are limited. We conducted mark-recapture and
radio-telemetric studies of A. japonicus to evaluate population demography, reproductive ecology
including breeding migrations, diet composition and dam impact within relatively natural and disturbed
habitats in the Hino River, Tottori Prefecture between 2001 and 2011. One section of the river, the upper
portion, was relatively undisturbed and ran through a wooded area, and the other section, the lower
portion, was more heavily disturbed and ran through an agriculturally-dominated area. Our results
revealed that adult A. japonicus are abundant in both the relatively natural and disturbed areas. Giant
salamanders in the lower portion were larger and heavier than those in the upper portion, and we
recorded fewer salamanders in small size classes (younger individuals) in the lower portion than the
upper portion. These data suggest that giant salamanders experience lower recruitment in the lower
portion than in the upper portion, possibly due to reduced availability of nesting sites and/or larval and
juvenile microhabitats as a result of habitat degradation. In the upper portion, females moved between
stream sections to reach nesting sites and spawn, and in the lower more disturbed portion many
salamanders used nesting sites within branch streams and migrated multiple directions within both main
and branch streams. Availability of spawning nests is relatively limited and nests are frequently destroyed
by disturbances such as floods throughout the study area. Because of the ephemeral nature and limited
availability of nests, A. japonicus must be able to migrate between sections to reach newly create nests.
In the lower portion however, the movements of many salamanders were interrupted by dams during the
breeding season. These data provide essential baseline information on an A. japonicus population
across a habitat gradient from relatively natural habitat to disturbed stream habitat flowing through
human-dominated areas.




                                                                                                       522
Okamoto, Taku (Center for Environmental Biology and Ecosystem Studies, National Institute for
Environmental Studies);

Recent taxonomic changes of the common skinks of genus Plestiodon (Scincidae, Squamata) on
the Japanese main islands, the Izu Islands, and far eastern Russia

The skinks of genus Plestiodon (formerly Eumeces ) in the Japanese main islands and far eastern
Russia had long been recognized as Eumeces latiscutatus (Hallowell, 1861), and the populations on
the Izu Islands, central Japan, had been treated as Eumeces okadae Stejneger, 1907 (e . g., Taylor,
1936; Uetz, 2011). However, several recent molecular systematic studies have clarified the followings:
the population of the Izu Peninsula (including the type locality of E. latiscutatus ) is distinct from those of
remaining parts of the entire Japanese main islands, and closely related to E. okadae (Motokawa and
Hikida, 2003); and the populations of eastern and western part of the Japanese main islands are
genetically distinct with reproductive isolation (Okamoto and Hikida, 2009). After the generic classification
has been revised (Smith, 2005; Brandley et al . 2005), the Japanese species are currently placed in
Plestiodon . Thus, the following three parapatric species should be recognized at present: Plestiodon
latiscutatus on the Izu Peninsula and the Izu Islands ( E. okadae is a junior synonym of it); P.
japonicus (Peters, 1864) on the western part of Japan; and an undescribed species on the eastern part
of Japan. Our recent taxonomic revision have clarified that these three species can be identified by
diagnoses of scale morphology and DNA barcode, and far eastern Russian population should be
conspecific with the undescribed species of the eastern Japan (Okamoto and Hikida, submitted).



Olave, Melisa (CONICET-CENPAT); Avila, Luciano; Sites, Jack W (CONICET-CENPAT, Canada);
Morando, Mariana (CONICET-CENPAT, Puerto Madryn, Argentina)

A well-supported species tree of the Eulaemus clade (SQUAMATA: LIOLAEMUS): Evidence of an
ancient radiation

The lizard genus Liolaemus is endemic to an extensive area of temperate South America and includes
235 recognized species. Since Laurent‘s (1983) morphological study, the genus has been divided into
two subgenera: Liolaemus (or the chiliensis group) and Eulaemus (or the Argentinean group),
distributed mainly to the west (Chile) and east (Argentina) of the Andes, respectively. Morphological and
mitochondrial characters have been used to propose phylogenetic hypotheses for different clades within
this genus, and most of these are based on incomplete taxon sampling and limited intraspecific sampling.
In this work we present the first well-supported molecular phylogenetic hypothesis for the clade
Eulaemus , based on 12 nuclear molecular markers (protein coding loci &amp; anonymous loci) as well
as two mitochondrial markers (cytb-12S; ~ 10,500 bp total). This clade includes 77 described species,
and we included multiple representatives from all larger groups within it, including new candidate species.
We analyzed the dataset using different species tree approaches (*BEAST, BEST, STEM and MDC) and
compare these results with traditional concatenated analyses. We also present fossil-calibrated
divergence estimates (using BEAST), and discuss a possible ancient radiation for most of the larger
Eulaemus clades.




                                                                                                           523
Olgun, Kurtulus (Adnan Menderes University);

Systematics and Phylogeny of Genus Ophisops (Reptilia:Sauria) in Mainland and Islands of
Turkey

Genus Ophisops (Snake-eyed Lizard) is represented by eight species world-wide. Only one of these
species Ophisops elegans is present in Turkey as well as is recorded from Israel, Lebanon, Syria,
Jordan, Iraq and Iran. This species was first discovered from Bakû by Ménétriés in 1832. Ophisops
elegans is very common in the Mediterranean ecological zone. But it is also distributed around the Irano-
Turanian ecozone. It can be seen in suitable biotopes from 400 meters below to and 1.100 meters above
sea level. Taking the previous studies carried out into consideration, evaluations on the taxonomic
status of the Ophisops elegans can be divided into the three time periods. First of these periods is the
studies accomplished up to 1978 and they suggests three subspecies for O. elegans . Second one
comprises the works carried out between 1978 and 1993 that suggests a fourth subspecies in addition to
existing three subspecies. At this period, it has been proposed that subspecies present in Turkey,
particularly in Lake District and South-eastern Anatolia region, need to be studied in detail. Lastly, studies
have been published from 1993 to date have put forwarded that it is not possible to solve the taxonomic
status of Ophisops elegans using only morphological characteristics. In order to resolve the taxonomic
status of this species, molecular systematic approaches could be very useful. In the light of this
information, specimens of Ophisops were collected from all over Turkey and some of the islands located
in Aegean Sea of the Turkish cost. Then various morfometric measurements and folidosis values were
taken and analysed statistically in order to determine the differences between populations from different
localities. Cyt b and 16S rRNA sequences of mitochondrial DNA of Ophisops specimens were
analysed to clarify taxonomical position of differentiated population and to construct a phylogenetic tree.
Based on the phylogenetic analyses, two main monophyletic groups (species taxon) of Ophisops have
been recovered in Turkey; one includes Artvin (Eastern Blacksea Region), Ardahan, Kars, Iğdır, Van,
Hakkari, Şırnak, Muş (East Anatolia Region), Mardin and Batman (Southeast Anatolia Region)
populations and the other comprises the remaining populations. There are a total of nine difrentiated
populations (subspecies taxon) beloning to these two monophyletic groups.



Oliveira, Adriele Karlokoski Cunha de (Universidade Federal do Paraná); Oliveira, Igor Soares de
(Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, Brazil)

Natural history and cytogenetic of Sphaenorhynchus surdus (Anura: Hylidae): an endemic frog of
Brazilian Southern Atlantic forest

Sphaenorhynchus Tschudi, 1838 is a genus with fourteen species and it is currently considered a sister
genus of Dendropsophus and Xenohyla. This genus is distributed throughout South America with ten
species restricted to the Brazilian Atlantic forest. Sphaenorhynchus surdus (Cochran, 1953) is one of
these species and it is distributed in the states of Paraná, Santa Catarina and Rio Grande do Sul, in
Southern Brazil. This taxon was recently divided in two species, S. surdus and S. caramaschii. However,
there is a lack of information about the biology of both species. Hereby we provide a description of natural
history traits and show preliminary data of cytogenetic for S. surdus. Information about this species is very
scarce and we provide the first karyotype approach for this taxa, as well as to the genus
Sphaenorhynchus. Our study was conducted in the Atlantic forest, in the Araucaria forest domain. We
conducted our surveys from August 2009 to July 2010. We collected data about activity patterns and use
of microhabitat. For the karyotype analysis we performed conventional staining to determine the
chromosome number and morphology, and location of the Nuclear Organization Region (NOR) by Ag-




                                                                                                          524
NOR staining. Sphaenorhynchus surdus was observed in exclusively nocturnal calling activity during