m-to-
forest habitat gradient.



Bruner, John (University of Alberta);

A phylogenetic analysis of the Percidae using osteology

The present phylogenetic analysis found percids to be divided into five subfamilies based on 49
informative osteological characters, with the subfamily Percinae (genus Perca ) the most primitive form
within the family. The remaining four subfamilies contain the following genera: Acerinae ( Gymnocephalus
), Percarinae ( Percarina ), Luciopercinae ( Stizostedion,           Romanichthys, and      Zingel ), and
Etheostominae ( Ammocrypta, Percina, and Etheostoma ). Luciopercinae is divided into two tribes,
Luciopercini ( Stizostedion ) and Romanichthyini ( Romanichthys, Zingel ). 18 outgroups were used to
polarize the characters for the 28 percid species examined. I compare my results with two recent
publications, Smith and Craig (2007) and Whitlock (2010). Smith and Craig (2007) tried to find the
relationships of the serranid and percid fishes among the Percomorpha using a combination of RNA and
nuclear DNA molecular data sequenced from 180 species. Whitlock (2010) used 73 osteological and 4
integumentary characters to determine phylogenetic relationships of 27 species of percomorph fishes.




                                                                                                           88
Bruschi, Daniel Pacheco (Departamento de Biologia Estrutural e Funcional, Universidade Estadual de
Campinas (Unicamp), Campinas, SP); Busin, Carmen Sílvia (Instituto de Ciências Biológicas (ICB),
Universidade de Passo Fundo, Canada); Lima, Albertina Pimentel (Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da
Amazônia (INPA), Manaus, AM, Canada); Rivera, Mirian; Blasco-Zúñiga, Aílin (Pontifícia Universidad
Católica del Ecuador (PUCE), Quito, Ecuador, Canada); Recco-Pimentel, Shirlei Maria (Departamento de
Biologia Estrutural e Funcional, Universidade Estadual de Campinas (Unicamp), Campinas, SP, Canada)

Cytogenetic studies in Phyllomedusa vaillantii and Phyllomedusa ayeaye with descriptions of
multiple NORs

Chromosomal analyses have been successfully applied to anurans groups as valuable tool to investigate
chromosome evolution. To contribute to the understanding of chromosomal evolution in Phyllomedusa
genus, we described for the first time the karyotype of two species: P. vaillantii , not currently assigned to
any group of species and P. ayeaye of the P. hypochondrialis group. Specimens of P. ayeaye were
collected in Serra da Moeda (Minas Gerais State, Brazil) and specimens of P. vaillantii collected
Jacareacanga, Pará State, Brazil; Porto Velho, Roraima State, Brazil; and in Yasuní, Provincia de
Orellana, Ecuador. Chromosomes were stained with Giemsa and submitted to C-banding and
sequentially stained with two base-specific fluorochromes: DAPI and mytramycin (MM). The nucleolus
organizing region (NOR) was detected using Ag-NOR and fluorescent ― in situ ‖ hybridization (FISH) with
28S rDNA probe isolated from P. hypochondrialis. The karyotypes of both species were
2n=12M+12SM+2ST with chromosome morphology very similar to other karyotyped species of the genus.
In P. ayeaye , the NOR were detected in the pericentromeric region of 9p and in one homolog of pairs 3
and 4 at pericentromeric and interstitial regions, respectively, coincident with secondary constrictions.
These regions were also showed richness in GC nucleotides detected by MM. The C-banding revealed
centromeric heterochromatin in all of the chromosomes and DAPI stained the heterochromatic regions of
pairs 8 (both arms) and of pairs 6q and 10p. In all specimens of P. vaillantii NOR were detected in 7p,
positive to MM and coincident with secondary constriction. Centromeric C-bandings were detected in all
chromosomes and on pericentromeric regions in 11q and 12q, interstitial regions in both arms of pairs 1
and 8, and in 2q, 7q and 9q, and at subtelomeric region in 4q. All bands were DAPI positive. The
karyotype of P. vaillantii differs from those yet described for other species of the genus mostly by
heterochromatic pattern while the karyotype of the P. ayeaye show similar heterochromatin pattern with
other species of the P. hypochondrialis group, as P. hypochondrialis, P. nordestina and P. rohdei,
corroborating it inclusion in this phenetic group. Chromosomal data described herein may represent an
important contribution to cytogenetic studies of the genus Phyllomedusa and it will be useful for future
understanding of the chromosomal evolutionary relationships within the genus.



Buckley, John (Amphibian and Reptile Conservation Trust);

The Pool Frog in the UK - the reintroduction of an extinct native species

The last northern clade pool frog population in Britain became extinct in the 1990s just as it was
recognised as native. Research using four major lines of enquiry, genetic, bioacoustic, zooarchaeological
and archival, demonstrated native status and showed it belonged to the clade of pool frogs also found in
Scandinavia. A reintroduction strategy was written and a 10 ha receptor site with over 40 ponds prepared.

After exhaustive health screening, the first frogs were introduced from Sweden under licence in 2005 and
3 more annual releases followed. Since the last one in 2008 a small population has maintained itself at
about 50 adults. Although seen in a number of ponds it relies on just two nearby ones for breeding.




                                                                                                           89
Individual frogs appear healthy, adult survival is relatively high and breeding behaviour appears to be
normal but the population is not growing as rapidly as hoped. The population remains intrinsically
vulnerable to the threats attendant on all small isolated populations. The reasons for slow population
growth and failure to colonise adjacent habitat are not understood. In an attempt to improve the situation
some ponds were restored in the autumn 2011, head starting of tadpoles is being considered for 2012
and a short list of sites for the next reintroduction is being drawn up.



Buhlmann, Kurt (Savannah River Ecology Laboratory); Koch, Stephanie (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
Canada); Butler, Brian (Oxbow Associates, Inc., Canada); Tuberville, Tracey (Savannah River Ecology
Laboratory, Canada); Palermo, Veronica (Oxbow Associates, Inc., Canada); Bastarache, Brian (Bristol
County Agricultural High School, Canada); Cava, Zachary; Green, Jared; Slocum, Jeff (U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, Canada)

Reintroduction and Head-starting: Tools for Blanding's Turtle Conservation

We designed and implemented a project to reintroduce Blanding‘s Turtles ( Emydoidea blandingii ) to
Assabet River National Wildlife Refuge, Massachusetts, USA. We evaluated the relative benefits and
risks of using various life stages of Blanding‘s Turtles collected from a donor population within the same
watershed, including direct-release hatchlings (released in autumn shortly after hatching), head-started
hatchlings (raised in captivity for 9 mo), juveniles, and adults. We developed a simple population model
to evaluate which of several release strategies was most likely to result in a stable population at the
recipient site while minimizing negative impacts to the donor site.        Model results suggested annual
releases consisting largely of head-started hatchlings were most likely to achieve our goal, given the
assumptions inherent in the model. From 2007-2011, we have released 81 direct-release and 107 head-
started hatchlings at the refuge; approximately 70 more head-starts will be released as of May 2012.
Head-started hatchlings were larger (mean = 62.7 mm carapace length, 46.6 g) compared to direct-
release hatchlings (mean = 36.3 mm carapace length, 8.8 g). Simultaneous radio-tracking of 12
translocated juveniles has provided useful information on habitat preferences that we used to select two
sites within the refuge for future releases. Six head-started hatchlings have also been released with radio
transmitters (one in 2009 and five in 2010), but one was found deceased a year after release. We
continue monitoring efforts to assess survivorship, growth, and site fidelity of all released Blanding's
Turtles and to compare results among the head-started and direct-release hatchlings. We will update our
models and reintroduction efforts based on monitoring data.



Burbrink, Frank (College of Staten Island); Brandley, Matthew (School of Biological Sciences, Sydney,
N, Australia); Myers, Edward (CUNY Graduate Center, Staten Island, NY, United States); Chen, Xin
(CUNY Graduate Center, Staten Island, United States); Pyron, Alex (The George Washington University,
District of Coumbia, NY, United States)

Are processes of diversification in New World squamates deterministic?

Independent colonizations of the New World (NW) from the Old World has occurred among various
squamates groups several times and has yielded spectacular diversity of both species and form.
However, it is unclear if this extreme diversity is the result of single or multiple processes of species
diversification and morphological change over time for these NW colonizers. Here we examine these
processes using new computational techniques for four groups of squamates, which include viperids,
watersnakes, ratsnakes, and Plestiodon skinks. All four groups colonized the New World in the same
region in the early Miocene and thus share a similar source of ecological opportunity. Our results indicate



                                                                                                         90
that the four groups explosively radiated in the mid-Miocene with an eventual reduction in diversification
rates driven by diversity dependence. While processes of species diversification appear to be shared
among the groups, morphological disparity and change in morphology across the tree are both specific to
each taxon. This suggests that rates of morphological change are decoupled from rates of speciation.
Ultimately, these results indicate that processes of species diversification are deterministic in New World
colonizing squamates yet rates of morphological change reflect contingency and are specific to each
group.



Burger, Joanna (Rutgers University); Zappalorti, Robert (Herpetological Associates, Toms River, NJ,
United States); Gochfeld, Michael (UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscatway, NJ, United
States); Devito, Emile (New Jersey Conserve Wildlife, Far Hills, NJ, United States); Schneider, David;
McCort, Matt (Herpetological Associates, Toms River, NJ, United States); Jeitner, Christian (Rutgers
University, Piscatway, NJ, United States)

Long-term Use of Hibernacula by Northern Pine Snakes (Pituophis melanoleucus)

Understanding the specific habitat requirements of reptiles during different life stages or seasons is
critical to conserving viable populations. Northern Pine Snakes (Pituophis melanoleucus) are one of the
few species that spend the winter in underground hibernacula which they excavate themselves. We
report on 26-years (1986-2011) of monitoring Pine Snake use at seven hibernacula in the New Jersey
Pine Barrens. Our goal was to determine the frequency of repeated use, number of snakes present by
year, disruptions of hibernacula, and the relationship between number of snakes present and the
probability of occupancy of each hibernaculum in successive years. The overall goal was to determine
the importance of protecting known hibernation sites regardless of whether they appear occupied in a
given season. These data suggest that if no snakes are observed entering a particular hibernaculum over
a limited time period , it does not mean none are there, or that none will use it in successive years. The
variability in use suggests not only that predation and human disturbance can result in non-occupancy the
following year, but that environmental and temperature-related conditions force snakes to have alternative
hibernacula to reduce risk and insure survival. Pine Snakes are listed as threatened by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection for many reasons, including habitat loss. There is continued
pressure from developers to destroy habitat during development, including critical hibernation sites. The
long-term use of specific hibernacula even with periods of low or no use, suggest that they should be
protected to provide a matrix of available over-wintering sites.



Burgess, George (Florida Program for Shark Research, Florida Museum of Natural History, Univ.
Florida); Coelho, Rui (Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR), Faro, Portugal); Schofield, Pamela
(Southeast Ecological Science Center, US Geological Survey, Gainesville, FL, United States)

Advances in the taxonomic resolution of the Etmopterus lucifer-complex in the Indo-Pacific region

Lantern sharks of the genus Etmopterus (Elasmobranchii: Etmopteridae) are deep-sea sharks
characterized for producing visible light through epidermal photogenic organs (photophores). Within this
group, the Etmopterus lucifer complex forms a species complex characterized for having the dermal
denticles arranged in longitudinal rows. The worldwide distribution of this group and the morphological
and coloration similarities, historically have resulted in difficulties in species identification. Adding to that,
when captured from commercial fisheries this group of sharks is usually discarded due to their low to null
commercial value, making the availability of study material limited. Our review of this complex revealed
the presence of five morphs in the Australian region, including three undescribed species. The two



                                                                                                               91
previously described species, Etmopterus brachyurus (known from Western Australia) and Etmopterus
molleri (New South Wales) are distinguished by their elongate bodies and photophore and pigmentary
patterns. The three additional morphs newly described are provisionally referred to as ―finescale‖, ―dark‖
and ―rough‖. The undescribed ―finescale‖ (NSW and Queensland) is distinguished by its dense curved
denticles, while those of both ―rough‖ (an undescribed Great Australian Bight species) and ―dark‖ (NSW
and Tasmania) are more erect and set in well-spaced rows. ―Rough‖ and ―dark‖ morphs are separated by
a series of morphological and denticle density characters. Ironically, Etmopterus lucifer, by literature
attribution nominally cosmopolitan in distribution, is absent from Australia and seems to be confined to the
NW Pacific, where it was originally described. This study represents and advance in the taxonomic
resolution of this species-complex, that until recently has been poorly-studied. Such increased knowledge
will allow for more detailed (species-specific) data to start being collected, which will contribute for a better
management and conservation of this species group.



Burke, Russell (Hofstra University); Francoeur, Laura (The Port Authority of NY & NJ, Jamaica, NY,
United States); Kanonik, Alexandra (Town of Hempstead Department of Conservation and Waterways,
Point Lookout, NY, United States); Frame, George (National Park Service, Staten Island, NY, United
States)

Why Did Terrapins Cross The Runway? The puzzling turtle invasion of JFK airport

 In the summers of 2009-2011 domestic and international news agencies carried stories about
Diamondback Terrapins ( Malaclemys terrapin ) causing delays on the runways at John F. Kennedy
International Airport in New York, one of the busiest airports in the world. JFK is located within New York
City on the eastern edge of Jamaica Bay, which was once a thriving estaurine ecosystem. Terrapins are
only one of many wildlife problems for the airport. Airport construction was started in 1942, eventually
covering 2000 ha of smooth cord grass salt marsh with solid fill and destroying large amounts of terrapin
habitat. Nevertheless, indirect evidence suggests that a large terrapin population persists, perhaps in
excess of 10 000 individuals. For a variety of reasons most Jamaica Bay marshes are rapidly eroding,
but the marsh near the airport may be the healthiest, perhaps because it is the youngest and highest.
Long term research on terrapins elsewhere in Jamaica Bay shows that they have undergone dramatic
changes in reproductive patterns in the last decade, including reduced clutch frequency, increased egg
size, and increased clutch size. These changes are unexplained but may be associated with changes in
habitat size and quality, in which case the JFK airport subpopulation may have much higher prospects.
Terrapins have been observed on JFK runways since at least 2001, and a small number were killed there
annually until this recent surge in numbers. The increase could be due to recently improved recruitment,
movement of individuals from other parts of Jamaica Bay, changes in nesting behavior, and/or increased
detection by airport personnel. We will discuss changes in airport operations, predator control, and
efforts to better understand the causes of this dramatic increase in terrapin encounters.



Burkholder, Derek (North Miami); Heithaus, Michael; Fourqurean, James (Florida International
University, North Miami, FL, United States); Wirsing, Aaron (University of Washington, Seattle, WA,
United States)

Top-down control in a relatively intact seagrass ecosystem

Coastal marine ecosystems have been degraded dramatically worldwide and continue to be threatened.
Seagrass ecosystems, which provide critical habitat for juveniles of many species, including commercially




                                                                                                              92
important ones, have been particularly hard-hit. Of particular interest is the loss of large herbivores (e.g.
sea turtles and sirenians) and top predators (e.g. sharks), which may have disrupted top-down processes
that were historically important. We used exclusion cages to elucidate the effects of large herbivores
(green sea turtles, Chelonia mydas and dugongs, Dugong dugon) on seagrass community structure,
nutrient dynamics, and ecosystem dynamics in the relatively pristine seagrass ecosystem of Shark Bay,
Western Australia. We also investigated the possible indirect effect of top predators (tiger sharks,
Galeocerdo cuvier) on seagrass beds mediated by spatiotemporal shifts in grazing by green turtles and
dugongs. Excluding large grazers from mixed beds of Halodule uninervis, Cymodocea angustata, and
Halophila ovalis for thirty-two months resulted in a shift in seagrass community composition, increased
shoot lengths in all species and increased total seagrass biomass. However, seagrass responses to
exclusion were species-specific.         There were increases in percent cover and shoot density for
Cymodocea angustata but a decrease in cover and density for both Halodule uninervis and Halophila
ovalis. Overall, our findings suggest that spatiotemporal shifts in foraging habitat use by megagrazers
may mediate indirect effects of tiger sharks on the seagrass communities of Shark Bay and that declines
in these taxa in other parts of their range are likely to result in changes to seagrass communities.



Burraco, Pablo (Doñana Biological Station); Gomez-Mestre, Ivan (Doñana Biological Station, Canada)

Physiological stress responses in spadefoot toad tadpoles to natural and anthropogenic
disturbances

Natural and anthropogenic disturbances cause deep alterations on ecosystems worldwide, contributing to
the decline and extinction of a growing number of species. Within vertebrates, amphibians form the
group with a greater number of threatened species, and it is therefore important to understand how they
respond to anthropogenic disturbances compared to natural threats. To that end we studied physiological
stress responses in spadefoot toad tadpoles ( Pelobates cultripes ) from populations within the protected
area of Doñana National Park (south-western Spain). We tested tadpoles‘ responses to varying levels of
water temperature, salinity, pH, predators (native and invasive) and herbicide (glyphosate). We found
that tadpoles responded physiologically to chronic exposure to these factors (21 days of exposure) by
modifying to different extents their corticosterone levels, standard metabolic rate, oxidative stress enzyme
activity and immune response (leukocyte count). We found that salinity was the factor that more strongly
induced a physiological stress response in tadpoles. We also found that tadpoles responded
physiologically to the presence of native predators ( beetle larvae, Dytiscus larvae ), whereas they
showed no response when facing invasive ones (red swamp crayfish, Procambarus clarkii ), suggesting
that tadpoles were not detecting invasive predators‘ cues. This is likely a consequence of lack of joint
evolutionary history due to the recent introduction of the red swamp crayfish in the area (1970‘s).
Exposure to the herbicide just changed the homeostasis of individuals. When the tadpoles were
subjected to herbicide and native predator simultaneously we observed a response similar to that which
existed in the presence of only native predator. Hence, both natural and anthropogenic disturbances can
profoundly alter the physiology of amphibians and can often occur in combination in natural populations
exposed to human activities. Each of the parameters studied has theoretical and practical advantages
and disadvantages, but we found c orticosterone to be the most sensitive parameter to the experimental
stress levels used in our experiment, as it was the one that more consistently differed among treatments.
In sum, we compared the variation of a series of key physiological parameters involved in the stress
response to common environmental factors.




                                                                                                          93
Burrowes, Patricia (University of Puerto Rico); Longo, Ana V. (Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United
States)

Seasonal modulation of defense mechanisms against Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis may
explain persistence of susceptible amphibians.

Although some species of amphibians have persisted after epidemic outbreaks of the chytrid fungus,
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (=Bd ), they remain vulnerable under enzootic conditions. In Puerto
Rico, susceptibility of direct-developing frogs persisting with Bd is associated to seasonality and
ontogeny, where the highest infection intensities are observed during the cool-dry season and among
juveniles. The aim of this project was to investigate the implications of this seasonal and ontogenetic
variation in vulnerability to chytridiomycosis among Eleutherodactylus coqui. We hypothesized that the
observed differences in infection intensities and prevalence between the dry and wet seasons induced a
seasonal modulation of defense mechanisms against Bd , and a potential for evolutionary trade-offs
between traits that confer resistance (ability to limit a pathogen‘s burden) and tolerance (ability to limit a
pathogen‘s damage) to Bd. We monitored Bd prevalence and infection levels among age classes in the
field throughout seasons for seven years (2005-2012) and compared fitness of infected and uninfected
frogs. Results suggest that that during suboptimal environmental conditions (cool-dry season),
Eleutherodactylus coqui ‘s immune system is suppressed. As a consequence, hosts rely on defense
mechanisms that provide tolerance to Bd characterized by high infection intensities and increased
prevalence in the population.         At the turn of the season to warmer and wetter weather, favorable
environmental conditions promote immunological response to Bd infections increasing resistance to
disease, characterized by low infection intensities and a decrease in prevalence. These results constitute
the basis for our current research seeking for evidence of variation in immune response under controlled
Bd -inoculation trials as well as consideration of alternative defenses such as behavioral thermoregulation
and symbiotic skin microbes. Understanding the trade-offs between hosts defenses against pathogen
threat, may explain the influence of environmental factors, host‘s age and life history strategies in
developing these adaptive mechanisms, and lead to effective mitigation in favor of biodiversity at risk.



Burton, Frederic (Blue Iguana Recovery Programe);

Reintroduction and monitoring techniques for population restoration of the critically endangered
Grand Cayman Blue Iguana, Cyclura lewisi

The Blue Iguana Recovery Programme, on Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands, is working to restore a
population of at least 1,000 Grand Cayman Blue Iguanas ( Cyclura lewisi ) sustaining themselves in the
wild, within protected areas in their former range. From a functionally extinct wild population in 2002, the
programme has released over 600 captive bred and head started sub-adults into three protected areas.
Use of artificial retreats has been successful in inducing these iguanas to establish initial territories at the
location of their release. Maturation and breeding in the wild has now been confirmed in all three areas.

Monitoring iguana population trends in these areas presents difficulties because the natural history and
habitat of this species violate key assumptions for some standard techniques for determining population
demographics, population density and/or population size. Distance sampling of the iguanas themselves,
and mark-recapture techniques can not be validly applied on this species in this setting, even though all
the released iguanas are uniquely marked. Two area sampling techniques and one distance sampling
technique were trialed to determine which was the most cost-effective for ongoing monitoring of
population density in the release areas.




                                                                                                             94
Distance sampling of retreats occupied territorially by individual iguanas, has proved the most cost-
effective technique. The retreats are identified incrementally over 18 survey days of replicated line
transect inspections, by which time discovery of new iguanas resident within detection range of the
transects drops to zero. Non-territorial iguanas observed moving within the survey area are added to the
resident count. In 2010 this technique enabled 81% area coverage throughout the 6-hectare release area
in the Salina Reserve, with a team of eight trained volunteers over three weeks. Although still extremely
effort intensive, this technique yields a sufficiently precise estimate to be suitable for monitoring
population dispersal and demographic change, and so to inform adaptive conservation management.



Bury, Bruce (US Geological Survey);

Effects of forest management practices on the herpetofauna of northwestern USA: Past, present,
future.

There is a legacy of extensive loss (>80%) and fragmentation of forests from past logging in the Pacific
Northwest. More recent management practices aim for smaller block sizes and more protection for
sensitive habitats, such as headwaters. Current and future projections call for operations that reduce fuel
loads yet maintain high timber production levels. The rotation time of harvest has become less over time
(from ca. 80 to 40 yr intervals), so major change is fairly frequent. These practices impact wildlife habitats
with removal of large amounts of forest-floor cover and increased temperatures. Although Woodland
salamanders (Plethodon) are reduced in logged areas, most other terrestrial herpetofauna appear
somewhat resilient to timber harvest. In contrast, stream amphibians in older stands can be >3 times
more numerous than in adjacent clearcuts. Buffer zones occur along streams with fishes but may not be
present along headwaters. Disrupted headwaters reduce presence and numbers of stream amphibians,
especially Tailed frogs (Ascaphus truei) and Torrent salamanders (Rhyacotriton) that may not fully
recover >4 decades post-harvest. Giant salamanders (Dicamptodon) are more common and appear to
recover more rapidly than the other forms. Laboratory experiments show that these stream amphibians
are among the most sensitive of any amphibian to elevated water temperatures (Critical Thermal Maxima
of 27-29° C). Siltation also appears to reduce populations. Despite inherent variance in populations based
on habitat preferences, timber harvest remains the primary threat to persistence of stream amphibians in
the Pacific Northwest. This issue will only be exacerbated with projected effects from global climate
change and more fragmentation of habitat. Thus, we need (1) interagency teams dedicated to
understanding how timber harvest, fuels reductions and climate change will affect biota, and (2) efforts
that will ensure connectivity of suitable habitats across western forests into the future.



Bury, Gwendolynn W (Oregon State University);

Southern Torrent Salamanders suitable range, response to climate

In this study, I project the climactic envelope for a sensitive headwater stream indicator species for the
2050s and 2080s for six climate scenarios. Headwater ecosystems in the Pacific Northwest are already
challenged by human alterations and these changes are likely to be exacerbated by climate change.
Southern Torrent Salamanders (Rhyacotriton variegates) are highly sensitive indicators of stream
disturbance. These small, endemic salamanders require cold waters. Further, they do not tolerate water
loss, which restricts their dispersal in response to rapidly changing climate. I modeled the habitat
suitability (envelope) for R. variegatus in northern California for 6 climate scenarios, for the decades of
the 2050s and 2080s. I employed a range of climate variables to summarize the habitat requirements of



                                                                                                           95
R. variegatus, including seasonality, summer maximum temperature, and annual temperature variation. I
used the program MaxEnt and a GIS to quantify the loss and movement of suitable habitat for R.
variegatus. I investigated the percentage of habitat classed as best, moderately suitable, moderately
unsuitable, and unsuitable. I also quantified the classification of habitat at the 371 sites used to construct
the model. The 6 scenarios modeled reveal a variety in amount of habitat loss, though all tested had more
than 50% of suitable habitat lost by the 2080s. The most extreme future climate scenario indicated that
none of the area studied would be suitable for R. variegatus by the 2080s. At the known sites for R.
variegatus, 97% of sites are classed as best in the current analysis, while most mild future projection
shows only 21% of sites remaining classed as best by the 2080s. This modeling exercise shows that the
suitable habitat for a headwater stream indicator is projected to decline rapidly in the next century. These
results indicate that the health of headwaters in Northern California should be a concern.



Buser, Thaddaeus (University of Alaska Fairbanks); Campbell, Matthew; Nichols, Courtney; Lopez,
Andres (University of Alaska Fairbanks, Canada)

Comparisons of variability in rate and type of change between genes and lineages within
Euteleosti

We examined patterns of molecular evolution from the partial sequences of four protein-coding nuclear
genes, VCPIP (850bp), SVEP1 (950bp), TBR1 (750bp), and ptchd1 (780bp), across a broad range of
euteleost fishes. Our goals were to quantify variability in the rates of change and type (i.e. synonymous
vs. non-synonymous) of change between genes and between fish lineages within Euteleosti. Genomic
DNA from preserved tissue samples was extracted and target loci were amplified using Polymerase
Chain Reaction (PCR). Amplicons were then sequenced to create a sequence library for each of the four
genes. Phylogenetic hypotheses were generated from the combined dataset and were used to examine
the mode and rate of evolution for each gene and subsets of the data (i.e., silent sites, different codon
positions, etc.). In addition, by comparing the gene trees supported by different loci and the various
inferred mutations observed in the gene sequences, we were able to identify changes in the rate and
mode of molecular evolution between the target genes and different groups of euteleost fishes. The
results of this study will add to our growing knowledge of molecular evolution in fishes and provide
excellent starting points for future studies of evolution of function in the genes examined and of the extent
of phenotypic and genetic diversity in vertebrates.



Buser, Thaddaeus (University of Alaska Fairbanks);

Physiological color change and cyrpsis in marine sculpins

The use of crypsis in sculpins (Pisces; Cottidae) is well documented. They, like many benthic, lie-in-wait
predators, exhibit a variety of physiological (i.e. disruptive coloration, matching coloration, dorsally-
compressed bodies, elaborate cirri, etc.) and behavioral (i.e. quiescence) traits that presumably aid in
crypsis. The ability to actively change color through the movement of pigment granules within a
chromatophore (physiological color change) has been described and quantified in the freshwater species,
the coastrange sculpin (Cottus aleauticus) and slimy sculpin (C. cognatus), however, despite substantial
anecdotal evidence suggesting their ability to do so, there has been virtually no description of the ability of
marine sculpins to exhibit physiological color change. To investigate the use of physiological color
change in marine sculpins, members of the genera, Artedius, Oligocottus, Clinocottus, Enophrys, and
Myoxocephalus were collected from wild populations in Kachemak Bay, Alaska and exposed to a variety



                                                                                                            96
of experimentally manipulated background colors. The degree of color change was measured using
Photoshop CS3 (Adobe Systems Inc., San Jose, CA, USA) from digital images taken throughout the
trials. The results of this pilot study will inform the development of further investigations into the coloration
abilities of marine sculpins.



Butler, Margi (University of Otago); Berger, Lee (James Cook University, Townsville, Canada); Poulter,
Russell (University of Otago, Canada)

Genetics and genomics of Australasian isolates of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis, a fungal
pathogen of amphibians

Many amphibian species are threatened with extinction. Together with habitat depletion, amphibians are
susceptible to an infectious disease caused by the pathogenic fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis .
This recently emerged pathogen has driven frog species to extinction in North, Central and South
America and Australia. We have isolated this chytrid from two frog species in New Zealand.

The origin of the pandemic is unclear. The complete sequences of strains JEL423 (Panama) and JAM081
(California) are publicly available. The assembled data show that the fungus is diploid; a large number of
heterozygous sites can be detected by analysis of the trace data from these sequence projects. The
major difference between strains is the loss of heterozygosity caused by mitotic recombination.
Preliminary analysis of selected regions of the New Zealand strains and other isolates demonstrates that
this recombination is occurring at a high frequency. Recombination gives rise to patterns of homozygosity
that vary among strains and these patterns can be used in epidemiological studies. The most effective
way of detecting these recombination events is high-throughput genome sequencing, We have performed
such analysis on a number of strains from New Zealand and Australia. Using this sequence data, we
have designed PCR protocols to detect phylogenetic signals in the recombination patterns.

Using this system we have begun the analysis of the phylogeny and epidemiology of the chytrid outbreak
in Australasia. We have established that the New Zealand strains are a clade and that the New Zealand
epidemic was initiated from Australia, probably Queensland. We have been able to trace the relationships
of chytrids from the eastern states of Australia. We can draw some conclusions as to the source of the
Australian epidemic.



Cain, Patrick (Indiana State University); Gardner, Brittani (Indiana State University, Canada); Thaker,
Maria (Indian Institute of Science, Canada); Hews, Diana (Indiana State University, Canada)

Fluctuating asymmetry in visual signals of male Sceloporus undulatus lizards

 Fluctuating asymmetries (FA) are small perturbations from perfect bilateral symmetry in morphological
traits and result from suboptimal conditions for development. The degree of FA may reflect the resistance
of a geneotype to developmental perturbation, and hence may be used by receivers as a measure of
―quality‖. Other measures, such as body mass residuals, also may be used in opponent assessment. We
asked whether FA in male-typical color patches differed between adults from a disturbed and a non-
disturbed site. We also asked whether body mass residuals, potentially a more ―short-term‖ measure of
quality, differed between sites. We calculated FA in the area of three color-signaling patches (abdominal
blue, abdominal black, throat blue) in male Sceloporus undulatus from a logged (n = 12 males) and an
unlogged (n = 30) site. The patch area of the left and right sides for each trait was calculated from digital
images using ImageJ software. Following methods of Palmer & Strobeck (2003), we found significant FA



                                                                                                              97
for all three traits. Trait FA did not differ significantly between the two sites, for any trait. Body mass
residuals did differ significantly, with more negative residuals on the logged site (mean = - 0.269)
compared to the unlogged site (mean = 0.108). We also asked if residual patch size (residuals from
regression of average patch size onto snout-vent length) could convey information about relative body
mass. Residual patch size was significantly and positively correlated with residual body mass, for
abdominal blue patches only; larger males had relatively larger blue patches. Although FA did not differ
between the two sites, stress effects in the disturbed site may be delayed and individuals could exhibit
higher FA in future generations. Further, the exact timing of the disturbance is unknown, as were the ages
of the adults measured. Body mass residuals differed between logged and unlogged sites, consistent with
stress affecting trait expression at the disturbed site. Because no site effect was detected for the ―longer-
term‖ quality measure (FA) but was for the ―shorter-term‖ quality measure (body mass residuals), the
disturbance may have been relatively recent. We detected significant FA in the three traits, hence future
work should determine if conspecific receivers assess FA in patch size. Similarly, whether conspecifics
use body mass-residuals when assessing opponents should be determined.



Cairns, Nicholas (University of Ottawa/Carleton University); Stoot, Lauren (University of Ottawa/Carleton
University, Ottawa, ON, Canada); Cooke, Steven (Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada); Blouin-
Demers, Gabriel (University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada)

Reduction of turtle bycatch by means of gear modification in a small-scale inland commercial
fishery

Nicholas A. Cairns1,2*, Lauren J. Stoot1,2, Steven J. Cooke1 and Gabriel Blouin-Demers2 1Fish Ecology
and Conservation Physiology Laboratory, Department of Biology, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON
2Herpetology Laboratory, Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON While targeting
commercially important species using imperfectly selective gear, fishers may capture a number of bycatch
species whose ecologies overlap. Modification of fishing gear to improve selectivity is a common method
used to mitigate the capture of bycatch. Bycatch reduction devices (BRDs) rely on differences in form
(e.g., size or shape) or behaviour between target and bycatch species to avoid trapping non-target
animals. In eastern Ontario there is a small-scale fyke-net fishery, which operates in lakes and large
rivers. This fishery primarily targets sunfish (Lepomis spp.) and bullheads (Ameiurus spp.). These fyke-
nets lack selectivity and along with target species, capture a variety of bycatch species including
gamefish, mammals, and turtles. Turtles are vulnerable to drowning if denied access to atmospheric
oxygen. At the population level, the loss of adults is particularly damaging as their life history features
naturally high adult survivorship and delayed sexual maturity. Of those turtles that have ecologies that put
them at regular risk of capture by fyke-nets, 3 of the 4 have some level of risk status assigned by the
Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. Improving gear selectivity by BRD
modifications is a possible method of reducing turtle bycatch in freshwater fisheries. The primary objective
of this presentation is to describe a series of studies where we design, refine and test the potential of
broadly effective BRDs added to commercially used fyke-nets. This project takes into account the variety
in local turtle and fish communities as well as water conditions potentially encountered by commercial
fishers in eastern Ontario. The final design focuses on maintaining the trap‘s effectiveness in collecting
target fish species and the overall ease of use for fishers.




                                                                                                          98
Calatayud, Natalie (Mississippi State University); Bullock, Lindsay (Mississippi State University, MSU,
Canada); Langhorne, Cecilia (Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS, United States);
Rowlison, Trish (Mississippi State University, MSU, Canada); Kouba, Andy; Carrie, Vance (Memphis Zoo,
Memphis, TN, United States); Scott, Willard (Mississippi State University, MSU, United States)

Egg jelly removal with cysteine does not inhibit tadpole development in the Fowler Toad (Bufo
fowleri)

The major impediments to the cryopreservation of amphibian eggs are size, yolk content, the presence of
a thick highly viscous coat (egg jelly), and the susceptibility to toxic shock brought on by exposure to
cryoprotectants. Egg jelly can be removed by incubation in varying percentages of cysteine. However,
there is limited information on the long term effects of jelly removal on embryo development and survival
prior to cryostorage. In this study, we examined the effects of jelly removal using three different
treatments of 1, 2 or 3% cysteine on whole embryo development and metamorphosis. Ovulated eggs (n=
11,584; females n=3) were collected following hormone stimulation with 500 IU human chorionic
gonadotropin and 15 μg of luteinizing hormone and subsequently fertilized in vitro with freshly collected
spermic urine. Fertilized eggs were allowed to develop to the two and four cell stage before initial
observation. Embryos were then subjected to three different cysteine concentrations, rinsed thoroughly in
de-chlorinated tap water (controls retained jelly) and embryonic development monitored. Results indicate
that there was no significant difference between 1, 2 or 3% on the percentage embryo development at 5
distinct stages: 2-4 cell (p>0.405), mid-gastrula (p>0.405), muscular response (p>0.632), heartbeat
(p>0.613) and operculum development (p>0.391) and throughout tadpole development (p>0.9084)
compared to controls. These results indicate that de-jellying embryos with cysteine will not adversely
affect their development thereby moving closer to a cryopreservation protocol by removing the first barrier
to penetration of cryoprotectant into the intra-cellular space of the blastomeres. Furthermore, the effects
of incubating three different cryoprotectant combinations were tested (DMSO + glycerol, DMSO +
ethylene glycol and ethylene glycol + glycerol; each treatment at 0.5 molar concentration) for 5, 10 and 20
minutes on control versus cysteine treated de-jellied embryos. Results to date indicate that the presence
of egg jelly does not provide extra protection to the embryo during exposure to cryoprotectant at room
temperature; however, more studies are required to evaluate which cryoprotectant provides de-jellied
embryos with the best protection against intracellular ice damage during freezing with the least toxicity.
This study is a vital first step in the creation of an amphibian embryo cryobank for the conservation of
critically endangered anuran species.



Caldwell, Michael (University of Alberta); Palci, Alessandro (University of Alberta, Canada); Nydam,
Randall (Midwestern University, Canada)

The key role of fossils (1869-2012) to our understanding of snake origins and evolution

The origin of snakes from within squamate reptiles is an excellent example of a major evolutionary
transition.   Investigating the origins of a major lineage, such as snakes, is problematic for the simple
reason that the processes of macrevolutionary change produce major morphological differences between
the studied lineage and its closest relative or sister clade. Snakes possess a number of squamate
synapomorphies that strongly support their inclusion, and thus origin, within Squamata. However, snakes
are also anatomically very distinct from lizards, and within their own lineage have evolved a number of
specialized/ autapomorphic anatomies; this degree of distinctiveness and specialization makes it difficult
to interpret characters and hypothesize character states for use in subsequent phylogenetic analysis. In
the absence of robust phylogenetic hypotheses the induction of origins scenarios is even more
problematic. Despite the inherent difficulties of studying the evolutionary transitions leading to the origins



                                                                                                           99
of a major vertebrate lineage, there has been a resurgence of interest on the problem of snake phylogeny
and origins driven almost completely by the discovery and description of new fossil snakes with
hindlimbs, and recharacterization of previously known fossil snake taxa. Anatomical features present in a
variety of fossil snakes and lizards have invigorated the debate and are reviewed here alongside new
data obtained from the analysis of the anatomy and molecules of extant snakes and lizards. Recent
hypotheses of snake ingroup and sistergroup relationships, and the origins scenarios they implicitly or
explicitly support, are reviewed and contrasted. A first-level problem concerns the sistergroup relationship
of scolecophidian snakes. Are they a distinct clade of basal snakes, or are they derived snakes nested
within a clade of higher snakes? All other sister-group relationships and origins hypotheses for snakes
are dependent on the answer to this problem.



Calich, Hannah (Dalhousie University); Campana, Steven (Bedford Institute of Oceanography,
Dartmouth, NS, Canada)

Mating scars reveal mate size in blue sharks (Prionace glauca)

Blue sharks ( Prionace glauca ) are the most abundant large shark species in the Atlantic Ocean yet little
is known about their reproductive habits. Male blue sharks engage in precopulatory biting, which
produces mating scars on females. These scars are often observed on sexually immature females. The
objective of this study was to determine the size and maturity status of male sharks attempting to mate
with immature females. Using data collected from sharks caught at annual Nova Scotia shark fishing
tournaments between 1993 and 2011, I found a significant curvilinear relationship between male shark
fork length and jaw gape. By using the mating scar diameter as the independent variable, I was able to
estimate the fork length and infer the sexual maturity of the male sharks that produced the mating scars.
Results indicate that mature males with a mean fork length of 218 cm ± 24 cm were attempting to mate
with sexually immature females However, there was no significant relationship between the estimated
size of the male and that of the female with which it was trying to mate, indicating that male blue sharks
do not have a size preference for mating. Based on the female fork lengths I suggest that the females
should be classified as subadult instead of immature, making it possible that these females were capable
of sperm storage and possibly self-fertilization.



Caligari, Patricia (Department of Biology - University of Puerto Rico - Rio Piedras Campus); Burrowes,
Patricia (Department of Biology - University of Puerto Rico - Rio Piedras Campus, Canada)

Wet season geographic assessment of the response of three different endemic Puerto Rican
anurans to the pathogenic fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd)

Chytridiomycosis is a lethal infectious disease caused by the pathogenic chytrid fungus
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), which is responsible for the extinction of many amphibians
worldwide. In Puerto Rico three species of Eleutherodactylus disappeared potentially due to this
pathogen, and many others are at risk. A synergistic effect between Bd and climate was shown for two
species at El Yunque, but this relationship has not been tested in other species or forests. The purpose of
this study is to evaluate the status of Bd in three endemic species, Eleutherodactylus wightmanae,
Eleutherodactylus coqui, and Leptodactylus albilabris , which differ in conservation status, ecology and
life history, in three highland forests across the island. We collected 248 tissue samples from adults and
juveniles during the 2011 wet-season (August-November). Total DNA was extracted from frog skin and
Bd was detected by a dedicated qPCR assay. We compared Bd infection prevalence and intensity



                                                                                                        100
among forests, species and developmental age. There was little variation in prevalence of infection and it
was not associated with forest or specie. However, we found patterns of Bd infection intensity across
forests that may be explained by geographic variation in climatic conditions like rainfall and temperature.
Results revealed the presence of very high loads of Bd (>10,000 zoospores) in some individuals in all
species, but especially in Eleutherodactylus wightmanae which is a threatened species. With respect to
ontogeny, we found that adults of Leptodactylus albilabris, has higher levels of infection compared to
tadpoles only at El Yunque. Results from this study will enhance our understanding of the mechanisms of
Bd under enzootic conditions.



Camacho, Agustín (University of São Paulo); Grizante, Mariana (University of São Paulo, Campus
Riberão Preto, Canada); Tiemi, Adriana (University of São Paulo, Canada); Pavão, Rodrigo (Federal
University of Natal, Canada); F/Fonseca Pinto, Ana Carol; Recoder, Renato; Navas, Carlos; Rodrigues,
Miguel (University of São Paulo, Canada); Kohlsdorf, Tiana (University of São Paulo, Campus Riberão
Preto, Canada)

Why have Snake-like lizards evolved so multiple times? Comparative data from Gymnopthalmid
lizards point to an answer

The multiplicity of acquisitions of Snake-like body forms among lizards is a mong the most striking
evolutive phenomena in vertebrates. These transformations include changes in important functional
morphological traits, like body elongation and a dramatic reduction in the number of digits. Although these
transformations have received much attention, the lack of functional comparative analyses precludes a
better understanding of why this suite of traits has evolved so many times. Therefore, here we present
comparative data for 10 closely related species of Gymnopthalmid lizards, including syntopic, lacertoid
and fossorial Snake-like forms from the Brazilian Caatingas. For five-to-twelve specimens of each
species, we measured 1) sprint speed and its dependence of a fluid substrate (e.g. with and without
sand) during horizontal and vertical escape, 2) digging depth during an experimental heat shock, 3) ability
to feed on and under the ground, 4) thermal tolerance and preference. We also estimated the relative
abundance of lacertoid and snake-like taxa at 227 sampling plots along 4 study areas at northeastern
Brazil. At these sites, we also measured the daily distribution and dynamics of micro-environmental
temperatures (13420 measures along 27 days), and the distribution of prey availability on and under the
ground in 128 samplings. Snake-like lizards were slower than lacertoid ones during horizontal escape,
even more without sand. However, they were faster during vertical escape (digging). Snake-like lizards
were able to dig deeper in the sand and feed more on buried prey. Contrasting these results with the
empirical models of microhabitat temperature and prey availability in their occurrence areas, these results
indicate that Snake-like lizards are able to access milder climatic conditions and more resources in a
sandy and hot environment. These results were congruent with the lower critical thermal maxima
apparent in some of the fossorial species and the higher population density of fossorial lizards found by
us. However, without a loose substrate like sand, locomotion of fossorial Snake-like lizards got impaired
and their advantages cannot be applied anymore. Therefore, our results suggest that fossorial Snake-like
forms might be adaptive in the presence of hot and sandy environments but unadaptive at others when
they are not present. Environments with these properties have been independently generated at different
continents and thus might have favored the evolution of snake-like body forms in several independent
lineages of lizards.




                                                                                                       101
Camacho, Neftali (Natural History Museum of Los Angeles, County); Pauly, Gregory (Natural History
Museum of Los Angeles County, Canada)

Contributions of a once orphaned museum collection towards understanding changes in reptile
and amphibian diversity in heavily urbanized southern California

The Herpetology Section at the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County, in addition to its
extensive holdings of preserved specimens and skeletons (ca. 181,000), recently acquired 1,732
preserved specimens of reptiles and amphibians previously housed at the University of California, Irvine.
These specimens were largely unavailable to the research community because their records had not
been digitized and made available in an easily searchable database. Most of these specimens were
collected between 1953 and 1961 from southern California, in particular the Greater Los Angeles Area.
The human population in this area has grown from approximately 6 million during the period of collection
to nearly 18 million today, making the Greater Los Angeles Area the second largest core-based statistical
area in the United States following the New York Metropolitan Area. Thus, by georeferencing and
digitizing these records, this material now provides an important snapshot of the changing biodiversity of
this heavily urbanized region. These historical records can now be compared to more recent records
such as those obtained through the museum's citizen science project the Lost Lizards of Los Angeles
(LLOLA) which documents lizard observations throughout the area. Other collection highlights include
records for species of current conservation concern such as Thamnophis hammondii and Phrynosoma
blainvillii , and a previously uncatalogued paratype of the San Lorenzo Island Rattlesnake Crotalus ruber
lorenzoensis .



Camak, David (Southeastern Louisiana University); Piller, Kyle (Southeastern Louisiana University,
Hammond, United States)

Assessing the impact of low head dams and life-history on fine scale genetic structure of
Etheostomatine darters

Anthropogenic modifications to aquatic habitats, such as dams, can fragment lotic systems, disrupt fluvial
continuity and modify flow patterns.       Such structures could negatively impact riverine ecology and
potentially act as barriers to gene flow. Although previous studies have examined potential negative
effects of aquatic barriers on population structure and gene flow, most have focused on large species of
fish that are highly vagile and have low habitat specificity. In addition, past studies have shown there is
often a correlation between life history characteristics and gene flow in fish.This study will test the
influence of dams and life-history variation on fine-scale genetic structure of Etheostomatine darters (
Ammocrypta beanii, Etheostoma swainii , and Percina nigrofasciata ) in the Pearl River basin. Individuals
of all three species also were analyzed from three control sites (no dams) in the neighboring Lake
Pontchartrain basin (Tangipahoa River system). A minimum of thirty specimens were sampled from a
total of twelve sites across both basins. Our data suggests that the dams impacted the spatial genetic
structure of each species differently. There was no genetic differentiation among populations of the
Ammocrypta beanii, a main channel, highly vigil species , above and below the two low head dams,
whereas E. swainii and P. nigrofasciata displayed large and moderate amounts of genetic structure,
respectively, across this same area. The data suggests that life-history may play a greater role than the
dams in shaping fine-scale genetic structure for these species. The implications of these results and a
comprehensive summary of this data will be presented.




                                                                                                       102
Camargo, Arley (Department of Biology & Monte L. Bean Museum); Sites, Jr., Jack W. (Brigham Young
University, Provo, UT, United States); Morando, Mariana; Avila, Luciano (CONICET-CENPAT, Puerto
Madryn, Argentina)

Species delimitation with ABC and other coalescent-based methods: a test of accuracy with
simulations and an empirical example with lizards of the Liolaemus darwinii complex (Squamata:
Liolaemidae).

Species delimitation is a major research focus in evolutionary biology because well-supported hypotheses
of species boundaries are a prerequisite for the study of speciation. New species delimitation methods
(SDMs) can accommodate non-monophyletic species and gene tree discordance as a result of
incomplete lineage sorting via the coalescent model, but do not explicitly accommodate gene flow after
divergence. Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) can incorporate gene flow and estimate other
relevant parameters of the speciation process while testing alternative species delimitation hypotheses.
We evaluated the accuracy of BPP, SpeDeSTEM, and ABC for delimiting species using simulated data
and applied these methods to empirical data from lizards of the Liolaemus darwinii complex. Overall,
BPP was the most accurate, ABC showed an intermediate accuracy, and SpeDeSTEM was the least
accurate under most simulated conditions. All three SDMs showed lower accuracy when speciation
occurred despite gene flow, as found in previous studies, but ABC was the method with the smallest
decrease in accuracy. All three SDMs consistently supported the distinctness of southern and northern
lineages within L. darwinii . These SDMs based on genetic data should be complemented with novel
SDMs based on morphological and ecological data to achieve truly integrative and statistically robust
approaches to species discovery.



Camp, Ariel (Brown University); Brainerd, Elizabeth (Brown University, Canada)

Powering suction expansion: Axial muscle strain and pectoral girdle rotation in largemouth bass,
Micropterus salmoides

Suction-feeding fishes rely on an explosive expansion of the mouth cavity to accelerate fluid and prey into
the mouth. Suction expansion can involve over 20 moving bones, but is driven by dorsal expansion, via
neurocranial elevation, and ventral expansion via depression of the lower jaw and hyoid apparatus.
Suction expansion must be fast enough to capture elusive prey and forceful enough to accelerate water
into the mouth, therefore it should require considerable power. The cranial muscles are relatively small
and may not be able to generate sufficient power, but the large axial body muscles, the epaxials (EP) and
hypaxials (HYP), also attach to the feeding apparatus and may generate power for suction expansion.
The rostral EP is already known to power dorsal expansion. Ventral expansion may be powered by the
sternohyoid, which is hypothesized to depress the hyoid apparatus while the HYP stabilizes the pectoral
girdle. Alternatively, the HYP could power ventral expansion by retracting the cleithrum of the pectoral
girdle, which is linked to the hyoid apparatus and lower jaw. We determined the rostrocaudal distribution
of strain in the axial muscles, and the role of the HYP in powering ventral expansion. We measured the
kinematics of the neurocranium and cleithrum during suction feeding in largemouth bass ( Micropterus
salmoides ) using X-ray Reconstruction of Moving Morphology (XROMM). XROMM combines bi-planar x-
ray videography with 3D bone models to reconstruct in vivo , 3D skeletal kinematics. We simultaneously
measured strain in the EP, HYP, and sternohyoid muscles using fluoromicrometry. For this technique,
radio-opaque markers were implanted intramuscularly and tracked using bi-planar x-ray video to measure
changes in muscle length. Strain and kinematics were measured in 3 fish for a total of 25 strikes. HYP
strain magnitudes (mean of 6.3%) were similar to those of the EP. The total distance shortened by the
HYP was statistically significantly greater than that of the sternohyoid muscle (mean of 6.2 mm vs. 0.66



                                                                                                       103
mm, p<0.01). The cleithrum was mobile, and rotated caudoventrally a mean of 9.4°. Both skeletal
kinematics and muscle strain support the role of the HYP in powering ventral expansion. Additionally,
both the EP and HYP showed strain more than halfway down the body, suggesting that these muscles
may generate substantial power during suction feeding.



Campana, Steven (Fisheries and Oceans Canada); Fisk, Aaron (Univ. of Windsor, Windsor, ON,
Canada); Klimley, Peter (University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, United States)

Greenland sharks and their long distance migrations to nowhere

Archival satellite popup tags (n=16) were deployed on Greenland sharks (Somniosus microcephalus) up
to 4.5 m in length, both in the Canadian Arctic and off the eastern coast of Canada. Despite their large
size, most of the sharks were immature at the time of tagging. Tags remained on the sharks for an
average of 6 months before popping off. All tagged sharks travelled a minimum of 150 km, and some as
much as 1500 km, at depths of up to 1200 m. Migration pathways which took the sharks off the
continental shelf, and well off the bottom, beg the question: what the heck are these sharks doing?



Campbell, Earl (USFWS - Pacific Islands Fish and Wildlife Office);

Brown Treesnake Control and Research: Programmatic Lessons Learned Over Twenty Years

Since the mid-1980‘s significant attention has been focused on the introduced brown treesnake ( Boiga
irregularis ) and the negative biodiversity, economic and human health impacts that this species had to
the island of Guam. The potential introduction and establishment of this snake to other sites within and
beyond the Pacific Region is an on-going concern. Current efforts for brown treesnake control on Guam
are relatively labor intensive, utilizing a combination of trapping, toxicants, hand-capture, and detector
dogs to reduce snake abundance locally.          The budget for all brown treesnake control and research
efforts has averaged around $8 million (US) annually in recent years. A critical success is the reduction
of brown tree snakes detected in the State of Hawaii in association with the movement of civilian and
military vehicles or cargo from Guam. This success is directly linked to the implementation of a dedicated
snake interdiction program on Guam operated by United States Department of Agriculture - Wildlife
Services (USDA - WS) in 1994. This program currently employs over 60 individuals and 12 dogs.
Unfortunately, stability of funding for this program has varied over time. Despite uncertainty, program
implementation has been consistent due, in part, to the dedication of specific individuals. The stability of
brown treesnake quarantine programs in the Commonwealth of the Mariana Islands and the State of
Hawaii, both high risk recipient sites, is less consistent. The development of a rapid response program
lead by the United States Geological Survey (USGS) for brown treesnake sightings off Guam is a
success.      Research by the USGS and the USDA - WS - National Wildlife Research Center has led to
the trapping and toxicant techniques currently used.        Development of broader-scale tools that could
lead to broader-scale control or eradication of brown treensnakes has been hampered by a lack of
dedicated, consistent funding for specific research directions. Department of Interior – Office of Insular
Affairs funding for USGS research has been an exception to this pattern and is a factor contributing
research successes by this group. It is important to note that the spatial scale that brown treesnake
control can be conducted is limited, labor intensive and relatively costly. The costs of implementing
control at this scale successfully in quarantine situations are minimal compared to the ecological and
economic impacts that the introduction of this species could have in another site.




                                                                                                        104
Campos, João R C (UNICAMP); Benevides, Saulo S N; Lourenço, Luciana B (UNICAMP, Canada)

Chromosome painting on B chromosome of Physalaemus feioi and cytogenetic study of its
related species

Based on morphological and acoustic parameters, the former species-complex of Physalaemus olfersii
was recently submitted to an extensive taxonomic review resulting in the revalidation of Physalaemus
lateristriga and in the description of Physalaemus feioi and Physalaemus orophilus . Despite the
morphological similarity of these four species, interspecific variation in the occurrence of the nucleolus
organiser regions (NORs) was already reported for P. olfersii and P. feioi . In addition, a supernumerary
chromosome was found in the later. Herein, we described the chromosomes of P . lateristriga and
extended the study of the B chromosome of P. feioi , increasing their sample and using chromosome
painting. The chromosomes of P. lateristriga showed a high level of similarity to those of P. feioi and
P. olfersii . The karyotype of P. lateristriga presented 2n=22, with two large metacentric pairs (1 st and
2 nd ), five medium-sized metacentric (5th and 6th ) and submetacentric pairs (3 rd , 4 th , and 7 th ), and
four small metacentric/submetacentric pair (8th to11th ). Moreover, an Ag-NOR site, coincident with a
conspicuous secondary constriction, was visualised proximally at the long arm of chromosome pair 3 and
in one of the homologues 4. Regarding to P. feioi , we observed an additional Ag-NOR labelling in the
telocentric B of two specimens. A probe generated from 12 entire microdissected B chromosomes only
detected the heterochromatic long arm of this chromosome in mitotic metaphases, suggesting a peculiar
molecular composition of the B chromosomes. Another interesting finding regarding this B chromosome is
the frequency it occurred. In the description of the karyotype of P. feioi , done in 2010, two out of the
three specimens collected from Viçosa, State of Minas Gerais, Brazil, presented B chromosome, while in
our sample, obtained from the same locality during the two following years, only two out of 80 specimens
carried B elements. Moreover, three specimens of P . feioi obtained from a different Brazilian locality
(Simonésia, also State of Minas Gerais) had no supernumerary. Therefore, the presence of B
chromosome seems to be an exclusive characteristic of specimens from Viçosa population and further
studies are still necessary to elucidate about the evolutionary origin of this extra chromosome.

Financial support: Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo – FAPESP (process No.
2010/12600-4)



Canessa, Stefano (ARC Centre of Excellence for Environmental Decisions, School of Botany, University
of Melbourne, Australia); Converse, Sarah J. (Patuxent Wildlife Research Centre, USGS, Canada);
McCarthy, Michael A. (ARC Centre of Excellence for Environmental Decisions, School of Botany,
University of Melbourne, Australia, Canada)

Can life history traits predict captive performance of endangered amphibians? A meta-analysis to
inform decision making in ex-situ conservation programs

Ex-situ conservation is often advocated as the last resort for amphibian species that face high risks of
extinction or threats that cannot be easily resolved by in-situ conservation alone (such as
chytridiomycosis). Captive breeding programs can be complex, as they need to account for demographic
and genetic dynamics, management of captive and wild populations, quarantine and captive husbandry
requirements as well as the eventual release strategy and the establishment of self-sustaining wild
populations. This range of challenges implies several key decision nodes which need to be resolved,
mostly before a program can even start.




                                                                                                        105
Structured decision making, which allows definition of problems and evaluation of alternative actions and
trade-offs, can help in addressing such complexity. When selecting a species for ex-situ conservation,
uncertainty may regard the suitability of the species for captive breeding (for example its survival and
productivity in captivity), as well as the time and costs needed to build sufficient expertise and to achieve
the desired target. If these aspects can be at least in part predicted by available information, for example
life history traits of species, it is possible to use this knowledge to develop quantitative models that aim to
predict possible consequences of given courses of action. In our presentation, we describe a meta-
analysis of several captive breeding programs for amphibians worldwide: using hierarchical modelling, we
assess how life history traits (generation time, longevity, and fecundity) can be used to predict various
measures of performance in captivity (population growth rate, recruitment and survival). This information
can then be used to evaluate how captive breeding programs can assist conservation of the target
species.



Canessa, Stefano (ARC Centre of Excellence for Environmental Decisions, School of Botany, University
of Melbourne, Australia); Martel, An; Pasmans, Frank (Department of Pathology, Bacteriology and Avian
Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Belgium, Canada)

Clarifying the role of chytrid in the decline of the Apennine yellow-bellied toad: designing effective
monitoring programs that account for pathogen detection

Chytridiomycosis is among the hypothesized causes of the decline of the endangered Apennine yellow-
bellied toad Bombina variegata pachypus, an Anuran endemic of peninsular Italy. However, since the first
reports of mortality for the species in 2004, no systematic screening for the disease was undertaken in
any part of its range. In 2011, we tested 86 individuals at eight sites in the northern Italian region of
Liguria to assess prevalence of the pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. We estimated capture
probabilities from mark-recapture data collected between 2010 and 2011, then calculated population size
for five different populations and estimated the probability of not having detected infections of varying
prevalence given the number of individuals tested. The most parsimonious model assumed constant
survival and sex-, time-dependent recapture probabilities. Estimates suggested small population sizes
and variable recapture rates, highlighting the need for accurate monitoring. All chytrid tests returned
negative: we estimated that infections of more than five to ten individuals per population were unlikely to
have been missed.

Using model estimates of recapture rates, we found that collecting samples over multiple surveys
increased the probability of detecting the disease if present, particularly for screening programs outside
the peak period of breeding activity. We used the information obtained in this study to design an
optimized chytrid screening plan for several populations during the 2012 season, also taking into account
possible seasonal variations in pathogen prevalence. Incorporating estimates of individual capture
probabilities in the program design stage ensured we could reach the desired threshold of confidence
about chytrid prevalence, while optimally allocating effort.



Cantwell, Lisa (University of Tennessee Knoxville);

Response of Anolis sagrei to Acoustic Calls from Predatory and Non-predatory Birds

Predation is one of many selective forces driving the evolution of behavioral strategies in prey organisms.
Studies indicate that various vertebrates and invertebrates use sensory cues to detect the presence of




                                                                                                           106
predators and evaluate predation risk. Lizards and birds frequently occupy the same habitats;
consequently, avian predation on lizards has been implicated as an important selective pressure on lizard
behavior. Anoles, most of which are non-vocal species, have highly developed auditory systems with
enhanced directionality and a hearing range that overlaps with the frequency range used by birds to
communicate. However, few studies have been conducted on how lizards respond to auditory cues. The
response of adult male brown anoles to predatory and non-predatory vocalizations and control stimuli
was studied to determine whether they use auditory cues as an indicator of predation risk from birds.
Anole responses (no reaction, eye movement, head tilt, and flight) to treatment stimuli were significantly
different. Less than half of the anoles responded to playbacks of non-predatory (sparrow, cardinal and
finch) stimuli, white noise or silence, whereas three fourths of the anoles responded to playbacks of
kestrel calls and two thirds of the anoles responded to playbacks of hawk calls. In contrast, responses to
predatory thrasher calls were intermediate and not significantly different from responses to non-predator
and control stimuli. This may be because the lizards tested in this study did not develop within the
geographic range of thrashers and therefore may not perceive their calls as threatening. Head tilt was the
most frequent response exhibited to predatory stimuli compared to non-predatory and control stimuli,
suggesting increased vigilance from perceived predation risk. Responses to acoustic cues suggest that
male brown anoles are able to discriminate predatory from non-predatory bird calls. The use of auditory
perception in assessing predation risk in anoles may be as important as visual and chemical cues in
detecting and recognizing predators. Anoles, and lizards in general, may therefore use a multimodal
system to obtain accurate information regarding predation risk to make optimal behavioral decisions
under risky conditions. This study demonstrates that brown anoles, a non-vocal species, are able to
obtain information about predation risk through the use of acoustic cues and that the role of hearing in
these lizards has been underappreciated.



Carazo, Pau (University of Valencia); Noble, Dan; Chandrasoma, Dani; Whiting, Martin (Macquarie
University, Canada)

Smart personalities: sexual differences in spatial learning ability and in associated personality
traits in the water skink (Eulamprus quoyii)

Cognitive mechanisms are indispensable tools for survival, and the proximal scaffold of adaptive
behaviour. Not surprisingly, one of the most salient aspects of cognition is the extraordinary individual
variability in cognitive performance that can be observed in almost every animal species studied to date.
And yet, we currently struggle to understand how and why these intraspecific individual differences arise
and are maintained by natural and sexual selection. In this study, we use the water skink ( Eulamprus
quoyii ) as a model to examine sex and personality as factors potentially underlying the evolution of
individual variability in spatial learning, a key dimension of lizard cognition. In most lizards (including the
water skink) males appear to face greater spatial cognitive demands than females in their evolutionary
struggle for reproductive success (e.g. due to sexual differences in territorial behaviour). However, the
study of sexual differences in cognitive performance has been neglected in reptiles. Our first aim in this
study was hence to examine whether males performed better than females in a functional spatial learning
task. We show that male lizards were significantly better learners than females, suggesting that sexual
selection is likely to play an important role in the evolution of spatial cognition in this lizard species. Our
second aim was to explore the possibility that individual cognitive differences may be associated with
particular personality traits. We show that spatial learning is indeed associated with personality traits,
such as exploratory behaviour in a novel environment and boldness after an anti-predatory attack, which
strongly suggests the existence of ‗cognition-personality syndromes‘ in lizards. More importantly, we show
that such syndromes take a different form in males and females. We discuss these findings in the



                                                                                                           107
reproductive context of E. quoyii , and examine the potential role of sexual selection and behavioural
syndromes in the evolution of spatial cognition in this species, and in reptiles at large.



Cardwell, Mike (California State University Sacramento);

The effect of radio-telemetry on the growth of Northern Mohave Rattlesnakes (Crotalus s.
scutulatus)

Radio transmitters were surgically implanted in the peritoneal cavities of Northern Mohave rattlesnakes,
Crotalus s. scutulatus , during a forty-month field study in southern California. Transmitter mass was < 5%
of body mass and transmitters were replaced annually. Precise snout-vent length (SVL) measurements
under general anesthesia were made annually. Corresponding SVL measurements were made upon
chance encounters with non-telemetered conspecifics during the study. This analysis compares the rate
of growth between the telemetered group ( n = 13) and the non-telemetered group ( n = 16), during
mean growth periods measuring 744 d (± 65.8 SE) and 403 d (± 60.3 SE), respectively. The non-
telemetered group grew at a greater mean rate (0.0639 mm/d ± 0.020 SE) than the telemetered group
(0.0212 mm/d ± 0.006 SE), however, analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) indicates that the largest effect
was produced by the difference in mean initial SVLs ( F 1,25 = 20.836, p < 0.001, partial eta 2 =
0.455), while the effect of transmitter status was small and insignificant ( F 1,25 = 0.929, p = 0.344,
partial eta 2 =0.036). Evidence that the telemetered snakes may have become acclimated to the
frequent presence of a human investigator will also be discussed. While limited by a small sample size,
these data suggest that intraperitoneal implantation of small transmitters and resulting frequent presence
of a human may not significantly impede the growth of wild rattlesnakes. Especially if substantiated by
additional data, this finding supports the hypothesis that behavior observed during similar radiotelemetry
studies is indicative of the behavior of the larger non-telemetered population.



Carfagno, Gerardo (Gettysburg College); Fong, Peter (Gettysburg College, Canada)

Growth inhibition of tadpoles exposed to sertraline in a competitive environment

Sertraline is a widely prescribed pharmaceutical sometimes marketed as the drug, Zoloft. This drug
belongs to the class of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) suspected of causing
developmental abnormalities in some organisms at environmentally low concentrations. These drugs
have been increasingly detected in surface water, but the risks associated with environmental exposure
to pharmaceuticals have not been well documented. Our study addresses the need for a better
understanding of the effects of pharmaceutical pollutants on tadpoles, an ideal model and indicator
species. Specifically, we test the effects of sertraline exposure on the behavior and development of Wood
Frog (Rana sylvatica) larvae. Tadpoles hatched from wild-collected egg masses were exposed through
metamorphosis to concentrations of 0, 0.1, 1.0 or 10.0 µg/L of sertraline. We tracked tadpole
development using image analysis to estimate mass, and we also recorded actual froglet mass at the
conclusion of the study. Time to metamorphosis did not differ between treatments. Also, no obvious
changes were observed in the behavior of tadpoles exposed to the drug. We did find evidence for slower
growth in tadpoles exposed to the drug and raised among conspecifics. However, this effect was not
detected when the study was replicated with tadpoles raised individually. This may indicate that the drug
works synergistically with competitive interactions. Although we see some potentially harmful effects from
low levels of these drugs, more study is needed to determine the true impacts on natural communities.




                                                                                                       108
Carlisle, Aaron (Stanford University); Goldman, Kenneth (Alaska Department of Fish and Game,
Canada); Bigman, Jennifer (Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, Canada); Madigan, Daniel; Litvin, Steven
(Stanford University, Canada); Kline, Thomas (Prince William Sound Science Center, Canada); Block,
Barbara (Stanford University, Canada)

Investigating Ontogenetic Changes in Habitat Use in Salmon Sharks Using Stable Isotope
Analysis

Salmon sharks ( Lamna ditropis ) are wide-ranging apex predators in the North Pacific. As upper trophic
level predators, they likely play an important role in structuring North Pacific marine foodwebs, yet virtually
nothing is known about trophic ecology and habitat use of young salmon sharks or ontogenetic shifts in
their diet and habitat use. We used stable isotope analysis (SIA) of salmon shark vertebrae to elucidate
ontogenetic changes in habitat use and trophic ecology. The tissue in each annulus of a salmon shark‘s
vertebra provides an isotopic record that reflects an integrated record of their movements and foraging
over a year of their life. By serially sampling vertebral annuli for stable isotope ratios of carbon ( 13 C/ 12
C) and nitrogen ( 15 N/ 14 N) we reconstructed the general migratory history of individual sharks. We
utilize an isoscape of the major biogeographic provinces of the eastern North Pacific in conjunction with a
Bayesian mixing model to estimate annual patterns of use among ecoregions. There was a clear
ontogenetic shift in habitat where sharks primarily used offshore habitats during their juvenile years, with
increasing use of productive neritic habitats with age. Electronic tagging data was used to inform SIA
results by characterizing annual patterns of ecoregion residence of larger sharks. Integrating electronic
tag and stable isotope data provides a unique and powerful way to study the ecology and life history of
these important and difficult to study predators.



Carlson, Amy (University of New England); Sulikowski, James (University of New England, Canada)

Horizontal and Vertical Movement Patterns of Archival Satellite Tagged Spiny Dogfish (Squalus
acanthias) in the Northwestern Atlantic

Spiny dogfish (Squalus acanthias) are assumed to be a highly migratory species, making habitual north-
south migrations throughout their Northwestern Atlantic U.S range. Because spiny dogfish are also
assumed to be a benthic species, their stock structure is estimated through bottom trawl surveys. Recent
anomalies in population trends, including a recent four-fold increase in spawning stock biomass, suggest
alternative movement behaviors may exist for this species. To obtain a better understanding of the
horizontal and vertical movement dynamics of this species, Microwave Telemetry Pop-off Satellite
Archival X-Tags have been attached to spiny dogfish at the northern extent of their U.S. geographic
range. Ten adult male and thirteen adult female spiny dogfish fixed with these satellite tags were
deployed in the Gulf of Maine, off the coast of Portland, Maine throughout 2007-2010. Twenty-two of the
twenty-three tags have released and transmitted data. Of these twenty-three tags, three have been
physically recovered, twenty-two have been filtered and modeled, and one failed to transmit. Approximate
geolocations and vertical movements within the water column were derived from archival light level,
pressure, and temperature records and has been filtered and fitted with bathymetric data using
derivations of the kftrack modeling package in R and Matlab. Reconstructed tracks ranging in lengths
from 2 to 12 months suggest that the seasonal migration patterns appear to be more regional (between
the Gulf of Maine and New Jersey) and local (between the Gulf of Maine and Cape Cod) in nature.
Kernel utilization distribution models also suggest strong core home ranges for these tagged individuals.
In addition, vertical movements show distinct diel patterns with deepest recorded depths ranging from 70



                                                                                                           109
to over 600 meters. Vertical preferences also suggest this species may not utilize the benthos as much as
implied. Additionally, correlations to abiotic factors and overall sample-wide patterns suggest differences
in movement patterns from older published migration paradigms. Based on this preliminary data, it
appears that spiny dogfish populations estimated from NEFSC bottom trawl surveys may not be as
indicative as once thought due to these new movement findings.



Carlson, John (NOAA NMFS Panama City Laboratory); Smith, Kelcee (National Marine Fisheries
Service, Panama City, United States); Norton, Shelley (National Marine Fisheries Service, Saint
Petersburg, United States); Simpfendorfer, Colin (James Cook University, Townsville, Q, Australia)

Extinction risk and viability of sawfish populations

Sawfish (Family Pristidae) populations have been declining worldwide and currently are among the most
endangered marine fishes. Data from multiple sources indicates many populations have undergone
significant population declines and severe fragmentation. As such, the International Union for the
Conservation of Nature (IUCN) lists all species of sawfish as ―Critically Endangered‖ on the IUCN Red
List and the United States lists the US distinct population of smalltooth sawfish and globally the largetooth
sawfish as Endangered under the Endangered Species Act. Despite these listings, there is little
investigation on the existing populations in terms of their current risk of extinction, and potential viability
and recovery. Given the lack of data for many populations, we determined the probability that local scale
extinction have occurred using a time series of incidental observations, such as surveys, museum
collections and records from the public. For existing populations, we applied a sensitivity analyses to
suggest minimum probability levels for declaring a species to be in danger of local extinction. For all
species examined, the highest probability of localized extinction occurred in West Africa and Central
America with the lowest probability determined for Australia and the United States. Recognizing the
model does not take into account important biological information (e.g. population increase rates), we
determined quasi-extinction risks in a population viability model and found all populations had the
potential to increase given fishing mortalities below 20%.



Carranza, Salvador (Institute of Evolutionary Biology (CSIC-UPF));

Biogeography and evolution of North African reptiles and amphibians: dating the origin of the
Sahara Desert

Deserts carry an aura of antiquity, but reconstruction of their past histories is not easy. This is largely
because there may be little direct evidence of their previous presence. Erosion is generally dominant, with
few sites favoring the orderly accumulation of stratified deposits, so that the essential evidence tends to
be scanty, scattered and difficult to date and correlate. Because of this paucity of evidence, relatively
recent dates are often given for the onset of really dry conditions, even though the deserts concerned
have distinctive endemic plants and animals that suggest at least parts of them are really quite old. The
Sahara, the main arid region in North Africa, is by far the biggest desert in the world, covering some nine
million square kilometers, and extending 5500 km across North Africa from the Atlantic Ocean to the Red
Sea. The Sahara has often been thought to have been originated after the Pliocene, at least in its present
very arid form. Various large-scale phenomena in the late Tertiary and Pleistocene, such as the uplift of
the Tibetan plateau, increase of ice caps and cooling of the oceans, are likely to have caused desiccation
of the areas concerned; so it was thought probable that a really high level of aridity only became
established in North Africa 2-3 My ago. Recently, fossil sand dunes around 7 my old have been found in



                                                                                                           110
northern Chad, suggesting that the Sahara Desert may be much older than was previously thought.
However, this hypothesis has been heavily criticized and a younger origin for the Sahara Desert has been
suggested. In spite of the harsh environment, several reptile groups have colonized the Sahara Desert
and some of them show morphological and physiological adaptations that allow them to survive under
arid and hyper-arid conditions. On the other hand, the Sahara Desert has acted as a vicariant agent for
some other groups. In this talk, I will use robust phylogenies for some of these North African reptile and
amphibian groups in order to understand how the Sahara Desert has acquired its endemic faunas and to
try to infer the age of the largest desert in the world. The molecular phylogenies recovered will also be
used to infer the biogeography and evolution of the main groups concerned.



Carranza, Salvador (Institute of Evolutionary Biology (CSIC-UPF));

Origin and diversification of the geckos of the Socotra Archipelago

Continental islands are very important hotspots of biodiversity and provide premier settings for studying
the evolutionary and ecological processes that have resulted in such unique biotas. The Socotra
Archipelago, in the western Indian Ocean, is a case example of an ancient continental fragment, a block
of Precambrian Gondwanaland with a long biogeographic history. The Archipelago comprises four
islands: Socotra, Darsa, Samha and Abd Al Kuri and is located in the Arabian Sea, situated 380 km
southeast from the coast of Yemen and about 100 km east from the Horn of Africa (Somalia). Often
referred to as the ―Galapagos of the Indian Ocean‖, it was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Natural
site in 2008 as a result of its high level of endemicity at both specific and generic levels. From an
evolutionary point of view, the archipelago is of particular significance because of its ecological diversity
and long biogeographic history and thus represents a unique model to unravel the origin and speciation
process in ancient continental fragments and to understand how different biogeographic, evolutionary and
ecological factors have interplayed in the assemblage of Socotra‘s unique biota. The integration of
phylogenetic and phylogeographic analyses at multiple loci and at various evolutionary time scales
allowed us to reconstruct the evolutionary history of the 18 species of endemic geckos of the Socotra
Archipelago of the genera Hemidactylus, Pristurus and Haemodracon, giving an approximate time frame
to the origin and in situ diversification in these three groups. The study revealed the existence of complex
patterns of within-island diversification and high levels of intra-species genetic divergence suggesting that
the interplay of both historical and ecological factors seems to have a role in the speciation process.
Interestingly, the case of Hemidactylus forbesi and Hemidactuylus oxyrhinus, which inhabit the island of
Abd al Kuri with an area of 133 km2, may represent one of the most extreme cases of intra-island
speciation in reptiles ever reported.




                                                                                                         111
Carretero, Miguel A. (CIBIO, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos,
Universidade do Porto); García-Muñoz, Enrique; Kaliontzopoulou, Antigoni (CIBIO, Centro de
Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, Universidade do Porto, Vairão, Portugal);
Gomes, Verónica (CIBIO, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos,
Universidade do Porto, Vairão, Canada); Carneiro, Diana; Zagar, Anamarija (CIBIO, Centro de
Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, Universidade do Porto, Vairão, Portugal); Sillero,
Neftalí (Centro de Investigação em Ciências Geo-Espaciais (CICGE), Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal)

Evolutionary ecophysiology of lacertid lizards. Do preferred temperatures and water loss rates
trade-off in Podarcis?

Studies on thermal ecology undoubtedly dominate the research on lizard ecophysiology. This is
especially true for the Old World family Lacertidae. Within this group, preferred body temperatures (Tp)
are well known to correlate with several physiological optima but also to carry substantial phylogenetic
inertia. In contrast, much less is known on their water ecology traits, although some studies in other
families suggest that body temperature and evaporative water loss (Wl) may trade-off. Both aspects,
together with their evolutionary trajectories, needed to be investigated to wholly understand the
phenotypic evolution and biogeography of these lizards. By integrating thermal and water ecology data,
mechanistic models of potential distribution could be elaborated for current species and their ancestors.
Here, we analyse both ecophysiological traits in the lacertids of the genus Podarcis, a taxonomically
complex group whose phylogenetic relations and divergence times have been recently assessed. For a
total of 15 lineages + 3 outgroups, mostly from Iberian Peninsula and North Africa, two laboratory tests
were performed: 1) the classic Tp experiment using a photothermal gradient during 10 time intervals; and
2) the determination of Wl rates in sealed chambers during 12 hours. Significant interspecific differences
in mean values and temporal patterns were detected either for thermal or for hydric parameters even
between sympatric species. Uncorrected results for thermal and hydric traits were inversely related
suggesting a trade-off between Tp and Wl. However, phylogenetically distant groups deviated from the
common trend advising for phylogenetic correction. In a phylogenetic context, predominant
ecophysiological shifts dated back to the Miocene-Pliocene rather than more recent geological times. The
importance of these results in terms of current and past ecological modelling and future conservation is
discussed.



Cartamil, Daniel (Scripps Institution of Oceanography); Kohin, Suzanne (Southwest Fisheries Science
Center, Canada); Sosa-Nishizaki, Oscar; Santana, Omar; Olvera, Miguel (CICESE, Canada); Graham,
Jeffrey (Scripps Institution of Oceanography, Canada)

Satellite tagging of juvenile thresher sharks (Alopias vulpinus) in the Southern California Bight

The common thresher shark is a large, wide-ranging coastalpelagic species. In the eastern Pacific, it
ranges from Baja California, Mexic oto British Columbia, Canada.Throughout its range it is harvested
commercially, and it constitutes the largest shark fishery in California waters. Nevertheless, many aspects
of its biology are poorly known, particularly as regards early life history. In the present study, juvenile
thresher sharks (i.e., fork length < 120 cm) were tagged with pop-up satellite archival tags (Microwave
Telemetry X-tags) to investigate their long-term movement patterns, habitat preferences, and geographic
range. All sharks were tagged in southern California waters. Tag deployments ranged from three to six
months, and tags archived light level, depth and temperature information. In total, data were successfully
acquired from 23 juvenile threshers; eight tags were physically retrieved and produced high resolution
archival data sets. 89% of pop-off locations were over the continental shelf. The furthest southward
movement was to Bahia Sebastian Vizcaino, Baja California, Mexico, and the furthest northward



                                                                                                       112
movement offshore of Morro Bay California. Juvenile thresher sharks primarily inhabited the upper 60 m
of the water column, and showed a strong diel depth distribution, with significantly greater depths by day.
Results indicate that the nursery area of the common thresher in the eastern Pacific consists mainly of
continental shelf waters from central Baja California, Mexico to central California, USA. In Mexican
waters, juvenile threshers are harvested by the inshore artisanal gillnet fishery.



Carter, Cynthia (Odum School of Ecology, University of Georgia); Maerz, John (Daniel B. Warnell School
of Forestry and Natural Resources, The University of Georgia, Canada); Mendelson, Joseph (Zoo Atlanta
& School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Canada)

A prospective study on the relationship between reproductive ecology and road mortality in Gila
Monsters (Heloderma suspectum).

The relationship between roads and herpetofanua has been studied in a number of taxa with a focus on
vehicular mortality and habitat fragmentation. Heloderma suspectum likely faces increasing threats of
mortality due to urbanization and road construction, however there is little empirical evidence to support
this claim.

We propose to conduct a descriptive study examining the reproductive status, resource ecology, and
spatial dynamics of road-killed Gila monsters throughout their range in the United States. We have
identified approximately 395 specimens from 18 museum collections using the HerpNet database. We will
examine specimens that were collected on roads and also include information on the site and date of
collection. Necropsies will be performed on each specimen to determine sexual stage based on gonadal
activity. The snoutvent length will be measured and gut contents will be analyzed to identify prey items.
Average monthly temperature and rainfall will be determined for each specimen using the NOAA climate
database. The habitat of each collection site will be characterized using historical aerial photographs, as
they are available, and remote-sensing landscape databases. We will analyze the data to determine
whether there are seasonal patterns to road mortality, a bias for particular reproductive stages, and if the
collected individuals are disproportionally male or female. Collection site information and morphological
data will be compared to elucidate the relationship between the reproductive ecology of H. suspectum
and habitat characteristics. Ultimately this study will provide insight into how the urbanization of desert
habitats affects the reproduction and population dynamics of H. suspectum .



Carter, Evin (Indiana - Purdue University Fort Wayne); Kingsbury, Bruce (Indiana - Purdue University
Fort Wayne, Canada)

Impacts of Invasive Plants on Resource Selection and Thermoregulation by a North American Pit-
Viper (Agkistrodon contortrix mokasen)

Invasive plants have been identified as a potential factor in the decline of many forms of wildlife.
Nevertheless, there is a paucity of clear evidence regarding causative mechanisms. We therefore
investigated the effects of nonnative invasive plants on resource selection and thermoregulation by 22
radio-tagged Northern Copperheads (Agkistrodon contortrix mokasen) in southern Indiana. Copperheads
exhibited clear avoidance of most invasive plant species at multiple spatial scales, with exotic shrubs
having the greatest influence on copperhead habitat selection. Avoidance appears to be at least partially
attributable to limited thermoregulatory opportunities within exotic plant-dominated habitats relative to
native habitats, with exotic shrub habitats providing the lowest thermal quality as a group. Additional




                                                                                                        113
mechanisms underlying avoidance may include lack of suitable cover and/or decreased foraging success,
but their significance is currently unclear. Habitat restoration should be effective in mitigating the effects
of most exotic plant species, but careful planning and implementation of restoration are essential to
maximize success and minimize negative outcomes for snakes and other wildlife.



Carter, Evin (Indiana - Purdue University Fort Wayne); Kingsbury, Bruce (Indiana - Purdue University
Fort Wayne, Canada)

Managed Areas as Ecological Traps for Snakes in an Exotic Plant-Invaded Landscape

Areas such as wildlife refuges or parks offer important opportunities for the protection of imperiled wildlife.
Unfortunately, conflicting practices and objectives with respect to natural resource management and
general property management can potentially lead to negative outcomes such as the decline or
extirpation local flora or fauna. Here, we provide direct evidence of the impacts of property management
and restoration activities on a population of Northern Copperheads ( Agkistrodon contortrix mokasen ) in
southern Indiana, showing that several managed habitats can and do attract Northern Copperheads and
simultaneously place them at greater risk of injury and/or mortality. At the same time, however,
management activities create or maintain forest gaps, providing thermoregulatory opportunities in an
otherwise low quality, exotic plant-invaded, landscape. We discuss our results in terms of the ecological
trap concept and provide management recommendations that should be applicable to multiple forms of
wildlife beyond Northern Copperheads.



Carter, Evin (Indiana - Purdue University Fort Wayne); Attum, Omar (Indiana University Southeast,
Canada); Kingsbury, Bruce (Indiana - Purdue University Fort Wayne, Canada)

Reducing the Potential for Human-Snake Encounters in a Recreational Park

Parks often struggle to balance outdoor recreation with the protection of wildlife. Additional complications
can arise for park managers when recreation occurs in areas shared with wildlife perceived by humans to
be dangerous. Despite these potential issues, many parks may inadvertently increase the potential for
human-wildlife encounters through the creation of artificial forest gaps used for recreational purposes.
We utilized radiotelemetry and ArcGIS to determine the potential for human encounters with Northern
Copperheads ( Agkistrodon contortrix mokasen ) at a recreational park in southern Indiana before and
after several simulated closures of artificial (recreational) forest gaps. Our results demonstrate that by
restricting human access to artificial forest gaps, encounters with Northern Copperheads could be
reduced by 1.5 – 10 x the expected potential. We discuss our results in terms of management
implications and provide suggestions for land managers facing related concerns of human-wildlife
encounters.




                                                                                                           114
Caruso, Nick (University of Maryland); Lips, Karen (University of Maryland, College Park, MD, United
States); Adams, Dean (Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States); McDiarmid, Roy
(USGA/Smithsonian Inst., Washington DC, DC, United States); Fleischer, Rob (National Zoological Park,
Washington DC, DC, United States)

Through the looking glass: Widespread declines in body size in Appalachian Plethodontid
salamanders

Climate change models project widespread range contractions for Appalachian salamanders within the
next 10 yrs, with greatest effects predicted for species in the southern Appalachians. Climate change can
impact amphibians in various ways, including shifts in species distribution, lowered body condition, and
reduced growth. These changes may be detected in the field by quantifying changes in occupancy,
population abundance, individual body size and reproductive effort. Highton (2005) documented
widespread declines in population abundance of 28 species of Plethodon in the eastern US by the
1980‘s. Between June–October 2011, we resurveyed 67 of Highton‘s historic collecting sites, which
included 192 populations of 14 species of Plethodon. At each site we sampled 3, 50 x 3m plots in which
we captured all salamanders found under cover objects. We identified each capture to species, sex, and
age class; swabbed each animal for Bd; and measured snout-vent-length (SVL), mass and body
temperature. We found a total of 1,870 animals (μ = 8.6/site; range = 0–75) of 14 species. Using these
animals and ~8,000 specimens collected from those same sites between1957–1996, we compared
average SVL for each population between pre-decline (1957–79) and post-decline (1980–2011) periods.
Using linear mixed models, we found that SVL was significantly smaller post-decline for the full dataset of
~8,000 animals (p = 0.0001), and for the cinereus (p = 0.0001) and jordani (p = 0.0026) groups. For
individual species, we only had power to detect a decrease in SVL for Plethodon cinereus (p < 0.0001).
The rate of evolutionary change in SVL (measured in Haldanes) differed among species groups (F 4, 80 =
21.978; p < 0.0001) and was greatest within the jordani group and lowest for the glutinosus group.
Populations that showed the greatest rate of decline were those found at lower latitudes (F 1, 81 = 9.045; p
= 0.0035) and higher elevations (F1, 81 = 9.9994; p = 0.0022) with a strong interaction effect (F 1, 81 = 8.29;
p = 0.0051). Our results show reduced body size in Plethodon across sites within a 767 km region of the
Appalachians, with the fastest rates of change in the southern latitudes. Our results support predictions of
species loss from the southern Appalachians (Milanovich et al. 2009) and we hypothesize that these
changes are driven by regional climate change patterns.



Casas, André (Universidade de São Paulo); Intelizano, Wagner (Universidade Metropolitana de Santos,
Canada); Carvalho, Marcelo (Universidade de São Paulo, Canada)

Anatomical variation in the extrinsic eye muscles of the Odontaspidade (Chondrichthyes:
Lamniformes).

 The family Odontaspididae is represented by the genera Carcharias and Odontaspis and has been
considered to be paraphyletic in morphological and molecular studies. These results suggest that
odontaspidid morphology should be revised. The present study examined seven specimens of this family
(six Carcharias taurus, one Odontaspis noronhai) and two specimens of Rhizoprionodonsp.
(Carcharhiniformes), with the objective to describe and understand morphological variation in their
extrinsic eye muscles. Carcharias taurus and Odontaspis noronhai present six extrinsic eyes muscles
(rectus dorsalis, rectus lateralis, rectus ventralis, rectus medialis, obliquus dorsalis, and obliquus
ventralis), therefore resembling the elasmobranch general pattern. To precisely determine the
morphology of the obliquus dorsalis muscle in the examined species the trochlear nerve (IV) was followed
from its origin to its distal innervation. This procedure revealed variations in the origin of the obliquus



                                                                                                           115
dorsalis when compared to the general pattern described for other elasmobranchs. Two distinct
conditions for its origin were found: state (0), origin on nasal capsule dorsal to the origin of the obliquus
ventralis (present in Odontaspis noronhai, Alopidae, Lamnidae and in the great majority of
elasmobranchs described in the literature); and state (1), origin on nasal capsule ventral to the origin of
the obliquus ventralis (present in Carcharias taurus and Rhizoprionodon sp.). This preliminary result
suggests that state (1) is independently derived in Carcharias taurus and Rhizoprionodon sp. For a
greater comprehension of the phylogenetic meaning of the variation in the obliquus dorsalis in Carcharias
taurus, additional lamniform and other elasmobranch taxa must be examined.



Casas, André (Universidade de São Paulo); Toledo-Piza, Mônica (Universidade de São Paulo, Canada)

The dorsal gill arch musculature of the Characiformes (Teleostei: Ostariophysi): morphological
diversity and phylogenetic significance.

In the present study we carried out a detailed anatomical study of the dorsal gill arch musculature of
representatives of the Characiformes, one of the most diverse orders of freshwater fishes. In the most
recent and encompassing study of this morphological complex, Springer e Johnson (2004) examined the
musculature of the dorsal branchial arches from representatives of all main taxa of bony fishes, focusing
on actinopterygians, and showed that there is morphological variation that was not documented before.
The study of those authors included only three species of Characiformes, an order that includes
approximately 1700 species grouped in 270 genera and 18 families. In the present study we examined 61
species representing all the Characiformes families, except the Citharinidae, and observed that there is
variation in this anatomical complex. These are related to differences in the origin and insertion of the
levator muscles, size and form and presence or absence of the oblique muscles and adductors muscles.
Examples include: Levator internus has a single insertion on pharyngobranchial in the majority of the
examined species while in all examined representatives of the Erythrinoidea, Acestrorhynchus,
Curimatopsis and Thoracocharax, levator internus has two sites of insertion on pharyngobranchial 2.
Obliquus dorsalis 4‘ absent in the majority of the examined species and present in the examined African
species representing the Distichodontidae and in some Neotropical species of the Characidae. Adductor
4 present in the majority of the examined species, is absent in examined species of the Ctenoluciidae and
reduced in all examined Alestidae. Those differences will be evaluated later in a phylogenetic context.



Cashner, Mollie (Southeastern Louisiana University); Piller, Kyle (Southeastern Louisiana University,
Canada)

Pandora's Box: Is Notropis lutipinnis phenotypically plastic or a species complex?

Recently, the range of Notropis lutipinnis (Yellowfin Shiner) has been restricted to include only
populations in the Savannah River drainage westward to the Altamaha River drainage and Flint River
and northward to the upper portions of the Chattahoochee River system in Georgia. Although
morphological variation in fin coloration has been documented, no studies to date have been able to
characterize distinct populations of N. lutipinnis based on morphology. Preliminary geometric
morphometric analysis revealed that populations from three river systems (Savannah, Oconee, and
Ocmulgee Rivers) are highly distinct in morphospace. Additionally, mtDNA sequence data revealed
multiple divergent lineages which cross current river system boundaries. We have expanded our
morphological and molecular data set to include more populations throughout the range of N. lutipinnis




                                                                                                         116
in order to determine whether morphological variation is congruent with the observed patterns in genetic
divergence among these populations.



Casper, Gary (UWM Field Station); Hecnar, Stephen (Lakehead University, Thunder Bay, ON, Canada)

Tales of Scales: Herpetofaunal Inventory and Monitoring at Differing Geographic Scales in the
Western Great Lakes

Development of effective inventory and monitoring programs is of fundamental importance in determining
species status and documenting changes in their abundance and geographic distribution, especially in
response to changing climate or human land use. Many challenges exist for collecting and vetting recent
and historical distribution data to build species inventories, especially at large scales. Equally challenging
obstacles exist to developing effective and meaningful monitoring programs. We addressed these
challenges at several geographic scales for various stakeholders: a) six National Parks spanning 750 km
from southern Lake Michigan to northern Lake Superior, b) the Lake Superior watershed encompassing
approximately 21,062,148 ha in portions of Michigan, Minnesota, Wisconsin and Ontario; c) the Ottawa
National Forest (approximately 404,680 ha) just south of Lake Superior, d) the Milwaukee (228,532 ha)
and Sheboygan River (67,396 ha) basins, and e) individual land trust properties in east-central Wisconsin
(2-77 ha). Recent glacial history throughout this region has allowed only a few thousand years for
herpetofaunal communities to develop. We evaluated well over 14,000 occurrence records for the study
areas and ranked records by voucher status and source type, identifying knowledge gaps. We performed
surveys through various partnerships and tested monitoring methods to develop detection probability
statistics, standardize methodology, and develop sampling recommendations which account for false
absences. We identified overlaps in sampling methods for achieving best return on effort for monitoring
programs, and determined the minimum sampling effort required to achieve 95% confidence in detection.
Many species are readily detected (many by several methods), but detection probabilities vary among
species, methods, habitats and sampling periods. We discuss challenges in collecting and vetting data,
and in achieving effective herpetofaunal monitoring across differing geographic scales.



Caspers, Barbara (University of Bielefeld);

The importance of mate choice for speciation in amphibians

Assortative mating – preferred mating with the own type - is a major pre-zygotic isolation mechanism that
is supposed to play a central role in ecological and adaptive speciation. First, this talk will provide an
overview in how far assortative mating has been found to be important for differentiation processes in
amphibian species. Second, we are going to present our research results centred on the importance of
assortative mating in an adaptively diverging salamander population. Recent studies on a population of
the terrestrial fire salamander ( Salamandra salamandra ) in Germany (the Kottenforst near Bonn)
suggest that the adaptation to different reproduction habitats within the small forest initiated a process of
adaptive divergence under sympatric conditions. We analysed whether assortative mating might explain
the maintenance of the two different genetic clusters in this system using a three steps approach. i) we
investigated the degree of assortative mating under natural conditions. Therefore we reconstructed the
paternal genotype by analysing more than 1150 larvae deposited by 46 wild caught females, which
deposited there larvae in our lab. The results clearly indicate that female fire salamanders mate
assortatively according to their own habitat type. ii) we used mating experiments under semi-natural
conditions in order to document existing pre-zygotic isolation mechanisms. Therefore, we kept females



                                                                                                          117
with two other males, one of each habitat type, in a enclosure for two subsequent days and recorded all
matings. iii) we investigated the use of chemical cues in habitat dependent assortative mating, as odour
cues are widely used by salamanders for intraspecific communication and sexual recognition. The results
of these experiments indicate that female fire salamanders are actually able to distinguish between males
of the two habitat types. Here, we present the full data set of three years of experiments, showing the
importance of assortative mating for adaptive speciation in the fire salamander.



Castañeda, Maria del Rosario (Harvard University);

Anolis lizards in the Encyclopedia of Life

The Encyclopedia of Life (EOL) aims to gather detailed and accurate information on all life forms on earth
(i.e., animals, plants, fungi, protist, and bacteria), concentrate it in one place and make it widely available.
The content is produced and compiled by scientists in different areas to ensure high quality of the
resulting product. With nearly 400 species currently recognized, Anolis Daudin 1802 (Squamata:
Iguanidae) is one of the most diverse groups of vertebrates traditionally ranked as a genus. These lizards,
commonly known as anoles, are distributed from southeastern North America to central South America,
including the West Indies, and are characterized by the presence of adhesive toe-pads and, in most
species, brightly colored throat fans, called dewlaps. Anolis species have been a research tool for many
areas of biology including behavior, ecology, evolution, functional morphology and genomics, just to
name a few. In addition to being an important research group, Anolis species are highly appreciated in
the pet world. For these reasons, as well as their abundance and visibility where they occur, anoles are a
clade of great interest to both scientists and the public in general. Here I present progress on the creation
of new content and the revision of previous entries of EOL Anolis pages. In addition, I provide
information on how to navigate the EOL pages, details on the many resources available through the EOL,
and contacts to participate in the EOL Anolis community and other EOL initiatives.



Castañeda, Maria del Rosario (Harvard University); de Queiroz, Kevin (Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, DC, United States)

Multivariate analysis of the morphological component of ecomorphology in mainland Anolis
lizards (Dactyloa clade).

Based on Greater Antillean communities of Anolis lizards, the term ecomorph has been used to describe
the association between ecological and morphological features. Species in each ecomorph class have
similar morphologies (e.g., relative body, tail, hind and forelimb lengths) and similar ecological
characteristics, including foraging behavior and perch height and diameter. When analyzed with
multivariate statistics, species form identifiable clusters in morphological and ecological space, each
representing a different ecomorph class. In the Greater Antilles, species of the same ecomorph class from
different islands are not each other‘s closest relatives; instead, each island has assemblages of closely
related species representing different ecomorphs. Here we focused on the morphological aspect of
ecomorphology in mainland Anolis species of the Dactyloa clade. We analyzed six morphological
characters associated with habitat use to answer the following questions: 1) Are there recognizable
clusters of Dactyloa species in multivariate morphospace? 2) Are species in the same morphological
cluster also phylogenetically close? And 3) is the distribution of Dactyloa species in morphospace similar
to that seen in Caribbean species? We found seven clusters composed of morphologically similar
species. These clusters do not correspond to monophyletic groups, though the species composition of



                                                                                                            118
some clusters is not completely independent of phylogeny. Finally, some of the Dactyloa species were
classified as members of the trunk-crown, trunk-ground and twig ecomorph classes. Other species (and
complete clusters) occupied regions in multivariate space that were not occupied by Caribbean species
(i.e., they exhibited distinct combinations of morphological traits). In conclusion, we found that Dactyloa
species exhibit both similarities to and differences from the Caribbean Anolis radiation in the association
of morphological characters in multivariate space.



Castoe, Todd (U of Colorado School of Medicine); de Koning, AP Jason (U Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO, United States); Ray, David (Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS, United
States); Bronikowski, Anne (Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States); Secor, Stephen (University
of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, United States); Feschotte, Cedric (University of Texas at Arlington,
Arlington, TX, United States); Warren, Wesley (Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO,
United States); Pollock, David (U Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States)

Comparative genomics and transcriptomics of snake - what makes snakes soo cool?

Studying organisms with extreme phenotypes can provide unique insight into the structure and function of
biological systems, and advances in sequencing technologies provide new unparalleled access for
investigating such non-traditional model systems. Here we share new insight from 3 complete snake
genomes that showcase the unique genomic attributes of snakes, and discuss how these relate to
evolution of extreme phenotypes. We provide highlights from new transcriptomic analyses of extreme
physiological remodeling in snakes that demonstrates the power of snakes as a model, and of taking a
system-wide approach to studying such extreme adaptive remodeling. We discuss how these changes
we observe in snake genomes and transcriptomes may be collectively related to the evolution of extreme
phenotypes and, indeed, why snakes are soo cool.



Cates, Corey (The University of Texas at Tyler); Ford, David; Pettingill, Kaitlyn; Ford, Neil (The University
of Texas at Tyler, Tyler, TX, United States)

Nutritional stress early in life can be compensated for with increased feeding after subsequent
improvement in prey availability. That hyperphagy may require behaviors that would increase
susceptibility to predators. This investigation set out to discover what and how those behaviors are
altered during compensatory growth after dietary restriction in a snake species.         Twenty-four corn
snakes ( Pantherophis guttata ) were each raised on either high (50% body mass/week) or low
(15%/week) diets of dead mice for 174 days. The average body mass between the two groups differed by
~50% at that time. Three behavioral trials were started; aggression, hiding versus exploration, and time to
feeding. Aggressive behavior in the High Diet Group (HDG) was found to be statistically lower than in the
Low Diet Group (LDG). The HDG was also found to spend less time in exploration behavior within their
cage than the LDG. The LDG was faster to find and consume the food. These behaviors all appear to be
related to the compensatory growth response as seen in the drive to find additional food. At day 175, the
two groups were placed on the same diet of 50% body mass/week (HDG diet). At this time the food
availability was made on a selection basis, with the food being offered in multiple small amounts (two
mice/feeding) rather than in one large offering (one mouse/feeding) as in the first 174 days.
Compensatory growth occurred in the LDG due to the increase in food availability. Food availability
fluctuations seem to elicit a slowed growth rate when food sources are low but a catch up growth
response when food availability increases.




                                                                                                         119
Caviedes Solis, Itzue Wendolin (Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México);
Nieto Montes de Oca, Adrián (Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,
Canada)

Molecular Phylogeny of the Plectrohyla bistincta Group (Anura: Hylidae)

The hylid genus Plectrohyla includes 42 species, which represent 42.85% of the total number of hylid
frog species in México. In a recent phylogenetic analysis of Plectrohyla , the genus was composed of two
main clades separated geographically from each other by the Isthmus of Tehuantepec: the P.
guatemalensis group, which includes 18 species distributed eastward from the Isthmus, Mexico, to El
Salvador and Honduras in Central America, and the P. bistincta group, which is endemic to Mexico and
includes 24 species distributed westward from the Isthmus to Durango. Most of these species are
microendemic, and because they have been only occasionally recorded or not recorded at all during the
last 20 years, they are considered endangered species.

The relationships among the species in each of the above groups are still poorly known: only eight
species of the P. bistincta group and four species of the P. guatemalensis group have been incuded in
the most recent phylogenetic analyses of the genus. Evidently, these hypotheses cannot be regarded as
a final assessment of the phylogenetic relationships within the P. bistincta or P. guatemalensis groups,
and the inclusion of additional species in the analysis may change the relationships in the phylogeny.

The main goal of this project is to investigate the monophyly of the P. bistincta group and the
phylogenetic relationships within the group. We present a phylogenetic analysis of 17 species of the
group using data from two mitochondrial genes (ND1, 960 bp and 12S, 943 bp) and three nuclear genes
(Rag-1, 420 bb, Rhod, 361 bp, and POMc, 508 bp). To evaluate the monophyly of the group, we included
representatives of the       P. guatemalensis      group and the genera         Exerodonta, Ecnomiohyla,
Duellmanohyla, Bromelioyla , and Ptychohyla . Data analysis was performed using Bayesian methods;
the best fitting models for each gen were identified using the Akaike information criterion in MrModelTest,
version 2.0, and Bayesian analyses of the concatenated data were performed using MrBayes, version
3.1.2.



Cayot, Linda J. (Galapagos Conservancy); Gibbs, James P. (State University of New York College of
Environmental Science and Forestry, Syracuse, United States); Tapia, Washington (Galapagos National
Park Service, Puerto Ayora, Galapagos, Canada)

Restoring Tortoise Populations in the Galapagos: Contrasting case studies from Española and
Pinta Islands

At the time of the establishment of the Galapagos National Park in 1959, giant tortoises were rare on the
southern island of Española and considered extinct on the northern island of Pinta. Eventually 14
tortoises were discovered on Española but only a single tortoise, ―Lonesome George,‖ was recovered
from Pinta. Goats, the only introduced mammal on either island, destroyed much of the habitat on both,
causing long-term impacts that endure after eradication. The recovery of the tortoise population on
Española began in the late 1960s with the initiation of a captive breeding program and the eradication of
goats. Young tortoises were repatriated to Española starting in 1975, with a total of 1750 released by
January 2012. Annual survival rates of >95% of adults and 90-95% of juveniles have resulted in
approximately 50% overall mortality of all repatriates over the 35-year release program. In situ
reproduction was first observed about 15 years after reintroduction began and has now generated a
sizable component of native-hatched tortoises in the population (approximately 20%). The success of the




                                                                                                       120
Española project has been aided by targeted research in the breeding and rearing program, regular
surveys of the growing population, and genetic studies. An ecological assessment completed on
Española in June 2010 has provided new information regarding the long-term impact of the now
eradicated goat population and the relationship between tortoises and cactus, and resulted in
recommendations for experimental habitat manipulation to restore the island ecosystem to a more
pristine, pre-goat condition. On Pinta, tortoise restoration followed a very different trajectory. Lack of
breeding stock to re-establish the original population and failure to find additional Pinta tortoises either in