  .1,                            10:30 Friday                                 m
Feeding behavior and mechanics of sharks: past, present and future. P.J. Motta. Department of Biology,
Universny of South Florida, 4202 East Fowler Ave., Tampa, Florida, 33620 U.S.A.
Knowledge of the feeding behavior of sharks is based on a rich history of descriptive studies, and understanding of
the feeding mechanism is rooted in anatomy. These works posed as many questions as they answered. Questions
about the feeding mechanism and the function of jaw protrusion remain, the degree of stereotypy of prey capture
behavior, the role of jaw suspension in feeding, and how a relatively simple morphological system evolved to the
current diversity of feeding forms. Research is now addressing these questions.' Utilizing anatomical techniques,
computer imaging, electromyography and kinematic analysis, models of the feeding apparatus are being proposed.
Prey capture behavior appears not to be a modal action pattern, many sharks exhibiting variability and modulatory
abilities. Jaw suspension is not clearly related to feeding behavior as was once thought, and our work has revealed
evolutionary shifts that influenced the diversity of feeding forms. We are now posed with additional questions of the
evolution of suction feeding and the scaling of prey capture kinematics. The feeding behavior and mechanics of
elasmobranchs continue to be an exciting and relatively unexplored area that promises to further our understanding
of these apex predators and augment our knowledge of lower vertebrate feeding mechanisms.




   2                             16:00 Friday                                 PI                                PCH
Preference for static and dynamic criteria in Physalaemus pustulosua. J. Bosch and M.J. Ryan, Department of
Zoology, University of Texas at Austin. Austin, TX 78712 USA.
Anuran call properties were classified as static or dynamic based on vrlthin-male variablltiy during bouts of calling.
Females exert stabilizing or weakly directional selection on static propertties, and highly directional selection on
dynamic properties. Selection pressure was examined in two cal) characteristics; a static character (dominant
frequency of the whine), and one dynamic character (intervals between whines). Six phonotaxis experiments were
conducted with gravid females using synthetic calls. Stimuli presented for both characters are based on the mean
and standard deviation of those characters in the study population, to compare preferences between static and
dynamic characters. For each character, 3 distinct intervals of variation have been used (1SD, 2SD, and 3SD), that
which is translated in 3 different experiments: mean-1.5SD vs. mean-0.5SD, mean-1.5SD vs. mean+0.5S0 and
mean-1.5SD vs. mean+1.5SD. As expected, preference was strong in the dynamic character, increasing in
proportion to the increase in the interval between stimuli. Preference for the static character remained constant. The
degree of ‘motivation’ in the choice made by females was measured as the time taken to make the choice, the
number of speakers visited, and the number of females necessary to get 20 valid responses. For both characters an
increase in female 'motivation' was observed in proportion to the increase in the intenral of variation between stimuli.
Furthermore, all these measures of 'motivation' were greater in the dynamic character than the static character.




   3                             .16:00 Friday                                PI                             . PCH
Acoustic competition In Physalaemus pustulosus, a differential response to calls of relative frequency.
Bosch and M.J. Ryan, Department of Zoology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712 USA.
The response of male Physalaemus pustulosus to conspecific whines of different frequencies was examined. In the
first block of playback experiments (fixed response), three types of synthetic stimuli (HFR, MFR, LFR) were used that
corresponded to calls of high frequency (mean+2 SD), mid-frequency (mean), and low frequency (mean-2 SD) for
the study population. In the second block of interactive playback experiments (relative response) whines of relative
frequency to that of the male subject were used: male frequency + 2 SD (HRR), male frequency (MRR), and male
frequency - 2 SD (LRR). In the fixed frequency experiments, no modification of male vocal response was observed.
However, in the relative frequency experiments, males responded with greater rates of whine production, and above
all, with more complex calls (adding secondary notes) to stimuli of similar or higher frequency than to stimuli of lower
frequency than their own. In other words, male vocal competition is greater only when competitors have similar or
relatively higher whine frequencies to their own, and does not increase when competitors have call frequencies
which are at the mean or higher for the population as a whole. Nevertheless, this differential response cannot be
explained only as an effect of competition between males of different sizes, given that the relationship between
frequency of the whine and male size is very weak.

   4                             16:00 Friday                                PI                               PCH
The agonistic behaviors of the blackbanded sunfish Enneacanihus chaetodon. VJ. Silliman and K.M. Nordfors,
Millersville University, Millersville PA 17551 USA.
The Blackbanded sunfish (Enneacanthus chaetodon) could be considered a cosmopolitan species of the Atlantic
coastline (except in Virginia and Maryland, where they are an endangered species). E. chaetodon prefers calm
lentic waters which Pre highly vegetated and extremely acidic in nature. This species quickly adapts to captivity and
readily shows aggressive behaviors at low densities. The experiment was designed to determine if the onset of
agonistic behaviors in E. chaetodon was significantly Influenced by size, density, and/or time. Research has
indicated that ttie encroachment of inter individual space and the acclimation period ( a function of time) were both
shown to be a significant factor for the onset of aggression. Size, however, was not considered a significant factor
br the onset of aggression. The onset of submissive behaviors were considered significant related to the relative
body size and wib the encroachment of inter individual space; yet It was not considered significant In relation to
time. The results Indicate that the changes in the agonistic behaviors of E. chaetodon occur as a function or time,
encounter, and density.




   5                             16:00 Friday                               PI                                PCH
Effects of changes in hydration and temperature on jumping ability in two species of Puerto Rican frogs. Y.
Sanchez. Department of Biology, University of Puerto Rico, San Juan, PR 00931-3360.
Variation in temperature and hydration may significantly affect the jumping performance of amphibians and therefore
their foraging efficiency, habitat selection, survivorship and fitness. We compared locomotor abilities of two
neotropical frogs Eleutherodactylus anb’llensis and E. cochranae. Jumping performance (maximum jumping
distance) was measured at three temperatures (20°C, 25°C and 30°C) and two hydration levels (100% and 75%). E.
antillensis showed a significant decrease in jumping ability under dehydration condition at 25°C and 30°C. However
at 20°C, there was no significant decrese in jumping ability for E. antillensis. E. cochranae showed no differences in
jumping ability. E. cochranae seems to have greater tolerance to changes in temperature and hydration.




   6 .                           16:00 Friday                                PI                               PCH
Response of ravine salamanders to chemical stimuli from autonomized tails. J.A. Hucko and P.V. Cupp,
Department of biological Sciences, Eastern Kentucky University, Richmond, KY 40475 USA.
The ability to detect chemical cues is an important predator avoidance mechanism in many organisms, which is best
known in aquatic organisms. Only a few studies have examined this ability in terrestrial salamanders. In this
experiment, I investigated the response (i.e., avoidance or non-avoidance) of ravine salamanders (Plelhodon
richmond!) to substrates marked with chemical cues from the tails of autonomized conspedfics. Trials were
conducted in 13cm x 2cm glass petri dishes, each dish contained a substrate that was marked with either
homogenized tail, autonomized tail, non-injured conspecific or aged water, salamanders tended to avoid substrates
marked with homogenized and autonomized tails and did not avoid substrates marked by non-injured salamanders
and aged water, these results suggest that chemical alarm cues can be released from the tails of ravins
salamanders and these cues can be detected and avoided.   7                             16:00 Friday                               PI                                PCH
Acoustic competition In male Pelodytes punctatus. Interactive playback experiments. R. Marquez. J.M.
Pargana and E.G. Crespo, Centro de Biologia Ambiental, Faculdade de Ciencias,, Universidade de Lisboa, P 1700
Lisboa, Portugal. (RM) Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales. Josd Gutidrrez Abascal 2.28006 Madrid, Spain.
The advertisement call of Pelodytes punctatus is composed of two distinct pulsed notes (A & B). A single A note is
always emitted at ths beginning of a calling bout and it may be followed by a sequence of 0 to 6 B notes. We
designed a playback experiment to mimick the effect of competing male calls with call bouts of different number of
Bs on a naturally calling focal male. The A and B notes used in the playback tests were natural calls selected by
their overall similarity with a sample of calls of different animals from the same population, measured through
audiospectrogram correlations. Tests were performed in the field in southern Portugal with a set up that included an
Apple portable computer and interactive playback'Sound Maker* software (the call of the focal animal triggered the
response of the playback sound). When exposed to stimuli with increasing number of B notes, males did not
increase the number of B notes in their calls. They did increase call repetition rate. Other static call parameters
(duration, frequency and number of pulses of A & B) did not change linearly with number of number of B notes in
thestimuius.




   8                            16:00 Friday                                 PI                               PCH
Radiotrackfng amphibians: lessons from implant and external attachment procedures. D.M. Madison and
V.S. Lamoureux, Department of Biological Sciences, State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New
York 13902-6000.
   Year round radiotracking of Ambysloma maculatum, A. tigrinum, Cryptobranchus alleganiensis, and Rana
clamitans has lead to improved package design, surgical procedures, field release and recovery, and positioning
techniques. External packages are generally unacceptable for tracking amphibians. Amphibian skin is too
physiologically active, delicate and moist for the attachment of external units by waist bands, harnesses, collars,
glues or sutures. Packages fixed to the amphibian integument has caused tethering and even injury and death in the
animal's struggle to free itself. External packages can also prevent amphibians from entering or turning around in
small mammal tunnels, ainways, vegetative tangles and rock crevices. External packages, stomach inserts, and
surgical (coelomic) implants were userf on aquatic hellbenders to test the various methods in a natural setting. The
implants worked best, followed by the inserts, which were defecated after 10 days. External packages were
unsatisfactory.
Radiotransmitter implants were used successfully in all the above species, but precautions with design, implant
surgery, and field deployment must bs taken. Implant packages should be small enough to allow amphibians to turn
around in tight spaces and be coated with beeswax instead of paraffin. Sutures should be more closely spaced in
colli weather, and cyanoacrylate should bs avoided. Animals should be released at the beginning of their daily
activity cycle in the same pulse of ecological/social events from which they were removed. Finally, "local
triangulation* should be used to obtain positions; visual fixes should normally be avoided.


   9                            16:00 Friday                                 PI                              PCH .
A laboratory study of foraging behavior in young northern water snakes {Nerodia sipedon): The effect of
water depth, habitat structure, and ontogeny on foraging proficiency. C.A. Conaway and A.R. Gibson,
Cleveland State University, Department of Biological, Geological, and Environmental Sciences, 2399 Euclid Avenue,
Cleveland, Ohio 44115 USA.
I earned out a laboratory study of foraging proficiency in young northern water snakes (Nerodia sipedon) presented
with different water depths (0.25, 0.50, 1.00, 2.00 in.), and the presence or absence of artificial habitat stnjcture.
Over a seventeen month period and using two litters of young water snakes, I performed three laboratory
experiments in which I measured the time requited to capture and ingest live minnows in a small feeding arena
during 30-minute trials. Snakes generally took less time to capture fish in shallower water than they did in deeper
water. Ingestion times largely were unaffected by depth. Larger/older snakes took less time to capture fish than did
smaller^oung snakes, and larger snakes also captured more fish than did smaller snakes. In an experiment using
one litter of young snakes, I found that capture and ingestion times generally were unaffected by the presence of one
form of habitat structure, despite its importance as documented in other studies.

   10               . . .    , 16:00 Friday       .   .                       PI                              PCH
Comparative behavior of two parthenogenetic and one bisexual species of Cnemidophorus lizards from
souttiem Texas. M.A. Paulissen. Department of Biological & Environmental Sciences, McNeese State University,
Lake Charles, Louisiana 70609, USA.
Two species of the all-female, parthenogenetic Cnemidophorus laredoensis complex (Teiidae) coexist with the
bisexual species Cnemidophorus gularis in the Rio Grande Valley of southern Texas and northern Mexico. I studied
the behavior of the two parthenogenetic species, provisionally designated 'LAR-A' (= C. laredoensis) and 'LAR-B',
and C. aularis through focal animal observations of free-ranging lizards in a state park in Texas. Focal animals were
followed for a minimum of 10 minutes and all behaviors were recorded into a tape recorder. Playback of the tapes
allowed determination of the amount of time lizards spent performing various behaviors. Observations were made
during the May to June breeding seasons of 1994-1996. The major differences were between males of C. gularis
and LAR-A, LAR-B, and C. gularis females. In general, C. gularis males spent a significantly greater percentage of
time interacting with other lizards (most often courting conspecific females or parthenogenetic females), moved
greater distances during the time they were observed, and moved faster than C. gularis females and females of the
two parthenogenetic species.        There were few behavioral differences between C, gularis females and
parthenogenetic females. The two parthenogens did devote a greater percentage of their time to searching for food
than did C. gularis males and females; however there was no significant difference in the rate of capture of arthropod
prey. Overall, the results suggest that the behavioral differences between sexes are greater than the behavioral
differences between species in this group of lizards despite differing reproductive modes.




   11                           16:00.Friday                            ...   PI       .                      PCH
Environmental cues used by juvenile com snakes {Elaphe g. guttata) for spatial learning and memory of an
escape task. T.J. Nyberg. Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY
14627, USA; A. Jain and W. Amaya, Neuroscience Program, Oberlin College, Oberlin, OH 44074, USA; D.A.
Holtzman, Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University-of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627, USA.
Spatial orientation is necessary for snake survival, mediating important behaviors such as den localization and
predator escape responses. To characterize cues used for spatial orientation, eight juvenile com snakes were
trained to find the only open hole within a circular arena, given a choice of eight holes. During training, snakes
showed significant decreases in the latency to find the goal and in the path length taken to find the goal. A
significant increase was found in ths percent movement in ths goal quadrant. Manipulations of controlled
environmental cues (rotation of a cue card, rotation of the arena, release from a new position in the arena, and
removal of the cue card) were done to examine the effects on orientation to the goal. The results indicate that no
one particular cue was used by all of the snakes, although rotation of the cue card and arena affected the most
snakes. Individuals were affected differently by different cue manipulations, and some snakes appear to use multiple
environmental cues for this task. Snakes also appear to use cues which were not manipulated, such as extra-arena
(e.g. overhead lights) and intra-arena cues (e.g. variation in the arena surface).




   12                           16:00 Friday                                  PI                              PCH
Testing the assumption that satiated salamanders are fess likely to risk nocturnal movement. B.D. Kuss.
Cumberland College, Dept, of Biology, 7196 College Station Drive, Williamsburg, KY 40769, USA.
If predation is a serious threat to salamanders, and if predation is mors likely when salamanders are moving about at
night, away from a place of retreaL then it would seem an unnecessary risk for well fed salamanders to move about
as much as those which are having difficulty finding food. Juvenile Plethodon glutinosus, measuring 35-50mm svi, of
two feeding groups, 6 in each group, were kept in enclosures where nocturnal movements could be detected by
infrared beam interruptions. Enclosures measured 35 x 35cm, were 5cm In height, and a single cover object was
provided in the center of each. Small crickets, 6-10mm, were given as food every 5fh day within the 20 days of
recording. Well fed salamanders ate 4-6 crickets at a feeding and gained mass over the test period. The less well
fed salamanders were allowed 1 -2 crickets at a feeding and either gained or lost mass minimally. The well fed group
demonstrated significantly less movement than the group which ate less ^=4.27, p<0.001). These results are
consistent with a view that movements outside of a place of retreat pose a risk for juvenile P. glutinosus.   13                          16:00 Friday                            PI                      PCH
Structural differences In gill vasculature among batiod elasmobranchs. R.L. Sherman. Nova Southeastern
University Oceanographic Center, 8000 N. Ocean Drive, Dania, FL 33004 USA.
Classic studies of gill vasculature indicate the gross anatomy of elasmobranch gills is similar in most spedes, and in
general, resembles those of teleosts. Studies of fine gill stnicture of several species of batoid elasmobranchs have,
however, reported some structural differences. These differences include the presence, in urolophids (Urolophus
jamaicensis, U. mucosus, U. paucimaculatus), of 1) a tip channel, possibly an extension of the afferent filament
artery that nrns along the top of the filament corpus cavemosum, and 2) a vascular arcade, a vessel which connects
the afferent filament arteries of a hemibranch near the tip of each filament. To date, these stnictures were believed
to be unique to the urolophids as they were not found in either rajids {Raja erinacea, R. davata} or the shark
Scyliorhinus canicula. Research with the cownose ray (Rhinoptera bonasus) and other batiod elasmobranchs,
however, indicates the tip channel and vascular arcade are not unique to urolophids. Additional research is required
to determine the phylogenetic and physiologic significances of these structures.




  .14                          16:00 Friday                           PI                       PCH
Chondrocranium and Internal oral anatomy of Hyla chrysosceiis. S.F. Soear. C.C. Swart and R.O. de Sd,
Department of Biology. University of Richmond,, Richmond, VA 23173 USA.
Hyla chrysosceiis, family Hylidae, ranges from Southern Canada south to Texas and Rorida. Internal oral
morphology and chondrocranial anatomy for this species have not been described. However, chondrocranial data is
available for eight species within the family Hylidae. Herein, we describe the internal oral anatomy using scanning
electron microscopy (SEM), chondrocranial anatomy, and ossification sequence for H. chrysosceiis. Specimens were
field collected in Beaverdam, Virginia, and preserved in 10% formalin. A total of 43 tadpoles, ranging from Gosner's
stages 30 to 46, were cleared and double-stained for bone and cartilage using standard techniques. A table of
ossification sequence is presented. In addition, two tadpoles were prepared for SEM using standard techniques.
Hyla chrysosceiis differs in several characteristics from the other described members of the family Hylidae. It is
most similar to the previously described H. puchella and H. lanciiormis. However, in H. chrysosceiis the anterior tipS
of the cornua trabeculae are laterally expanded. Hyla chrysosceiis has an otic process connecting the
palatoquadrate to the otic capsule. This process was reported absent in H. lanciiormis. The muscular process of H.
chrysosceiis is smaller than that of H. pulchella . The internal oral anatomy of H. chrysosceiis is similar to that
reported for other hylids.




  15                           16:00 Friday                               PI                        PCH
Chondrocranial morpholom and skeletogenesls of three species of Physalaemus (Anura: Leptodactylldae).
W.Jr. Turner and R.O. de Sa, Department of Biology, University of Richmond, Richmond, VA 23173 USA.
The chondrocranial morphology and skeletogenesls of tadpoles in the genus Physalaemus remains unknown.
Herein, we describe the chondrocranial morphology of three species: Physalaemus gracilis, P. henselii, and P.
pustulosus. Skeletogenesls is reported based on complete developmental series of P. gracilis and P. pustulosus.
Tadpoles were fixed, staged dollowing Gosner's table, 1960), and cleared and double-stained for cartilage and bone
using standard procedures. Examination of the whole-mounted and stained spedmens revealed little difference in
chondrocranial anatorriy and the onset of ossification among the three species. Physalaemus is characterized by
having suprarostrals in which the ala and the corpus are fused dorsally. Furthermore the suprarostrals are
ventromediatly fused. Physalaemus also exhibits a well-developed processus quadratoethmoidalis. A processus
pseudopterygoideus is present only in P. gracilis. The processus antorbitalis fuses to the tip of the processus
musoularis in P. pustulosus and P. henselii to form a commisura quadratoorbitalis, this connection is lacking in P.
gracilis. The frontoparietal fenestra of P. pustulosus and P. gracilis is completely divided by well-developed taeni
tectum transversalis and taeni tectum medialis, these taenia are absent in P. henselii. h larval otic process is absent
and the processus ascendens has an intermediate attachment to the braincase in all three species




   19                         16:00 Friday                             PI                             PCH
Lateral line and swim bladder modifications associated with the laterophyslc connection of chaetodontid
butterflyfishes. W.L. Smith and J.F. Webb, Department of Biology, Villanova University, Villanova, PA 19085
USA,

The laterophyslc connection is a unique mechanical linkage between anterior horns of the swim bladder and the
lateral line canals in the post-temporal bones of the skull in fishes of the genus Chaetodon. Webb and Blum (1990)
and Webb (in press) described this well-developed connection in C. octofasciatus and suggest that this connection
may allow these fishes to, deteH pressure stimuli using their jateral line system. VVe have extended these

   16                         16:00 Friday                           PI                            PCH
Development of the suprarostral plate in pipoid frogs. C.C. Swart and R.O. de Sa, Deptartment of Biology, ,
University of Richmond,, Richmond Virginia, 23173 USA.
The ethmoid plate of anuran larvae is formed by the fusion of the trabecular and parachordal cartilages early in
development. From the antero-lateral edges of this plate, the cornua trabeculae arise as two separate and anteriorly
diverging projections. Usually, at their most anterior tips, the cornua trabeculae articulate with the suprarostral
cartilages, the element supporting the upper jaw. Modification of the cornua has been demonstrated in several taxa
(Wild 1996). In pipids, cornua trabeculae and suprarostral cartilages are not identifiable as separate elements even
in relatively early larvae (Neiuwkoop and Faber stage 50). Instead, a single and continuous cartilaginous plate
covers the entire area, the suprarostral plate (Trueb and Hanken 1993). This plate has been reported in Xenopus,
Pipa, and Rhinophrynus. Hymenochirus boettgen lacks a suprarostral plate and possesses a further modified
ethmoid area. Tadpoles of Xenopus laevis , Rhinophrynus dorsalis and H^enochinjs boettgeri were studied using
whole-mounted cleared and stained specimens and paraffin and plastic embedded cross-sectioned material. Herein
we describe the development of the suprarostral plate in Xenopus iaevis , Rhinophrynus dorsalis with comments on
the condition in Hymenochirus boettgeri




   17                       16:00 Friday . .                          PI                         PCH
Ultrastructure of gymnophione scales and their utility as phylogenetic characters. A.L. Soroston. Natural
History Museum and Department of Systematics and Ecology, The University of Kansas USA.
Since Taylor's Atlas of Scales (1972), interspecific variation among caecilian scales has been virtually ignored, and
only the presence or absence of sc^es has been used as a phylogenetic character. The issue of variation has
focused on scale morphology within and among individuals of a single species. Considerable variation has been
found in the size, shape, arrangement, and number of scales, and thus, scales have been regarded as too variable
to be phylogenetically informative. The surface morphology of scales has been investigated in detail in only a few
taxa. The outer-most layer of caecilian scales is comprised of mineralized squamulae. The objectives of this study
were to investigate intraspecific and interspecific variation in the arrangement and shape of the squamulae,' and to
address whether there are scale characteristics, besides the presence or absence of scales, that can be utilized in
reconstructing phylogenies. Scales from representative of the four caecilian families ttiat possess scales were
removed and analyzed using light and scanning electron microscopy. Little intraspecific variaition was found in scale
ultrastructure, while a good deal of interspecific variation was identified. Variation in scale ultrastructure among taxa
is quantified and scale characters are discussed.




   18                           16:00 Friday- ,                        .. PI.                              PCH
Dentition and nuptial biting in the ground skink, Scincella lateralis. V.R. Townsend (Jr). J. Akin, J. Dauphine, S.
Kidder and B.E. Felgenhauer, Department of Biology, University of Southwestern Louisiana, Lafayette, LA 70504
USA.
During courtship, male ground skinks frequently bite the body of female lizards. Scars resulting from such ’nuptial
bites" are easily obsen/ed on the abdomen of the female and remain visible for up to several weeks. In this study,
we used both light microscopy and scanning electron microscopy to examine the nuptial scars and dentition of adult
lizards. In addition to qualitatively describing the morphology or the dentition of adult ground skinks, we were also
able to examine the relationships between the number and size of the teeth and body size and sex. In an attempt to
elucidate the mating patterns of females, we compared the morphological features of the nuptial scars of females
with the key morphological features of male dentition.




  22                            16:00 Friday                        Pl                             PCH
Age and wowth of the grunt Haemulon sp. (Teleostei: Haemulldae), from Paraiba coast, Brazil. C.R.R. Nunes
and B.P. Ferreira, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Departamento de Oceanografia - Av. Arquitetura. S/N.
Recife, PE - 50670-901, Brazil.

The genus Haemulon include night predators of family Haemulidae, commonly known in Brazil as ’xira" or "cord".
Schools of haemulid feed in areas adjacent to the reefs at night, and by day they form large schools over coral reefs.
In Northeastern Brazilian coast grunts are collected by local fisherman as food or bait, but in spite of their commercial
importance, studies about their biology are rare in Brazil. Haemulon sp, is a new grunt described from the   19                        16:00 Friday                              Pl                            PCH
Lateral line and swim bladder modifications associated with the laterophysic connection of chaetodontid
butterflyfishes. W.L. Smith and J.F, Webb, Department of Biology, Villanova University, Villanova, PA 19085
USA.
The laterophysic connection is a unique mechanical linkage between anterior horns of the swim bladder and the
lateral line canals in the post-temporal bones of the skull in fishes of the genus Chaetodon. Webb and Blum (1990)
and Webb (in press) described this well-developed connection in C. octofasa'atus and suggest that this connection
may allow these fishes to detect pressure stimuli using their lateral line system. We have extended these
observations to include a description of the laterophysic connection (including swim bladder, connective tissue,
lateral line canal and neuromast morphology) in both male and female C. octofasciatus (43-91 mm SL) and C.
multicinctus (83-96 mm SL) in order to test ths hypothesis that the morphology of the connection is sexually
dimorphic in these two species. In addition, Fomipiger lon^irostris (109-141 mm SL) which lacks this sensory
specialization, served as a outgroup for ths comparison of swim bladder and connective tissue morphology and the
morphology of the lateral line canals and canal neuromasts in the vicinity of the laterophysic connection.




  20                            16:00 Friday                          PI                       . PCH
Lateral line canal morphogenesis in the cichlid, Archocentrus nigrofasclatua. M.L. Tarby and J.F. Webb.
Department of Biology, Villanova University, Villanova, PA 19085 USA.
The development of the supraorbital and mandibular canals was analyzed in Archocentnjs nlgrofascialus (n=26, 4.5
-11.5 mm SL) in order to evaluate conflicting descriptions of canal morphogenesis and the manner in which they are
incorporated into dermal cranial bones. Neuromasts of the dorsal aspect of the head were examined (n=6,4.5 - 8.0
mm SL) using SEM to clarify their identity as presumptive canal or superficial neuromasts. Four developmental
stages were identified. Neuromasts arise in the epithelium (Stage I) and a bony plate ossifies under each
neuromast. Epithelial ridges arise on either side of the neuromast and ossify intramembranously forming canal walls
(Stage II). The epithelium fuses over the neuromast (Stags III) and canal walls fuse medially (Stage IV)> forming the
lateral line canal roof. Thus, the supraorbital and mandibular canals appear to develop as outgrowths of the
underlying dermal bone, not as separate ossifications. In addition, regression analyses reveal that neuromast width
and canal width exhibit a positive linear relationship with fish size in both the supraorbital and mandibular canals
indicating that there are probably ongoing interactions between neuromasts and dermal bones after initial canal
ossficiation.




   21                           16:00 Friday                                PI                              PCH
Effects of maternal conditions on early life history traits of black porgy Acanthopagrua achlegell. W.-B.
Huang and T.-S. Chiu, Institute of Zoology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; C.-T. Shih, Institute of
Oceanography, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC and Canadian Museum of Nature, Ottawa,
Canada.
This stu^ examined the effects of maternal conditions on early life history traits of black porgy Acanthopagnjs
schlegeli. Age-ll females produced significantly larger eggs as compared to the same size of Age-Ill females. Also,
within each of the age groups, there was a positive relationship between egg size and female size. The larger eggs
generally had larger volume of oil globules, required longer incubation period (hatching age), and produce larger
larvae that endured longer to stanration. Hatching age was covaried negatively with yolk volume at hatching,
indicating that embryonic development consumed primarily yolk as its energy resource. The condition factor,
gonadosomatic index, hepatosomatic index, and lipid content of the females were not related to the early life history
traits of their offsprings

  22 . .                        16:00 Friday                         P1                            PCH
Age and growth of the grunt Haemulon sp. (Teleostei: Haemulldae), from Paraiba coast, Brazil. C.R.R. Nunes
and B.P. Ferreira, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Departamento de Oceanografia - Av. Arouitetura. S/N
Recife, PE - 50670-901, Brazil.
The genus Haemulon include night predators of family Haemulldae, commonly known in Brazil as "xira" or "cord'.
Schools of haemulid feed in areas adjacent to the reefs at night, and by day they form large schools over coral reefs.
In Northeastern Brazilian coast gaints are collected by local fisherman as food or bait, but in spite of their commercial
importance, studies about their biology are rare in Brazil. Haemulon sp., is a new grunt described from the
Northeastern Brazilian coast, where it is one of the most abundant reef fishes. Collections are being carried out
monthly al three shipwrecks (Alice, Alvarenga and Erie) and other reefs close to the coast of Joao Pessoa, PB, since
may/97 with hand nets during SCUBA dives or with hook and line. So far, 200 individuals were collected. Total
length varied from 87 to 177.9mm. Age was determined from the number of opaque zones from the center to the
margin of each otolith. Otolith cross-sect'on showed growth marks (hyaline and opaque zones) when observed with
transmitted light. The relations between weight and length were determined. Tne parameters of von Bertalanffy
growth equation were calculated for size and age frequency distributions with FISAT Program.




   23                          16:00 Friday . ..                     PI                               PCH
Size of newly metamorphosed northwestern salamanders (Ambystoma gracile} at time of dispersal. M.C.
McLain. University of Washington, Box 352100, Seattle, WA 98195 USA; A.B. Stringer, University or Washington,
Box 352100, Seattle, WA 98195 USA.
Two populations of newly metamorphosed Northwestern salamanders were analyzed for population and cohort size.
Dispersing individuals were captured at two breeding ponds encircled with drift fences in the fall of 1997. Captured
animals were temporarily marked to avoid double counting. Two distinct size-cohorts of juveniles were observed
leaving the one of the ponds. Measurement ranges for the small size-cohort were 2.1-5.7g wt., 40-54mm SVL, and
63-110mm total length. Ranges for the largo size-cohort were 6.8-15.1g wt., 59-79.5mm SVL, and 119-158mm total
length. Ths size difference of the two cohorts was statistically significant for all three measurements. A 55:45 ratio of
numbers of animals in the small to large cohort was obsen/ed. Only one size-cohort was obsenred leaving the
second pond. The size ranges of this cohort matched those of the largo size-cohort at the first pond. Data from the
two ponds from previous years also shows both single and double size-cohorts in the ^1 metamoqjhosing
populations. The size ranges of previous single and double size-cohorts match those of 1997 closely. The two size­
cohorts suggest that lanrae from egg masses deposited in successive years are metamorphosing at the same time.




  24                           16:00 Friday                            PI                       PCH
The timing and pattern of myogenesis in Hymenochlrus boetlgerl. M.T. Smetanick. G.P. Radice and R.O. de
SS, Department of Biology, University of Richmond, Richmond, VA 23173 USA.
Myogenic heterochronies have not been studied in anurans. Xenopus laevis exhibits muscle function prior to
multinucleation of axial myotome. Il is interesting to determine if the early muscle function in X. laevis is a
heterochronic event shared with other pipids or a unique trait of X. laevis. Herein, we studied myogenesis in the
pipid Hymenochinis boetlgerl. We specifically focused on the timing of four events: 1) initial presence of muscle
protein, 2) first stimulated twitch, 3) first spontaneous twitch, and 4) onset of multinudeation. Muscle protein was
detected at stage 25 (Nieuwkoop and Faber, 1956, developmental table for Xenopus) using the 12/101 anti-muscle
antibody ^d the DAB substrate reaction. Muscle was stimulated with a metal probe and obsenrations were made
under a dissecting microscope. Stimulated first twitch took place by stages 27^8, whereas spontaneous twitch
occurred       stage 31. Methacrylate sections stained with toluidine blue revealed multinucleated myotome after
stage 42. Overali, myogenic events in H. boetlgerl occur in the same sequence as in X. laevis, but delayed by 2-3
stages, except multinudeation, which occurs around the same stage in both species. In addition, first heartbeat is
also delayed in H. boettgerHSIage 36/37, compared to 33/34 in X. laevis}.   25                            16:00 Friday                     .          PI                 PCH
The effect of chronic Aroclor® 1242 exposure on metamorphosis of ranld tadpoles. M.J. Rybitski. Virginia
Institute of Marine Science, College of William and Mary, Gloucester Point, VA 23062 USA.
Aroclor® 1242 is a polychlorinated biphenyl (PCS) formulation reported to have endocrine disrupting activity in many
animals. To examine its effects on amphibian metamorphosis, tadpoles resulting from two morphologically disparate
egg masses were orally dosed daily throughout the larval period, approximately eight months. The effects on ranld
metamorphosis varied between the egg masses. In the first egg mass, tentatively identified as R. sphenocephala,
there was no statistical difference between treatments in the number of metamorphs at the end of the experiment. In
the second egg mass, tentatively identified as R. palustris, PCB treatment was correlated with an increase in the
number of tadpoles completing metamorphosis, significantly in the highest dose. The apparent stimulation of
metamorphosis in the second egg mass by PCB exposure may be due to an endocrine disrupting effect on the
corticosterone "stress" axis. A thyroid-mediated mechanism of effect is also possible. The increase in
metamorphosis in the PCB treated groups was only significant at the highest dose (1000 pg/g). This levd of
contamination exceeds concentrations likely to occur in the wild. Based upon these results, it is unlikely that PCB
exposure in the wild is altering time to metamorphosis to a degree that would detrimentally effect amphibian
populations. Interpretation of these results is hampered by the difficulty in identifying the ranid larvae. Efforts are
ongoing to resolve the identification of the tadpoles and froglets.




   26                          16:00 Friday .                           PI   .                      PCH
 Preliminary Notes on Clemmys Insculpta in Eastern New York including body size, growth rates, seasonal
activity and age distribution. T. Hunsinger. Biology Dept., Hudson Valley Community College, Vandeburg Ave.
Troy, NY 12180.
A population of the wood turtle {Clemmys insculpta) was studied in the Moordener Kill, Rensselear County, New
York from May 18 to November 5, 1997. All captures and data was collected from turtles found in the stream or
basking in a position to be visible from the stream. Sixty-one captures resulting in a total of 18 adults (10 males and
8 females) and eight juveniles captured. Each individual was measured and marked. Ages ranged from two to
indistinguishable. Sexual maturity was attained at age eleven in this population. The mean carapace length of ten
adult males was 183.7 mm, with the maximum being 195 mm in a male that was over twenty years of age. No
individual was found with a body mass greater than 950 grams. This is a smaller body size than has been recorded
in many southern populations of Clemmys insculpta that have been studied. Water temperature was recorded at the
time of capture. A negative correlation was recorded for body mass and coldest wafer at capture for each individual
(r= -0.485). No turtle smaller than 725 grams was captured after the water temperature dropped below 11 degrees
Celsius. All turtle activity stopped when ttie water temperature reached 7 degrees celsius.




  27                           16:00 Friday                           PI                             PCH
Age and length of migrating efts, Notophthalmus virldescens In the Mastigouche Reserve, Quebec. M.H.
Caetano and R. LeClair, Departamento de Zoologia e Antropologia, Faculdade de Ciencias de Lisboa, C2 Campo
Grande, 1700 Lisboa, Portugal.
From June to October 1994, we used five drift fences, 20 m-long with 10 pitfall traps each side, to sample migrating
red efts {Notophthalmus vihdescens) in terrestrial habitats near Lake Lafond in the Mastigouche Reserve, Quebec.
Fences were at varying distances (up to 200 m) from the shore. Eft age was estimated by skeletochronology. More
than 1200 specimens, from a total of 1443, were the smallest (mean SVL = 21.5 mm) and youngest efts (O-r, 1 and 2
yr) caught while migrating towards the forest; most of these (83%) were caught in fences A ano C, al 15 m from the
shore, between 7 and 30 September. The 226 efts caught migrating towards the lake were more frequent (81.6%) in
June and August. The ones caught in fences A, B and C (up to 87 m from the shore) were maturing efts with mean
SVL of 32.3 mm (max: 39) and aged between 3 and 5 yr. The adult newt population in Lake Lafond was known to
have a modal age frequency of 4 yr and a maximum age of 10 yr. It is concluded for this population that the
terrestrial eft stage lasts a maximum of 5 yr, that maturity can be reached at 3 yr in both sexes, and that females tend
to be larger than males at specific ages.




Statu* of the world'* fresh water* and flahes. D.E. McAllister. Box 20060, Perth Mews P.O., Perth ON K7H 3M6,
Canada.
Surface fresh waters represent 0.01% of the planet's water, of which 1% was in rivers, 99% in lakes. Now reservoirs
hold five times as much water as river beds and affect flow seasonality. Agriculture severely affects fish habitat by
water withdrawal and quality of runoff. Biological (exotics) and industrial chemical pollution also affect ecosystem
integrity. Freshwater fishes comprise 40.4% of the world's fish species. Freshwater fish diversity is unevenly
distributed. Polar and arid areas have few species, rivers more than lakes. Six countries, Brazil, Indonesia, China,
Zaire, Peru and U.S., contain over 90% of freshwater fish species. Species geographic density, rather than absolute
counts, provides a< different country list. Equal-area geographic grids offer a superior method of identifying
biodiversity hotspots. Globally about 20% of the world's freshwater fish species are extinct, endangered, or

  28                          16:00 Friday                            PI                             PCH
Ontogenetic cranial allometries and their Impact on vision in snakes. C.L. Caorette. Evolution, Ecology, and
Organismal Biolog, Ohio Slate University, 1735 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210 USA, Ohio State University,
1735 Neil Avenue. Columbus, OH 43210 USA.
Changes in head size and shape during development occur in all vertebrates. One general observation is that the
eyes of most vertebrates are large early in development and that the remainder of the head tends to grow around
them. This paper presents a comparative study of the relative size and position of the eyes within and among
different groups of snakes. Of particular interest are changes associated with head size in left and right visual field
overlap, with respect to both quantity and direction of overlap. For example, in some arboreal species, the eyes are
rotated about the dorsal-ventral axis towards the frontal plane during ontogeny. This increases the frontal .binocular
overlap, while sacrificing some of the postero-lateral visual field. These changes may be the consequence of
structural changes to increase gape and the development of larger, more powerful jaw musculature in larger
individuals for capturing and ingesting larger prey. Correlations with natural history and phylogeny are discussed
together with some hypotheses of ultimate causation.




  ■29                        20:00 Friday                      .. EMI . ,                     RRC
ROMMY II: What's it really all about? R.W. Murphy. LA. Lowcock and R.D. MacCulloch, CBCB, 100 Queen's
Park, Toronto, ON M5S 2C6.
Rommy has completed his Ph.D. degree at a well-known university. He cant find a job. After a series of
postdoctoral positions he comes to Canada for yet another bout of training. After learning how to gather molecular
data he begins the analysis. He encounters a strange philosophy for reconstructing genealogical asscxiiations, one
that seems to conflict with his previous training. Although he considers himself a cladist, it seems he knows virtually
nothing about the history of systematics and the assumptions behind various methods of analysis. He doesn't even
understand the basic difference between phenetios and cladistics, or why Neighbor-joining phenograms conflict with
parsimony analyses, why maximum likelihood estimates of phylogeny fail, and why frequency data suck. As the
pressure to publish his data mounts, he suffers the wrath of reviewers and editors who have their own vested
interests to defend. He eventually figures out that a philosophy underlying a methodology is important, then realizes
Ifiat even this - and all the petty squabbeling over it -- is trivial...




   30                            13:20 Friday .                   II                          THN..
 Stocks of Couesius plumbeus (Cyprinidae) in the Keweenaw Peninsula, Michigan. R.M. Bailey. Museum of
Zoology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079, U.S.A.
The lake chub {Couesius plumbeus), the most widespread minnow in northern North America, ranges from Alaska to
New England. Couesius is regarded as monotypic, but its relationships have been debated and there have been
questions as to whether or not the species is polytypic. Several recent studies cited in the literature remain
unpublished.
In 1941, Hubbs and Lagler reported that two subspecies, occasionally sympatric though usually separated
ecologically, occurred on the Keweenaw Peninsula. Later these authors suggested that the two forms verged on full
specific distinction. Restudy of their abundant material supplemented by new collections indicates that there are. in
fact, two morphs of the lake chub in the area, one chiefly in creeks, the other in Lake Superior shorewaters and
rivermouths. The creek form has a smaller eye, a shorter and slightly more rounded dorsal fin. and significantly
fewer vertebrae. I suggest that these reflect different ecological conditions during development. Downstream drift of
creek fish has resulted in sympafry of the lake and creek morphs at the mouth of Eagle River. The relationships of
Couesius are discussed.




                              16:00        ______________________ JJ______________________ THN
Lesson* from E J. Crossman - The relevance of a comprehensive approach to fish taxonomy. J.D. Reist.
Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 501 University Crescent, Winnipeg, MB, R3T 2N6.
In his direction to students. Dr. E.J. Crossman emphasizes and encourages a comprehensive approach to questions
and problems of fish systematic and taxonomic studies which, at the time I was doing my degree work, were
dominated by morphological and osetological approaches. Recently such studies have become dominated by
genetic approaches which often rely solely upon tissues provided to laboratories rather than the fish themselves, and
focus solely upon variation at the molecular level. Little or no reference is usually made to other character systems
such as morphology, osteology, ecology or biology. For well known groups and studies at higher taxonomic levels
this bias may not matter, and genetic studies add another dimension to our knowledge. However, for poorly known
groups and lower taxonomic levels, working solely with tissues can limit understanding, may bias results, and result   31.                           13:50 Friday . ,                              11     .                         THN
Status of the world's fresh waters and fishes. D.E. McAllister. Box 20060, Perth Mews P.O., Perth ON K7H 3M6,
Canada.
Surface fresh waters represent 0.01% of the planet's wafer, of which 1% was in rivers, 99% in lakes. Now reservoirs
hold five times as much water as river beds and affect flow seasonality. Agriculture severely affects fish habitat by
water withdrawal and quality of runoff. Biological (exotics) and industrial chemical pollution also affect ecosystem
Integrity. Freshwater fishes comprise 40.4% of the world's fish species. Freshwater fish diversity is unevenly
distnbuted. Polar and arid areas have few species, rivers more than lakes. Six countries, Brazil, Indonesia, China,
2faire, Peru and U.S., contain over 90% of freshwater fish species. Species geographic density, rather than absolute
counts, provides a different country list. Equal-area geographic grids offer a superior method of Identifying
biodiversity hotspots. Globally about 20% of the world's freshwater fish species are extinct, endangered, or
vulner^le. Numerous productive fisheries are at risk. Driving forces, not just immediate human impacts need to be
considered. 54% of ths planet's accessible runoff Is now used In growing human populations. Present economic
frameworks are reducing capacity of governments to respond. Senous responses need to be Initiated before the
new millennium if the collision between needs of humans and freshwater biota does not result in massive extinctions.




  32                        14:20 Friday                             II                            THN
Morphological and genetic variation In northwestern longnose suckers, Catostomus catostomus-the Salish
sucker problem. J. D. McPhail and E. B. Taylor, Dept, of Zoology, University of BC, 6270 University Blvd.,
Vancouver, BC, V6S 1Z4.
A distinctive form of longnose sucker, ths Salish sucker, occurs in southwestern British Columbia and western
Washington. Salish suckers differ from other western longnose suckers in both their morphometry and mitochondrial
genome. Thus, both morphometric and molecular data indicate taht Salish suckers have divereged from other
northwestern longnose suckers; however, our molecular data suggests an even ‘deeper* divergence between
western and eastern longnose suckers, and the Salish sucker is unambiguously part of the western lineage. This
implies that the Salish sucker evolved after the divergence of western and eastern longnose suckers. The
geographic distribution of Salish suckers is consistent with a pre-Wisconscinan origin south of Puget Sound and post
glacial dispersal north into southwestern B.C. The Salish sucker is in decline throughout its geographic range and
probably will be extinct in southwestern B.C. within a decade. THe diagnostic mitochondrial haplotypes
characteristics of the Salish sucker argue that a unique part of the evolutionary history of the longnose sucker will be
lost with the extinction of the Salish sucker. As such they constitute and Evolutionarily Significant Unit and warrant
some protecton in Washington State where there still is at least one large population.




   33                            15:30 Friday                              II                           THN
Maintaining quality muskellunge populations and sports fisheries: A biological basis for setting size limits.
J.M. Casselman. Science Development and Transfer Branch, Aquatic Ecosystems Science Section, Glenora
Fisheries Station, R.R. 4, Picton, Ontario KOK 2T0; C.J, Robinson, Watershed Ecosystems Graduate Program, Trent
University, Peterborough, Ontario, K9J 7B8.
Muskellunge, the largest freshwater sports species in temperate North America, are venerable fish whose size and
stature match those of their benefactor. Dr. E. J. Crossman. Naturally sustaining muskellunge populations that
'trophy* fish are a valuable resource. Dr. Crossman's studies over the years have provided a legacy essential to our
understanding of the specie's biology and its management. We review the relationship between length of the
reseracher and that of the fish studied. Was there a natural affinity here? Dr. Crossman has encouraged aquisition
and archiving of biological data on this relatively rare fish, so where once there was little, now there is a wealth of
infomiation to manage and assess exploitation. Using the Cleithrum Project archive, we developed a precise,
biologically based method for setting size limits that guarantees adequate reproductive capadty and determines a
Minimum Ultimate (trophy) Size Limit (M.U.S.L.) based on comparable growth potential for male and female
muskellunge from 14 Ontario sources, we demonstrate how data on as few as 11 fish (>8 -11 yr.) can adequately
describe growth potential. Age and number of muskellunge that exceed M.S.U. can indicate how well we perpetuate
the legacy of good science and rational, conservative management encouraged by Ed.

   34                           16:00 Friday                                 II                               THN
Lessons from E.J. Crossman - The relevance of a comprehensive approach to fish taxonomy.                   J.D. Reist.
Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 501 University Crescent, Winnipeg, MB, R3T 2N6.

In his direction to students. Dr. E.J. Crossman emphasizes and encourages a comprehensive approach to questions
and problems of fish systematic and taxonomic studies which, at the time I was doing my degree work, were
dominated by morphological and osetological approaches. Recently such studies have become dominated by
genetic approaches which often rely solely upon tissues provided to laboratories rather than the fish themselves, and
focus solely upon variation at the molecular level. Little or no reference is usually made to other character systems
such as morphology, osteology, ecology or biology. For well known groups and studies at higher taxonomic levels
this bias may not matter, and genetic studies add another dimension to our knowledge. However, for poorly known
groups and lower taxonomic levels, working solely with tissues can limit understanding, may bias results, and result
in erroneous conclusions. External morphology is often the first clue to undiscovered diversity. Genetic variation may
be present but without associated knowledge of morphology may not be interpreted correctly. Thus, quantifying and
understanding morphological diversity is important in the development of hypotheses which can then be tested using
other approaches such as genetics. Morphological diversity within an esociform (Olympic mudminnow, Novumbra
hubbsi) and morphological and genetic diversity within a salmoniform group (Arctic and Dolly Varden chars,
Salvellnus spp.) are used to illustrate the need for close association of various approaches to achieve fuller
understanding of diversity and relationships of fishes. In keeping with the legacy of Dr. Crossman, I advocate a more
comprehensive approach to systematic and taxonomic studies which should include reference to morphological,
ecological and biological chararactes as well as genetic characters.



  35                          16:30 Friday                                II                         THN
Evidence of mate competition and mate choice In Atlantic cod. J.A. Hutchings. T.D. Bishop and C.R. McGregor-
Shaw, Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 4J1.
We quantified individual differences in reproductive behaviour of Atlantic cod under simulated natural conditions. At
field spawning densities, 16 individually marked cod (7 males, 9 females) were observed twice daily and videotaped
continuously for 9 weeks at ambient photoperiod and temperature in a large tank. Males established an aggression­
based dominance hierarchy with 96% of all agonistic interactions being initiated by the 3 largest males.
Microsatellite DNA analysis of 1 female's brood identified paternal gene contributions from the 3 behaviourally
dominant males. Interactions between sexes were dominated by male circling of females. After descending to the
bottom, a motionless female was circled an average 2.4 times (range: 1 to 11), usually by 1 male per circling bout but
by several males throughout the spawning period. Circling may provide opportunities for males to gain individual
access to reproductive females and for females to assess the quality of potential mates. Given the prevalence of
sound communication among reproductive cod and other gadids, sexual differences in the size of sound- producing
muscles in haddock provide indirect evidence of mate choice. The mating conditions of cod and haddock are
consistent with the hypothesis that these fish reproduce in leks.




   36                       17:00 Friday                            II                         THN
E. J. Crossman and his contribution to the study of fish species at risk. E. Holm. CBCB, Royal Ontario
Museum, 100 Quuens Park, Toronto, ON, M5S 2C6.
Dr. E. J. Crossman has shown a concern for the biodiversity and dedine of fishes in Canada. He is a member of the
board on both the national and provincial committees concerned with listing vulnerable, threatened and endangered
fishes. He received a grant and coordinated the production of several status reports for the Committee on the Status
of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. Recently he has become involved in the Committee on the Status of Species at
Risk in Ontario. The information which he has helped to produce is used by fishery managers and biological
consultants that are attempting to protect habitats and the fishes which are sensitive to its degradation. The status
reports are eventually published in a scientific journal and summaries of the information is being made available to
the general public through the ROM's web page.   37                           17:30 Friday                                   II                               THN
Threats to the fish diversity of Khanka Lake, Russia. N.E. Mandrak. Department of Biology. Trent University,
Peterborough, Ontario K9J 7B8.
In 1993, a joint Royal Ontario Museum - Zoologioal Institute of St. Petersburg expedition surveyed the fish fauna of
Khanka Lake, Russia. Khanka Lake is located on the Russian-Chinese border in the Amur River basin of eastern
Asia. If supports a large commercial fishery and its' shores are ringed with rice paddies and fish farms. The lake
contains a biogeographically interesting fish assemblage with endemic, Eurasian, Manchurian, and Sino-lndian
affinities. Historically, the lake has the most diverse fish fauna of any lake in Russia with more than 50 species
caught in the lake. The 1993 survey sampled fishes at over 100 sites in Khanka Lake and caught only 34 species.
The biological diversity of Khanka Lake appears to be seriously threatened by unregulated overharvesting and
cultural eutrophication.




   38                            18:00 Friday                                  II                        .     .THN
Changes in the biodiversity of the fishes of the Great Lakes. B.C. Cudmore. Royal Ontario Museum, Centre for
Biodiversity and Conservation Biology, 100 Queen's Park, Toronto ON M5S 2C6.
The need for better understanding of the changes in the biodiversity of the fishes of the Great Lakes includes the
need to inventory the number of fishes introduced and those which become extirpated. Compiling records on
introduced fishes, the lakes they are found in, the vectors used, and their current reproductive status provides
valuable information for the monitoring of the fish communities. There have been 52 introduced fishes recorded from
the lakes, 27 of which are currently established. It is important to continue to compile this information to track
introduced species, not just their arrival, but their establishment and spread, as these species are often referred to as
one of the main reasons for changes in the biodiversity of the lakes. Another change to biodiversity is the loss of
species. To date, there have been 26 species and subspecies extirpated from one or more of the lakes. Lake
Ontario has the highest number of extirpated species, while Lakes Nipigon and Superior have lost no species.
Understanding the present fish community and the changes it has experienced, allow for more effective management
of the Great Lakes.




   39                            13:00 Friday                                 16                               MCN
The first graduate student looks back 35 years, and even further. R. Altio. Department of Biological Sciences,
Mississippi State University,, Mississippi State, MS 39762 USA.
The First Graduate Student was sometimes hyperbolic in speech and actions, and his perceptions of the world were
spawned at the edge of a cornfield in central Illinois. The Major Professor was different - he never has had a firm
grasp on the concept of hyperbole, and he viewed the world through glasses made near some large river in southern
Ohio. How, when, and why did they meet? What happened? How could their interactions have formed the
foundations for the entire career of The Student?
I think I know the answers to these and other questions. I will spend 30 min. on a chronicle of how I met Ron
Brandon, the three academic years that I spent in his association when he was a doctoral student at the University
of Illinois and I was an undergraduate, and the two years I spent as his first graduate student at Southern Illinois
University. I will then add a smattering of happenings since those times. In the process, I hope to illustrate who he
is, or who I think he is, and then I will end with a summary - that could be the fun part, because we seldom pause
long enough to say "Thank you."




Structure and frequency of multiple spermatophores of Ambystana                     texanum.    E.J. Zalisko. Blackbum
College, Carlinville, IL 62626, USA.
Spermatophores of Ambystoma texanum collected in the field from Macoupin and Jackson Counties, Illinois, consist
of a sperm filled cap supported by a gelatinous base. This structure is consistent with prior reports for this and other
Ambystoma species. Multiple structures consisted of up to 7 spermatophores stacked vertically. Individual
spermatophores within multiple structures have a morphology consistent with single spermatophores.
Spermatophores within multiple structures adhere to each other. The base of each stacked spermatophore typically
covers the subjacent spermatophore cap, leaving only the cap of the top spermatophore exposed. Rve
                  figiHc nt ot-saA snermatonhore.g were examined. The percent of spermatophores in multiple

   40                            13:30 Friday                                   16                         ..    MCN
Ron Brandon's contributions to our understanding of salamanders of the genus Gyrinophilus. R.C. Bruce.
Department of Biology. Western Carolina University, Cullowhee, NC 28723 USA.
To the degree that a failing memory permits, the presentation will first recount my initial experiences with Dr.
Brandon, in Bearcamp Gorge in the summer of 1962, particularly the memorable night of July 4. The important
contributions of Dr. Brandon to our understanding of the systematics of Gyrinophilus will then be reviewed. The
presentation will conclude with an examination of the current status of our knowledge of Gyrinophilus porphyriticus in
the southern Blue Ridge. Patterns of variation in pigmentation, body size, and life history suggest the presence of
three geographic variants. Preliminary research has suggested some level of reproductive isolation among at least
two of them. Additional genetic and behavioral studies are needed to resolve questions of diversification and
speciation in the southern Blue Ridge complex of Gyrinophilus porphyriticus.




   41                            13:45 Friday                                   16    .   .                  .   MCN
Another look at the Batesian-Mullerlan mimicry spectrum.                R.W. Van Devender. Department of Biology,
Appalachian State University, Boone, NC 28608 , USA.
In 1976 James Huheey used a functional feeding model to simulate the effects of adding weaker models to simple
Mullerian Mimicry system. Huheey concluded that weaker models decrease the survivorship of the stronger models
and have the same impact on the models as would Batesian mimics. This conclusion contradicts a number of earlier
theoretical and logical assertions, but has apparently survived the test of time rather well. I used a similar functional
model of feeding to ask whether specific changes alter the conclusion that Mullerian Mimicry cannot exist. The newer
feeding model included both positive and negative values for noxiousness and a wide range of relative proportions of
model species. Individuals of the second mimic species were ADDED to a resident pool of noxious model instead
of replacing them. This modification was added because models and mimics only share their appearance not
necessarily their ecological space. Success, or lack of success, was measured In terms of mortality rates for both
species. Results of the simulations delineate situations with "viable" proportions of "models" and "mimics". In all
situations where the second species was at all noxious, overall sunrivorship for the original species increased.
Mullerian co-models have exactly the impact that Fisher suggested in 1930. The model used extended the ranges of
possible attractiveness beyond the usual limited range of palatable vs. unpalatable and suggests ways of
incorporating these variables into more general systems.




  ■42                            14:00 Friday                               .   16            .                  MCN
Sperm storage in spermathecae of female smooth newts (Triturus vulgaris) during the breeding season.
D.M Sever. Department of Biology, Saint MaryOs College, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA; T. Halliday, Department of
Biology, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK.
Unmated female smooth newts collected in terrestrial situations were mated in the laboratory, and the ultrastructure
of the transferred sperm and the spermathecae was observed at various intervals after mating. Sperm from a
spermatophore cap lodged in a female's cloacal orifice can migrate info spermathecae within one hour after mating.
Spherical stnjcfures on the axial fibers of some sperm in the cap could indicate immaturity. Disorderly clusters of
sperm from the cap are still present in the cloacal chamber 12 hours after mating but are absent 24 hours after
mating. During storage, sperm often are in tangled masses in the spermathecal tubules. The sperm are coated
with spennathecal secretions, and some sperm nuclei were observed embedded in the spermathecal epithelium.
Littio evidence for spermiophagy early in the breeding season was found. During oviposition, mazes of sperm
occur external to the spermathecal oriflces, and sperm may be released in this condition onto eggs as they pass
through the cloaca. The tangled clusters in which sperm are found from pick-up to oviposition is hypothesized as
an adaptation to reduce the effectiveness of sperm competition from the ejaculates of rival males.




                                 15:30 F’jda
Mofecuior and morphofo^cal phylogenetics of the Mexican ambystomatid salamanders. H.B. Shaffer and
S.R. Voss, Section of Evolution and Ecology, University of California, Davis,, CA 95616 USA.
The Mexican ambystomatid salamanders comprise a group of about 15 species, all of which are part of the tiger
salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum) complex. The paedomorphio populations from Puebla and adjacent Veracruz
were originally brought to our attention by Ron Brandon, and constitirte a system of extraordinary interest for the
study of speciation and the evolution of metamorphosis. The region contains at least five lacustrine, paedomorphic
populations which demonstrate a wide range of morpholi^ical and physiological novelties, while the
metamorphosing animals from the same region appear to fall within the limits of normal A. velasci. Based on both
allozyme and mitochondrial DNA sequence data, most of these taxa are virtually indistinguishable, suggesting thatSpaWnoU al liio cuyo vi a uuiiiiiuiu iii wiiuoi iiiiiiuio.   mio wiap^         iiww mhwimm - (w       wi j
grasp on the concept of hyperbole, and he viewed the world through glasses made near some large river in southern
Ohio. How, when, and why did they meet? What happened? How could their interactions have fomned the
foundations for the entire career of The Student?
I think I know the answers to these and other questions. I will spend 30 min. on a chronicle of how I met Ron
Brandon, the three academic years that I spent in his association when he was a doctoral student at the University
of Illinois and I was an undergraduate, and the two years I spent as his first graduate student at Southern Illinois
University. I will then add a smattering of happenings since those times. In the process, I hope to illustrate who he
is, or »^o I think he is, anti then I will end with a summary - that could be the fun part, because we seldom pause
long enough to say "Thank you."




Structure and frequency of multiple apermatophores of Ambystoma                    texamm.      E.J. Zallsko. Blackbum
College, Carlinville, IL 62626, USA.

Soermatophotes of Ambystoma texanum collected in the field from Macoupin and Jackson Counties, Illinois, consist
of a sperm filled cap supported by a gelatinous base. This structure is consistent with prior reports for this and other
Ambysttxna species. Multiple structures consisted of up to 7 spermatophores stacked vertically. Individual
spermatophores within multiple structures have a morphology consistent with single spermatophores.
Spermatophores within multiple stnjctures adhere to each other. The base of each stacked spermatophore typically
covers the subjacent spermatophore cap, leaving only the cap of the top spermatophore exposed. Ave
spermatophore fields of 21-535 spermatophores were examined. The percent of spermatophores in multiple
structures was positively correlated with the number of spermatophores within a spermatophore field (19%, N = 21;
73.8%, N = 112-120; 83.7%, N = 378-535 spermatophores). Further, the number of spermatophores within multiple
structures was positively correlated with the number of spermatophores within a spermatophore field (22% of all
spermatophores were in structures of 4 or more spermatophores for N = 378-535; 15.7% for N= 112-120; and 0%
for N = 21 spermatophores).




  44                            14:30 Friday                         16                          MCN
From Berry Cave to Wayah Bald; One mile up and forty years long. J.E. Huheev. Sounvood Mountain Scientific,
215 Tucker Lane, Lenoir City, TN 37771-3405 USA.
Field experiences, from cave bottoms to mountaintrms, from the swamps of Southern Illinois to the balds and rain
forests of the Blue Ridge and Smoky Mountains, will be discussed. Along the way, previously undescribed forms
have been described, studied, and also overlooked. Rare species were sometime plentiful, and "common" species
unobtainable. Mimics changed from Batesian to Mullerian. And a good time was had by all.




 . 45                         14:45 Friday                       16                              MCN
What happens to the head when "axolotls" "metamorphose". S.M. Reilly. Department of Biological Sciences,
Ohio University, Athens OH 45701 USA.
Although, the paedomorphic salamanders Ambystoma mexicanum and Ambystoma dumertlii are not known to
metamorphose in nature they often undergo spontaneous metamorphic changes when maintained in the
laborato^. In addition, individuals of these species have been induced to transform with treatments of thyroxin.
Descriptions of these transformed individuals are based entirely on external features associated with
metamorphosis of ths gills and tail fin and variation in these external features indicates that many of the transformed
individuals are only partially transformed. This study examines the internal changes that occur in the cranium and
hyobranohial apparatus in these species in both spontaneous and induced individuals. The degree of
metamorphosis in these individuals is evaluated relative the normal transformations known for metamorphosing
sister species and spontaneous and induced changes are compared.               Interestingly, most of these transformed
individuals, whether metamorphosis is spontaneous or induced, die within 5 months or the onset of transformation.
Functional interpretations of the internal anatomical patterns are used to examine the possibility that abnormal
metamorphosis limits the feeding ability of these individuals, thus, contributing to their short term post "metamorphic"
survival.

of the transferred sperm and Ike sperrrWIR^^^mniHliniHmiMaii^^HH
spermatophore cap lodged in a female's cloacal orifice can migrate into spermathecae within one hour after mating.
Spherical structures on the axial fibers of some sperm in the cap could indicate immaturity. Disorderly clusters of
sperm from the cap are still present in the cloacal chamber 12 hours after mating but are absent 24 hours after
mating. During storage, sperm often are in tangled masses in the spermatheoal tubules. The sperm are coated
with spermathecal secretions, and some sperm nuclei were observed embedded in the spermathecal epithelium.
Uftle evidence for spermiophagy early in the breeding season was found. During oviposition, mazes of sperm
occur external to the spermathecal orifices, and sperm may be released in this condition onto eggs as they pass
through the cloaca. The tangled clusters in which sperm are found from pick-up to oviposition is hypothesized as
an adaptation to reduce the effectiveness of sperm competition from the ejaculates of rival males.




Molecular and morphologfcal phylogenetics of the Mexican ambystomattd salamanders.                   H.B. Shafter and
S.R. Voss, Section of Evolution and Ecology, University of Califomia, Davis,, CA 95616 USA.

The Mexican ambystomatid salamanders comprise a group of about 15 species, all of which are part of the tiger
salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum} complex. The paedomorphic populations from Puebla and adjacent Veracruz
were originaliy brought to our attention by Ron Brandon, and constitute a system of extraordinary interest for the
study of speciation and the evolution of metamorphosis. The region contains al least five lacustrine, paedomorphic
populations which demonstrate a wide range of morphological and physiological novelties, while the
metanrarphosing animals from the same region appear to fall within the limits of normal A. velasci. Based on both
allozyme and mitochoitdrial DNA sequence data, most of these taxa are virtually indistinguishable, suggesting that
the ambystomatid radiation from the Puebla lakes region has taken place in the very recent past. As such, it
constitules an example of very rapid physiological and morphological evolution, and possible speciation, as well as
severe conservation challenges to preserve these narrowly restricted taxa.




   47                         15:45 Friday .    . .                 16                            MCN
 Evolutionary Relationships of spiny-tailed Iguanas (genus Ctenosaura} and their Implications for Mexican
and Central American biogeography. L. Bucklev. Rochester Institute of Technology, Department of Biological
Sciences, Rochester, NY 14623.
Several important geophysical trends in Mexico and Central America are reflected in the pattern of relationships
among lizards of the genus Ctenosaura. The spiny-tailed iguanas are primarily lowland species whose current
distributions wpearto have been influenced by both fragmentation and dispersal. Identifiable events cluster into one
of two general categories which include those which are fairly recent (< 3 mya) or those which are relatively older (>
5 mya). Species or spedes groups whose divergences reflect relatively older events may have resulted from uplift
of interior highlands, isolation of the Baja peninsula and previous isolation of Lower Central America from Nuclear
Central America and Mexico. More recently diverged species may be the result of episodes such as the emergence
of the isthmus of Tehuantepec, the formation of the Mexican tiansvolcanics, the fragmentation of Pacific coastal arid
habitats and isolation on islands.




   48.                       . 16:00 Friday                            16      ...                   MCN
What, If anything, is Desmognathus ocoeetJ S.G. Tilley. A.E. Todd and J.A. Anderson, Department of Biological
Sciences, Smith College, Northampton, MA 01063.
Recognizing Desmognathus ocoee as a distinct species is consistent with cladistic and distance analyses of
allozyme polymorphisms, but corxteals complex patterns of genetic differentiation and significant gaps in our
understanding. One difficulty has been our lack of knowledge of the contact zones between D. ocoee and two
related taxa; Desmognathus.carolinensis in the Blue Ridge and D. ochrophaeus in the Cumberland Plateau. We
present data suggesting that the D. ocoee-D. carolinensis "contact zone" is tens of kilometers wide and
characterized by discorriant variation among several allozyme loci. The Cumberland Plateau populations of D.
ocoee are replaced north of the Tennessee River by a form that is strongly differentiated from both D. ocoee and D.
ochrophaeus and probably represents yet another distinct spedes. We are still left with the question of whether
subdividing D. ocoee or combining it with other taxa would produce taxonomic entities conforming to any species
concept invoking genetic cohesion among local populations .   49                        16:15 Friday                                   16,.                            MCN
Demographic and reproductive relationships In a southern Illinois population of the crayfish frog, Rana
areolata. M. Redmer. Department of Zoology, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale, Carbondale, Illinois 62901,
USA.
Rana areolata and the sibling R. capita may be declining in parts of their ranges. Demographic (snout-vent length
[SVL] and skeletochronologicaliy estimated age) and reproductive (fecundity and ova size) characteristics were
examined in a southern Illinois R. areolata population. Fifty-nine frogs (36M:23F) were sampled in 1996.
Hematoxylinophilic lines of arrested growth (LAG) were detected in all cross-sectioned phalanges. Male ago
averaged 3.53 yr (range = 2-5 yr) while female averaged 3.83 yr (range = 3-5 yr). Male SVL averaged 82.78 mm
(range = 71-90 mm). Females averaged 89.61 mm (range = 79-102 mm). Age and SVL were positively related in
males (r = 0.81) and females (r = 0.76). Male and female age distributions did not differ significantly, though male
SVL distribution was smaller than that of females. Ova from fifteen clutches were counted. Mean clutch size was
4868 (range = 3208-6807). Female SVL and age were both positively related to clutch size (r = 0.87 arid 0.64,
respectivery). Mean ovum/embryo diameter calculated for all yolked ovarian complements, and two oviposited
clutches (at the blastula stage or earlier), was 2.05 mm (range = 1.80-2.20 mm). Ovum size and clutch size were
negatively related (r = -0.68).




   50                           16:30 Friday                               16                           MCN
Variation in the scleral ossicles of cryptodiran turtles. K.D. Andrews, Dept. Biol., Glendale Community College,
Glendale, AZ 85302, USA; J.L. Carr. Dept. Biol., Northeast Louisiana University, Monroe, LA 71209 USA.
Among tetrapods, scleral ossicles form a ring of small bony plates in the eyes of Sphenodon, lizards, turtles, and
birds. The number of ossicles and their pattern of overlap have been used as taxonomic characters for lizards and
birds; however, the ossicles of turtles have been considered too variable to be phylogenetically inforrnative. We
undertook a more comprehensive survey to assess levels of variability in scleral ossicles and their potential utility as
taxonomic characters among chelonians. Ossicles in 432 eyes from 73 species representing nine out of 10
cryptodiran families were cleared and stained. The ossicles were counted and the pattern of ossicle overlap in the
ring for each eye recorded. Bilateral symmetry, and extent of intraspecific and interspecific variation were analyzed.
Number of ossicles ranged from 7 to 14 per eye. The most common numbers of ossicles were 10 (39%) and 11
(35%). There was a high degree of bilateral symmetry in the number of ossicles present. Within a species, the
extent of bilateral symmetry in overlap patterns ranged from 39% to 100%. For the most common numbers of
ossicles, overlap patterns were predominated by one or two vry common patterns. Although number of ossicles
alone may be useful in distinguishing some closely related species, it has limited use at higher taxonomic levels.
The overlap patterns are very consenrative and therefore of limited phylogenetic utility.




   51                          13:00 Friday                             CR4                                 AXL
Agrichemical, methyl mercury, and UV radiation effects on multiple endpoints In southern leopard frogs
(Rana utrlcularla) and gray treefrogs (Hyla chrysoscells). C.A. Britson. Department of Biology, University of
Mississippi, University, MS 38677, USA; S.T. Threlkeld, Department of Biology, University of Mississippi, University,
MS 38677, USA.
We measured effects of three chemicals and UV radiation on Rana utrlcularla and Hyla chrysoscells tadpoles using
a center point- and chemical-free control-enhanced 2^ factorial design. Rana tadpoles were introduced to 72, 500-1
mesocosms (90 each) on 25 April 1997. UV radiation was transmitted or blocked using OP-4 or OP-3 filters (installed
16 May). Methyl mercury, chlorpyrifos, and atrazine were applied at 0,10, 50, and 100 % of 0.4 mg/kg, 30 ppb, and
192 ppb, respectively, on 8 June. Rana tadpoles were sampled 1,2,4,8,16 and 32 days after chemical application.
Survivorship of Rana tadpoles decreased with increased mercury concentration (psO.0001). Size variation (residual
of tile mas^ength ratio) in sunriving tadpoles was significantly affected by a UV and chlorpyrifos interaction, possibly
antagonistic, on days 1, 8, and 16 m<0.05) and atrazine (p=0.018, day 1). Fewer Rana metamorphs were obtained
under conditions of transmitted UV (p=0.0078) and mercury (p=0.0014). On day 33, we placed 25 Hyla eggs in each
mesocosm. Interspecific competition with Rana decreased the number of H^a metamorphs obtained (p=0.0231).
Multiple interacting effects of these anthropogenic and environmental stressors may shape natural anuran
populations.




Behavioral habituation tn the green frog, Rana damHana. S, PenM and P. Owen, Butler University, Department
of Biology, Indianapolis, IN 46208, USA.
Habituation and its role in the dear enemy effect were investigated in a population of green frogs, R^a
GreeS h^“ Kged breeding Mason in which males vocalize from territories to attrac^[mates Wotested
me DtedSXn that ni^e green frogs will habituate to broadcast synthetic conspecflc stimuli.
that male oreen frogs can discriminate familiar from unfamiliar stimuli. We infer that habituation helps to mediatetho
teStX iKcSs Xeen male green frogs. Strangers present a greater threat than familiar neighbors Males
              tn thfi advertisement vocalizations of their near-neighbors, allowing them to focus more ^ention on

       52                           13:15 Friday                         CR4                               AXL.
a    Behavioural responses of anurans to ultraviolet radiation. V. Blazeski and L.E. Licht, Department of Biology,
     York University, 4700 Keele Street, Toronto. ON M3J 1P3.
     Global trends indicate that amphibian populations may be declining. One of the factors implicated in the declines is
     ultraviolet radiation (UV). To date, almost all sturJies conducted on the embryonic life stage of anurans have shown
e    that effects of ambient UV are negligible. Other studies, which focused on the larval life stage, have shown that
     amounts of UV above current ambient levels may be detrimental to tadpoles. Some anurans have visual pigments
     sensitive to UV and their ability to sense this radiation may presuppose a mechanism tor detecting and avoiding if. A
     series of indoor and outdoor behavioural tests were conducted in Toronto, Ontario, to determine behavioural
     responses of anurans to UV. Larval and metamorphosed fomns were placed in outdoor enclosures exposed to
e    natural sunlight and sunlight screened with Mylar filters to reduce UV radiation. The results showed that neither
s    tadpoles nor juveniles of Rana piplens and Rana sylvatica, nor juveniles of Bufo americanus, preferred UV-reduced
 ,   environments.
e




        53. . .                     13:30 Friday                            CR4                           AXL
 ,   Vasotocin influences advertisement and aggressive calls of the gray treefrog, Hyla versicolor. M.B. Tito and
     S.K. Boyd, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA; I. Albert,
     Department of Physics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA.
     The neuropeptide arginine vasotocin (AVT) influences vocalizations in some anuran amphibians but whether this is
e    true across anurans is unknown. We examined the ability of AVT to influence advertisement and aggressive calls in
s    Hyla versicolor. Males were injected with AVT (100 ug;ip) or saline immediately after capture and their calling was
0    recorded. Advertisement and aggressive calls had distinctly different spectral and temporal qualities. AVT-injected
e    males gave significantly more c^ls of both types at 30, 60, and 90 min after injection, compared to saline- injected
     males. This difference was due to a disappearance of calling in saline-injected males. In addition, AVT-treatment
     increased both call duration and intercall intervals for advertisement calls, thereby decreasing overall call rate
e    (compared to pre-injection calls of those same frogs). Aggressive calls were given singly so we could not record call
 f   rate or intercall intervals. Aggressive call duration did not change after AVT treatment. Individual animals gave
     significantly more advertisement calls than aggressive calls. The ratio of advertisement to aggressive calls did not
     change after AVT injection. AVT thus maintains vocal behavior in Hyla versicolor urider stressful conditions. It is
     likely however that another neural or hormonal factor determines whether an advertisement or aggressive call is
     given.
     Supported by NSF #IBN95-14305.




       54                               13:45 Friday                            CR4                         . AXL
s    Acustic parameters of diploid and tetrapioid treefrogs.          McLister. Dept. Ecology & Evolutionary Biology,
f    University of California, Irvine, CA 92717.
,

g
1
d
d
 l
y
d
h
.
n




 t
     vK 24061 USA.
     We examined the relative stability versus lability of temporal display structure in males of the lizard,
d    carolinensis >Ne videotaped headbobbing displays across field and laboratory environrnents, STCial crmt^s, and
     populations for males froin Georgia, Florida, and Hawaii, and subsequently generated
o    gS)hs of these displays for statistical comparison. Anolis caroltnensts is known to be a recent (circa 1950)
s    of Hawaii and displays from this population could therefore be altered through founder effects, genetic d<an^or a
n    o^^aH^nou^yo                      ^™.nfer6d over the rest of the species' range. Therefore, we expected to find16 May). Methyl mercury, chlotpyrifos, and atrazine were applied at 0,10,50, and 100 % of 0.4 mg/kg, 30 ppb, and
192 ppb, respectively, on 8 June. Rana tadpoles were sampled 1,2,4,8,16 and 32 days after chemical application.
Survivorship of Rana tadpoles decreased with increased mercury concentration (p<0.0001). Size variation (residual
of the mas^ength ratio) in surviving tadpoles was significantly affected by a UV and chlorpyrifos interaction, possibly
antagonistic, on days 1, 8, and 16 (p<0.05) and atrazine (p=0.018, day 1). Fewer Rana metamorphs were obtained
under conditions of transmitted UV (p=0.0078) and mercury (p=0.0014). On day 33, we placed 25 Hyla eggs in each
mesocosm. Interspecific competition with Rana decreased the number of H)4a metamorphs obtained (p=0.0231).
Multiple interacting effects of these anthropogenic and environmental stressors may shape natural anuran
populations.




Behavioral habituation In the green frog, Rana ctem/tana, S. Perrill and P. Owen, Butler University, Department
of Biology, Indianapolis, IN 46208, USA.

Habituation and its role in the dear enemy effect were Investigated in a population of green frogs, Rana clamitans.
Green frogs have a prolonged breeding season In which males vocalize from territories to attract mates. We tested
the prediction that male green frogs will habituate to broadcast synthetic conspecific stimuli. Our results indicate
that male green frogs can discriminate familiar from unfamiliar stimuli. We infer that habituation helps to mediate the
territorial interactions between male green frogs. Strangers present a greater threat than familiar neighbors. Males
can habituate to the advertisement vocalizations of their near-neighbors, allowing them to focus more attention on
the unfamiliar vocalizations of a territorial intruder. This would save energy that could be invested in a male's
advertisement calls and in the defense of his territory.




  '56                       14:15 Friday                            CR4                             AXL
Striking In bold snakes. D. Cundall and A. Deufel, Lehigh University, Biological Sciences, 31 Williams Dr.
Bethlehem PA 18015-3190 USA.
Boid strikes resemble predatory viper strikes. Quantitative analysis of video records (30fps, 1/1000 s exposure) of
160 strikes made by 18 bold snakes representing eight species show that although at least three kinematic patterns
may be used, the majority of strikes are made by dropping the mandible and accelerating the braincase over the
prey. The snake's teeth slide over the prey surface and do not engage until the prey moves In the direction of the
strike. Gape rarely exceeds 60 degrees and jaw closure may begin at or just prior to contact with the prey. The
strike terminates with a bite involving ventral flexion of the snake's head during formation of the first constricting coil.
The rapidity and variability of strikes suggest that suspensorial design in bold snakes acts in part to absorb shocks.
Anatomical and behavioral comparisons to other alethinophidian snakes suggest that the rapid strike may have
coevolved with macrostomate gape size because features of skull design that increase gape size also increase
shock absorbing potential during strikes.




   57                         14:30 Friday                              CR4                           AXL
 Pressure/immobllfzation as first aid for venomous snakebite In the United States. D.L .sr Hardy. 585 S Main
Av. Tucson, AZ, 85701; S.P. Bush, Loma Linda University. School of Medicine.
Pressure/immobilization (P/I) is a first aid method used in Australia for elapid snakebite which consists of elastic
bandage wrapping and splinting of the extremity. It has recently been suggested that it be used following venomous
snakebite in the United States. However, most physicians do not recommend P/I for pitviper bite because local
necrosis may be increased due to venom sequestration, and clinical experience in terms of outcome after pitviper
envenomation is lacking. In addition, correct application of P/I requires knowledge of the technique and immediate
availability of appropriate materials, its use may increase the incidence of compartment syndrome, and
implementation of P/I can delay transport to a medical facility. Advocates say possible Increased local necrosis from
P/I use is an acceptable trade off if systemic venom effects can be delayed. We recommend the use of P/I in the
U.S. be limited to bites by captive Australian elapid snakes and only on a case by case basis. Passive
immobilization and immediate travel to a medical facility remain the only first aid measures universally accepted.
P/I is not recommended following pitviper envenomation as it has not been shown to improve outcome and may
cause additional injury.

Comparl&one of temporal display structure across contexts and populations In male Anotta camHnanaia:
signal stability or lability? M.B. Lovern. T.A. Jenssen and K.S. Orrell, Dept, of Biology, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg.
VA 24061 USA.

We examined the relative stability versus lability of temporal display structure in males of the lizard, Anolis
carolinensls. We videotaped headbobbing displays across field and laboratory environments, social contexts, and
populations for males from Georgia, Rorida, and Hawaii, and subsequently generated display-action-pattem (DAP)
graphs of these displays for statistical comparison. Anolis carolinensls is known to be a recent (circa 1950) colonizer
of Hawaii, and display from this population could therefore be altered through founder effects, genetic drift, and/or a
tropical environment unlike that encountered over the rest of the species' range. Therefore, we expected to find
lability in temporal display structure between Hawaiian and mainland populations. In contrast, we found that males
from each population used the same three, highly stereotyped temporal display structures (i.e., display types, labeled
A, B, and C) in their display repertoires, and that all three of these types were used across all measured recording
environments and social contexts. Furthermore, intra-display structure was not affected by recording enviranment or
social context, but within the relatively small total variance, a significant population effect was found for a majority of
intra-display units.




   59                           15:30 Friday                            CR4                            AXL
Perch height and movements of the arboreal lizard Anolis nebulosus from a tropical dry forest of Mexico. A.
Ramirez-Bautista, Institute de Biologia. Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico. Apdo. Postal 70-153. Mexico
D.F. 04510; M. Benabib. Institute de Ecologia. Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico. Apdo. Postal 70-275.
Mexico D.F. 04510.
We studied perch height and individual movements of the lizard Anolis nebulosus from Chamela, Jalisco, Mexico.
Males used higher perches than females. Adults used significantly higher perches than juveniles and hatchlings,
and overall, perches were significantly higher during the wet than the dry season. Perch height increased with body,
environmental, and microenvironmental temperature, suggesting that perch height plays a role in thermoregulation.
Distance moved by each individual was not related to SVL. Females moved longer distances than males, but
females remained longer in the study area than males. Significant differences among age classes were found in the
time period that lizards lived in the trees. The number of days lizards remained in the area was inversely related
with the distance traveled. A larger proportion of lizards that moved longer distances died before the reproductive
season, in comparison to those that moved shorter distances or did not move at all from ths tree where they were
originally caught, suggesting that it is dangerous to move, and lizards should establish soon in a territory to increase
their fitness.




  ■60                         15:45 Friday                            CR4                              AXL
Infiuence of population and hydric conditions during incubation on migratory behavior of neonatal snapping
turtles following nest exodus. M.S. Finkler. Miami University, Oxford, OH, 45056, USA; D.L. Knickerbocker,
Kalamazoo College, Kalamazoo, Ml, 49006, USA; D.L. Claussen, Miami University, Oxford, OH, 45056, USA.
Although many studies have ascribed potential benefits of increased water availability during incubation to neonatal
survival in turtles, none have directly examined how differential water availability influences the migratory behavior of
the hatchlings under field conditions. In this study, we examined terrestrial movements and microhabitat selection of
powder-trailed Chelydra se^entina hatchlings from Nebraska and Michigan in an enclosure setting with three
different degrees of vegetational cover available. Nebraska hatchlings moved greater distances during the first 4
days posthatching than did Michigan hatchlings, and Nebraska hatchlings from eggs incubated on wet substrates
travelled greater distances than did their dry-incubated counterparts. Moreover, Nebraska hatchlings from wet-
incubated eggs travelled a greater proportion of their total path distances in areas with low vegetational cover.
Though preliminary, these data suggest that the increased water content of hatchlings from wet-incuoated eggs may
allow them to select pathways conducive to rapid transit, whereas hatchlings with lower water contents may need to
restrict activity to areas where local hydric conditions help retard excessive water loss. In addition, differences in
movement between the two populations suggest different behavioral reponses to water-stressing environmental
conditions during overland migrations associated with differences in regional climate.   61                            16:00 Friday        ..                        CR4    .                         AXL
Mother-offspring interactions in the ground skink, Scincella lateralis. j.A,-Al9n and G.S. Sonnier. Department
of Biology, University of Southwestern Louisiana, Lafayette, LA 70504-2451 USA.
Parental care is relatively rare in reptiles and cannibalism of offepring even occurs in some taxa. Yet. young often
remain near their parents with little, if any dispersal. Using hatchling ground skinks (Scincella lateralis) reared from
eggs laid by known mothers, wo examined the responses of female ground skinks to each of three conditions; her
own offspring, another female's offepring, and a surrogate control. In addition, we observed the responses of
individual hatchlings to either their own or a different mother. While the responses of mothers were not significantly
different between own versus non- offspring, hatchling ground skinks did associate more closely with their own
mother than with a strange mother. Furthermore, females occasionally cannibalized offspring dunng testing (both
their own and another's). These preliminary data suggest that kin recognition of offspring by mothers may not occur
in this species, but that hatchlings may exhibit an association preference for their own mothers.




   62                           16:15 Friday                     ..   .        CR4            .   .             A)^
Maternal attendance and post-parturient behaviors of neonate pigmy rattlesnakes.                P.G. May and T.M.
Farrell®’*’, ®Kology Department, Stetson University, DeLand, FL           32720 USA; ‘’Biology Department, Stetson
University, DeLand, FL 32720 USA.
We observed maternal associations between post-parturient pigmy rattlesnakes and their offspring in the field
between 1992 and 1997, and in 1997 performed manipulative experiments on 31 mothers and their captive-bom
litters to determine whether association was passive or active. In 16 litters, females and their litters were housed in
divided terraria where females could gain access to their young only by crossing a barrier inaccesable to neonates.
In 15 litters, terraria were divided by a barrier passable     neonates but not Uie mother. Behavior was monitored
until offspring had completed their first neonatal shed. Twelve of 16 females crossed the barrier to associate with
offspring, 7 within the first hour after separation. This differed significantly from a random distribution of females
(binomial test, P=0.038). The proportion of offspring in association with their mother increased steadily with time
after separation, and significantly more than 50% (random expectation) of offspring had crossed the barner to
associate with their mother in 8 of the 12 time periods during which observations were made. Association between
post-parturient females and their offspring is due to active behaviors by both mothers and their offspring.




   63                           16:45 Friday                               .   CR4                    .   .      A)^
A study of the defensive behavior of cottonmouths (AgMstrodon piscivorous) in South Carolina.                      M.E.
Dorcas, J.W. Gibbons and M.S, Mills, Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, University of Georgia, , P.O. Drawer E,
Aiken, SC 29802, USA.
To quantify the defensive behavior of venomous snakes, we tested the behavior of 50 free-ranging ^onmo^hs
(Agtdstr^on piscivorous) when confronted by a human antagonist Cottonmouths encountered in the field received
one or more of three treatments: 1) one of us stepped beside the snake with our boot touching the snake's body and
held that position for 20 sec, 2) one of us stepped directly on one of the coils of the snake for 20 sec with enough
force to cause discomfort to the snake, or 3) one of us grabbed the snake at midbody with a set of snake tongs
modified to resemble a human arm and hand. The behavior of tested snakes (e.g., tongue flicking, crawling away,
gaping, musking, striking, biting) was recorded during each stimulus. Nine snakes escaped upon being encountered
and were not tested. When stepped beside, about 50% attempted to escape, about 25% gaped, and none struck.
When stepped on, about 50% gaped, and only about10% bit the boot. When grabbed with the artificial hand, aboi4
35% bit. The unexpectedly low incidence of biting leads to our conclusion that cottonmouths aggressively defend
themselves only as a last resort.

   64                          13:00 Friday                                 CE12                                   OVC
Steroid hormones and uterine gland formation In the Atlantic stingray, Dasyatls sabina. E Amesbury''*' and
D.A. Crain*'*’, ’University of Florida, Dept, of Zoology, Gainesville, Florida, 32611 USA; ’University of Mississippi,
Dept, of Biology. University, MS 38677 USA; F.F. Snelson Jr, “University of Central Florida, Dept, of Biology,
Orlando, FL 32816 USA; L.J. Guillette Jr, University of Florida, Dept, of Zoology. Gainesville, Florida, 32611 USA.
Testosterone and 17-(3 estradiol concentrations have been correlated with ovulation, embryonic nutrition and
parturition in various elasmobranch species. In this study, we test the hypothesis that variaticwis in serum
concentrations of sex steroid hormones correlate with reproductive changes occurring during gestation in the Atlantic
stingray, Dasyatls sabina. To fest this hypothesis, blood and uterine samples were collected from rays during the
non-reproductive and reproductive seasons. Histological analysis revealed that the uterus became glandular ^d
highly vascular early in the reproductive season, when females were carrying uterine encapsulated eggs. During
early gestation, serum estradiol concentrations were low, averaging 140 + 84 pg/ml. However, by mid-gestation,
serum concentrations were significantly elevated to 8293 -i- 4840 pg/ml. High estrogen concentrations during mid- to
late-gestation could be con-elated with later gestational events, not with gland formation and the onset of histotroph
production. Testosterone concentrations varied significantly through the cycle. Serum concentrations increased to
279 -I- 43 pg/ml during mid-gestation.




   65                           .13:15 Friday                        .       CE12                         ..       OVC
Ultrastructure of early oogenesis In juvenile Cleamose skates, Rafa eglanterla. J.T. Wyttels and A.B. Bodine,
Clemson University, AVS Department, Clemson, SC 29634 USA; J.P. Wourms, Clemson University. Department of
Biological Sciences, Clemson, SC 29634, USA; C.A. Luer and C.J. Walsh, Mote Marine Laboratory, 1600 Ken
Thompson Parkway, Sarasota, FL 34236, USA.
The ultrastructure of the pre-vitellogenic stages of oogenesis in juvenile Raja eglanteria are described. Stage 1
comprises a single follicle cell and rx)cyte. In stage 2, two follicle cells surround an oocyta that has a thin
cytoplasmic shell and a large germinal vesicle with condensed chromosomes. In stage 3,6-8 follicle cells adhere via
tight junctions to the oocyte. Both cells lack microvilli. The ooplasm is weakly eosinophilic and contains occasional
lipid droplets, mitochondria, glycogen rosettes and ribosomes. In stage 4, a monolayer of squamous follicle cells
extend flattened processes that interdigitate and encapsulate the oocyte. Microvilli extend from these processes and
the oocyte into the intercellular space. The cytoplasm contains spherical lipid droplets surrounded by mitochondria.
The germinal veside has dispersed chromatin and a single nucleolus. A monolayer of follicle cells that contain many
mitochondria and well developed golgi crxnplexes invest stage 5 oocytes. The intercellular space Is wider and
contains amorphous material. Microvilli, clathrin coated, and non-coated pits occur on the oocyte surface. The
cytoplasm is homogeneous, contains ribosomes, small electron dense particles, non-membrane bound lipid
droplets, and peripheral clusters of mitochondria. Yolk platelets are absent. The large germinal vesicle contains
chromosomes in the lampbrosh configuration.




   66                            13:30 Friday                        .       CE12                              .   OVC
Egg capsules of the viviparous matrotroph, Sphyma tiburo, restrict the passage of molecules greater man 2
kDa. T.C. King. Dept, of Biology, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, USA; T. Koob, Shrineris Hospital for
Children, Tampa, FL USA; C, Manire, Mote Marine Laboratory, Sarasota, FL USA; J. Lombardi, Dept, of Biology,
University of North Carolina at Greensboro USA.
A semi-permeable egg capsule surrounds each embryo of most viviparous sharks throughout gestation. Though the
presence of this acellular matrix as an embryonic investment in viviparous species has lorig been thought to
moderate physiological exchange, there is little Information concerning its structural, biochemical, or permeability
characteristics. We used a variety of histological and physiochemical approaches to Investigate both the form and
function of this membrane in the placental viviparous snark, Sphyma tiburo, to better understand the csrosule's role
as a moderator of maternal-embryonic relationships, and why this structure persists in many matrotrophic sharks.
Scanning electron and light microscopy reveal that the capsule consisits of multiple fibrillar layers of an extracellular
matrix. The capsule is ^gnifioantly tninner (-1 um) than those of viviparous and oviparous species examined thus
far. Capillary electrophoresis, combined with SDS/PAGE and spectrophotometry were used to measure the
passage of different molecular weight markers across the egg capsule. We have found that materials less than 900
Da are capable of diffusing across the egg capsule, while those greater than 2 kDa are not.   67     .                     13:45 Friday    .                          ■CE12          .                   OVC
Observation of the mating behavior of the manta ray, Manta biroatria, at the Ogasawara islands, Japan.
Yano. Seik^ National Aperies Research Institute, Ishigakl Tropical Station, 148-446    , Fukai Ota, Ishigaki,
Okinawa 907-0451, Japan ; F. Sato, Ogasawara Marine Center, , Byobudani, Chichijima, Ogasawara, Tokyo 100-
2101 ;T. Takahashi, Sea-Tac Co.,, Miyanohama-michi, Chichijima, Ogasawara, Tokyo 100-2101, Japan.
On 11 July 1997, the mating behavior of wild manta rays, Manta birostris, was obsen/ed while skin diving in
Chichijima, the Ogasawara Islands, Japan, and was recorded with 49 underwater photographs and about 20
minutes of video tape. The female manta ray involved was estimated to be approximately 5-5.5 m in disc width
(DW). The two males involved were slightly smaller than the female, and were estimated to be 4-4.5 m DW.
Copulating behaviors of the two different males were observed in the present study and their behaviors were almost
the same. The males chased behind the tail of the female for 20-30 minutes. The manta rays swam fast during this
chasing phase of their mating behavior. The males nipped the tip of the left pectoral fin of the female during each
copulation event, both of which occurred within one meter of the surface. The mating behavior of the manta rays is
divided into the following five steps. Male chases behind the tail of the female, and attacks her several times while
chasing her (chasing behavior, step 1). Male nips the tip of the pectoral fin of the female and then the male moves
to ths ventral surface of the female (nipping behavior, step 2). Male inserts a clasper into the cloaca of the female
(copulating behavior, step 3). Male removes the clasper from the cloaca of the female, but maintains his oral hold of
her pectoral fin (post-copulating behavior, step 4). Male releases the pectoral fin of the female, setting her free
(separating behavior, step 5). Ths copulation of Manta birostris is of ths abdomen-to-abdomen type.




 . 68                           14:00 Friday                               CE12                         OVC
Mating, gestation, and birth in nurse sharks (GInglymostoma cirratum): the complete story.         J.C. Carrier.
Department of Biology, Albion College, Albion, Ml 49224, USA; F.L. Murru, R.L. Davis, M.T. Walsh and S. Dover,
Sea World of Florida, Animal Senrioes, 7007 Sea World Drive, Orlando, FL 32821, USA; H.L. Pratt Jr.,
NOAA/NMFS, Narragansett Lab, 28 Tarzwell, Narragansett, Rl 02882, USA.
Shark mating activities were filmed in the wild and females recorded as participants in the June mating events were
subsequently captured. Each shark was examined in the field using ultrasonography to determine the extent of the
presence of eggs, and two animals were selected from the reproductively active population and transferred to
holding facilities at Sea World of Rorida (Orlando). Serial blood samples were taken from both animals during the
captive period. One animal was examined monthly using ultrasound and, in August and October, by intrauterine
endoscopy to assess the progress of the presumed pregnancy. The endoscopic procedures verified the presence of
numerous eggs and reveled the appearance of young that had emerged from egg cases. Ultrasonic imagery was
used to further confirm the presence of hatchlings. Both animals eventually earned young to term. The first births
occurred after 3.5 months, and these earliest births occurred with remnants of the yolk sac in place. The longest
surviving offspring was bom al the end of October, approximately 4.5 months following observations of mating in the
field. This time frame differs from previous estimates of six months that were based solely on obsenrations from
necropsy. A total of 15 offspring were bom, five from one animal and ten from the second animal. Only one newborn
survived. Both of the females and the sunziving offspring were tagged for return to the site of capture. The value and
restrictions of the evaluation methodology and the limitations of the capture and captive elements are discussed.




   69                           14:15 Friday                               CE12                              OVC
Reproductive strategy of a freshwater stingray Potamotrygon sp. from the mid-Rlo Negro Basin, Amazonas,
Brazil. M.L. Arauio. Pds-graduagao Institute Nacional de Pesquisa da Amazonica, Universidade do Amazonas
Brazil.
An undescribed species of South American stingray, Potamotrygon, local name 'cururu,* is endemic to the middle
Rio Negro Basin. The reproductive biology, migration, and the impact of its fishery have been investigated.
Potamotrygon sp. reach a maximum size of 300 mm disk width. It is a relatively small species for South American
freshwater stingray. They live in shallow floodplain and river margin with sandy bottom and leaf litter. The water is
usually wami, acidic and low in dissolved oxygen. The reproductive cycle follows the river pulse, flood and drought,
of the basin. Beginning in July, when water level has peaked and started to descend, males and females are
aggregated in different areas; spermatogenesis starts earlier than vitellogenesis. After copulation in August,
ovulation may start three weeks later. The gestation period is about three months and new bom start to appear in
November. The embryos are nourished by yolk sac and trophonemata in ths uterus. New bom stay on top of
female for 3-4 days before they assume an independent life. During the reproductive season of 1996-97, females
had one gestation period. However, during the current El Nino year 1997-98, an earlier and prolonged drought has
occurred in the region, females have a second gestation.

   70                            14:30 Friday                                 CE12                          ..   OVC
Structure and evolution of shark ribosomal DNA Internal transcribed spacers.    M.S. Shivii. Nova Southeastern
University, Oceanographic Center, 8000 North Ocean Drive, Dania, FL 33004 USA; M,J. Stanhope, School of
Biology and Biochemistry, The Queen's University, Belfast, BT9 7BL„ N. Ireland, UK; S.O. Rogers, College of
Environmental Sdence & Forestry, State University of New York, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.
Internal transcribed spacers (ITS1 and ITS2) are DNA regions separating the multicopy, nuclear ribosomal RNA
genes. We have obtained complete ITS2 sequences from several sharks representing different lineages, and report
here on aspects of the comparative structure and evolution of this locus.
Shark ITS2 regions are ths largest reported for any eukaryote, a size explained in part by the insertion of sequence
elements strongly resembling group I introns. These insertion elements appear to be present in all major shark
lineages. They are, however, conspicuously absent from hammerhead sharks, arguing for an ancient origin of these
elements with subsequent loss in the presumably derived hammerhead lineage. The insertion element is also absent
from the ITS2 of the one stingray (Urolophus Jamaicensis) we have examined thus far.
We have also explored the phylogenetic utility of ITS2 sequences for resolving some relationships within the family
Carcharhinidae. The precise affinities of Prionace and Negaprion to Carcharhinus are currently unsettled, with
hypotheses proposed about Prionace being either a derived species within or sister taxon to Carcharhinus.
Preliminary phylogenetic analysis of 1TS2 sequences places Prionace well within the Carcharhinus clads, arguing
against ths current status of the blue shark as a separate genus.



   71                           . 14:45. Friday                               CE12                                OVC
Characterization of blue shark (Prionace glauca) mitochondrial genome control region sequences for
population genetic studies. B.A. Ertan. Oceanographic Center, Nova Southeastern University, 8000 N. Ocean
Drive, Dania, FL 33004, USA; L. Park, National Marine Fisheries Service, 2725 Montlake Blvd. East., Seattle, WA
98112, USA; M.J. Stanhope, Medical Biology Center, The Queen's University, Belfast, N. Ireland, UK BT9 7BL; M.S.
Shivji, Oceanographic Center, Nova Southeastern University, 8000 N. Ocean Drive, Dania, FL 33004, USA.
Blue sharks are highly vagile elasmobranchs with a circumglobal temperate and tropical distribution. This species
displays complex reproductive and migratory behavior, making it difficult to realize a clear picture of genetic stock
structure. Wo report here our examination of the utility of mitochondrial (mt) DNA control region sequences for
assessing blue shark genetic structure on a global scale. Complete control region (1069 bp in size) sequences were
obtained from 16 blue shark individuals collected from 5 globally distributed sites. Contraiy to ths case in most
vertebrates, this locus is remarkably conserved in blue sharks. The 11 haplotypes observed differed from each other
by 5 or less single nucleotide substitutions or indels over the entire control region. Most of the genetic variation (8 of
12 variable sites) was restricted to the 350 bp region adjacent to the tRNA-proline gene, with no variation observed
in the central 400 bp section of this locus. Phylogenetic analysis revealed no indication of geographic population
structuring. We infer from these data that either the blue shark mt control region may be too conserved to be useful
for population genetic studies, or that dispersal over a global scale is occum'ng, or has occurred in the recent past.




   72                             15:30 Friday                                CE11                               OVC
Distribution, evolution, and functional significance of gonadotropin-releasing hormone In the elasmobranch
brain. P.M. Forlano and K.P. Maruska, Department of Sologioal Sciences, Rorida Institute of Technology, USA;
J.A. King, MRC Regulatory Peptides Research Unit, Department of Chemical Pathology, University of Capetown
Medical School, South Africa; S.A. Sower, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of New
Hampshire, USA; T.C. Tricas, Department of Biological Sciences, Florida Institute of Technology, USA.
The basic structure of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) includes at least nine different forms found across
the vertebrates. Some forms are believed to serve extrapituitary functions, as indicated by their wide distribution
throughout the brain. Chicken II GnRH (cll) is considered the most evolutionarily conserved variant because it is
generally found to coexist with al least one other form in all the jawed vertebrate classes, while dogfish GnRH (df) is
found exclusively in elasmobranch fishes. This study examined the distribution of df and cll GnRH-immunoreactive
(ir) cell bodies and fibers in the brain of the Atlantic stingray, Dasyatis sabina, by immunocytochemical methods as a
first step to correlate anatomical distribution with possible functionality of the different forms in an elasmobranch.
Do^sh GnRH-ir cells and fibers were localized in the ganglia of the terminal nerve and throughout the ventro-caudal
telencephalon and preoptic area, while a large, discrete cll GnRH-ir cell nucleus was found in the midbrain
tegmentum with main projections to the diencephalon and hindbrain. This is the first study to show differential
distribution of cll and df GnRH in the elasmobranch brain, and supports the hypothesis of divergent function of GnRH
variants such as gonadotropin control and neuromodulation of sensory function.   73                            15:45 Friday                              CE11                                 OVC
Effects of splenectomy on the immune system of the nurse shark, Ginglymostoma cirratum, assessed by
changes in peripheral blood leukocyte populations and histology of lymphomyeloid tissues. C.A, Luer and
C.J. Walsh, Mote Marine Laboratory, 1600 Ken Thompson Pkwy, Sarasota, Florida 34236-1096 USA; A.B. Bodine
and J.T. Wytiels, Department of Animal and Veterinary Sciences, Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina
29634-0361 USA.
In the absence of bone marrow and lymph nodes, elasmobranch fish must rely on alternative lymphomyeloid tissues
for production of immune cells. Principle tissues include spleen, thymus, epigonal organ, and, in some species,
Leydig organ. To investigate the role of spleen in immune cell production, spleens were removed surgically from
juvenile nurse sharks, Ginglymostoma cirratum, (n=8). Sham operated (n=5) and non-operated (n=5) Juveniles
served as controls. Peripheral blood, from which hematocrits and differential white cell counts were obtained, was
sampled at varying intervals during the first week after surgery, then at weekly intervals for five weeks. Animals were
sacrificed at various times for histological examination of lymphomyeloid tissues. Hematocrits did not vary
significantly during the study. Circulating levels of lymphocytes decreased during the first three days, after which
levels gradually returned to normal ranges within two to three weeks. Granulocyte levels increased initially arid
recovered after approximately three weeks. Preliminary assessment of tissue imprints indicates an increase in
immature lymphoc;^s and granulocytes in epigonal oi^ans of splenectomized animals compared with controls,
suggesting that epigonal organ may increase its production of lymphocytes in the absence of spleen, but not at the
expense of its role in granulocyte production.




   .74                          16:00 Friday                               CE11                                  OVC
Hormonal regulation of growth in vertebral cartilage of the clearnose skate, Raja eglanteria. J. Gelsleichter
and J.A. Musick, Virginia Institute of Marine Science, School of Marine Science, The College of William and Mary in
Virginia, Gloucester Pt., VA 23062 USA.
In most elasmobranchs, growth of vertebral cartilage proceeds incrementally and forms periodic marks that are
extensively used in age and growth studies. Such research is essential for the management of these fishes, yet is
often limited by poor understanding of the physiological processes that regulate vertebral growth. Since skeletal
growth in most vertebrates is under strict control of file endocrine system, the goal of this study was to investigate
the hormonal regulation of vertebral growth in the clearnose skate. Raja eglanteria. Synthesis of cartilage matrix
glycosaminoglycans (GAG) was used as a marker for vertebral growth using an in vitro culture system. The effects
of growth hormone (GH), insulin-like growth lactor-l (IGF-I), tri-iodo-L-thyronine (T3), and corticosteroids on GAG
synthesis were assessed, due to their well-documented roles in cartilage growth. The effect of calcitonin (CT) on
vertebral growth was also investigated, due to its involvement in the skeletal physiology and mineral homeostasis of
terrestrial vertebrates. Finally, the effect of parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrp) on GAG synthesis was
examined, because of its critical role in mammalian skeletogenesis. PTHrp has recently been defected in the
perichondrium of elasmobranch vertebral cartilage, thus it may play a role in chondrocyte proliferation and
differentiation. The present study is the first investigation on the hormonal regulation of elasmobranch skeletal
physiology.




   75                            16:15 Friday                               CE11                           .     OVC
Mechanics of ventilation in the swellshark, Cephaloscyllium ventriosum (Scyliorhinidae).                       L.A. Ferry-
Graham. University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-2525 USA.
Most fishes are faced with one of two options for gill ventilation: physically moving their gills through the medium
(“ram" ventilation), or actively pumping the medium over their gills via “buccal pumping“. The basic pattern of
mechanical movements during buccal pumping was studied over 40 years ago. However, unique patterns of water
flow through the head of the swellshark during feeding suggested that the generation of respiratory currents might
not be as simple as once thought. Using pressure transducers implanted into the buccal and gill cavities of actively
respiring swellsharks, it was discovered that pressure traces vary within and among individuals. These data,
combined with both video and electrical impedance data for the displacement of the lower jaw and gill septum,
suggest that although the classic pattern of pressure generation regularly occurs, at least one novel pattern of
pressure generation exists. During this novel pattern, pressure reversals exist over a much longer duration than
previously thought possible, and at much larger magnitudes. It is questionable whether the classic alternating
“suotion“ and “pressure“ pumps are always used for moving water over the gills unidirectionally, and whether
continuous water flow over the gills exists for large intervals of time in this species.




   7tj___________________ 13-15 Friaay_____________________ CA2                                                 CHM
Age, growth and reproduction of the grtw triggarfish (Baftsfas e^riscuili in the eastern Gulf of Mexico. RK
Hood. Florida Marine Research Institute, Florida Department of Environmental Protection, 100 Sth Ave. S.E., St.
Petersburg, FL 33710 USA; A.K. Johnson, North Carolina State University, Department of Zoology, Box 7617,
Raleigh, NC 27695-7617 USA.

   76                            16:30 Friday                                CE11                               OVC
Ontogenetic changes in energetics and active and passive ventilation of the swell shark {Cephaloscyllium
ventnosum} egg capsule. S.R. Meehan. Department of Environmental Protection, Lignumvitae Key, Florida USA;
A.P, Summers, Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, UMASS Amherst, Massachusetts USA; T.J. Koob, Shriner's
Hospital for Children, Tampa, Florida USA.
The swell shark. Cephaloscyllium ventriosum, is an oviparous chondrichthyan fish. Each egg capsule contains a
single embryo that is incubated on the sea floor for 7.5 to 10 months. The homy capsule material is not sufficiently
permeable to oxygen to supply the needs of a late stage embryo, however, after about one third of development four
slits open in the sides of the egg case to admit seawater. We investigated ontogenetic changes in metabolic rate and
mechanisms of capsule ventilation. Mass specific rate of oxygen consumption decreases as the embryo grows. Early
stage embryos have a relatively large tail appendage that is used to generate a water current through the capsule.
During development this appendage decreases in relative size and just before hatching the embryo ventilates the
capsule by oropharyngeal pumping. In addition to the active pumping, the capsule is ventilated passively. When in a
current, pressure differences along the capsule induce flow through the capsule interior. Sufficient water to supply
the oxygen needs of a near term embryo will be induced to flow at current speeds of just 0.2 knots. This passive flow
comes at no metabolic cost to the embryo.




   77                            16:45-Friday                                CE11                          .. OVC
Electroreception in neonatal bonnethead sharks, Sphyrna tiburo.              S.M. Kaiiura. Hawaii Institute of Marine
Biology, PO Box 1346, Kaneohe, HI, 96744, USA.
Digital video analysis was used to quantify behavioural response of neonatal bonnethead sharks, Sphyrna tiburo, to
prey-simulating electric fields. Sharks less than twelve hours post-parturition failed to demonstrate a positive feeding
response to the electrodes, however, vigorous biting at the electrodes was observed in sharks greater than 24 hours
post-parturition. Orientation behaviours were classified as one of four types: straight approach, single turn, looping
return and spiral tracking where the shark appears to follow the voltage equipotential to the centre of the dipole.
Most orientations to the dipole were from a distance of less than 10 cm with a maximum orientation distance of 22
cm. The mean threshold for initiation of orientation was 0.14 iiV-cnr’ with a minimum of less than 0.001 pV-cm ’.
The mean value is almost double that obtained for juvenile scalloped hammerhead sharks, S. lewini, which require a
mean stimulus of only 0.08 uV-cnr’ to Initiate an attack- The greater sensitivity of S. lewini may be attributed to their
larger size and consequent longer ampullary canals.




 . 78                            13:00 Friday                                 CA2                               CHM
Validation of otolith age estimates for the rainbow darter, Etheostoma caeruleum, in the James River of the
southwest Missouri Ozarks. D.W. Beckman. Department of Biology, Southwest Missouri State University,
Springfield, Missouri 65714, USA.
In the past 15 years there has been an emphasis on validation of age estimates for fish population studies.
However, age estimates have been validated for few freshwater stream fish species; with a dearth of published age
validation studies for North American darters of the genus Etheostoma. Traditionally darter ages have been
obtained from scales or by length-frequency analysis, methods now known to be unreliable for many species.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate otolith and scale age estimates for the rainbow darter, Etheostoma
caeruleum, from the James River in the southwest Missouri Ozarks. Validity of age estimates was assessed by
following the progression of annulus formation at the growing edge of scales and otoliths in fish captured throughout
the year (edge analysis). Samples of 10-15 fish were taken by seine in each of 8 months from July 1996 through
May 1997. Otoliths were viewed whole and in transverse section, and scales were viewed mounted between glass
slides. Edge analysis of whole or sectioned otoliths indicated that one opaque annulus was formed per year in the
otoliths, primarily during summer months. High agreement between sectioned and whole otolith ages (75% exact
agreement, 99% within one year) indicates that consistent, valid ages can be obtained for Etheostoma caeruleum
using either otolith method. Otolith age estimates ranged from 0-4 years. There was no clear pattern discerned in
timing of scale annulus formation, and scale age estimates tended to be lower than otolith age estimates. Our
results suggest that scale age estimates for darters should be made with caution.




   82                            14:00 Frday                                  CA2:                              CHM
Development of the lateral line system in the shovelnose sturgeon, Scaphirhynchus platorynchus.                     MA
Gibbs and R.G. Northcutt, Dept. Neurosdences, UCSD, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093-0201, USA.

The shovelnose sturgeon, Scaphirhynchus platorynchus, normally develops over a 10 day period at 18 °C. During
the first 45 hours post-fertilization, three preotic (anterodorsal, anteroventral and otic) and three postotic (medial,
___ A_____ 1__ I__ *._ !_ \ l_A__ I I!___ I___ I_ __ S___ *■____ ___ 1_ ___ *_ ■__ ■ _»___ ■ •>_ ____ ____ ___ _ >  79                  .     13:15 Friday ,                           CA2                             CHM
Age, growth and reproduction of ths grm triggerfish (Ballstos capriscua} In the eastern Gulf of Mexico.
Hood. Florida Marine Research Institute, Florida Department of Environmental Protection, 100 Bth A,ve. S.E., St.
Petersburg, FL 33710 USA; A.K. Johnson, North Carolina State University, Department of Zoology, Box 7617,
Raleigh, NC 27695-7617 USA.
  Gray triggerfish (Batistes capriscus), commonN occur in the Gulf of Mexico recreational and commercial reef fish
fisheries. Yet life history information needed for proper fisheries assessment of this species is inadequate. We
sampled 679 gray triggerfish (103-725 mm FL) from the eastern Gulf of Mexico to assess their age structure, growth,
mortality, and reproduction. Marginal-increment analysis and oxy-tetracycline injected fish failed to validate annual
formation of rings in the dorsal spine; however, data from other studies indicates rings are formed once a year.
Assuming rings are annual, ages ranged from 0 to 14 years. The von Bertalanffy growth parameters were L* = 625
mm FL, k=0.152, and to=-1.9 for combined sexes. The age of full recruitment was 4 years to the commercial fishery
and 3 years to the recreational fishery. Estimates of total instantaneous mortality ranged from 0.742 to 0.836. The
mean length of males was significantly larger than females, and the overall sex ratio was 2.1:1 in favor of males. No
immature males were obsen/ed in our samples. Most females were mature by age 1 (87.5%) and 250 mm FL
(91%). Ovaries containing vitellogenic oocytes were observed from June to September indicating that gray
triggerfish spawn during the summer. Total fecundities ranged from 213,912 to 1,172,854 oocytes from females
ranging 194 to 489 mm FL.




   80                           13:30 Friday                               CA2                               CHM
Age and growth of sheepshead, Archoaargua probatocephalus, from the nearshore waters of Tampa Bay,
Florida. T.C. MacDonald. B.L. Winner and K.B. Arinendola, Florida Marine Research Institute, 100 8th Ave. S.E., St.
Petersburg, FL USA 33701.
Florida's Fisheries-lndependent Monitoring (FIM) program began collecting sheepshead, for life-history analyses,
throughout the nearshore waters of Florida in 1993. Mors than 1,050 sheepshead (653 females, and 430 males),
ranging in size from 107-522 mm FL, have been collected in the Tampa Bay estuary. Ages were estimated after the
annuli were independently counted six times from thin-sectioned sagittae. Marginal increment analysis
demonstrated that a single increment minimum occurred during May-June. Sheepshead reached a maximum age of
14 years. Analyses of the von Bertalanffy growth models showed that females and males grew at similar rates
through age five, but that after age five the predicted lengths for females were greater than those for males. A
previous Fisheries-Dependent (FD) study conducted in Louisiana waters indicated that sheepshead there grew faster
and achieved older Mes than did those from Tampa Bay. Although there may be subspecific (A. probatocephalus
probatocephalus in Tampa Bay and A. probatocephalus oviceps in Louisiana) differences in age and growth,
differences in sampling design (FIM vs. FD) most likely explain the disparity in growth model results.




  .81   .                      13:45 Friday                               CA2                               CHM
Age and growth of hardhead catfish, Arlus felis, and gafftopsail catfish, Bagre marinus. In Tampa Bay,
Florida. D.J. Harshanv and R.E. Cr^tree, Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Florida Marine
Research Institute, 100 8th Avenue SE, Tampa, FL 33701 USA.
We collected 1068 hardhead catfish (Anus felis) and 639 gafftopsail catfish (Bagre marinus) from Tampa Bay, FL. A.
felis fork lengths ranged 111-439 mm FL and ages ranged 0-23 years. B. marinus fork lengths ranged 140-577
mm FL and ages tanged 0-24 years. Based on these growth rates and preliminary estimates of length at maturity,
A. felis and B. marinus could reach sexual maturity at age - 5. Preliminary examination of gonads suggest that
female A. felis reach sexual maturity at about 250 mm FL and B. marinus females reach maturity at about 330 mm
FL. Males appear to be smaller at age than females. The von Bertalanffy growth equation for males and unsexed
age-0 and age-1 A. felis was FL=324.8 (1-e(-0.243(Age+1.462))) and for females and unsexed age-0 and age-1 A.
felis was FL=341.9 (1-e(-0.241(Age-r1.383))). The von Bertalanffy growth equation for males and unsexed age-0
and age-1 S. marinus was FL=501.4 (1-e(-0.167(Age+0.981))) and for females and unsexed age-0 and age-1 S.
marinus was FL=556.6 (1-e(-0.139(Age+0.974)) ). Age frequency distributions suggest relatively abundant age
groups through the age of 17 for both species.

  82                         14:00 Friday                         CA2                         CHM
Development of the lateral line system In the shovelnose sturgeon, Scaphirhynchus platorynchus. M.A.
Gibbs and R.G. Northcutt, Dept. NeurosciencQs. UCSD, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093-0201, LISA.
The shovelnose sturgeon, Scaphirhynchus platorynchus, normally develops over a 10 day period at 18 °C. During
the first 45 hours post-fertilization, three preotic (anterodorsal, anteroventral and otic) ano three postotic (medial,
supratemporal and posterior) lateral line placodes arise within the cephalic ectoderm. Lateral line ganglia are formed
in each placode from endogenous neuieblasts which migrate from the placodes at 60 hours post-fertilization.
Placodes begin to elongate into sensory ridges a few hours before hatching, and by the time hatching occurs, at
about 106 hours post-fertilization, neuromasts are erupting in the central zones of the otic and caudal anterodorsal
sensory ridges. By four days post-hatch, an exposed mechanosensory lateral line extends from the dorsal zone of
the anteroventral sensory ridge to the supra- and infra-orbital zones of the anterodorsal ridge. At 10 days post-hatch,
the larva is feeding and has a mechanosensory lateral line that extends from the rostrum to ths trunk and includes
neuromasts from all six dorsolateral placodes. Electroreceptive ampullary organs, which arise from ths
anteroventral, anterodorsal, otic and supratemporal placodes begin to enjpt just before the onset of feeding, and are
fully developed by the time canals begin to form around the neuromast lines at twelve days post-hatch.




   83                           14:15 Friday                                CA2                               CHM
Lack of negative effect of ambient ultraviolet radiation on development of eggs and larvae of the
southernmost anuran of the world near the ozone hole. S.F. Fox. Department of Zoology, Oklahoma State
University, Stillwater, OK 74078 USA; D.J. Bruggeman, Department of Zoology, Oklahoma State University,
Stillwater, OK 74078 USA; H. Nunez, Seccion Zoologfa, Museo Nacional de Historia Natural, Casilla 787, Santiago,
Chile; R.A. Van Den Bussche, Department of Zoology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078 USA; J.A.
Bantie II, Department of Zoology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078 USA.
One possible cause implicated in worldwide amphibian declines is increased ultravlolet-B radiation (UV-B) brought
on by anthropogenic thinning of the ozone layer. Due to the ozone hole, increased UV-B is most pronounced over
Antarctica in winter, but ozone-poor air drifts northward over the southern cone of South America in early spring
when frogs there begin to breed, thus potentially exposing their eggs and larvae to damaging amounts of UV-B.
Damage from UV-B at that time is expected to be intense, especially since UV-B levels there prior to the first
appearance of the ozone hole were not high. We report preliminary results from a multi-year study of potential UV-B
effects on survival, growth, malformations, and DNA damage of developing eggs and larvae of Pleurodema bufonina
in southern Argentina. In none of four populations studied so far have we found evidence of a negative effect of
ambient UV-B.




   84                           14:30 Friday .                          CA2                         CHM
Variability in exposure of amphibian embryos to uv-b radiation.       P.S. Com. USGS Midcontinent Ecological
Science Center, Aldo Leopold Wilderness Research Institute, PO Box 8089, Missoula, MT 59807 USA.
In ihe last 20 years, thinning stratospheric ozone has resulted in a 5-10% increase in UV-B radiation at the Earth's
surface, poleward above 40° latitude. Field experiments that have shown increased mortality of amphibian embryos
exposed to ambient sunlight, compared to those exposed to sunlight with UV-B removed, have lead to a hypothesis
that increased UV-B radiation has contributed to amphibian declines. However, measurements of incident UV-B are
missing from most of these studies, and variability in UV-B has not been examined. There are several sources of
variation in the UV-B radiation to which embryos may be exposed, including annual variation in UV-B, seasonal
gradients in UV-B, annual variation in amphibian breeding phenology, and local geographic variation in breeding
phenology. I used satellite-based estimates of UV-B radiation and observations of amphibian breeding phenology in
northern Colorado to estimate the range of variation in UV-B. Erythemal exposure (UV-B weighted by the action
spectrum for human skin irritation) increases by 80% from 1 May to 30 June, and breeding activity may vary by 30
days from year to year and 14 days across an elevation gradient. Mean 10-day erythemal exposure for two
populations of boreal chorus frogs, Pseudacris maculata, ranged between 192 and 388, and the mean exposure
between populations of P. maculata and boreal toads, Bufo boreas, on elevation gradients increased by 21 and 28%,
respectively. The increase in UV-B radiation due to ozone thinning is small relative to variation in UV-B to which
embryos may be exposed.   85                .           14:45 Friday                                 CA2                                CHM
Difference In growth rates among turtles b) Pool 20 of the upper Mississippi River.                  M.A. Romano. R.V.
Anderson and M.L. Gutierrez, Department of Biological Sciences, Western Illinois University, Macomb, IL 61455
USA.
Six species of turtles were collected at 3 sites from June through September 1997 to evaluate growth relationships
among turtles on Pool 20 of the Mississippi River. Length and weight data for the smooth softshell {ApoIone mutica,
n=48), spiny softshell (A. spinifera, n=8), painted turtles {Chiysemys picta, n=35), common map turtles (Graptemys
gaographica, n=34). common snapping turtles {Chelydra serpentina, n=29) and red-eared sliders (Trachemys
scripla, n=54). Analysis of Covariance (ANCOVA) was utilized to evaluate lines of log-trarisformed lengths
regressed against log-transformed weights among species and sexes within species. Significant differences amorig
slopes from different species were fou^ suggesting that growth rates vary among turtles. Significant differences in
growth rate between sexes was found for common map turtles and red-eared sliders. Another ANCOVA was carried
out between melanistic red-eared sliders and normally pigmented individuals to evaluate the possibility that dark
individuals might represent releases of turtles from elsewhere in United States by an Iowa turtle farm. No difference
was found in growth rate between melanistic and non-melanistic individuals; however, the elevations, of the
respective lines were significantly different.




   86                            15:30 Friday                                 CA2                                 CHM
Nest-site choice in a turtle with temperature-dependent sex determination. F.J. Janzen. Department of Zoology
& Genetics, Program in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Iowa State University, Ames, lA 50011 USA.
The role of nest-site choice in the population biology of species with temperature-dependent sex determination
(TSD) is virtually unexplored despite its importance in theoretical models for the evolution of sex ratio in such
species. In those models, the evolution of sex ratio is largely determined by heritable variation in maternal choice of
thermal qualities of nest sites. This ongoing 3-year field study examined thermally-dependent nest-site choice in a
marked population of painted turtles that has been the focus of long-term studies of TSD. Analyses to date indicate
that individual turtles exhibit significant fidelity to nest sites with similar amounts of surrounding vegetation cover. In
other words, some turtles consistently prefer unshaded sites and vice versa. Because vegetational cover is a
reasonable predictor of nest thermal environments and offspring sex ratios in this population, these findings suggest
that nest-site choice and, hence, TSD may be able to evolve in response to environmental change. Supported by
NSF grant DEB-9629529.




  ■87.                           15:45 Friday                                 CA2                       CHM  .
Modeling organismal growth In turtle populations:            assumption validation and practicality.M.J..Dce£lik,
Center for Biodiversity, iTlinois Natural History Survey, 607 East Peabody Drive, Champaign, IL 61820 USA; L.
Comerford, Department of Mathematics, Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, IL 61920 USA.
For the last decade, interest in modeling chelonian growth has increased and provided a framework for better
understanding of this life history trait. Modeling growth generates variables that can be used as life history
descriptors, and in unified comparative studies. With a long list of models, the question becomes which one to use?
To choose among models, we must first understand the basic assumptions of the typical linear, guadratio, allometric,
Johnson, Putter, von Bertalanffy, Gompertz and Logistic algorithms: 1) age is known, 2) growth follows the specified
algorithm, 3) seasonal effects are absent and 4) genetic effects are minimal. Assumption one is circumvented using
mark/recapture analogues of the aforementioned models, while assumption two is eliminated by using robust models
like the Richard's, Schunte, Baker and Francis. New insights into modeling have allowed us to include seasonality;
however, our knowledge of genetic effects does not presently allow us to correct existing models. We will discuss
and present the value of certain mark/recapture growth models, by fitting mock and actual data sets to the von
Bertalanffy, Gompertz, Logistic, Richard's and Schnute mark/recapture analogues.




Sensory biology of vision in the elasmobranchs. S.H. Gruber. Bimini Biological Reid Station. RSMAS/University
of Miami, 4600 Rickenbacker Causeway, Miami, FL 33149-1098; R.E. Hueter, Center for Shark Research, Mote
Marine Laboratory, 1600 Ken Thompson Parkway, Sarasota, FL 34236.
The visual system of elasmobranchs is reviewed with respect to stnjcture, function and behavior. As a general
review, the >flsual systems of eiasmob.ranchs and teleosts are compared and contrasted. Similar visual structures
and functions of phvioaeneticallv unrelated elasmobranchs are shown to occur in species oocuovinq similar habitats

   88   .   .                  .    16:00 Friday                           CA2                              CHM
Maternal effects, nest-site choice, and the maintenance of temperature-dependent sex determination. CX,.
Milne and F.J. Janzen, Department of Zoology and Genetics, 339 Science II, Iowa Stale, University Ames, lA 50011
USA.
The adaptive value, if any, of temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD) is uncertain in reptiles. Suggested
mechanisms include differential fitness between offspring sexes, dependent on maternal condition. Thus, females
with the ability to assess environmental conditions that produce the sex whose fitness benefits most from maternal
condition would have a selective advantage. This presentation reports a three-year field study on nest-site choice in
the painted turtle, Chrysemys picta, a species exhibiting TSD. No relationship was found between egg mass and
nest-site choice for the three years of the study. Although egg mass may not influence nest-site choice in painted
turtles, other maternal effects that remain unexplored may play a role in nest-site choice and the maintenance of
TSD.




   89                    . .       08:10 Saturday                            I8                              OVC
Don Nelson and the study of shark behavior. S.H. Gruber. Bimini Biological Field Station, RSMAS/University of
Miami, 4600 Rickenbacker Causeway, Miami, FL 33149-1098; T.C. Tricas, Department of Biological Sciences,
Rorida Institute of Technology, 150 W. University Blvd., Melbourne, FL 32901-6988 USA.




   90                              08:30 Saturday .                          18                              OVC
Hearing in elasmobranchs: a review. AA. Mvrbera (Jr.1. Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science,
University of Miami, Miami Florida 33149, USA.
A brief history is provided of the studies which established that elasmobranchs not only detect underwater sounds,
but respond to them in ways that suggested a rapid ability to locate specific sound-sources. The latter included
acoustical features that mimicked sounds produced by stnrggling prey as well as providing a point-source to observe
the behavioral activities of such predators. The rapid speed in locating sound-sources by free-ranging sharks
created controversy, however. An important theory, at the time, precluded fishes, and particularly sharks, from
directional hearing in the acoustical far-field (distances beyond one wavelength of a sound). Repeated confirmation
that sharks could accomplish such a feat during the late '60s - mid 70s resulted in several new theories that could
account for rapid directional hearing by these animals. These theories will also be briefly reviewed as will be the
findings that resulted from a renewed interest in the neural mechanisms of elasmobranch hearing in the '80s. The
report will end with ideas concerning future directions of hearing research in elasmobranchs.




What la the current status of chemical shark repellents? J A Sisneros. Department of Biological Sciences,
Florida Institute of Technoiogy, 150 W. University Blvd., Melbourne, FL 32901 -6968 USA.
Efforts by the US Navy to develop a chemical shark repellent during the post W.W.II years were unsuccessful and
later abandoned. Interest in chemical shark repellents was renewed by the discovery of pardaxin, a natural shark
repellent secreted by the Moses sole {Pardachirus marmoratus). The surfactant-like nature of pardaxin led
researchers to test the shark reoellencv of various surfactants. The most effective surfactant tested to date is the   91                            09:00 Saturday                                     18   ...                          OVC
Sensory biology of vision In the elasmobranchs. S.H. Gruber. Bimini Biological Field Station, RSMASAJniversity
of Miami, 4600 Rickenbackor Causeway, Miami, FL 33149-1098; R.E. Hueter, Center for Shark Research, Mote
Marine Laboratory, 1600 Ken Thompson Parkway, Sarasota, FL 34236.

The visual system of elasmobranchs is reviewed with respect to structure, function and behavior. As a general
review, the visual systems of elasmottranchs and teleosts are compared and contrasted. Similar visual structures
and functions of phylogenetically unrelated elasmobranchs are shown to occur in species occupying similar habitats
and often displaying comparable behaviors. For example, the vertical slit pupil Is found In active, pelagic and
epibenthic elasmobranchs as widely divergent as carcharhinid sharks and m^iobatid rays. Likewise, a strong
correlation is found between depth of occurrence and position of the peak spectr^ absorption of the visual pigment,
regardless of systematic affiliation. Performance testing of the visual system also reveals features adaptive to
behavior and environment. Since the majority of information on visual performance has been gleaned from the
lemon shark (Negaprion brevimstris}, that visual system is reviewed. Correlates between visual structure, function
and behavior show that the lemon ^ark has an ecologically broad period of activity and is able to carry out its
normal behavior throughout the entire diet period. The review ends with an unejpected finding relating the lemon
shark's visual pigments to habitat changes with aging. The final conclusion is that an understanding of how
elasmobranch visual structure and function are correlated with behavior and ecology is barely at a beginning stage,
and the field of elasmobranch vision, even after extensive study in recent decades, remains wide open. Supported
by a grant from the Florida Department of Education to SHG and N0AA/NMF€ grants to REH.




   92                            09:30 Saturday                          .18                               OVC
The elasmobranch mechanosensory lateral line system: form and function?                K.P. Manrska. Department of
Biological Sciences, Florida Institute of Technology, 150 West University Blvd., Melbourne, FL 32901 USA.
The biological function of the mechanosensory lateral line in relation to ecology and behavior is essentially unknown
in elasmobranch fishes. One function of the teleost lateral line is to facilitate prey detection, but does the
elasmobranch mechanosensory system possess the morphology and organization to support a role in prey
localization and c^ture? General organization of the ventral lateral line system was examined in several
representative batoid species (Dasyatis sabina, Raja eglanteria, Narcine brasiliensis,Gymnura micrura) in relation to
their food habits and feeding behavior. Batoid ventral lateral line systems consist of pored and non-pored canals,
and vesicles of Savi. The relative distribution of these mechanosensory structures differs between species and may
be related to function. It is proposed that the ventral lateral line system in most benthic feeding batoids functions in
the localization of invertebrate prey via a novel mechanotactile mechanism mediated by the non-pored canals and
vesicles of Savi around the rostrum and mouth. This presentation will summarize current knowledge of
elasmobranch lateral line anatomy, physiology and behavior; discuss relationships between batoid ventral
mechanosensory systems and feeding ecology; and propose future research on lateral line form and function in
elasmobranch fishes.




   93                            10:30 Saturday                                     18                                OVC
Electroreception: Mechanisms for detecting weak signals in noise. D. Bodznick. Dept, of Biology, Wesleyan
University, Middletown, CT 06459-0170 USA.
The elasmobranch electrosense is known for its extraordinary sensitivity which Is necessary for detecting the feeble,
behaviorally-relevant electric fields in the sea. But a cost of this sensitivity is vulnerability to electrical noise including
that produced by the fish's ovm behaviors. Behavioral, morphological and physiological specializations are ail
necessary for extracting the important weak signals from noise. Each of these types of specializations will be
discussed and recent work on the physiological mechanisms for extracting weak signals from noise will be reviewed.
Physiological adaptations include receptors that can operate over an extended voltage range without loss of
sensitivity, simple subtractive circuits in the hindbrain and sophisticated adaptive filter mechanisms that involve the
development of an expectation of the noise typically associated with each of the fish's different behaviors. The end
result of these mechanisms is that all traces of the noise can be eliminated in the hindbrain without any loss of
sensitivity to the signals important for behavior.

   94                           11 00 Saturday                                   18                               OVC
What is the current status of chemical shark repellents? J.A. Sisneros. Department of Biological Sciences,
Florida Institute of Technology, 150 W. University Blvd., Melbourne, FL 32901-6988 USA.

Efforts by the US Navy to develop a chemical shark repellent during the post W.W.II years were unsuccessful and
later abandoned. Interest in chemical shark repellents was renewed by the discovery of pardaxin, a natural shark
repellent secreted by the Moses sole (Pardachinis manmoratus}. The surfactant-like nature of pardaxin led
researchers to test the shark repellency of various surfactants. The most effective surfactant tested to date is the
alkyl sulfate surfactant sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). Swim-through repellency tests were conducted in a
roundabout test tank using swell sharks, Cephaloscyllium ventriosum, to determine if repellent efficacy of alkyl
sulfate surfactants was affected by carbon chain length, ethylene oxide (EO) groups, and counterions. Results
indicate repellency increases as all^ chain length increases from octyl to dodec^, decreases with the addition of EO
groups, and is not affected by counterions. SDS is the most effective known chemical repellent, but it does not meet
ttie Navy's potency requirement for a classic surrounding-cloud type repellent of 100 parts per billion. Thus, SDS is
only practical as a directional repellent such as in a squirt application. Recent work on semiochemicals may offer a
new prospective direction for the search of a more effective chemical shark repellent.




   95 .                         11:30 Saturday                                  18                                OVC
Comparative anatomy of the elasmobranch cerebellum: theme and variations of a sensorimotor interface.
J.G. New. Dept, of Biology and Parmly Hearing Institute, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, IL 60626 USA.
 The cerebellum of elasmobranch fishes denranstrates a wide range of variation in size and complexity across taxa.
Previous studies have demonstrated that he cerebellum of squaliform sharks is relatively simple, with a single
smooth corpus, whereas that of galeomorph sharks is relatively much larger and multilobate, with numerous sulci in
each lobe. The majority of previous studies have focussed on those taxa possessing smaller and simpler cerebelli.
The purpose of this paper is to examine in detail the anatomy of the cerebellum of carcharhiniform sharks,
particularly Caicharhinus limbatus and Spyma lewini and compare the structure and cytoarchitecture with those
previously described in elasmobranchs with smaller and simpler cerebellar structures. Models of cerebellar function
and sensorimotor integration in other vertebrates will be compared with what is known of the physiology and role of
the cerebellum in elasmobranchs to generate hypotheses explaining the wide variety of cerebellar morphologies in
elasmobranchs.




   96                           08:00 Saturday                                  14                                THN
Homage to A. S. Rand, or the Importance of taxon-centered research in biology.                      M.J. West-Eberhard.
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Unit 0948, APO AA 34002-0948.
Interpretation of a biological phenomenon, whether the structure of a molecule or the call of a frog, depends on
understanding its natural setting, environmental, ontogenetic, and phylogenetic. Lack of knowledge or intuition in
any of these areas will limit understanding. This means that progress in biology depends on knowing certain test
organisms literally inside out - on developing what has been called *a feeling for the organism* and a broad base of
detailed information about particular taxa, f will discuss how narrowly phenomenon-directed research may miss
opportunities to see pattern; why comparative biology must include the study of intraspecific variation as well as
inter-spedfic variation and phylogeny; and how the irrational and almost perverse affection of certain biologists for
snakes, lizards, crocodiles and frogs has contributed to the elucidation of principles of general significance in biology.  97         ______           08:45 Saturday
An historical perspective of frog communication studies A,S. Rand, Smithsonian Tropical Research Intitule,                   A
900 Jefferson Drive, Suite 2207, Washington DC 20560 USA.
Mv role in today’s symposium is to provide a broad brush review of studies on anuran communication in the p^t
TOs wfll fTCus on contnbutions that have summarized the state of the art or initiated new research directions. This
review will provide a basis against which the recent advances in anuran communication can be appreciated.




                               09:30 Saturday                                   14                                THN
   98


Institute, P.O. Box 2072, Balboa, Republic of Panama.
Fmns mmmiinicate oresence and male reproductive readiness with sound; temporal and spectral call measures
rarw information The acoustic communication system is anatomically constrained by a fnctional pulmonary v^Jy®
       toSSSTisSltato? The phjlfcs of emitterchannel, and receiyer.establish the boundary conditions wi hir,
which communication systems must have evolved. The uncertainty dissipated therein rernairis subject to natu^
selection Obligate aquatic associations punctuated by facultative terrestrial excursions required fax's                 L
aaareoations at uncertain seasonal foci. Sound transmission experiments within water gener^ion of
anrSdion of S±ome acoustic waveforms show the different potentials of advertising local bree^g
onnominities In vitro the larynx of the tungara frog (Physalaemus pustulosus) inflates under pneurnatocousbc
control such that heritable physical constraints must largely reside in elastic (potential energy) patterns of activation.
On the other hand, the vocal folds of Bufo are rigidly suspended, their kinetic tuning weights being
Here control emeraentiy concerns mass in motion (kinetic energy), and lacks a medial fold foospr mechanism.
contactinq friction^ folc^s of Scaphiopus are considered primitive. Female preference and
direction ?o acoustic parameters via sexual selection on the elaborated pulmonary valve, the male anuran larynx.




                                                                                 14                               THN
    99                          10:45 Saturday
 Design features and patterns of dlfferentlatioii of acoustic signals of anurans.          M.J, Littleiohn, Department of
 Zoology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia 3052.
 The structure of the male advertisement call, and of the encounter call where it has also b®®n described1 are



 Dr^u?ti“ of cX notes and pulses. The morphological attributes and behawore tha facilitate the effectwe
 Drooaaation of the sounds, and orientation and phonotaxis to them by the intended receivers .su^ as^^bre®ding
 consoedfio females are also considered. The ways in which the acoustic repertoire of a taxon is elaborated, how
 the soeoifioitv of a'signal is enabled (i.e,, through coding and redundancy), and the possible intraspecific and
 interspecific acoustic bases by which the effective choice of an appropnate mate is ipade, are discussed.




  Meadoan ewva chMs*! of         eonus fMaindta (JPImtiecifdaa}; notes on adaptaOons and dtotttbution. A. Weber.
  Zooioglsches In^tut und zoologisches Museum, Universiteet Hamburg, Martiri-Luiher-King-Platz 3,20146 Hamburg,
  Germany.
  Since the description of the first troglobitic Middle American Rhamdia in 1983 a lot of additional populations have
  been discovered in hitherto unet^lored cave waters of southern Mexico. Morphological investigations revealed that
  all known troglomorphic populations are related to the epigean species R. laticauda. However, several trcgiobitic
  populations are nowada^ separated from the ancestral epigean form. Two of them have already been described as
  species and the description of a third one is submitted. Constructive traits of cave adaptation are longer barbels and
  the accumulation of adipose tissue at the basis of the anal and the adipose fin. The preadaptations distinguishing R.
  laticauda as the ancestral form for successful cave rxlonization are discussed, focusing on ths mechano- and

                                                                                                                           3




                              08:45 Saturday                                 12                               MCN
  100
Keynote speaker; Biology of cave fishes: A retrospective and prospective w‘^ ■^?l?®RnRn7 vnan
Amblyopsidae. T.L. Poulson. UIC, Biological Sciences (m/c 066), 845 West Taylor Street, Chicago IL 60607 7060
USA.
Cave fish show convergence and parallelism in regressive and constructive traits in directed indirect response^^
absence of light. In addition to reduction in eyes and pigment, regressive losses mdude c ^dian
escape and alarm responses, and diversity and intensity of agonistic behaviors. Constnjctive 9^® J"?-V,?-
elaboration of extraoptic sensory systems (including proprioception) with neoteny,
increased egg size and decreased clutch volume, decreased metabolic rate, and increased foragwg                 .
Several issues should be considered more routinely. 1. the trap of a favonte hwothesis, ssP®®!®"*                 of
of regressive evolution; 2. scale, in the context of lifespans and importance of rare ®''ents, 3. me pos^bility ot
active invasion rather than isolation due to rigorous climate; & 4. molecular traits as complementary to other cave
independent traits in cladistics.
 I will show how new techniques and approaches are yielding and will yield surpii®ing and excibng '"sights.
 Molecular methods are relevant to rates of gene flow, problems of small population size, indeperiden _"^®'°"Si
 mechanisms of regression, and phylogeny. Mark recapture studies give more accurate rneasures of grov^ and
 population size. And community signatures for organic enrichment, acute vs. chronic toxicity, and siltation include
 differential effects on cave fish.



                                                                              12                              MCN
   101                         09:30 Saturday
Some aspects of the diversity and conservation status of the cave fishes of the world.
Deparmont of Language Engineering, University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, PO Box 88,
Manchester, UK.
nf tho f'a 9(;nnn enn nf fishes 79 soecies have so far been described that live their whole lives in caves and other
?nd™n^^habrtSs. Th^                                 57. 16%) and 17 families (of 482, 3.5%) 19 of the 50 genera
contafoinq cave fishes are monotypic cave-restricted (38% of genera, 24% of species). 4             genera are cave
SSrided^and^havTl ormoraTs^es (11 species in total, 8% of genera, 14% of spedes). There are therefore 23
cave-restricted qenera with 30 species (46% of genera, 38% of species). 44 species (56 ^) are kntwn only from th&r
w® iS Mos? hSan Xs haCa only ? species but there are 13 cases ^ere 2^d 3 cases wtoe 3,
Secies coexist at the same location. China has the most species (14,Mexico (9^2^), Br^il (A
9%1 USA (6 8%) and Thailand (5, 6%). These five countnes have 41 species, 52/o of the total. A turtner
countries have 1 or more species. These animals are found throughout the tropical andsubtropio^
and 25“S with the majority being found between 16and 35°N. Three ostanophysaivorders "orriain 36 9®"®^ m
bmiiioe fnf RO         and 56 soecies (of 79 71%) There are 5 non-ostanophysan orders with 14 genera in 5 farn^lies
K afd 23?o^ls (29%? Thl &esl lUCN Red List (1996) has 3 species as Critically Endangered, 2 as
E^ngTred and 46 as Vulnerable (71% of the 72 species described in 1996). All of these animals have very small
distributions will always be vulnerable to human impact.




                                10:30 Saturday                                 12                            . MCN
    102
 iSoo^ehavIou^n^elationships of the blind catfish, genus Taui^la, a distributirmal relict from
 nort^Ltern Brazil (Sllurlformes, Pimelodidae). E- Trajarg and F.A. Bockmann, Departamento de Zoologia,
 Institute de Biociencias da USP, C. P., 11461, 05422-970 Sao Paulo SP, Brasil.
 A new soecies of troglobitic heplapterine catfish, genus Taunayia, was recently found in a rjave ’ram Campo
 Formoso^. asemiX region in northern Bahia, NE Brazil. The genus, charactei;ued by several                          ®®
 such as wide’latero-sensory canals, was previously monotypic, with one species, T.
 UDoer^ete and Paraiba river basins, Atlantic Rainforest, SE Brazil. Taunapa new sp®ci®s diffe s frorn T.
 nSminala bv the smaller size anophlhalmy, depigmentation, extreme rerJuotion of lateral line, reduction of vertebral
 SX7coXn of the^'craniarfontan^el. TEe%enus belongs to the Nemproglartis aubdade^arac enzed by
 the reduction of gas bladder and some paedomorphic traits. The epigean drainage in Campo                   '® ^°®’'7
 temoorarv thus ttie blind catfishes are isolated in the hypoxic subterr^ean water taWe dunng jposf of j
 PotentiaPoredators such as Rhamdia catfishes, enter the cave with penodioal floods. Taunayia         is indifferent to
 lioht but tvahiv responsive to mechanical stimuli, rapidly hiding when disturbed. However, unlike T. marginate, it is
 not esDontaneouslv crvptobiotio, presenting periods stationary on the bottorn alternating        swimming near the
 eXm^ and in the^vate^ column. Piscivory, including cannibalism (for the first time recorded in Brazilian
 fishes), was observed in the laboratory.




  MterMateHfte evotatton. B.D. MbH. P. Fu and M.R. Grose, Depariinent of Zoology, Univefsity of Toronto, 25
  Haibord Street, Toronto, Ontario, MSS 3G5.
  This paper has two objectives: describing Centrarchid microsatellites and discussing microsatellite evolution.
  Centrarchids, native to North American, are one of our most important sport fish and are of great interest to
  evolutionary ecologists. We develop 20 new microsatellites (from the bluegill Lepomis macrochirus) and analyze
  their polymorphism, inheritance, and examine their conservation within the genus (L. Qibbosus), across genera
  (Micropterus), and across families (Percidae, Esocidae). Concerning microsatellite evolunon, we show that: (1) the
  rate of nucleotide substitution is not necessarily slower in fish than warm-blooded animals, (2) microsatellite length
  correlates with levels of polymorphism, and (3) null alleles may occur at a rate of 1 in 30 genotypes.concentration on groups in which there is little or no differentiation in specirai cnaraclGliyilUb
thus placed on the temporal aspects of the calls, which include duration, envelope shape, number and rate of
production of calls, notes and pulses. The morphological attributes and behaviors that facilitate the effective
propagation of the sounds, and orientation and phonotaxis to them by the intended receivers such as breeding
conspecific females, are also considered. The ways In which the acoustic repertoire of a taxon is elaborated, how
the specificity of a signal Is enabled (i.e., through coding and redundancy), and the possible Intraspecific and
interspecific acoustic bases by which the effective choice of an appropriate mate is made, are discussed.




Maxfcan cave catfish of the genus Rhamdia (PImetodIdae): notes on adaptations and distrttxttion. A. Weber.
Zoologtsches Institut und zoologisches Museum, Universitaet Hamburg, Martin-Luther-King-Platz 3, 20146 Hamburg,
Germany.

Since the description of the first troglobitic Middle American Rhamdia in 1983 a lot of additional populations have
been discovered in hitherto unexplored cave waters of southern Mexico. Morphological investigations revealed that
all known troglomorphic populations are related to the epigean species R. laticauda. However, several trc^lobitic
populations are nowadays separated from the ancestral epigean form. Two of them have already been described as
species and the description of a third one is submitted. Constructive traits of cave adaptation are longer barbels and
the accumulation of adipose tissue at the basis of the anal and the adipose fin. The preadaptations distinguishing R.
laticauda as the ancestral form for successful cave colonization are discussed, focusing on ths mechano- and
electrosensory lateral line system.




   104                         11:20 Saturday                                12                               MCN
Biology of ozark cavefish In Logan Cave national wildlife refuge, Arkansas. J.E. Johnson and J.Z. Brown,
Arkansas Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701 USA.
Amblyopsis rosaa is a threatened species endemic to the Springfield Plateau of Arkansas, Missouri, and Oklahoma.
One of the largest reported Ozark cavefish populations is in Logan Cave, Arkansas, and was surveyed 25 times
between 1993 and 1995. During the study, 113 cavelish were marked with visual implant tags. Half (56) of the
tagged fish were recaptured 163 times; 30 tagged fish were never recaptured, and the other 27 were unavailable for
recapture. Gross movement exceeded 1,000 m, with a mean movement of 1.2 mriish/d. Movement was positively
correlated with cavefish length. The Logan Cave population was open to migration, with a mean of 3.8 untagged fish
captured monthly. Jolly-Seber population estimates ranged from 12 to 93 fish monthly, with a mean of 32.3 fish and a
mean survival of 0.990/d. Most fish gained in length during April-October, the period a maternity colony of gray bats
(Myotis grisescens} also occupied the cave. The Logan Cave population of Ozark cavefish appears to be a subset
of a larger population, most litely inhabiting the recharge aquifer. Cavefish that moved through the aquifer and into
Logan Cave generally survived there less than two years. No cavefish were believed to have move upstream into
the aquifer or downstream out of the cave.




   105                        08:00 Saturday                                CF7     .   .          . ..        AXL
Genetic studies of Carolina darter populations In the southeastern US. K.J. Oswald. Marins Science Program,
University of South Carolina, Columb^, South Carolina 29208, USA; R.G. Arndt, Department of Biological Sciences,
The Richard Stockton College of New Jersey, Pomona, New Jersey 08240, USA; F.C. Rohde, North Carolina
Division of Marine Fisheries, 127 Cardinal Drive Extension, Wilmington, North Carolina 28405, USA.
The Carolina darter (Etheostoma collid) is generally regarded as a species of Special Concern. To address ths
genetic contribution of individual populations to the species as a whole, we have generated molecular genetic data
(sequences of mitochondrial and single-copy nuclear DNA loci) to estimate the degree of isolation among distinct
populations of E collis from throughout the species range (southern Virginia to central South Carolina). Furthermore,
we have partitioned the total genetic variance for each mitochondrial and nuclear locus into components within and
among drainages to determine the levels of population differentiation. These genetic data are interpreted in light of
the fractional contribution of individual populations to the total genetic variance remaining in E collis.

Upper^S^n^Paraib^v^^^^^^^^^^^^^H
marginata by the smaller size, anophthalmy, depigmentation, extreme reduction of lateral line, reduction of vertebral
nurriber and condition of the cranial fontanel. The genus belongs to the Nemuroglanis subolade, characterized by
the reduction of gas bladder and some paedomorphio traits. The epigean drainage in Campo Formoso is mostly
temporary, thus the blind catfishes are isolated in the hypoxic subterranean wrater table during most of the year.
Potential predators, such as Rhamdia catfishes, enter the cave with periodical floods. Taunayia sp. is indifferent to
light but highly responsive to mechanical stimuli, rapidly hiding when disturbed. However, unlike T. marginata, it is
not esponfaneously cryptobiotic, presenting periods stationaiy on the bottom alternating with swimming near the
bottom and in the water column. Piscivory, including cannibalism (for the first time recorded in Brazilian cave
fishes), was obsen/ed in the laboratory.




BlllcrosatetHte evolution. B.D. Neff. P. Fu and M.R. Gross, Department of Zoology, University of Toronto, 26
Harbord Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G5.

This paper has two objectives; describing Centrarchid microsatellites and discussing microsatellite evolution.
Centrarchids, native to North American, are one of our most important sport fish and are of great interest to
evolutionary ecologists. We develop 20 new microsatellites (from the bluegill Lepomis macmchirus) and analyze
their polymorphism, inheritance, and examine their conservation within the genus (L. gibbosus), across genera
(Micrcmtenjs), and across families (Percidae, Esocidae). Concerning microsatellite evolution, we show that: (1) the
rate of nucleotide substitution is not necessarily slower in fish than warm-blooded animals, (2) microsatellite length
correlates with levels of polymorphism, and (3) null alleles may occur at a rate of 1 in 30 genotypes.




   107                         08:30 Saturday                               CF7                                AXL
Genetics studies of endangered shortnose sturgeon (Acipenser brevlrostrum} populations in South
Carolina. J.M. Quattro. Department of Biological Sciences, Marine Science Program, Baruch Institute, and School
of the Environment, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA; D.K. Coykendall, Marine
Science Program, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA; J.D. Baldwin, Dept, of
Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, University of Rorida, 7922 NW 71 st Street, Gainesville FL 32653 USA; B.W.
Bowen, Dept, of Rsheries and Aquatic Sciences, University of Florida, 7922 NW 71 st Street, Gainesville FL 32653
USA.
The shortnose sturgeon (Acipenser brevirostnjm) has experienced dramatic reductions in population size over the
past century, and was added to the Endangered Spedes List in 1967. Despite their endangered status and
demographic attributes that might result in highly structured populations, genetic studies have not been undertaken
on remaining populations of this vulnerable species. We describe the results of genetic assays of shortness
sturgeon inhabiting four major river systems in South Carolina, part of a much larger study of genetic diversity among
shortnose sturgeon population throughout the Southeastern United States. We assay nuclear and mitochondrial
DNA loci for sequence variation and partition the genetic variation observed into within and among river
components. These components are used to address the null hypothesis that four rivers sampled do not harbor
genetically distinct populations of shortnose sturgeon.




   108                         08:45 Saturday                               CF7                                AXL
Population genetics study of the Central Stoneroller (Campostoma anomalum} from tributaries to Great
Miami River P. Dimsoski. G.P. Toth and M.K. Smith, U.S. EPA M/S 642, 26 West M.L. King Dr., Cincinnati, OH
45268.
Genetic distances and other parameters calculated from microsatellite allele frequencies were used to characterize
populations of Central Stonerollers in the Great Miami River basin. Six sampling sites were randomly selected from a
number of sites studied as part of a U.S. E.P.A. Regional Environmental Monitoring and Assessment Program
(REMAP) effort. These sites were located in two general areas, three in the upper part and three in the lower part of
^e river basin. Ten individuals per site were sampled. Alleles from seven loci were used to assign the genotype of
the fish. Genetic variation within populations varied from 27 to 46 percent. Four loci had high (greater than 0.15)
Wright's Fst values suggesting high variation of allele frequencies between the populations. This variation also
contributed to the larger range in values for Nel's genetic distances. Physically more distant sites exhibited greater
genetic distances. Cluster analysis using an unweighted pair group method divided the six populations into two
groups matching the geographical map of the sampling sites in the upper and lower part of the river. These results
provide evidence that genetic variation of the Central Stoneroiler which inhabit the Great Miami River basin is
spatially distributed.   109                          09:00 Saturday                                 CF7                  AXL
Allozyme variation in Etheostoma tippecanoe and Etheostoma denoncourtl.          S.A. Welsh. West Virginia
Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, Morgantown, WV 26506-6125 USA; S.A. Perry, Everglades National
Park, 40001 State Road 9336, Homestead, FL 33034-6733 USA; J.H. Howard, Frostburg State University,
Frostburg, MD 21532 USA.
 The Tippecanoe darter {Etheostoma tippecanoe} has an extremely fragmented range with isolated populations
widely distributed within the Cumberland and Ohio river drainages. Its range previously included the Tennessee
River drainage; however, these populations were recently described as a new species (golden darter, Etheostoma
denoncourS}, based on morphological data. To determine patterns of genetic variation within and between species,
22 loci in 12 populations of E. tippecanoe, and four populations of E. denoncourti, were examined with horizontal
starch gel electrophoresis. No fixed differences were observed between E denoncourti and E tippecanoe, and low
allozyme variation occurred across the range of both species. An alternate allele at Pgdh was present in 10 of the 12
populations of E. tippecanoe and absent in all populations of E. denoncourti. In addition, an alternate allele at Pgm
was present in all populations of E. denoncourti and absent in all populations of E. tippecanoe. All trees produced by
distance-Wagner analysis depicted the Clinch River population of E denoncourti as basal to an E. tippecanoe clade.
Although the species status of E. denoncourti was not supported by fixed differences, our allozyme data are
consistent with morphological differences between E denoncourti and E. tippecanoe.




   110                          09:15 Saturday                                CF7                                 AXL
Genetic variability of Eurasian and North American Perea. T.N. Todd. M.K. Bumham-Curtis and C.O. Hatcher,
Great Lakes Science Center, U.S. Geological Survey, 1451 Green Road, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA 48105; N.M.
Pronin, Russian Academy of Sciences, Eastern Sibenan, Institute of Rsheries, Ulan-Ude, Russia 670042.
Eurasian perch, Perea Huviatiiis, from Lake Baikal, Lena River, Volga River, and Poland, were compared with yellow
perch, Perea fiavescens, from the Great Lakes. Protein electrophoresis of 24 enzyme systems revealed a common
pattern of monomorphism. Of the loci scored, 27 were monomorphic. Five of the loci were nearly fixed for the
same common allele, but polymorphisms were observed in one or more of ths populations. Seven of the remaining
19 loci were polymorphic, but the Eurasian perch had a different common allele than the North American perch.
The remaining 12 loci had fixed differences between Eurasian and North American perch. A survey of variation in
the mitochondrial control region (D-loop) with PCR-RFLP discovered significant differences in haplotype presence
and frequency between Eurasian and North American Perea. Despite small sample size, the Polish perch
population (n:=10) was the most variable with five haplotypes and a mean number of painivise differences (Pi) of
1.47. In contrast, perch from Lake Baikal (n=104) had only three different composite mtDNA haplotypes ( Pi =
0.162). Such differences, coupled witfi morphological differences, strengthen the taxonomic validity of each
species. Perch from non-glaciated regions in both North America and Asia appear to have higher levels of
heterozygosity than those from glaciated regions.




   Ill                          09:30 Saturday                                .CF7                                 AXL
Population genetic structure, phylogeography, and spawning philopatry In walleye {StUostedion vibeum}
from mtDNA control region sequences. C.A. Steoien and A.I. Brokaw, Case Western Resenre University,
Cleveland, OH 44106-7080 USA; J.E. Faber, University of West Virginia, Parkersburg USA.
Mitochondrial DNA control region sequences (1200 base pairs) tested the genetic and phylogeographic structure of
230 walleye Stizostedion vitreum among spawning sites, lake basins, lakes, and glacial refugia in the Great Lakes
region. Polymorphisms included different copy numbers and sequences of tandem repeats, and base substitutions
in the left and right domains. Results indicated significant phylogec^raphic structure among glacial refugia, lakes,
basins, and spawning sites. Differences among spawning populations were consistent with reduced gene flow,
philopatry, and possible natal homing. Genotypic frequencies of spawning populations were consistent among years
and between males and females, supporting philopatry in both sexes. A population in the unglaciated plateau in
southern Ohio diverged prior to populations that differentiated in the Missouri (which was the next most ancestral
group), Mississippi, and Atlantic refugia during the Ice Ages. Haplotypes from the three refugia colonized the Great
Lakes after retreat of the Wisconsin glaciers and their distribution today reflects the geography of their prior isolation
and differential colonization. Populations that became associated with spawning localities appear to have diverged
further due to philopatry, resulting in fine-scale phylogeographic structuring.




Unexpected differences in the regulation of allozyme expression In a clonal hyiirid fish Ptioxinua aoa-
neogaeua. K.A. Goddard. T.H. Haws, D.L Letting, D.A. Fecteau, R.O. Hopkins and S.L Reed, Department of
Biology, Ursinus College, Collegeville, PA., USA 19426.
Phoxinux eos-neogaeus are all-female fish from the northern United States and southemCanada that reproduce by
gynogenesis, a form of clonal reproduction. These fish were formed by hybridization between a female of Phoxinus

  ■ 112    ..                   09:45 Saturday                                  CF7                                  AXL
Correlation, between the extent of reproductive Isolation and morphological specialization among sympatric
lake whitefish ecotypes {Coregonua sp.) as revealed by microsatellite and morphological analyses. GJjj
and L. Bematchez, University Laval Department de Biologie, GIROQ , Sainte-foy, Quebec, G1K 7P4.
Il is generally recognized that the evolution of sympatric fish ecotypes found in post glacial lakes is the result of
processes driving ecological and phenotypic changes. If the same forces driving phenotypic divergence are also
responsible for the development of reproductive isolation, one predicts a correlation between the extent of tropic
specialization and that of reproductive isolation being reached in a given environment. We test this hypothesis by
comparing morphological and genetic divergence between sympatric dwarf and normal whitefish ecotypes from six
different lakes of the St. John R. basin (eastern Canada and northern Maine). An analysis of molecular variance was
performed using 8 microsatellite loci while 9 meristic and 19 morphometric variables were selected to quantify
morphological differentiation. Significant differences in allele frequencies between ecotypes were found in 5 lakes,
confirming that they represent genetically distinct populations. This translated into significant but variable Fst
estimates between ecotypes, ranging from 0.041 to 0.225. Similarly, dwarf and normal ecotypes were significantly
different in morphological traits, the squared Mahalanobis distance (D) varying from 1.81 to 12.69. The extent of
morphological specialization reached between ecxjtypes in each lake was negatively correlated with the extent of
gene flow among them (Nm = 7.5265 - 0.2633 x D, r = - 0.67). These results supported our hypothesis that the
extent of reproductive isolation reached between ecotypes may be related to the potential for occupying distinct
tropic niches, and therefore to the same selective forces driving morphological specialization In each lake.




   113                          10:15 Saturday                                  CF7                                  AXL
A study of the North Atlantic redfish species complex (genus Sebastes}: usefulness of microsatellites for
inter- and intra- specific differentiation. S. Roques and L. Bematchez, GIROQ, Departement de Biologie,
Universitd Laval, Quebec.
Four species of redfish are potentially found in sympatry in the Atlantic Ocean: Sebastes marinas, S.vMparus,
S.fasciatus and S.mentetia. A combination of several characters can potentially distinguish these taxa at adult stage,
but no character alone can discriminate them, and none can be used for young stage identification. Low levels of
intraspecific and interspecific genetic variation have in general been found in those species.We developed specific
microsatellites loci, and the usefulness of 8 of them was investigated by measuring inter- and intraspecific genetic
diversity between two samples (n=30-50) of each of the four species. Results confirmed the high polymorphism of
these markers with a mean of 32 alleles per locus, and high overall heterozygosity from 0.65 to 0.82. Exact tests
revealed highly significant differences in alleles frequencies among species at all loci. Unique alleles or alleles size
ranges observed in a given species were absent or found at very low frequencies in the others. This resulted into a
highly significant interspecific genetic variance (up to 49%). At the intraspecific level, significant differences in allele
frequencies were obsen/ed between samples in all species. However, they translated into very small levels of
divergence.These results will be discussed in the context of both the evolutionary history and the management of
this species complex.




   114                          10:30 Saturday                                  CF7                                AXL
A mtDNA and microsatellite assessment of single vs multiple origins of landlocked Atlantic salmon (Salmo
salar L.) from Lake St-Jean, Quebec, (Canada). N. Tessier and L. Bematchez, Universite Laval, dept, biologie,
Ste-Foy, Quebec, G1K 7P4.
We r^orted inter-population genetic divergence among landlocked salmon associated with distinct tributaries in
Lake St-Jean. The erdent of differentiation between one of these populations from the others was more important
than that reported among any anadromous populations. Two alternative hypotheses may potentially explain these
observations: the lake was postglacially recolonized by a single founding population and subsequent founder events
with restricted gene flow, or they may have been recolonized by two ancestral populations that diverged prior to the
Wisconsinian glacial events. We tested these hypotheses by comparing the genetic composition with mitochondrial
DNA and microsatellites of these landlocked salmon with that of adjacent anadromous populations . We included a
landlocked population from Maine as an outgroup. Important differences in allele frequencies, Fst and Rst values
were obsen/ed among the landlocked populations, as well as between those and tne anadromous ones, which
contrasted with lower differences observed among the anadromous populations. Population clustering revealed that
all populations from Lake St-Jean grouped together and separately from the adjacent anadromous populations.
Genetic distance estimates between landlocked and anadromous population from the Saguenay system were as
important as those observed between them and the Maine population. These results support the hypothesis of a
single origin of landlocked salmon in Lake Saint-Jean. They also indicate that the divergence between anadromous
and landlocked populations of the Saguenay R. predates their recent physical isolation.




A microsaleHfts assessment of withki-river population structuring associated with the number of
spawningZnursery grounds in Atlantic salmon {Salmo aalat}. D. Garant. J.J. Dodson and L. Bematchez, CIRSA
Universite Laval, Pavilion Vachon, Departement de Biologie Quebec G1K 7P4.
It has been proposed that population structure of aquatic organisms is detennined by the number of environmental
settings allowing completion of their life cycles. In this study, we test the hypothesis that this leads to the         « xxJIi*w,piwiiiviwi* wwpj iiwiiwwiu ««wi
in the left and right domains. Results indicated significant phyiogeographic structure among glacial refugia, lakes,
basins, and spawning sites. Differences among spawning populations were consistent with reduced gene flow,
philopatry, and possible natal homing. Genotypic frequencies of spawning populations were consistent among years
and between males and females, supporting philopatry in both sexes. A population in the unglaciated plateau in
southern Ohio diverged prior to populations that differentiated in the Missouri (which was the next most ancestral
group), Mississippi, and Atlantic refugia during the Ice Ages. Haplotypes from the three refugia colonized the Great
Lakes after retreat of the Wisconsin glaciers and their distribution today reflects the gerjgraphy of their prior isolation
and differential colonization. Populations that became associated with spawning localities appear to have diverged
further due to philopatry, resulting in fine-scale phyiogeographic structuring.




Unexpectod dWfvrencee In tlw regulation of alha^me expresalon In a clonal hybrid ftah Phoxhug eos-
n»oga»us. K.A. Goddard. T.H. Haws, D.L. Letting, DA Fecteau, R.O. Hopkins and S.L. Reed, Department of
Biology, Ursinus CoHege, CoHegeviHe, PA. , USA 19426.
Phoxinux eos-neogaeus are all-female fish from the northern United States and southemCanada that reproduce by
gynogenesis, a form of clonal reproduction. These fish were formed by hybridization between a female of Phoxinus
neogaeus and a male of Phoxinus eos; they express one enzyme allele (allozyme) of P. eos and one allozyme of
P. neogaeus for each enzyme for which the parental allozymes can be distinguished by cellulose acetate
electrophoresis.      We have analyzed the expression of phosphoglucomutase(PGM) and glucosephosphate
isomerase(GPI) in heart, eye, muscle, and liver of ten or more diploid and triploid individuals (with 5-7 replicates of
each individual) of P. eos-neogaeus. Although a oneione ratio of expression is expected in diploid individuals, the
expression of the P. eos allele is statistically significantly greater than the P. neogaeus allele in some tissues for
PGM, and in other tissues for GPI. In triploid individuals, expression of the F. eos allozyme for GPI is expressed
significantly less than expected. These data indicate a difference in the regulation of the parental allo^mes by
tissue and enzyme that may effect the ecological role of the hybrid species, and may explain how polyploids survive
with three sets of chromosomes directing their cellular activities.




   116.                         11:00 Saturday                                 .CF7                                 AXL
Application of M-FiSH to fish chromosomes. R.B. Phillips and K.M. Reed, Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wl USA.
Multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization (M-FISH) is a new technique which allows localization of multiple DNA
probes on chromosomes from a single metaphase. We have used this technique to localize different families of
repetitive sequences to the chromosomes of zebrafish (Danio rerio) and several species of salmonid fishes including
rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) and lake trout (Salvelinus namaycush). Chromosome preparations were
obtained from a diploid cell line of zebrafish and from cultured blood of the salmonid species. Cloned probes were
labeled with either Spectnjm Organe or Spectrum Green using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and slides were
counterstained with DAPI. Images were captured with a CCD camera and analyzed with QUIPS software (Vysis,
Inc.). Different families and sub-families of repetitive DNAs were localized at different centromeric, subcentromeric,
and subtelomeric locations in each species. These probes will be useful for Identification of fish chromosomes in
gene localization experiments using M-FISH.




   117                          11:15 Saturday                                  CF7                                 AXL
Quantitative trait locus (QTL) for upper thermal tolerance (UTT) in rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss.
G.M.L. Perry. Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, N1G 2W1.
My research concerns the conservation of quantitativs trait loci (QTL) coding for the quantitative trait of upper
thermal tolerance (UTT) (resistance time in the zone of maximal thermal stress) in commercial rainbow trout
(Oncorhynchus m^'ss} populations. Previous research indicates the existence of four major QTL for UTT
segregating in inbred lines selected for response to this trait. Individuals used in this study are the result of intra- and
interstrain cross progeny of two unselecfed strains of commercial rainbow trout. Parental fish were derived from the
combination of two grandsires and 12 grandams within each strain. Preliminary analysis indicates that major allelic
variants are segregating in these hatchery strains for the previously identified UTT QTL. The ongoing survey of this
progeny generation may reveal additional QTL allelic variants. Later work will attempt to determine the physiological
mechanism by which the marked quantitative trait loci contribute to the total phenotype by assessing linkage
between candrdate coding loci (e.g. neat-shock proteins [hsps]) and variation in neutral microsatellite markers. The
discovery of QTL-associated variance for this trait in strains unselected for UTT suggests that QTL variants for upper
temperature tolerance may be fairly widespread in natural populations of rainbow trout.

wfth restricted gene flow, or they may have been recolonized by two ancestral populations thatoive^e^noHeHn?
Wisconsinian glacial events. We tested these hypotheses by comparing the genetic composition with mitochondrial
DNA and microsatellites of these landlocked salmon with that of adjacent anadromous populations . We included a
landlocked population from Maine as an outgroup. Important differences in allele frequencies, Fst and Rst values
were observed among ths landlocked populations, as well as between those and the anadromous ones, which
contrasted with lower differences observed among the anadromous populations. Population clustering revealed that
all populations from Lake St-Jean grouped together and separately from the adjacent anadromous populations.
Genetic distance estimates between landlocked and anadromous population from the Saguenay system were as
important as those observed between them and the Maine population. These results support the hypothesis of a
single origin of landlocked salmon in Lake Saint-Jean. They ^so indicate that the divergence between anadromous
and landlocked populations of the Saguenay R. predates their recent physical isolation.




A mforoMMeHlta aAsetMnftnt o< wttblr»-rfver popwtwHon strucbHing »s«oclst*d wftb ttw number of
spawnlng/nurse^ grounds in Atlantic salmon (Salmo saHar) . D. Garant J.J. Dodson and L. Bematchez, CIRSA
Universtte Laval, PaviNon Vachon, Ddpartement de Biologie Quebec G1K 7P4.
It has been proposed that population structure of aquatic organisms is determined by the number of environmental
settings allowing completion of their life cycles. In this study, we test the hypothesis that this leads to the
development of within-river population structuring associated with the existing number of spawning/nursery areas in
anadromcMJS Atlantic salmon. A total of 700 alevins sampled shortly after emergence (50 fish x 7 sites x 2 years)
were genotyped using five microsatellite loci. Heterogeneity in allele frequency distribution, translating into significant
Fst values among all pairwise comparisons of sites were c^served for the two consecutive years of sampling. These
parameters were lower among inter-annual samples of a same site than among sites. The majority of samples also
clustered by sites in a neighbor-joining tree built from chord-distance. These results therefore support the hypothesis
that genetic population substructuring in Atlantic salmon may develop at a very small geographic scale, as a
consequence of the existing number of grounds favoring survival of young life-history stages. TOcause salmon
associated with such population subunits may develop local adaptations, conservation and management policies
should be planned to preserve their genetic integrity.




   119                         -11:45 Saturday                                 CF7                                 AXL
Preliminary Investigation of microsatellite loci in red snapper (Lutjanus campechanus) in the northern Gulf
of Mexico. E.J. Heist and J.R. Gold, Department of Wildlife and Fisheries Sciences, Center for Biosystematics and
Biodiversity, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX USA.
The red snapper {Lutjanus campechanus} is one of the most economioally-important fishes in the Gulf of Mexico
(Gulf). Previous analyses of mitochondrial (mt) DNA in the northern Gulf detected no significant differences in
haplotype frequencry across a geographic gradient and no partitioning of uncommon haplotypes, indicating that red
snappers in the northern Gulf comprise a single genetic population. However, differences in mtDNA haplotype
diversity among several samples indicated that some level of genetic population structure exists, and that perhaps a
more rapidly-evolving genetic character might reveal that structure. We therefore developed a suite of highly
polymoq}hic DNA microsatellite loci to further examine the partitioning of genetic variation in this species. A
subgenomic library of restriction fragments was screened with di-, tri-, and tetra- nucleotide repeat and several
microsatellite loci were identified and sequenced. Oligonucleotide primers for amplification of loci via polymerase
chain reaction were developed. Polymorphism in microsatellite allele size was scored on denaturing polyacrylamide
gels. Microsatellite allele frequencies from different year classes and different regions were compared to further test
^e hypothesis that red snapper from the northern Gulf comprise a single genetic population.




  .120                         08:00 Saturday                                 GS3                                CHM
A review of the appendicular skeleton in amphisbaenlans (Reptilia; Squamata).                       M. Keamev. George
Washington University, Department of Biological Sciences, Washington, DC 20052 USA.
While reduction and loss of external limbs are hallmarks of amphisbaenian evolution, internal girdle and hindlimb
remnants in some amphisbaenian taxa have been known for many years. However, less than half of the known
genera have been surveyed for internal remnants of the appendicular skeleton and these structures have not been
systematically compared. I surveyed the appendicular skeleton in all extant genera of amphisbaenlans via the
preparation and study of radiographs, dry skeletons, and cleared and stained specimens and compared them to
eac^ other as well as to other non- and reduced-limbed squamates. This study revealed that relative reduction of
girdle and limb elements is diverse among the group. Variability in bony and cartilagenous components of the girdle
and limb remnants appears to contain useful information for ongoing phylogenetic studies of amphisbaenian
interrelationships. All amphisbaenlans retain at least one bony pelvic element but many amphisbaenlans have
completely lost the pectoral girdle. Among squamates, regardless of the degree of limb reduction or loss, the pelvic
girdle never completely disappears in amphisbaenlans or 'lizards' as it does in most snakes, and the pectoral girdle
never completely disappears in 'lizards' as it does in many amphisbaenlans and all snakes.   121                          08:15 Saturday                                 GS3                               CHM .
The phytogeny and evolution of viviparity in the alticolor and elongatus lineages of Uolaemus lizards. R.E.
Espinoza. Ecology, Evolution & Conservation Biology, MS 314, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557, USA.
The genus Uolaemus (Iguania: Tropiduridae) is the largest genus of lizards in the Southern Hemisphere. Partially
as a consequence of this diversity, the intrageneric relationships within Uolaemus are largely enigmatic.
Approximately half of the nearly 170 described taxa in the genus belong to the chiliensls group. Within this large
clade, several species groups nave been informally recognized including the alticolor and the elongatus groups. I
undertook an analysis of mitodiondrial DNA to ascertain the relationships among members of the alticolor and
elongatus species groups to (1) determine if members of each of these species groups formed monophylefio
lineages; and (2) address the evolution of viviparity within these groups. I sequenced about 700 bp (167
informative) of the mitochondrial 12S gene for nearly all described and several undescribed species within the two
species groups. A maximum parsimony analysis recovered three equally parsimonious trees. A consensus tree of
the mtONA results were then combined with additional evidence derived from morphological and ecological
studies. The combined phylogenetic hypothesis suggests that the two groups are indeed monophylefio.
Furthermore, viviparity appears to have evolved independently several times within the alticolor group, but only
once for the elongatus group, wherein, one species may have reverted to oviparous reproduction.




   122                        08:30 Saturday                                  GS3                               CHM
Genetic variation in Rana ephenocephala in response to an agricultural chemical: implications for
amphibian conservation. C.M. Bridges. 105 Tucker Hall, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 -7400, USA.

The amount of genetic variability present may indicate a species' ability to adapt to a stressful environment and can
be examined in a quantitative genetic analysis. Currently, numerous conservation efforts are being devoted to
determining whether amphibian spedes are in decline, as many studies would suggest. Therefore, because
amphibians ate amenable to quantitative genetic analyses and because their numbers may be declining due to
changes in their environment, mese organisms serve as an excellent model for examining the relationship between
the amount of genetic variability present in populations and adaptability in changing environments. Using tadpoles of
a single southern leopard frog (Rana sphenocephala} population, I examined the amount of genetic variability among
full- and half-sib families with respect to their sensitivity to both lethal (time-to-death) and subtotal (changes in
activity) levels of the agricultural chemical, carbaryl. Analyses of both time-to-deatn and activity data indicate
significant differences among full sib families, suggesting a great deal of variability, genetic or environmental, present
in the responses to this environmental stressor. There were also significant differences amorig half sib families in
the degree to which activity was reduced by sublethal carbaryl levels, indicating that this variability has a genetic
basis.




   123                          08:45 Saturday                                 GS3                       CHM
Conservation genetics of the Mojave fringe-toed lizard, Uma scoparia. In California.              T.L. Trepanier.
Department of ^xrlogy. University of Toronto and Centre for Biodiversity and Conservation Biology, Royal Ontario
Museum, 100 Queen's Park, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 2C6.
The Mojave fringe-toed lizard, Uma scoparia, is restricted to sand dunes in the Mojave Desert, existing in 25 known
localities. Because of this species' restriction to sand dunes, it has been considered a species of special concern.
Many populations are on the decline due to habitat destruction, misuse of off-road vehicles and possibly a significant
increase in raven numbers. The detennination of the extent and geographic distribution of genetic diversity among
the Mojave fringe-toed lizards is imperative for conservation and potential augmentation of endangered populations.
Augmentation of the Fort Inwin population is essential due to the rapidly declining population size, which is critical
since small populations are highly susceptible to stochastic events. If this population is to remain reproductively
viable, then genetic viability and integrity, including local adaptations must be maintained by introducing 'sister'
populations; individuals from populations that are most similar genetically. The mitochondrial genes ATPase 6 and
cytochrome b were sequenced for 27 U. scoparia from 8 localities, using U. notata as outgroup. In total, 1676
combined base pairs were sequenced, of which 170 were potentially phylogenefically informative. Results of
parsimony analysis revealed that the most closely related populations to NTC Fort Irwin are the dunes at Kelso and
Pisgah Crater, located southeast of the base.

   124                         09:00 Saturday                                 GS3                               CHM
Toward the phylogeny of the family Lacertidae: implications from mitochondrial DNA 12S, 16S and COI gene
sequences (Reptilia: Squamata). JJEu, Centre for Biodiversity and Conservation Biology, Royal Ontario Museum,
100 Queen's Park, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S2C6.
A phylogeny of the family Lacertidae was derived from mtDNA gene sequence data. Thirty-two species, representing
22 currently recognized genera and subgenera, were included in the analysis. A total of 3,600 base pairs was
obtained and aligned from 12S, 16S and COI gene sequences. A preferred tree was selected based on weighted
parsimony and functional ingroup and outgroup analyses. Decay analysis, bootstrap and permutation tail probability
were used to evaluate support for the recovered nodes. The genus Gallotia was resolved as the basal taxon and the
sister group of all remaining lacertids. Takydromus branched off next. All African lacertids grouped together, and
formed a monophyletic clade with the Eurasian genera Eremias and Ophisops. The remaining Eurasian lacertids
sequentially branched off near the base of the tree in a 'comb-like* fashion. The basal position of Gallotia and ths
monophyly of African lacertids are consistent with previous hypotheses. The European-origin hypothesis of lacertids
is favored, and the distribution of lacertids in Africa is likely a dispersal event.




   125                       . 09:15 Saturday                                 GS3                                CHM
Snake vertebrae do the twist. B.R. Moon. Dept Biology, Univ. Michigan, Ann Arbor Ml 48109, USA.

The zygosphene-zygantrum articulations of snake vertebrae are hypothesized to restrict or eliminate vertebral
torsion. This hypothesis is apparently based solely on the inference of function from structure, despite contradictory
evidence. Gasc (1974, Mem. Mus. Nat. Hist. Nat., Paris Ser. A Zool. 83:1-182) measured vertebral torsion of 1-
2°/joint in dried P^hon skeletons, but his results are seldom cited. I observed axial torsion during lateral undulation
and feeding in Pituophis melanoleucus. To determine whether apparent axial torsion results from differential
movement of the left and right body walls, combined lateral and vertical bending, or actual torsion at the vertebral
joints, I examined close-up video images of crawling P. melanoleucus and digitized macro video images of torsion in
fresh sections of the trunk. To measure vertebral torsion, I clamped sections of 10 vertebrae at one end and twisted
the free end by hand; the limits of twisting were clearly detectable and were reached before the movement produced
any axial bending. Freely crawling P. melanoleucus exhibited negligible lifting, moderate differential movement of
the left and right body walls, and apparent torsion of 0.02-2.4'’/vertebra. Fresh trunk sections allowed actual torsion
of 0.3-1.1’/vertebra, which produced substantial overall torsion when added over several vertebrae. Therefore, the
observed torsion was likely produced by differential movement of the left and right body walls combined with real
torsion at the vertebral joints. Despite the mechanical restrictions imposed by the complex articulations, vertebral
torsion occurs in snakes and appears to be functionally important in many kinds of snake movements.




   126                         09:30 Saturday                                 GS3                               CHM
Effects of an acetyl cholinesterase insecticide on amphibian communities under different levels of biotic
stress. M.D. Boone. 212 Tucker Hall Dept, of Biology, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO 65211 USA.

Widespread use of agricultural chemicals makes it increasingly likely that non-target wildlife could be exposed to
contamination. Many amphibian species utilize breeding habitats nested within or around agricultural areas, therefoi^e
population and community dynamics may bo influenced or altered by exposure to chemicals. The chemical used in
ttiis experiment, carbaryl. Is the active ingredient in the insecticide Sevin.This chemical acts through acetyl­
cholinesterase inhibition, and is known to affect amphibian activity and behavior. The objectives of this experiment
were to determine differentiai susceptibility to carbaryl among species, the effect of the chemical under different
biotic conditions, and the indirect effects of the chemical. To do this, I used three species of anurans in outdoor cattle
tanks: Hyla versicolor (gray treefrog), Bub woodhousii (toad) and Rana clamilans (green frog). Twelve experimental
treatments were manipulated for density (high or low), predator (presence or absence of Notophthalmus viridescens)
and chemical level (0, 3.5, or 7.0 mg/1 of carbaryl). Results showed that the chemical significantly affected size at
metamorphosis In H. versicolor. A predator by chemical effect in H. vers/co/or was significant; in the presence of
the predator, tadpoles at high chemical levels had a larger size at metamorphosis than other classes. Chemical
effects on survival at metamorphosis were significant in B. woodhousii and H. versicolor; higher chemical levels
significantly reduced survival. The chemical interacts with biotic factors in ways that would not be predictable from
two-factor experiments. Chemical by density interactions were significant in B. woodhousii and H. versicolor. This
experiment does indicate differential susceptibility among species and noted that differences in biotic conditions
affect the potency of the chemical.combined base pairs were sequenced, or wnicn 1/0 were potentially pnyiogeneticaiiy intormanve. nesuits oi
parsimony analysis revealed that the most closely related populations to NTC Fort Irwin are the dunes at Kelso and
Pisgah Crater, located southeast of the base.




BlogoographW area retattonatitpa of lowland naotropieal rainforaata baaad on dadlMIe anofyala of anurana
and llzarda. S.R. Ron. Division of Herpetology, Natural History Museum and ^o^verslty Research Center, and
Department of Systematics and Ecology, The University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-24^, USA.
In order to determine biogeographic relationships. Parsimony Analysis of Endemicity (PAE) was applied to
presence/absence of spedes of anurans in 14 localities of lowland Neotropical rainforests in the Chocoan Region,
Central America, Amazon Basin, and Brazilian Atlantic Forest Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (PAUP ^.1)
of 340 species led to two most parsimonious area cladograms (TL = 475, Cl = 0.705). The strict consensus showed
a basal polytomy among three regions: (1) Central America and Choco, (2) Amazon Basin, and (3) Atlantic Forest.
Within the Amazon Basin, the localities in the Upper Amazonian in Peru and Ecuador were separated from those in
the Lower Amazon Basin (Guianan Region + Belem). A PAE of presence/absence of 108 lizard species in 13 areas
in Central America and the Amazon Basin led to a single most parsimonious area cladogram (TL = 156, Cl = 0.692).
The Central American localities were separated from those of the Amazon Basin. Within the Amazon Basin, a
separation between Upper Amazonian in Ecuador and Peru and Lower Amazonian was observed. This pattern is
similar to the pattern obtained from the anuran PAE.




   128                         10:30 Saturday                                GS3                                CHM
Interactions among parental and hybrid leopard frc^ larvae in experimental ponds: implications for the
coexistence of genotypes. M.J. Parris. Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO
65211-7400, USA.
A major focus for contemporary studies of natural hybridization is experimental determination of the relative fitness of
parental and hybrid genotypes and measurements of the interactions between the genotype and environment.
Natural hybridization occurs between two anuran species, Rana blairi and Rana sphenocephala. To determine the
relative fitness of parental and hybrid genotypes in syrnpatric leopard frc^ populations in Missouri, I examined the
performance of parental and hybrid lanrae to measure differences in viability. Artificial crosses between R. blairi and
R. sphenocephala produced two parental and three hybrid genotypes. Resultant larvae were reared in experimental
ponds In single- and mixed-genotype populations. Analyses of variance indicated that R. sphenocephala decreased
Its larval period length when reared with F. backcross hybrid lan/ae relative to when reared alone. Fi backcross
hybrid ponds produced more metamorphs when lanzae were reared with either parental species relative to when
reared alone. When reared together, both R. sphenocephala and F, hybrids metamorphosed at larger body masses
than when reared separately. These results indicate ffiat parental and hybrid genotypes perfomi at equivalent or
higher levels when reared together compared to single-genotype ponds. Such evidence suggests that lanral
dynamics may play an important role in maintaining the coexistence of genotypes in this hybrid zone.




   129                         10:45 Saturday                                GS3                      CHM
The Rana llvlda complex: systematics of a group of Vietnamese waterfall frogs.          R. Bain. Centre for
Biodiversity and Crxiservation Biology, Royal Ontario Museum, & Department of Zoology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON M5S 2C6.
Remarkable morphological similarity among the cascade (waterfall) ranids of southeast Asia has made them a
taxonomic bane for 160 years. Central among this confusion has been the green cascade frog, Rana livida.
Inhabiting ths fast moving mountain rivers and forests of Indochina, this stink frog has long been suspected of being
composed of several species. Recently collected specimens from Vietnam keyed out to R. livida, but exhibited
evident morphological differences across populations. A combination of moqihology, morphometries, DNA content
analysis, and allozyme electrophoresis was used to investigate whether or not any of these morphotypes were
distinct species. The results from this investigation suggested the presence of 5 distinct species. A ph^ogeny for
the group using partial mitochondrial 16S gene sequences was estimated. A 537 base pair region yielded 91
potentially informative characters. Maximum parsimony was used to evaluate the data. Because these species
were identified over a very small portion of the geographic range of the Rana livida group, it is expected that this
phylogeny will be expanded as more species of this poorly understood complex are discovered.

tne predator, laopoies at nign cnemicai leveis naa a larger size at meiamorpnosis man omer classes, onemicai
effects on survival at metamorphosis were significant in B. woodhousii and H. versicolor; higher chemical levels
significantly reduced survival. The chemical interacts with biotic factors in ways that would not be predictable from
two-factor experiments. Chemical by density interactions were significant in B. woodhousii and H. versicolor. This
experiment does indicate differential susceptibility among species and noted that differences in biotic conditions
affect the potency of the chemical.




Aapecta of fh« ptiysfotogtoat eootogy of ttie desert horned Hzard, Fhzyvroeome ptMytMnoa.                    TX. Brown.
Department of Biology, Univ, of Los Angeles, California, Los Ar>ge>es. CA 90095 USA.
  Deserts are characterized by extreme environmental and resource variation, many desert reptiles have the ability to
tolerate these stresses through behavioral and physiological mechanisms. Desert homed lizards, Phrynosoma
platyfhinos, are one of the most common lizards in me Mojave desert Homed lizards are nxxphologically adapted
to exploit ants as their primary food source, and they are characterized by certain aspects of typical sit>and>wait
predators. It has been suggested that desert homed lizards should have relatively low energy requirements because
of their foraging strategy and because they inhabit an area typified by low resource availability. To address this
hypothesis, I used doubly labeled water to measure the energy and water turnover of a population of desert homed
lizards over a five year study period. The annual rainfall of the study area varied during the study period such that
there were normal, very wet and very dry conditions. This allowed me to examine the physiological plasticity of
homed lizards. The results of my research will be presented.




   131                          11:15 Saturday                                 GS3                                CHM
A comparison of ontogenetic and geographic variation of the Amazonian tree frog Hyla geographica. S.
Wolfson. Department of Biology, UNC Wilmington, Wilmington, N. C. 28405.
This study contributes to the knowledge of Amazonian herpetology by evaluating the mensurable and meristic
characters associated with ontogeny, sexual dimorphism, and geographic variation of the Amazonian tree frog Hyla
geographica. The taxonomic significance of the displayed variations was analyzed by evaluating external
characters. Four hundred eleven specimens from the following museums were examined: Museum of Comparative
Zoology at Hanrard, U. S. National Museum of Natural History, and Chicago Museum of Natural History.            This
analysis included population samples from the following political entities: Trinidad, Colombia, French Guiana,
Guyana, Suriname, Ecuador, Bolivia, Peru, and Brazil. Mensurable characters obtained were: head-length (HL) ,
head-width (HW), tympanum-diameter (TD), femur-length (FL), and snout-vent-length (SVL). These measurements
were used to calculate morphology ratios for analysis of ontogenetic growth variations. The means, standard
deviation, and range of all mensurable characters and growth ratios were determined. Distribution patterns of
pigments were coded and recorded for all specimens? The pigment patterns, or absence of pigments were recorded
for the snout, venter, dorsum, thigh, flank upper arm, and dorsal aspect of ths head. All specimens were examined
for sexual maturity. The variations of the mensurable characters, morphological ratios, and patterns of pigment
distribution suggest that the populations of H. geographica do not display significant geoclines and, therefore, are
one widely distributed species.




   132                          16:00 Saturday                                  P2                                PCH
Cytochrome b based gene genealogy of the common garter snake, Tltamnophis sirlalis. L. Rye. Department
of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario CANADA N1G 2W1; R. Lawson, California Academy of Sciences,
San Francisco, California 94118-4599 USA.
Thamnophis sirlalis is a widely distributed, highly variable, snake which is common throughout much of its North
American range. Historically, this species has been subdivided into many subspecies based predominantly on
geographical variation in colour pattern, although there is also variation in life history traits and meristic characters.
Of the twelve currently recognized subspecies, several meet in broad areas of intergradation which are forms of
hybrid zones where there is introgression between distinct gene pools. In order to infer the evolutionary relationship
of snakes on either side of these hybrid zones, a mitochondrial DNA gene genealogy was constructed. Cytochrome
b was amplified from over 123 snakes representing most of ths entire range. A 385 or 780 bp portion was sequenced
on a ABI automated sequencer at the GenAlyTic facility at the University of Guelph and yielded 45 distinct
haplotypes with 73 phlyogenetically informative characters. The heuristic search option of Paup was used to find all
equally most parsimonious trees (320 trees, length 126 steps, CI=0.71, RI=0.92, RC=0.65). The resulting strict
concensus tree revealed three distinct clades whose geographical distributions are not concordant with those of
currently recognized subspecies.                               16:00 Saturday.                                 P2                                PCH ■:
   133
Influence of hydrographic structure upon genetic structure in brook dwr {^Ivejinus fonf/naffs) populatioiw
in national parks of eastern Canada. C. Hebert £uid L. Bematchez, GIROQ, Departement de Biologie, University
Laval, Quebec, Canada G1K 7P4.
Despite the abundance of studies of genetic diversity in freshwater fishes, few of them spedfically addressed the role
of habitat stnioture in partitioning genetic variance within and among populations. Microsatellite loci have recently
been developed for Salvelinus fontinalis (Angers et al.. 1995) and successfully used to assess population structure
within the species. In this study, we analyzed the variability of six microsatellite loa among 25 brook charr
populations samples (n=30) in order to correlate hydrographic structure with genetic organization. These populations
originate from three Canadian National parks (Kouchibouguao. Fundy and Fonllon),^showing                     l^rogw^hic
structure. Considering the general characteristics of these habitats, we fomulated the hypothesis that the ratio of
interpopulation/intrapdpulafion genetic diversity will be inversly correlated with the potential for gene flow imposed by
those systems. Results obtained supported our working hypotheses. Thus, the hierarchical analysis_of rnolecular
variance revealed that the lower ratio of intefpopulation/intrapopulation genetic diversity was found in Kouchibouguao
(high migration potential) [0.0703 . P=0.01210] whereas an interrnediate value was observed m Fundy (interiTiediate
mioration potential) [0.1771 . P=0.00000]. The highest ratio was observed tn Fonllon (low migration potential) [1.6885
, P=0.00000]. We discuss the importance of habitat complexity on genetic structure in the context of management
and conservation.




   134                          16:00 Saturday           .                     P2
Genetic diversity of the La Mauricie National Park brook charr (Salvelinus fontinalis).                   L. Bematchez,
Departement de biologie. Universite Laval, Sainte-Foy QC G1K 7P4; B. Angers and P. Magnan, Departement de
chimie-biologie, Universit© du Quebec a Trois-, Rivieres QC.
The identification of brook charr conservation units and processes responsible for their evolution are prerequiates to
the conservation and management of the species in national parks. Iri this stud)4 we documented geitebcdiveraty
among brook charr populations from la Mauricie national park and investigated factors that can aorount for the
variation observed. Thirty-six populations (n=30) from eight different drainages were genetically charactenzed at five
microsatellites and mtDNA. The mtDNA homogeneity indicated a common refugial origin of all populations. In
contrast, extensive polymorphism was observed at microsatellites. Eleven evolutionary lineages were identified and
their divergence apparently predated the postglacial recolonization of the park, suggesting that ‘f’® P®*J?®®
recolonized by multiple population waves from a single yet fragrriented glacial refuge. Multivanate statisbcal analysis
highlighted the role of hydrographic systems, altitude, and stocking as the mam explanatory factors for the obsenrad
genetic structure. Altogether, these results suggest that the use of microsatellites may reonent our views about
problems of temporal and geisgraphical scales considered in conservation genetics.




Slowly-evolving proteins and higher-level snake phylogeny: a reanalysis.         L. Buckley, Biology Department,
 Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623-9932 USA; M. Kearney, Ge^e Washington University.
 Department of Biological Sciences, Washington, DC 20052 USA; K. de Queiroz, Departrnent of Vertebrate Zoology,
 National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington. DC 20056 USA.
 We reanalyzed the data of a recently published study of higher-level snake relationships, which was based on a
 UPGMA analysis of alleles at four "slowly-evolving" protein-coding loci. The distance matnx denyed from these data
 contains a large number of ties, which are not explicitly revealed in many UPGMA programs. Our analyses of these
 date reveal teat the single, well- resolved phenogram presented in the published study is only one among at least
 9,999 equivalent UPGMA phenograms supported by the data, the consensus of which is largely unresolved.
 Additive distance analysis and character-based parsimony analysis of the same data yield even less resolution.
 Thus, regardless of one's preference regarding analytical approaches, the date in question are highly ambiguous
 concerning higher-level snake phylogeny. The highly resolved tree presented in tee published study is an analyt cal
 artifact that was obtained only because the analysis failed to consider equivalent trees resulting from ties in the
 distance matrix.

   136______________          16:00 Saturday                                ■P2                               PCH
Microsatellite variation in wild populations of lake trout {Sah/elinus namaycush) from Lake Superior. EJ^
Leder and R.B. Phillips. Department of Biological Sciences. University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wl
ijSA; M Burnham-Curtis, Great Lakes Science Center, USGS, Ann Arbor, Ml USA; C.R. Bronte. Great Lakes Field
Station, USGS.Ashland, Wl USA.
Microsatellite variation was surveyed in six populations of lean lake trout and two populations of siscowet lake trout
from Lake Superior using heterologous primer pairs developed for brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis) and Atlantic
salmon (Salmo safari. The number of alleles varied from 4 to 21 at different loci. Mendelian inhentance was
confirmed for all loci. Significant differences in allele frequencies were found for leari populabons from
qeoqraphically distant regions and for leans and siscowets from the same regions. Genetic differences betoeen
southern and northern populations which were found in a previous study using allozyme loa were confirrned with the
miorosatellite loci. Comparison of our results with previous allozyme surveys and a recent study of microsatellite
frequencies in lake trout hatchery stocks and populations from inland Cariadian lakes suggests that there is more
within lake variation in large lakes compared to small lakes and wild populations compared to hatchery stocks.




   137                         16:00 Saturday                         .      P2
Stock Identification of dolphin, Coryphaena hippurus, in the western raritral Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico and
eastern Caribbean using molecular genetic techniques. R.S. Wingrovg, University of Charleston, Grice Manne
Lab, 205 R. Johnson Rd... Charleston, SC 29412.
The dolphin, Coryphaena hippurus, is a fast swimming, migratory, pelagic fish that supports irnportantcomrnercial
and recreational fisheries throughout the tropical and subtropical waters of the world. Oxenford and Hunte (1986)
suggested two distinct stocks exist in tee western central Atlantic. The southern stock migrages from Greriada
northwards to tee Virgin Islands and then returns souteeastwards in the Atlantic. The northern stock migrates frorn
Puerto Rico northwards to North Carolina and returns via Bermuda. The purpose of my study is to test Oxenford and
Hunte's (1986) two stock hypothesis and investigate the possible presence of additional stocks using rnitochondnal
DNA analysis. Dolphin samples were obtained throughout their range in the western central Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico,
and Caribbean by port sampling and attending offshore fishing tournaments. Preliminary results from restnction
fragment length polymorphisms of the ND-1 region of tee mitochondrial genome will be reviewed. Significant genetic
differences between geographic localities provides strong evidence of demographic isolation arid indicates tee need
for independent management of individual stocks (Dixon 1992, Moritz 1994). In August 1997, tee Soute Wlanbc
Rshery Management council proposed management options for tee highly migratory dolphin fishery. Date provided
by this study on the stock identification of the dolphin should be beneficial to the management of this fishery
throughout the western Atlantic. Gulf of Mexico, and Caribbean.




    138          __________ 16:00 Saturday                            .       P2
The structure of basking shark Cetorhinus maximus populations in the North-East Atlairtte- development of
genetic markers. T.J. Thom. A.R. Hoelzel, MJ. O'Connell and M.C. Lucas, Department of Biological Sciences,
 University of Durham, DH1 3LE, England, UK.
 Basking shark populations have been subject to exploitation for many years and are currently con^dered Jo be
 endangered in European waters. However, little is known of their population structure. In the recent past, population
 structure assessments have been made on tee basis of oapfure-mark-recapture studies or differentiation of menstio
 and morphological characteristics of different stocks. However, for a species such as the basking shark, which are
 not easy to tag in large numbers, and which little is known about their ecology, a new approach is required.
 Molecular genetic methods are increasingly being used with success in determining tee stock structure of
 commercially important fish species in bote marine and freshwater environments. In particular, the use ot
 microsatellite DNA sequences is finding increasing use in fisheries stock assessment. This poster presente reports
 on work to develop miorosatellite DNA markers for use in assessing the population structure and migratory behaviour
 of basking sharks in the north-east Atlantic.Ad^ve distenci           Srf dJaStortiSS paTSr^ronyliFalysis of the same data yield even less resolution
Thus reaardless of one's preference regarding analytical approaches, the data in que^on are highly ambrauous
c^cernTnffier “evePfna^e ph^ogeny.® The liighly msolve?tree presented in the published ^dy is an
artfaTthaf was obtained only^ b^use the analysis failed to consider equivalent trees resulting from ties in the
distance matrix.




Funduhja tUtiphamia la tho maternal parent of the clonal hybrid minnow FunOulua haltfocitus x Fimdutua
diaphanua. B.M. Nath. R.O. Hopkins, K.A. Goddard and R.M. Dawley, Department of Biology, Ursinus College,
Collegeville, PA. USA, 19426.
Fundulus hetemcIHus is an abundant estuarine fish found along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts of the United States.
This species has been the subject of numerous investigations of its own biology and has been used as a fool to
study zenobiotio metabolism, development, and ecology. Hybrids between Fundulus heteroclitus and F. diaphanus
from Nova Scotia reproduce clonally, and thus all individuals are genetically identical. Heterozygosity al
codominantly expressed enzyme loci is detectable for ell enzymes for which the parental species differ, with the
exception of isocitrate dehydrogenase for which the F, diaphanus is not expressed. We have amplified the
c^ochrome b gene from the mitochondrial genome and cut it with restriction enzymes for which the two parental
species have distinct restriction patterns to determine if the lack of expression of the F. diaphanus IDH allele is due
to Inactivation of a paternal allele, a phenomenon occasionally observed in hybrids. The hybrids share the
restriction patterns of F. diaphanus, indicating that F. diaphanus is the rnatemal parent of the hybrid lineage. Lack of
expression of the F. diaphanus allele must therefore be due to a mutation that inactivated this allele or another rare
event.




   140                         16:00 Saturday      ....          ...          P2                                PCH ..
Assessment of randomly amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) for use as genetic markers in studies of the
sailfin molly (PoeclUa latipinna). A.T. Quinones. K. Nakamura and J.C. Trexler, Department of Biological Science,
Rorida International University, Miami, FL 33199, USA.
RAPD markers are powerful tools in the analysis of genetic relationships and genetic diversity. Recently, however,
questions have risen concerning the inheritance patterns and the reproducibility of the RAPD markers. In this study,
fragments generated by RAPD primers were tested for Mendelian inheritance in sailfin mollies. Mollies were
collected from three locations in Rorida, and over 25 single-pair matings of parents with known RAPD genotypes
were made. Progeny from each mating were used to test patterns of inheritance. Of the sixty RAPD primers
initially screened, 18 amplified polymorphic bands and two showed no variation. Repeatable, identical bands were
amplified from both fin clips and muscle samples providing a mechanism for non-destructive genotyping of laboratory
fish. Frequencies of alleles in natural populations were determined to measure the degree of population stnicture.




   141                         '16:00 Saturday                                P2                                PCH
Evolution of germ-cell determining genes in amphibians. M.E. White and B.l. Crother. Department of Biology,
Southeastern Louisiana University, Hammond, LA 70402; A.D. Johnson, Rorida State University, Dept, of Biology,
Tallahassee, FL 32306.
Amphibians have been widely used as model systems for studying the early embryonic development of vertebrates.
Although much of the early development of all amphibians is very similar, frogs and salamanders differ strikingly in
the way they determine the germ cell lineage (the cells that will form eggs and sperm). The pattern observed in frogs
is quite different than the one seen in other vertebrates; the salamander mechanism is apparently much more similar
to that of birds and mammals. Although the pattern of germ cell formation has been elucidated in a wide variety of
species, little is known about the genes governing this process. Because most major embryological events are
controlled by genes that have been highly conserved evolutionarily, it is logical to conclude that genes involved in
germ cell determination will also be similar in a wide variety of species. Three genes- daz, oct-3/4 and vasa- have
been shown to be critical for germ cell determination in mammals. We have used phylogenetic methods to analyze
the homologous genes from frogs and salamanders to investigate whether the evolution of germ cell specific genes
reflects the mode of germ cell determination (salamanders being more similar to mammals) or the phylogenetic
relationships of the organisms (salamanders and frogs being more closely related). Our preliminary results suggest
that germ cell determining genes from two different salamanders are more closely related to the mammalian
homologues than to anuran ones, supporting the idea that the evolution of the genes tracks the mode of cell
determination rather than the anlm^ phylogeny.

“a«^^iN?.sequencesTsfin^^                                                               This poster presents reports
on work to develop microsatellite DNA markers for use in assessing the population structure and migratory behaviour
of basking sharks in the north-east Atlantic.




Genetic relationsbipe among disjunct populations of Waccamaw kiMIflah,               C.R. Young. Department of
Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA; J.M. Quattro, Department
of BiSogical Sciences, Marine Science Program, Baruch Institute, and School of the Environment, University of
South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA; J.M. Grady, Department of Biology, University of New
Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA; F.C. Rohde, North Carolina Division of Marine Rsheries, 127 Cardinal Drive
Extension, Wilmington, North Carolina 28405, USA.

Tho Waccamaw killifish (Fundulus waccamensis), a derivative of F. diaphanus, was originally thought to be endemic
to Lake Waccamaw and tributaries. Recently, however, samples thought to be F. waccamensis have been collected
in Lake Phelps. These samples differ morphologically from those found in Lake Waccamaw implying that they are
not the product of an accidental introduction of F. waccamensis into Lake Phelps. The large geographical distance
between Phelps and Waccamaw and the absence of F. waccamensis in intervening bay lakes, suggests that these
populations might be remnants of a once widespread species, or, alternatively, might have arisen independently from
F. diaphanus. Vie investigate these hypotheses using phylogenetic analyses of mtDNA control region sequences
sampled from F. waccamensis (Lakes Phelps and Waccamaw) and F. diaphanus.




   143                         16:00 Saturday                               'P2 .                             PCH
Fine-scale genetic population structure in wood frogs (Rana sylvatica). R.A. Newman and T. Squire, University
of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND USA.
The prairie pothole region of North Dakota contains numerous wetlands of varying habitat quality. As part of a study
of the consequences of environmental heterogeneity for population dynamics and life history evolution, we have
attempted to determine the spatial scale of gene flow using microsatellites, a highly polyrnorphic class of molecular
markers. We also plan to compare genetic population structure of wood frogs in the prairie pothole region with a
more ‘typical’ woodland population that breeds in wetlands around Lake Itasca, Minnesota. In addition to
documenting patterns of genetic differentiation in relation to spatial separation and habitat variation, we ultimately
hope to demonstrate the general utility of this information in studies of metapopulation dynamics and adaptive
evolution on a heterogenous landscape.




   144                         16:00 Saturday                                P2                               PCH
Genetic variation in the least brook lamprey, Lampetra aepyptera. M.M. While and S.M. Reilly, Department of
Biological Sciences, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701, USA.
Lampetra aepyptera is a widespread species of non-parasitic lamprey found throughout the eastern United States.
Previous studies have shown that certain populations of this lamprey exhibit heterochrony, by acheiving sexual
maturity without completing metamorphosis. A preliminary survey of allozyme variation was performed to evaluate
the extent of genetic differentiation among populations exhibiting either normal metamorphosis or tmncated head
development. The products of 22 loci were surveyed. Highly significant differentiation was observed among
populations. A population from western Kentucky (Terrapin Creek) was highly differentiated from eastern Kentucky
and Ohio populations, included several fixed allele differences. Because no metamorphosed adults have ever been
collected from Terrapin Creek, if appears to be a new paedomorphic species. Furthermore, allele frequencies
among the Terrapin Creek size classes were not different, suggesting variable time to reproduction in this
population. The eastern Kentucky population (Big Sinking Creek) exhibits some evidence of incomplete
metamorphosis. The presently recognized least brook lamprey appears to contain multiple species with a complex
paffem of intra- and interspecific heterochrony. Additional allozyme and morphological studies are underway.   145                        '16:00 Saturday       .    .   .                P2                             PCH
Assessment of fish community structure tn s.e. Brazilian rocky reefs and visuat census methods. C. Buitron.
Universidade Federal da Paraiba, CCEN - Departamento de Sistematica e Ecologia , 58059-900 Joao Pessoa, PB -
BRAZIL; L. Buitron, Socledade de Defesa do Litoral Brasileiro, Rua Cipriano Tavares, 55, 06010-100 Osasco, SP -
BRAZIL.
Reef fish assemblages are strongly Influenced by reef structure. In areas where visibility is poor, specific visual
census methods are necessary to determine the fish community structure. This work, part of a broader study of
Brazilian reef fishes community structure, aimed to establish specific visual census methods to detemmne ths fish
community stnjcture in rocky reefs, areas characterized by high turbidity, strong currents and irregular substrate.
Ave strip-transect protocols (5m depth dives) were made; 5 x 2m/intensive search without defined time, 10 x
2m/5min, 20 x 4rn/5min, 40 x 4m/10min and 50 x 4m/10min. An inventory of the fishes and a comparative study of
the community structure was made at Marine State Parks Laje de Santos (24° 19' S and 46° 11' W) and at
Alcatrazes Archipelago (24° 06' S and 45° 42' W), off Sao Paulo State. Diversity index indicated fliat the transect 50
X 4m/1 Omin is the most adequate for the studied areas, and that species number nearly stabilized at 40 x 4m/1 Omin.
28 species were censused and protocols were produced for each one. Laje de Santos showed 19 species and
Alcatrazes 21 species. Twelve censused species occurred in both areas.




   146                        16:00 Saturday                                  P2                              PCH
The influence of limiting resources on growth and survival of stream-dwelling cutthroat trout. S.M. Boss and
J.S. Richardson, Centre Tor Applied Conservation Biology, Dept, of Forest Sciences, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, V6T1Z4.
Two key resources are generally thought to limit salmonid populations in streams: the supply of food and the amount
of suitable space within the channel. However, the relative Influence of these limiting factors can change
seasonally. Both food and habitat availability can affect individual fitness, but to what extent does each factor
influence salmonid growth and sun/lval on a seasonal basis? I performed a summer field experiment to directly test
the effect of food and cover on growth and survival of stream-dwelling coastal cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki
clarM). Using a 2x2 factorial design, I manipulated food and cover in stream enclosures containing individually
marked trout. Fish receiving food addition experienced growth rates more than 25 times higher than those of unfed
fish. There was no effect of cover on either growth or survival. These results indicate that trout were severely food­
limited during summer. During winter. I combined a mark-recapture study of fish with stream habitat sunreys to
determine the extent to which habitat complexify limits growth and survival. Anally, to address how summer growth
affects over-winter survival, I monitored fish released back into the stream from the summer experiment throughout
winter.




   147                         16:00 Saturday                             .   P2                              PCH
The home range of a hognose snake (Heterodon platirhinos}. K.C. Hunsinger. The University at Albany, Albany,
New York.
Hognose snakes were studied in the Albany Pine Bush, a unique pine barrens community in Albany County, New
York. During June of 1997, a large female was captured and received a radio tag implant. For the remainder of the
season, this animal s movements were followed. This female moved around in a 64 square acre area and was
observed using small mammal burrows, making its own burrows, and mating. The longest distance between two
points of observation was 880 meters.




Impacts of Bufo bareaa and Rana futa/vanCrto tadpoles on algae and snaHs In ponds of Yeflowstons Naihmal
Park. W.E. Roberts. Mountain Research Center, P.O. Box 173490, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717.

  Decline in frog and tadpole populations may alter trophic structures and ecosystems. During summer 1997 I
investigated impacts of tadpole populations on food webs in ponds of Yellowstone National Park. The field

   148                        . 16:00. Saturday                                 P2                                PCH
Reef fish recruitment patterns off southeast Florida. D.S. Gilliam. R.L. Sherman, L.K.B. Jordan and R.E. Spieler,
Nova Southeastern University, Oceanographic Center, 8000 N. Ocean Dr., Dania, FL 33004 USA
Reef fish recruitment processes were examined using small model patch reefs (approximately Im’) off the southeast
coast of Florida. Three years of monthly visual census data was collected from three model reef designs and
analyzed for temporal patterns in recnjitment. Peak recruitment for most fishes occurred during the summer months
(June - September) although several abundant species (e.g. bluehead wrasse, TTialassoma bifasdatum) recruit in
^e winter. This type of information on the recruitment patterns of reef fishes aids in the understanding of processes
that structure reef fish assemblages.




   149                          16:00 Saturday                                 P2                                PCH
Trophic structure of the fish assemblages of the Agua Nancl creek, upper Parang river basin. S.S. Abes.
Programs de Pos-GraduagSo em Ecologia de Ambientes Aquaticos Continentals, Nupdiia - Nucleo de Pesquisas em
Limnologia Ictiologia e Aquicultura, UEM - Universidade Estadual de Maringa; A.A. Agostinho, Nupdiia - Nucleo de
Pesquisas em Limnologia Ictiologia e Aquicultura, UEM - Universidade Estadual de Maringd.
Spatial and temporal patterns in trophic stnjcture of fishes from Agua Nanci creek, upper Parana river basin (Brazil)
were assessed. Three monthly samples were taken from May 1996 to January 1997 using electrofishing, in three
segments of the creek (near the spring, middle of its extension, and near the mouth). Food spectrum was obtained
by analyzing gastric contents, with occurrence and volumetric methods, using the alimentary index. Trophic
categories were established based on: the main food item, the interpretafion of the Detrended Correspondence
Analysis - DCA, and Average-linkage clustering (Euclidean Distance-UPGMA). The relative abundance of the food
resources was estimated based on stomach content analysis. Diversity and food resources increased towards the
mouth and were related to the conservation of riparian vegetation and to longitudinal hydro-morphological gradients
of ths creek. Temporal variations in food resources were associated with seasonal prey and hydrological cycles,
thereby influencing the proportions of dominant trophic categories. Omnivores predominated in the upper part and
benthivores near the mouth. Piscivores and detritiypres presented low biomass. Longitudinal distribution of ths
trophic categories did not follow the river continuum concept, but was more related to food resources, habitat
heterogeneity and the conservation conditions in each segment of the creek.




   150                          16:00 Saturday                                 P2                                PCH
Preliminary observations on radiated tortoises (Geochelone radlata) in south western Madagascar. T.E.J.
Leuteritz. Department of Biology, George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia, 22030, USA.
Radiated tortoises are found within a limited range of spiny forest habitat in South Vifestem Madagascar. Specific
observations on the tortoises were made from November 23, 1997 to December 4, 1997. The majority of observed
tortoises were found along a 75-km stretch of road between Route 10 near Betioky, and the fishing village of
Beheloka. A total of 32 live tortoises, ranging in age from a juvenile that was a few years old (CL=12 cm) to a large
adult mala (CL=37.5 cm), were recorded. The mean carapace length was 25.5 cm. Tortoise weights ranged from
0.59 to 10 kg (mean=4.5 kg). The tortoises appeared healthy with no visible deformities or ecto-parasites. Some of
the data collected include temperature, size, gular scute length, and anal scute length. The latter two were collected
in order to examine sexual dimorphism. The author spent most of November 1997 in Madagascar as part of a
preliminary fact-finding trip sponsored by Conservation International (Washington, D.C.).




Structure and altitudinal pattern of fish communities and their regulation by biolic and abiotic factors tn two
streams In the Atlantic rainforest. C.P.D SHva. INPAAJNICAMP; M. Petrere Jr., UNESP.

We assessed how biotic and abiotic factors influence the local diversity (alpha diversity) of fish communities in two
rainforest streams (Itingugu e Tetequera) in the southeastern Brazil., These two streams rise in Itatins mountain,
------------ ' - I- - *4 «U.» *1414. __ _ __ _4I_______ I—!__ °______________                         •  ............ . ’ . TS1                        -16 00 Saturday            .    ..              P2                               PCH
Impacts of Bufo boreas anti Bana lutalventrla tadpoles on algae and snails In ponds of Yellowstone National
Park. W.E. Roberts. Mountain Research Center. P.O. Box 173490, Montana State University. Bozeman, MT 59717.

  Decline in frog and tadpole populations may alter trophic structures and ecosystems. During summer 1997 I
investigated impacts of tadpole populations on food webs in ponds of Yellowstone National Park. The field
component of this project involved two phases - experimental manipulations in enclosures and landscape-level
comparison of unmanipulated ponds with and without tadpoles. In separate experiments, I stocked three blocks of
enclosures with or without tadpoles of Rana luteiventris and Bufo boreas. In the experiment with Bufo boreas
tadpoles, I compared their impacts with those of freshwater snails. Every two weeks until tadpole metamorphosis I
measured tadpole and snail length, and collected samples of algal biomass. Results showed the Rana luteiventris
tadpoles depressed algal biomass after two weeks of growth, but not after four weeks. Bufo boreas tadpoles did not
depress algal biomass, but snails did. In the landscape-level project I compared eleven unmanipulated ponds, five
with tadpoles and six without. This comparison did not show a statistically significant impact of tadpoles on algal
biomass. Results of the two phases of this projed suggest that enclosures accurately mimicked conditions in whole
ponds, and that tadpole grazing had a complex influence on algal biomass, rather than a direct negative impact.




   152                         16:00 Saturday                                 P2                               PCH
Low-head dams impede upstream movements of fishes. D.L.G. Noakes and R.L. McLaughlin, Department of
Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada NIG 2W1.
Low-head dams are a possible means to control spawning migration of parasitic sea lamprey,Pefromyzon marinus,
in tributary streams of the Laurentian Great lakes. This would reduce the need for chemical control. We studied the
effects of low-head dams on stream fish communities by comparing streams with dams to paired reference streams
without dams. We used electrolishing to sample streams above and below dams, and corresponding sections of
barrier streams at three different seasons during ths year. Fish were marked according to the location offirst capture.
The dams appear to block upstream movements of sea lamprey. Movements of fish above and below the locations
of dams, or corresponding sites on reference streams, did not differ among streams. Upstream movements of fish
over dams was reduced, compared to reference streams. The longitudinal decrease In fish species diversity from
downstream to upstream sections Is greater for streams with dams than for matched reference streams. Our study
identified fish species most vulnerable to the effects of low-head dams and suggested likely mechanisms for this
impact.




   153                        16:00 Saturday                                 P2    ..                         PCH
Microhabitat selection and social organization of overwintering juvenile coho salmon {Onoorhynchus
klsutch) in a lake superior tributary. D.G. Lonzarich and D.B Healy. University of Wisconsin, Eau Claire,
Department of Biology, Eau Claire, Wl 54702.
Little is known about the ecology of stream-dwelling coho salmon {Oncortiynchus kisutch) in the Lake Superior
drainage. Unlike in their native range of the Padfic Northwest, Lake Superior coho salmon inhabit streams
charaderized by low winter flows and highly variable summer flows. Because high stream flows can profoundly
Influence fish behavior and distribution, we hypothesized In this study that the winter ecology of coho in Lake
Superior streams would differ from patterns described for pacific populations. In snorkeling surveys completed in
winter 1998, we examined the distribution and social organization of over-wintering coho in simple (no cover) and
complex pools of a Lake Superior tributary In Wisconsin. In all habitats, coho occupied focal positions In the main
channel; however, fish were more tightly distributed and closer to the streambanks In simple pools. Aggressive
Interactions also were more common in simple pools although dominance hierarchies were observed in the majority
of all pools. These results are in sharp contrast with research findings from pacific streams, which generally show
coho moving to protected habitats and becoming less aggressive with the onset of high flows in winter. This study
provides new insights into the behavioral plasticity of coho salmon and should aid In efforts to manage Great Lake
populations.

   154..                       16:00 Saturday                                  P2                            ..       PCH
Structure and altitudinal pattern of fish communities and their regulation by biotic and abiotic factors In two
streams In the Atlantic rainforest. C.P.D Silva. INPA/UNICAMP; M. Petrere Jr., UNESP.

We assessed how biotic and abiotic factors influence the local diversity (alpha diversity) of fish communities In two
rainforest streams (Itingugu e Tetequera) in the southeastern Brazil. These two streams rise in Itatins mountain,
approximately at the altitude of 800 m and run into other plain rivers near the ocean. Tide influences is noticed at the
lower stretches in both streams. Four sampling sites were chosen in each stream based on local physiographic
features along the overall length. Ashes were collected by fykenets, dipnets, sieves and glllnets. Physico-chemical
parameters (pH, temperature, conductivity, water current velocity, dissolved oxygen) and altitude were measured
using portable equipment. The total of 40 species were obtained. Twenty-nine are typical of freshwater whereas 11
are considered marine species. We collected 33 species in Itingugu stream, being 22 restrict to that area. In
Tetequera 18 species were captured but only 7 were of local occurrence. The Ichthyofauna of both communities
showed altitudinal gradient ano were formed through the processes of species addition and substitution. Species
addition is more evident In the upper and medium stretches of ths streams and Is influence by biotic factors (vacant
niche occupation and resources partitioning) and abiotic factors (physico-chemical parameters variations). On the
other hand, ths substitution process was more evident in the streams lower stretches as a consequence of
ecological equivalence. Therefore, in these patches, abiotic factors are the main agent influendng the structure of
^ese communities. The species diversity of each community was analyzed based on the relation between species
abundance and number. The Whittaker Plot analysis of both communities suggest that they follow log series and log
normal distribution.



  .155                          16:00 Saturday                                  P2                                    PCH..
Organisation of the forest snake assemblage of the Manaus region. Central Amazon, Brazil.                     M. Martins.
Departamento de Ecologla Geral, C. P. 11481, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 05422-970, Sao Paulo SP, Brazil; M.E.
Oliveira, Departamento de Zoologia - ICB, Universidade Estadual Paulista - C.P. 199, 13506-900 Rio Claro SP,
Brazil.
The assemblage of rainforest snakes of the Manaus region. Central Amazon, was studied from 1991 to 1995.
Fieldwork resulted in nearly 800 snakes of 66 forest species. Snake activity was markedly lower during the dry
season. Of the 61 species for which Information is available, 43% were primarily terrestrial, 31% fossorial and/or
cryptozolc, 20% arboreal, and 6% aquatic. Nearly all inactive snakes were found on the vegetation. In relation to time
of activity, 41% of 62 species seem to be strictly diurnal, 21% strictly nocturnal, and 38% both diurnal and nocturnal.
The commonest prey were lizards (consumed by 58% of the species), frogs (39%), mammals (23%), birds (18%),
and snakes (16%). A cluster analysis combining data on microhabitat use, diel activity and diet resulted in 'guilds"
encompassing mostly closely related species, but also distantly related ones that converge in habits. These patterns
dearly reflect the relative contribution of colubrid lineages in the assemblage. Indicating that historical factors
(phylogeny and biogeography) may have played and Important role In determining the current organisation of this
forest snake assemblage. However, current predation pressure and differential prey availability in the forest
tridimensional space seem to be important in determining current patterns of microhabitat use.




   156                          16:00 Saturday                            . . .PZ .     , . .                     .   PCH
Feeding habits of neotropical pitvipers, Bothrops spp.: a comparative study. M. Martins. Departamento de
Ecologla Geral, C. P. 11461, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 05422-970, Sao Paulo SP, Brazil; I. Sazima,
Departamento de Zoologia, C. P. 6109, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, 13083-970 Campinas SP, Brazil;
O.A.V. Marques, Laboratorio de Herpetologia, Institute Butantan, 05535-900 Sao Paulo SP, Brazil.
The genus Bothrops is composed by at least five monophyletic clades. We present original data on the feeding
habits of 12 species, encompassing all five clades. All species In the altematus group seem to be mammal
specialists, whose juveniles are relatively large and stout and lack pale tall tips (used to lure ectothermic prey In
other species). All species of the four remaining groups are euryphagic and ontogenetic shift in prey types seems to
occur in all: juveniles feed mostly on frogs and lizards, adults mainly on mammals (except for the isolated B.
Insularis, whose adults feed mostly on birds). Juveniles of these euryphagic species are relatively small and thin, and
their tall tips are distinctly coloured (retained in adults of B. bilineatus and B. insularis}. The sit-and-wa'rt foraging
tactic is the most commonly used by Bothrops, although all species may occasionally forage actively. Our results
indicate that euryphagy, sif-and-wait foraging, ontogenetic shift in prey type and distinctly coloured tail tips
associated with caudal luring are all pleslomorphic characters In the genus Bothrops. Mammal specialisation and the
absence of distinctly coloured tall tips associated with caudal luring In juveniles may be autapomoqihles of the
altematus group. (Supported by the FAPESP.)   157                          16:00 Saturday                                  P2                                PCH
Does the salt marsh snake (Nerodia clarkii} really utilize fiddler crab burrows?               And how much?         W.B.
Blihovde. University of Central Rorida, Biology Department, Orlando, H 32816 USA.
The Nerodia c/arfdf complex is one that ranges from Eastern Texas, along the Gulf Coast to Volusia County, Rorida.
Although the evolution and taxonomy of salt marsh snakes has received a great deal of attention, little is known
about ffie general ecological relationships. The endangered subspecies, Nerodia clarkii taeniata, and the mangrove
salt marsh snake, Nerodia clarldi coropressicauda, were studied to determine the percentage of snakes that were
injured by the Rddler Crab (Uca pugilatof), apparently from entering the burrows. Results showed a low percentage
of Nerodia that had tail injuries attributable to the fiddler crab, but support observations of snakes retreating into the
crab burrows (Carr and Goins 1942, Koohman 1992, and Meier's 1993). The data also suggest that due to the
behavior and frequency of injuries, Nerodia clarkii may depend on Uca pugiilator as a burrow associate, for shelter
during extended periods of harsh weather. I propose that more of the behavioral ecology of Nerodia clarkii needs to
be examined to understand the association of these two species.




   158.    .                    16:00 Saturday                                 P2                                 PCH
Seasonal variation in hatchling sex ratios of Chrysemys picta from eggs incubated near a pivotal
temperature. R.M. Bowden. M.A. Ewerf and C.E. Nelson, Dept of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN
47405 USA.
Seasonal variation in sex ratio is well documented for many species of turtles, and is largely attributable to a
seasonal increase in temperature. In contrast, we found a seasonal decrease in the proportion of males for
Chrysemys picta even though all of the eggs were incubated at or near the pivotal temperature. This trend occured in
each of the four years examined and at each of up to three sites per year. Although this trend was not always
significant for the individual samples, it was significant (p = 0.005) when the years and sites were combined. If this
trend were due to a minor systematic shift in incubator temperature, the lower proportions of males should have been
associated with a decrease in incubation time (laying to hatching) as both incubation time and proportion of males
decrease with increasing temperature. However, the sex ratio of the individual clutches was not significantly
associated with incubation time in either the site or individual year samples, nor in the samples combined (p = 0.84).
The slight trend for all samples combined was toward more (not fewer) males with no change in incubation times (p =
0.83). The seasonal shift in sex ratio here thus appears to be independent of temperature.




   159                          16:00 Saturday                          P2                          PCH
Latitudinal trends in wood frogs: size and age.     R. LeClair and M.H. Caetano, Departamento de Zoologia e
Antropologia, Faculdade de CiSncias de Lisboa, C2 Campo Grande, 1700 Lisboa, Portugal.
Length and age of 53 wood frogs, Rana sylvatica, from Kuujjuarapik in northern Quebec (55-17' N) was compared
with similar data from populations of other southern latitudes. Age was estimated by skeletochronology. Mean body
size and age were 47.1 mm and 6.1 yr in adult males (n = 41) and 50.9 mm and 7.7 yr in adult females (n = 8).
These data compared with those of Berven (1982) and Bastien and Leclair (1992) from Maryland and Trois-Rivieres
respectively, contradict the Martof and Humphries (1959) trend of a reduced size of wood frogs at northern latitudes.
Mean physiological longevity of adult male wood frogs from Kuujuarapik was 397 days (mean age in yr multiplied by
annual number of days without freezing temperature). This value compared to those of other populations does not
support the theoritical relationships between age at maturity and potential lifespan.




BtemaM «*. abuttdanee measures erf varfatfon ki stream fteh commtirrfty structure. KA. Chandler, D.M.
McElroy and R.D. Hoyt, Department of Biology, Western Kentucky Universky, Bowling Green , Kentucky 42101
USA; D. Stiles, Department of Agriculture, Western Kentucky University, Bowling Green, Kentucky 42101 USA.
Both biomass and abundance data are commonly utilized in characterization of ecological system dynamics;
however, questions exist as to which approach is best-suited for long-term studies. While potentially providing more
information than abundance data, biomass sampling may be more detrimental to ecosystem stability. We examined
thie             AAmrtariivi rAoailte doriimfl  akim/jaMA         kiAmaee                         mnl           Lvum

    160                         16:00 Saturday                               . P2                                 PCH
Correlates between dorsal color pattern and anti-predator behavior in snakes. R.J.F. Kink. Dept, of Zoology,
1735 Neil Ave., The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210 USA.
Dorsal color pattern in snakes is remarkably variable within and between species, providing a good opportunity to
study the adaptive significance of coloration. Pattern may function in a variety of anti-predator strategies, from
crypsis to aposematecism to optical illusionary effects, and it seems likely that different types of dorsal color patterns
would be correlated with different predator-avoidance behaviors. To investigate this hypothesis, wild-caught
colubrids of all available species were tested shortly after capture in a 1.2 x 1.2 m arena. Each was allowed to
acclimate in a hide-box in the center of the arena, and was then uncovered, whereupon the behavior in response to a
simulated predator was recorded. Where possible, data were also taken on the animals' behavior during the initial
capture. Four pattern types were studied: blotched, banded, striped, and unicolored. Preliminary results indicate
clear differences in escape and/or defensive behavior. All animals were released again after testing.




   161                          16:00 Saturday                                  P2                                PCH
The evolution of herbivory in modern fishes. R. Winterbottom. Department of Zoology, University of Toronto &,
CBCB, Royal Ontario Museum, 100 Queens Park, Toronto, Ontario; F. Santini, Department of Zoology, University of
Toronto &, CBCB, Royal Ontario Museum, 100 Queens Park, Toronto, Ontario.
Herbivory is a derived feeding characteristic that has evolved independently several times in all the major phyla and
classes of metazoans. Bony fishes are no exceptions to this. In fact herbivory might have evolved up to 7 times
independently in the percomorph fishes in a very short span of time at the beginning of the Cenozoic era and another
time in the Ostariophysans. Given the fact that herbivory has evolved in lineages that used to have different trophic
habits, and that it is performed in different ways, it is hypothesized that there has been a physiological preadaptation
that has allowed the evolution of this new feeding strategy. The available data are presented and discussed. In
additions, the evolution of herbivory is strongly connected to the evolution of modem coral reefs. The implications of
tttis association are also discussed.




   162                          16:00 Saturday                                  P2                                PCH
Spatial and temporal patterns in the distribution, composition and fish assemblages structure in the Agua
Nanci creek, upper Parana river basin. S.S. Abes. Programs de Pos-Gradua^ao em Ecologia de Ambientes
Aquaticos Continentais, Nupelia - Nucleo de Pesquisa em Limnologia, Ictiologia e Aquicultura, UEM - Universidade
Estadual de Maringd; A.A. Agostinho, Nupelia - Nucleo de Pesquisas em Limnologia, Ictiologia e Aquicultura, UEM -
Universidade Estadual de Maringa.
Spatial and temporal patterns in the distribution, composition and fish assemblage structure and their relation to
physical gradients were assessed. Samples were collected quarterly in three segments of the creek: near the spring,
midway along its extension, and near the mouth. Comparisons among creeks of the upper Parana river basin show
high heterogeneity in the ichthyofauna composition, attributed mainly to differences in creek morphology. This fact is
highly relevant to the determination of the regional biodiversity. Rsh density and biomass in the extension of the
creek were affected by seasonal factors, especially the rain regime. The upper part (spring) was more affected by
increment in discharge. Species richness, diversity, and evenness increased from spring to mouth, showing
correlation with creek width, pH increase, and the presence of riparian vegetation. These stnicture indicators also
were influenced by events related to the flood regime of the Parana river. Abundant species showed correlation with
some environmental factors, showing a certain degree of segregation among them, in relation to preference and use
of habitats. The faunal heterogeneity in the creeks combined with the high number of similar habitats and their
fragility to increasing degradation justify investigation of their structure and functioning, the understanding of which
improve management actions.




Sexual dimorphism in P^i^gtKtolheo sirtta (Pisces, Perciformse, NotothsnMae). A.E. Gosztonvi. Centro
Nadonal Pat^<o>nico, Boulevard Brown s/n, (9120) Puerto Madryn, Chubut, Argentina; A. Lopez Arbarello, Dep.
Ciencias Marinas, Fac. Cs. Naturales, (7600) Mar del Plata, Argentina.
A marked sexual dimorphism was obsenred in the height of the second dorsal fin in the Patagonian shore fish
Patagonotothen sima . In order to explore whether other morphometric features would also contribute to sexual
dimorphism in the species, a non-parametrio multivariate analysis (Rsher's Linear Discriminant Function) waswith similar data from populations of other southern latitudes. Age was estimated by skeletochronology. Mean body
size and age were 47.1 mm and 6.1 yr in adult males (n = 41) and 50.9 mm and 7.7 yr in adult females (n = 8).
These data compared with those of Berven (1982) and Bastien and Leclair (1992) from Maryland and Trois-Rivieres
respectively, contradict the Martof and Humphries' (1959) trend of a reduced size of wood frogs at northern latitudes.
Mean physiological longevity of adult male wood frogs from Kuujuarapik was 397 days (mean age in yr multiplied by
annual number of days without freezing temperature). This value compared to those of other populations does not
support the theoritical relationships between age at maturity and potential lifespan.




Biomass vs. abundance measures of variation In stream fish community structure. KA. Chandler, D.M.
McElroy and R.D. Hoyt, Department of Biology. Western Kentucky University, Bowling Green , Kentucky 42101
USA; D. Stites, Department of Agriculture, Western Kentucky University, Bowling Green, Kentucky 42101 USA.

Both biomass and abundance data are commonly utilized in characterization of ecological system dynamics:
however, questions exist as to which approach is best-suited for long-tenn studies. While potentially providing more
information than abundance data, biomass sampling may be irxrre detrimental to ecosystem stability. We examined
this trade-off by comparing results derived from abundance and biomass indicators in ichthyofaunal samples from
Buck Creek, an Order III tributary of Drakes Creek in southcentral Kentucky, collected twice yearly from Fall 1992 to
Spring 1996. Principal components analysis was used to summarize patterns of spatial and temporal variation
among samples for both biomass and abundance data. Correlations in patterns of loadings on corresponding PC
axes were used to compare the two approaches. PCI-Ill from the biomass data accounted for 59.1 % of the total
variation; eigenvalues for each axis were comparable to those obtained from abundance data. Both biomass and
abundance measures suggested season, station and year effects on community structure; however, taxa driving
seasonal differences in biomass were responsible for station differences in abundance, and vice-versa. These
contrasting patterns suggest a potentially complex life history patterns in species within this community. Mors
importantly, our results indicate that different sampling strategies may lead to qualitatively distinct impressions of
community dynamics.




   164 ....                     16:00 Saturday       ...   ••                 P2                                PCH
Hierarchical factors structuring fish communitfes in floodplain systems (Upper Parang River, Brazil). E.E.
Maroues*’'*. "Unitins - Universidade do Tocantins; C.V. Minte-Vera and A.A. Agostinho, Nupelia - Nuoleo de
Pesquisas em LImnologia, Ictiologla a Aquiculture, UEM - Universidade Estadual de Maringd; A.E.A.M. Vazzoler,
CNPq - Conselho Nadonal de Desenvolvimento Cienfifioo e Tecnologico, Senior Researcher; “’Programa de P6s-
Graduapao em Ecologia' de Ambientes Aquaticos Continentals, Nupelia - Nijcleo de Pesquisas em LImnologia
Ictiologla e Aquiculture.
Central to the hierarchical theory is the concept that organisation results from differences in process rates. The
structure imposed by differences in rates its sufficient to decompose a complex system into organizational levels and
into discrete components within each level. Floodplain ecosystems are complex systems which main force function is
flood regime. The structure of fish communities is said to depend on abiotic factors and biotic relations among
species.The importance of those factors depends on the scale of observation. Thus, for the Upper Parand fish
communities we determined the factors responsible for its structure using the hierarchical concept or ecosystem. On
the regional level the main structuring factor is the dynamic of Hood and drought, the scale of that process is a year.
On the local level, some abiotic factors and the presence of predators are the structuring one's.




   165                         16:00 Saturday                                  P2                               PCH
Timing of reproduction in oviparous and viviparous species in the scalarls group (genus Sceloporus}: an
intermediate step in the evolution of viviparity. F.R. Mendez. N.L. Manriquez and M. Villagran, Universidad
Nadonal Autonoma de, Mexico, A.P. 70-515, C.P. 04510, Mexico, D.F., Mexico; R.M. Andrews, Department of
Biology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg,, VA 24060, USA.; O. Hernandez,
Universidad Nadonal Autonoma de, Mexico, A.P. 70-515, C.P. 04510, Mexico, D.F., Mexico.
The evolution of viviparity in the genus Sceloporus is assodated with a shift from the spring mating and late summer
hatching observed for oviparous species to fall mating and spring birth obsenred for viviparous species. The scalaris
group provides a model system to evaluate this transition, as the sister spedes S. aeneus and S. bicanthalis are
oviparous and viviparous, respectively. We studied the reproductive cydes of two populations of S. aeneus and
three of S. bicanthalis. Ths timing of ttie reproductive cycle of S. aeneus was as expected for an oviparous species.
The timing of the reproductive cycle of S. bicanthalis, was, however, intermediate between oviparous and typical
viviparous species. Like S. aeneus, hatchlings of S. bicanthalis are produced in late summer. More like typical
viviparous spedes, however, mating by S. bicanthalis occurs in the winter. In the scalaris group, thus, the evolution
of viviparity is associated with an earlier initiation of the breeding season (spring to previous winter), but the shift
from fall to spring parition occurs after viviparity becomes stablished. The benefit of spnng birth by viviparous species
is that female hatdilings reach sexual maturity and breed by fall.

Universidade Estadual de Maringa.
Spatial and temporal patterns in the distribution, composition and fish assemblage structure and their relation to
physical gradients were assessed. Samples were collected quarteriy in three segments of the creek: near the spring,
midway along its extension, and near the mouth. Comparisons among creeks of the upper Parand river basin show
high heterogeneity in the ichthyofauna composition, attributed mainly to differences in creek morphology. This fact is
highly relevant to the determination of the regional biodiversity. Rsh density and biomass in the extension of the
creek were affected by seasonal factors, especially the rain regime. The upper part (spring) was more affected by
Increment in discharge. Species richness, diversity, and evenness increased from spnng to mouth, showing
correlation with creek width, pH increase, and the presence of riparian vegetation. These stnrcture indicators also
were influenced by events related to the flood regime of the Parana river. Abundant species showed correlation with
some environmental factors, showing a certain degree of segregation among them, in relation to preference and use
of habitats. The faunal heterogeneity in the creeks combined with the high number of similar habitats and their
fragility to increasing degradation justify investigation of their structure and functioning, the understanding of which
improve management actions.




Sexual dhnorpbism In Patagonotottwn alma (Pisces, Perciformes, NotothenHdae). A.E. Gosztonvi. Centro
Nadonal Patag<o>nico, Boulevard Brown s/n, (9120) Puerto Madryn, Chubut, Argentina; A. Lopez Arbarello, Dep.
Ciencias Marinas, Fac. Cs. Naturales, (7600) Mar del Plata, Argentina.

A marked sexual dimorphism was observed in the height of the second dorsal fin in the Patagonian shore fish
Patagonotolhen sima . In order to explore whether other morphometric features would also contribute to sexual
dimorphism in the species, a non-parametric multivariate analysis (Fisher's Linear Discriminant Function) was
applied to a matrix of 16 body part measurements of 20 male and 20 female specimens (a random sample taken
from of a total of 62 specimens) of P. sima obtained in Argentine Patagonian waters. A polynomial was obtained
whereby the above specimens could be assigned to the correct sex, using eight body measures besides the height
of the dorsal fin, with 100 % accuracy. The polynomial was tested in a random sample of 10 males and 12 females
with 97 % accuracy. Patagonotolhen sima lives in Patagonian inshore waters, usually breeding in the tidepools of
the intertidal zone, showing parental care of the egg masses, as other notothenioids are known to do. The much
higher dorsal fin might probably help males to lure females during courtship and spawning.
A polynomial was obtained whereby specimens could be assigned to the correct sex, using two measures apart from
the height of the second dorsal fin, with 100% accuracy. The polynomial was validated in a random sample of 10
males and 12 females with 92 % accuracy.




   167                         16:00 Saturday                                 P2                               PCH
Hatching success of Bog Turtle (Clemmys muhlenbergO} eggs in a Pennsylvania population under natural
and laboratory conditions. R.T. Zappalorti. M.E. Torocco and P.J. Drake, Herpetological Associates, Inc, Plant
and Wildlife Consultants,, 536 Seaman Avenue, Beachwood, New Jersey 08722 - USA.,,.
The hatching success of bog turtle (Clemmys muhlenbergO) eggs from a single population was examined at a site in
eastern Pennsylvania. Between 1993 and 1994 we compared naturally incubated hatching success with artificially
incubated eggs. Bog turtles lay their eggs in various types of Carex grass tussocks within their marshy habitat. In
1993,17 eggs in four clutches (four separate nest locations) were discovered. Seven eggs (two clutches) from two
separate nests were left in the field to incubate naturally. Eggs were hatched in the laboratory at ambient cycling
temperatures between 32.5 °C. during the day and 19.0 °C. at night (Mean 25.5 °C.}. Of the seven eggs, 3 hatched
(42.8%) and 4 (57.2%) were removed by an unknown predator prior to hatching, whereas 90% of the 10 eggs
incubated in the laboratory hatched successfully with only one infertile egg. In 1994, seven nests containing 10
clutches (33 eggs) were discovered. Twenty-one eggs at seven nests were left in the field and 12 were removed to
ths laboratory. All eggs removed from the field in 1994 were replaced with exact-size paraffin wax eggs. Ten
(47.6%) of the real eggs left in the field were removed from the nests by a predator (possibly a small mammal), two
(9.5%) were broken (presumably by another nesting female at the same site), and three (14.3%) failed to hatch. In
addition, four of the wax eggs were removed by a predator. All of the eggs incubated in the laboratory hatched
(100%). The results of this study suggests that predation on eggs by an unknown small mammal is a contributing
source of mortality at this colony. Natural hatching success may also be reduced by infertility and poorly understood
developmental problems.



   168                        16:00 Saturday.                                P2                                PCH
Clutch size and reproductive effort of oviparous (S. aeneus} and viviparous (S. bicanthalis} sister species of
Sceloporus. F.R. M6ndez. Universidad Nadonal Autondma de Mexico,, A.P. 70-515, C.P. 04510, Mdxico, D.F.,
Mdxico; R.M. Andrews, Department of Biology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State, University, Blacksburg, VA
24061, USA; F. Rodriguez and M. VillagrSn, Universidad Nadonal Autonoma de Mdxioo,, A.P. 70-515, C.P. 04510,
Mdxico, D.F., Mdxico.
The evolution of viviparity in reptiles Is presumably associated with a reduced dutch size and increased relative
clutch mass. We tested this idea by comparing the clutch size and relative dutch mass of one population of S.
aeneus and three populations of S. bicanthalis. Clutch size and reproductive effort varied among populations of S.
bicanthalis, but not between S. aeneus and S. bicanthalis. Therefore, the evolution of viviparity has not been
assodated with shifts in reproductive allocation by S. bicanthalis. The only life history difference between these two
yiecies is that the viviparous S. bicanthalis reaches sexual maturity at a smaller size and sooner than the oviparous
S. aeneus.   169                       . 16:00 Saturday                                 P2                                 PCH
Unusual gonad structure In the little known, cryptic coral dweller, Caracanthus maculatus (Pisces;
Caracanthidae). K.S. Cole, Deptof Biology, U. of Southwestern Louisiana, Lafeyette, LA, 70504-2451, USA.

The Indo-Pacific soorpaeniform family, Caracanthidae, contains a single genus of tour or five known species. These
fish are small-sized and live cryptically within highly branching corals. A histological examination of the gonads of
nine specimens of C. maculatus, collected in Papua New Guinea, revealed an unusual and possibly unique gonad
architecture. In females, the ovigerous tissue within each ovarian lobe is centrally located and surrounded almost
entirely, except most anteriorly, by a peripheral lumen. Early-stage oocytes are located in the center of the gerrninal
tissue; vifellogenio oocytes are situated on the periphery or extend into the lumen on a tissue pedicel. In spermiated
testes of males, the spennatogenic tissue is also centr^ly located and surrounded peripherally by a lumen but the
lumen appears afunctional, since spermatozoa are only found in spenn sinuses located in the testis wall. In addition,
the testis contains numerous early-stage oocytes. These latter features suggest that C. maculatus is hermaphroditic.
Currently, I am examining a congener, C. lypicus for the possibility of similar gonad structure and the capacity to shift
sexual function; and also closely related scorpaeniforms, including velvetfishes, for the possibility of similar unusual
gonadal structure.




   170                         13:00 Saturday                                . 18
Neuroecology of elasmobranch fishes:           Relating the brain to the real world.     T.C.Tricas, Department of
Biological Saences, Florida Institute of Technology, 150 W. University Blvd., Melbourne, FL 32901-6988 USA.
Ethological studies on elasmobranch fishes have attempted to explain the adaptive value of specific behaviors. For
example, laboratory studies have characterized the taxis responses duritig orientation to acoustic, olfactory, electric
and visual stimuli. These studies complement field research that describes the motor patterns involved^ in natural
behaviors such as reproductive interactions and feeding. Although lab and field studies have provided good
descriptions of behavioral motor patterns, relatively little infonnation is obtained on how sensory and central
processing systems initiate and form these often complex behaviors. The ampullary electrosense of the
elasmobranch is presented as a model system in which the peripheral morphology, neural response prrpperties and
central neuroanatomy can be interpreted in relation to the ecological factors that shape their behavior^. Vector
analysis of the peripheral organization of the ampullary canal system and neural response properties provide useful
tools for predicting different ecological functions for the ampullary clusters. Chronic recording of electrosensory
neurons in the alert swimming animal permit integration of neural activity with motor behavior. The mechanisms by
which sensory input and central processing shape elasmobranch behavior can bo better understood when
interpreted in relation to the natural ecology of each species.




   171                         13:30 Saturday                                  18
Elasmobranch movement patterns: simultaneous tracking of five white sharks with radio-acoustic
positioning system at Ano Nuevo Island. P.A. Klimley and B.J Le Boeuf, Bodega Marine Laboratory, University
of California, Davis, P.O. Box 247, Bodega Bay, California 94923.
We will briefly review the development of the radio-acoustic positioning system (RAP) and describe the
simultaneously tracking of five white sharks by the RAP over a three-week period during Oct.-Nov.1988. The RAP
determined the positions of these sharks tagged with beacons based on the arrival times of acoustic pujses at a
triangular array of three sonobuoys. These were linked via radio to a field station in view of the buoys on Ano Nuevo
Island, where tracks of the five sharks were displayed in real-time on a computer mcxiitor. We will show computer-
animated examples of movement patterns as well as graphical an^yses of the spatial and temporal inter­
relationships between sharks. The sharks spent a mean XX% of their time within the range of the buoys located
near the island, remaining there both during day and night. Trajectories suggesting active pursuit of prey occurred al
both times along a corridor leading from the island. Similarities in when three sharks tagged on the same day visited
the island versus two others tagged on subsequent days indicated that the former had some srxial affiliation. When
at the colony, the sharks usually moved independently of each other, except when attracted to a kill evident from a
cluster of short and non-directional movements. Individuals at times spent much of the day in a small area, possibly
lying on the bottom resting or waiting to ambush prey. During fall 1988, sharks will be tagged with transmitters that
record their swimming depths and stomach temperatures in order to unequivocally determine when they teed (based
upon stomach warming by endothermic prey) and describe the sequence of events associated with prey capture.

   172_________________ 14:00 Saturday_____________________ J8
Orientation and navigation in elasmobranchs: Which way forward? J.C. Montgomery and M.M. Walker, School
of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland New Zealand.
Elasmobranchs possess a multiplicity of mechanisms controlling posture and short distance orientation. Vestibular
contributions to posture and locomotion are well documented. So too, are the contnljutions of vision, olfaction and
the octavolateralis senses to short distance orientation, particularly orientation to specific environmental stimuli such
as those generated by prey. Less well understood are the mechanisms guiding orientation over longer distances.
Anecdotal and systematic observations of behavior show tidal, daily, repeat long distance, and even seasonal
movement patterns. Tnje bi-coordinafe navigation has not been demonstrated in elasmobranchs. The mechanisms
underlying the above movement patterns are largely speculative, however, they are likely to include responses water
currents, physical parameters such as temperature and pressure, and the geomagnetic field. Of particular interest in
elasmobranchs is that geomagnetic orientation could be mediated directly via a magnetite based sensory system, or
indirectly via ttie electrosensory system. Systematic studies of movement patterns, and experimental studies of the
underlying mechanisms of orientation are required to gain an understanding of orientation and navigation in this
intriguing group.




   173                         14:30 Saturday                 .            18
Elasmobranch behavioral ecology: oxymoron or opportunity? W.R. Strong. Dept, of Evolution, Ecology and
Marine Biology, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9610, USA.
Behaviorally and ecologically, sharks and their allies exhibit remarkable diversity. Over the past several decades,
Don Nelson and his contemporaries made enormous progress in the understanding of shark behavior. The vexing
task of relating this behavior to species and community ecology now stands in plain view. The study of behavioral
ecology can, in the broad sense, be construed to include almost anything the animal does within the context of its
environment. As a discipline, however, behavioral ecology has specific stated goals, principally to understand the
evolution of animal behaviors. Sharks in general are not well suited to these goals. As a result, empirical work is
often limited to descriptions of life history, distribution and abundance and basic investigations of morphological and
behavioral adaptations. Critically assessing how the latter affect survivorship and fitness is a formidable task, one
that largely remains in the domain of those who study teleosts, birds, etc. Nonetheless, elasmobranchs possess a
number of unique traits. And given their long-held positions as apex predators of the world ocean, much work
remains to be done in the area of predation. Understanding sharks' roles in the ecosystems they inhabit is central to
species management and, ultimately, to the "holy grail" of successful, system-wide management.




   174                          15:30 Saturday                                  18
The reproductive behavior of elasmobranchs. H.L. Pratt Jr.. NOAA/NMFS, Naragansett Lab, 28 Tarzwell Drive,
NanagansetL Rl 02882, USA; J.C. Carrier, Department of Biology. Albion College, Albion, Ml 49224, USA.
The study of elasmobranch reproductive behavior, a relatively new endeavor, has emerged from four overlapping
areas: inferences from fresh caught animals, captive observations, undera/afer and field observations of live
animals, and laboratory studies of reproductive structure and function. Several common behaviors have been
described from various species which include: sexual segregation, courtship behavior and copulation. Sexual
segregation is the seasonal aggregating behavior common to many elasmobranch species such as: Squalus
acanthias, Sphyrna lewinl, and Prionace glauca. Courtship behavior has been inferred for. Carcharhinus plumbeus,
C. limbatus, P. glauca, Odontaspis taunis, Dasyatis centroura, D. sabina, and others through the appearance of
tooth cuts on the female's body and noted in more detail with underwater observations on C. melanopten^,
Trianodon obesus, Ginglymostoma cirratum, among others. Copulation has been directly observed in captive
settings in: Scyliorhinus canicula, S. torazame, T. obesus, Aetobatus narinari, Rhinoptera javanica, Raja eglanteria,
and Heterodontus francisd, and in the wild for three species of urolophids, and for T. obesus, and G. cirratum.
Ongoing studies in G. cirratum are continuing with research into paternity, sperm competition and social stnjcture by
characterizing members of the population through diver identified tagging, acoustic telemetry, and DNA fingerprinting
of wild animals. Two wild, freshly-mated females are captured annually for laboratory observations on gestation and
associated changes in reproductive steroid hormones.simultaneously tracking of five white sharks by the RAP over a three-week period during Oct.-Nov.1988. The
determined the positions of these sharks tagged with beacons based on the arrival times of acoustic pulses at a
triangular array of three sonobuoys. These were linked via radio to a field station in view of the buoys on Ano Nuevo
Island where fracks of the five sharks were displayed in real-time on a computer monitor. We will show computer-
animated examples of movement patterns as well as graphical analyses of the spatial and temporal inter­
relationships between sharks. The sharks spent a mean XX% of their time within the range of the buoys located
near the island, remaining there both during day and night. Trajectories suggesting active pursuit of prey cxcurred at
both times along a corridor leading from the island. Similarities in when three sharks tagged on the s^e day visited
the island versus two others tagged on subsequent days indicated that the former had some social affiliation. When
at the colony, the sharks usually moved independently of each other, except when attracted to a kill evident from a
cluster of short and non-directional movements. Individuals at times spent much of the day in a small area, possibly
lying on the bottom resting or waiting to ambush prey. During fall 1988, sharks will be tagged with transmitterc that
 record their swimming depths and stomach temperatures in order to unequivocally determine when they feed (based
upon stomach warming by endothermic prey) and describe the sequence of events associated with prey capture.




Conv«ntional tagging method* a* applied to aharka: paat. praaent, and future. N.E. Kohler and P.A. Turner,
28 Tarzwell Drive, Narragansert, Rl 02882 USA.
Tagging programs provide valuable means to Increase our biological understanding of sharks and to obtain
information for rational resource management. Shark tagging programs throughout the wortd have been directed
toward several objectives, including collecting data on movements and migration, abundance, stock identity, age
and growth, mortality, and behavior. Results of these studies include recaptures from tagged Australian school
sharks over a 40 year period, recaptures from sandbar sharks and spiny dogfish after 19 years, and recaptures of
Greenland sharks after 16 years. An extensive shark tagging program has been conducted by the National Marine
Rsheries Service in the North Atlantic. This continuing study, covering 36 years, currently involves over 6,500
volunteer fishermen and scientists along the North American and European coasts. Under this program, 142,384
sharks representing 51 species were tagged between 1962 and 1997. In the same period, 7,276 sharks of 33
species were recaptured by fishermen. Results of the US program include: movements of blue sharks between
North America and Europe, Africa and South America (maximum distance ~ 3740 nmi.), transatlantic movements of
tiger sharks between North America and Africa, and a recapture of a sandbar shark after 28 years. A review of
tagging methods and summary of results of the major tagging programs on large sharks are provided.




   176                         16:30 Saturday                                 I8
Ultrasonic telemetry, tracking and automated monitoring technology. F. Voeaeli. VEMCO Limited, 100 Osprey
Drive, Shad Bay, Nova Scotia, Canada, B3T-2C1.
The tools for remote monitoring of marine animal behaviour have grown significantly In the last few years. The
availability of micro-controllers In smaller low power packages has enabled the development of more sophisticated
ultrasonic transmitters and battery powered automated monitoring sites. A brief historical perspective is presented
leading to description of new systems that combine archived sensor data with ultrasonic data download. These
systems provide multiple years of data gathering with the ability to gather the data and reprogram the device without
recapture of the animal.




   177 .                       17:00 Saturday                                 18
Physiological telemetry of elasmobranchs: taking the laboratory to the field. C.G. Lowe. Hawaii Institute of
Marino Biology, PO Box 1346, Kaneohe, HI 96744, USA; K.J. Goldman, VIMS Fisheries Dept., PO Box 1346,
Gloucester Point, VA 23062, USA.
 Physiological telemetry is a powerful tool in studying elasmobranchs in the laboratory and field. Controlled
laboratory studies of the physiology of elasmobranchs has increased our understanding of the behavior, life history,
and ecology of many species. However, extrapolating results from laboratory studies alone may misrepresent these
biological aspects of animals in the field. Additionally, some elasmobranchs are too large, logistically difficult to
maintain, or have low survivorship in captivity making them extremely hard to study in the laboratory. Physiological
telemetry offers a bridge between the laboratory and the field providing an opportunity to elucidate similarities and
differences. Previous studies have coupled a variety of sensors to acoustic transmitters to remotely relay information
on swimming speed, tailbeat fr^uency, muscle contraction rate, heart rate, muscle, cranial and stomach
temperature, and neural activity. These techniques have been used on elasmobranchs ranging from stingrays to
white sharks, but have been restricted by the size of the electronic components, attachment methods, or logistical
difficulties in conducting long-term tracks. Recent developments in sensor technology and miniaturization of
electronics have increased the diversity and applications of physiological telemetry. Acoustic modem and satellite
telemetry may offer a means of downloading archived data collected from animals in the field.

animals, and laboratory studies ot reproouctive sirucTure ana luncnon. oeverai curnrnun                         uwh
described from various species which include: sexual segregation, courtship behavior and copulation. Sexual
segregation is the seasonal aggregating behavior common to many elasmobranch species such as: Squalus
acanfhias, Sphyrna lewini, and Prionace glauca. Courtship behavior has been inferred for. Carchairiinus plumbeus,
C. limbatus, P. glauca, Odontaspis taurus, Dasyatis ceniroura, D. sabina, and others through the appearance of
tooth cuts on the female's body and noted in more detail with underwater observations on C. melanopterus,
Trianodon obesus, Ginglymostoma cirratum, among others. Copulation has been directly observed in captive
settings in: Scyliorbinus canicula, S. torazame, T. obesus, Aetobatus narinari, Rhinoptera Javanica, Raja eglanlena,
and Heterodontus francisd, and in the wild for three species of urolophids, and for T. obesus, and G. cirratum.
Ongoing studies in G. cirratum are continuing with research into paternity, sperm competition and social structure by
characterizing members of the population through diver identified tagging, acoustic telemetry, and DNA fingerprinting
of wild animals. Two wild, freshly-mated females are captured annually for laboratory observations on gestation and
associated changes in reproductive steroid hormones.




Tetometry, and the setoHlto tracking of the whale shark, ahtncttdon typua In the Sea of Cortez, Mexico. SA.
Eckert and B.S. Stewart, Hubbs Sea World Research Institute,, 2595 Ingraham St., San Diego, CA 92109 USA.

One of the greatest challenges to shark researchers is determining migration and long-range movements of sharks.
While reports of seasonal presence of the Whale Shark, Rhincodon typus in coastal waters are common, no
information has been available on where those sharks dwell during the "off season". Further no information is
available on whale shark activities or environmental preferences outside of the time when they are observed near
shore. In 1993 a project to determine movements and behavior of the Whale Shark was initiated by us in the Sea of
Cortez, Mexico. Working with commercial satellite transmitter manufacturers we developed a number of specialized
transmitters for whale sharks. Between 1993 and 1996 -17 of these PITs (of 3 different types) were deployed and
monitored. Results of this research, including the successful tracking of one shark for 13 months will be described.
Data as to preferred depths and water temperatures were also relayed by some of the transmitters and will be
presented. Finally, a description of the technological status of satellite telemetry as it applies to whale sharks will be
provided.




   179 ,              .   .   , 13:00 Saturday                                  14                               THN
The energetics of calling in frogs. K.D. Wells. Dept of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, University of Connecticut,
Storrs, CT 06269-3043.
The investigation of calling energetics in frogs provides an opportunity to integrate studies of behavioral performance
with whole animal physiology, muscle structure, and muscle biochemistry. Measurements of oxygen consumption by
calling males have shown that metabolic rates increase by up to 25 times resting rats. Structural features of the
trunk muscles that provide the power for call production, including mitochondrial density, capillary density, and
abundance of lipid reserves, are all positively correlated with calling rate. Activities of enzymes that are important in
aerobic metabolism and fatty acid metabolism are much higher in species with high calling rates than in those with
low calling rates. Pairwise comparisons of dosely-related species show the same pattern: those with high calling
rates have muscles that can sustain higher levels of call production than do those with low calling rates. Patterns of
energy substrate use reflect patterns of call production. Species with high calling rates depend more heavily on
stored lipids for call production than do species with low calling rates, and species with short breeding seasons
deplete their energy resenres more rapidly than do those with prolonged breeding seasons and long chorus
tenure.hysiology, muscle structure, and muscle biochemistry. Measurements of oxygen consumption by calling
males have shown that metabolic rates increase by up to 25 times resting rate. Structural features of the trunk
muscles that provide the power for call production, including mitos that are important in aerobic metabolism and fatty
acid metabolism are much higher in species with high calling rates than in those with low calling rates. Pairwise
comparisons of closely-related species show the same pattern: those with high calling rates have muscles that can
sustain higher levels of call production than do those with low calling rates. Patterns of energy substrate use reflect
patterns of call production. Species with high calling rates depend more heavily on stored lipids for call production
than do species with low calling rates, and species with short breeding seasons deplete their energy resen/es more
rapidly than do those with prolonged breeding seasons and long chorus tenure.

   180                         13:45 Saturday                                 14                              THN
Auditory Tuning and Phonotactic Preferences in Anurans.               H.C. Gerhardt. Division of Biological Sciences,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 USA.
Advertisement calls of anurans usually have one or two emphasized frequency bands, which match fairly well with
the maximum frequency sensitivity of one or the other, or both, of the two auditory organs, the basilar and amphibian
papillae. At a finer scale of analysis, however, mismatches often occur between their mean frequency of conspecific
calls in a species or population and the maximum frequency sensitivity of the auditory system. Such discrepancies
could be a mechanistic basis for sexual selection, but the question arises: How well do the usual threshold measures
of frequency sensitivify reflect frequency selectivity at the much higher signal levels at which anurans normally
communicate? Although threshold measures and frequency preferences estimated from the same individuals
correlate poorly with respect to small, but behaviorally effective, differences within a single frequency band, such
estimates do predict reliably which of the two frequency bands is preferred by females in species that have calls with
bimodal spectra. In some of these, thresholds determined centrally and preferences correlate well with estimates of
frequency sensitivity ar ther peripheral level, but this is not true of other species. Examples from behavioral and
neurophysiological studies of several species of treefrogs will be discussed.   181            _________ 14:30 Saturday_______                              14
Acoustic communication and neural processing in the Pacific treefrog. E A. Brenowitz, Depts. Psychology and
Zoology Univ of Washington, Seattle WA 98195 USA; G.J. Rose and T.B. Alder, Dept, of Biology, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City UT 84112 USA.
Male Pacific treefrogs, Hyla regilla, use advertisement and encounter calls to regulate inter-male spacing within
breeding chonjses. Encounter calls are produced when the advertisement calls of a neighbor exceed a threshold
amplitude. These aggressive thresholds are plastic; i.e. males resume advertisemenl.calling (areommodate) to
repeated presentation of advertisement calls at amplitudes 4 dB above their aggressive threshold. Correspondingly,
a male’s aggressive threshold for the advertisement call is positively correlated with the maxirnurn amplitude of
advertisement calls of neighbors, measured at the focal male's position. The aggressive thresholds of males for the
encounter call also are plastic but are not significantly correlated with the maximum call amplitude of their neighbore.
This disjunction stems from the fact that males in stable choruses are not exposed to supra-threshoW encounter
calls Accommodation to one call type fails to significantly alter a male’s aggressive threshold to the other call type.
Plasticity of aggressive thresholds, like plasticity of aggressive signalling, appears to be important in balancing the
costs and benefits of aggressive behavior.                                             .     ,,       . .. .
The capacity of males to selectively accommodate to the advertisement or encounter call supports the hypothesis
that these two call types are processed, in part, by discrete neural 'channels'. Because these two call types are
hlohly similar spectrally, selective accommodation cannot result from sensory adaptation in the penphery. ine two
c^l types however, differ markedly in their temporal structure, particularly their pulse repetition rate. These
obseivatio'ns support the notion that separate temporal filters exist in the central nervous system for processing
these two call types. Recent neurophysiological studies have provided insight into the mechanisms that underlie this
temper^ pattern recognition and discrimination.

   182                         15:30 Saturday                                  14
Ectothermy’s last stand: hearing In the heat and cold. P.M. Narins. Department of Physiological Science, UCLA,
405 Hilgard Avenue,, Los Angeels, CA 90095 USA.
Ectothermy is the norm among animals. It is known that aspects of both acoustic signal production and reception in
ectotherms are temperature-dependent. Since female preference in some ectothe^s is also temperature­
dependent, understanding the genesis of this dependence in detail becomes cruaal. The inner ear of ariurans is
unique in that it contains three organs which are specialized for sound reception. The amphibian papula (AH), the
basilar papilla (BP) and the saccule (S) are anatomically distinct, spatially-separate organs each with its own
complement of sensory hair cells and overlying tectorial structure. The feP and portons of the AP respond
exclusively to airborne sounds whereas other portions of the AP and the S exhibit sensitivity both to airborne sounds
and to substrate-bome vibrations. Measurements from the auditory periphery of Rana pipiens pipiens suggest that in
contrast to BP fibers, AP fiber tuning is highly temperature-dependent. Moreover, hair cells from the rostral AP and
S e>diibit a clear temperature dependence in their intracellular current step response, unlike caudally-l^ated AP and
BP cells. Finally, spontaneous otoacoustic emissions, which presumably reflect hair cell motility, are highly
temperature-dependent despite the fact that the upper portion of the emission frequency range (600-1600 Hz)
corresponds to the domain of the BP. A model is presented that attempts to reconcile these disparate results.




    183                      .. 16:15 Saturday                                  14
Integrating behavior and physiology:        hormones and the advertisement vocalization of male frogs.               S,B,_
Ernerson. Dept. Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.
 In this paper I present an integrative model that accounts for the relationship between intra- and interspealic
variation in male advertisement call characteristics in frogs and intra- and interspecific differences iri androgen and
corticosteroid levels. As androgen levels increase to a breeding baseline, size and rnyosin heai^ chain isofonn
composition of the call-producing muscles of the males change. These characteristics are relat^ to vocalization as
they determine (1) force of contraction and thus call intensity and (2) contraction veloaties and thus pulse repetition
rates. As the males call, energy is expended and depending on the length and iritensity of the vocalizations,
corticosteroids are released during the vigorous exercise. Additionally, the nightly calling has a feedback effect on
the production of androgens so that vocalization itself increases androgen levels. Individual differences iri nightly (all
effort are reflected in the variation of androgen and corticosteroid levels among calling males. Interspecific
differences in call characteristics result in interspecific variation in corticosteroidlevels as well.




 Female choice in cave Ifvtng and epigean populetlons of Poecifa mexicana (Pisces, PoecMHdae). J. Parzefall.
 Zoologisches Institut und Zixilogisches Museum, Univ, of Hamburg Martin Luther King. Pl.3 D-20146 Hamburg
 Germany.
 Males and females in Poecilia mexicana form mixed shoals in small rivers and ponds establishing a body lenght
 dependend hiearchy. Dominant males competing for females exhibit striking behaviour and color patterns. Small
 subdominant males conteract by an inconspicous female-like coloration and by sneaking copulations. The cave
 population from Tabasco/Mexico has smaller but functional eyes, reduced color patterns and the size differences

   184                         13:15 Saturday                                 12                                MCN
Genetics of cave fish evolution. H. Wilkens. Zoologisches Institut und Zoologisches Museum, Martin-Luther-King-
Pl. 3,20146 Hamburg, Germany.
Molecular analysis of the eye opsin genes reveals high rates of nucleotide substitution arid C to T transitions.
Nevertheless part of them is still functional and in the cave fish larval rudimentary visual cells a limited number or
opsin genes is even briefly transcribed. Only one opsin gene containing a deletion was found to be probably out of
function. The gamma s- and alpha A crystallin genes are not active during cave fish lens development although they
do not show mutative alterations. The genes being responsible for eye and melanophore reduction are in part rion-
allelic in the different cave populations. Fi-hybrids between different cave forms show larger eyes and exhibit darker
pigment than the parental specimens. These phenomena are positively correlated with the geographical distance
between the specifio cave populations.




   185                       .14:00 Saturday       .                           12                                MCN
The phylogeny, historical biogeography, and evolution of troglobitism in Amblyopsls rosae (Ozark cayefish)
and Typhlichthys subterraneus (southern cavefish). D.E. Bergstrom. Fisheries Research Sedion, M'ssoun
Department of Conservation, Fish and Wildlife Research Center, 1110 S. College Avenue Columbia, Missoun 65201
USA; D.B. Noltie, Fisheries and Wildlife Program, University of Missouri-Columbia Columbia Missoun 65211 USA;
T.P. Holtsford, Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri-Columbia Columbia, Missouri 65211 USA.
The phylogeny, biogeography, and evolution of troglobitic characters were investigated in the Amblyopsidae using
DNA sequence data from the mitochondrial gene ND2. The ND2 phylogeny is incongruous with current amblyopsid
taxonomy implying that the genera Amblyopsis and Typhlichthys are artificial taxa. The genus Amblyopsisi appears
polyphyletic A. rosae is monophyletic but not sister to A. spelaea. Genetic divergence among A. rosae from tour
different watersheds is equivalent to or greater than the divergence among different species and genera in the
family. Typhlichthys subterraneus is paraphyletic among four lineages, two of which are more closely related to
Chologaster cornuta, Forbesichthys agassizi, and Amblyopsis spelaea than they are to the remaining wo T.
subterraneus lineages. Mapping morphological traits onto the ND2 phylogeny suggests that convergent evolution of
troqlobitio traits (e.g., reduction of eyes and pigmentation) was common in the Amblyopsidae. Brooks Parsimony
Analysis (BPA) shows that the ND2 phylogeny corresponds closely to geological fragrnentation of the East-Central
North American Highlands, beginning as early as 8 mya. However, evidence of late Pleistocene dispersas was also
apparent. Phylogeography of the Amblyopsidae suggests that vicariant speciation resulting from karst deformation
may have influenced patterns of biodiversity in other groups inhabiting the Central Highlands.




    186    ._                  .14:25 Saturday         .                     .12                                 MCN
Blindcats of the genus Prietella (Ictaluridae) of northeastern Mexico: an overview of recent explorations and
studies. DA. Hendrickson. Texas Memorial Museum, Texas Natural History Collections, R4000 / PRC176,
University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712-1100 USA.
Explorations last year revealed a second locality for Prietella lundbergi, or a closely related form, in an isolated, 50 m
deep sump about 50 km north of the type locality in southernmost Tamaulipas. Four specimens frorn here bnng the
total number of specimens of this taxon to 5. Water quality and the aquatic invertebrate community of this sump
cleariv indicate lack of connections to a large spring that surfaces nearby. The sump is apparently perched alongside
large flows that discharge at the nearby spring. Blind populations of Astyanax mexicanus are known frorn nearby
caves, but none were found in this sump, nor in the type locality of P. lundbergi. Repeated attempts using cave
divers to obtain additional specimens from the type locality have failed. It is hypothesized toat the single specimen
known from the type locality had been displaced by flooding from a normally isolated habitat, similar to the new
locality. Mitochondrial DNA sequence data Indicate that P. lundbergi is distantly related to P. phreatophila, now
knowri from at least 6 localities in central and northern Coahuila, but support monophyly of the genus. Sequence
data support conspecificity of all Coahuila populations, and probable extensive interconnections of aquifers
throuqhout the range of the species in that state. Distributions of troglobitic invert^rates wmich broadly overlap wth
 Priet^la and extend further north, as well as some hydrogeologic data, indicate that P. phreatoptvla may reside in
 south Texas caves as well but It has not yet been taken there. Lab stocks have not res funded to attempts finctu^ng
 ^monal Injections) to Induce reproduction, but recent experiments with temperature fluctuations have resulted in




 The taxonomic status of the SSemrua frontalis complex (Serpentes: Etapbfes).                  NJ. Da Sifva (Jr.).
 Departamento de Biologia, Universidade Catolica de Goias - Ave. Universitaria, 1440 - Setor Universitario - 74605-
 010 - Goiania, GO - BRAZIL.; J.W. Sites (Jr.), Department of Zoology and Monte L. Bean Museum, Brigham Young
 University, Provo, UT 84602 - USA.

 The Micrurus frontalis complex is an assemblage of poorly defined taxa ranging from the Cerrado regions of Central
 Brazil, through eastern Bolivia and the temperate areas of southeastern Brazil, to the Pampean regions of south
 Brazil, Uruguay, Paraguay, and Argentina. It Is also a very diverse group with up to seven entities (subspecies)                                                      and depending on th© length and intensity of the vocalizations,
corticosteroids are released during the vigorous exercise. Additionally, the nightly calling has a feedback effect on
the production of androgens so that vocalization itself increases androgen levels. Individual differences in nightly rail
effort are reflected in the variation of androgen and corticosteroid levels among calling males. Interspecific
differences in call characteristics result in interspecific variation in corticosteroidlevels as well.




Female choice In cave living and epigean populations of PtMcHfa mojricma (Pieces, Poecillldae). J. Parzefall.
Zoologisches Institut und Zoologisches Museum, Univ, of Hamburg Martin Luther King. Pl.3 D-20146 Hamburg
Germany.

Males and females in Poedlia mexicana form mixed shoals in small rivers and ponds establishing a body lenght
dependend hiearchy. Dominant males competing for females exhibit striking behaviour and color patterns. Small
subdominant males conteract by an inconspicous female-Iike coloration and by sneaking copulations. The cave
population from Tabasoo/Mexico has smaller but functional eyes, reduced color patterns and the size differences
are less prominent. Aggression and shoaling have been reduced quantitatively. All these differences are genetically
based as demonstrated by hybrid studies. Doing female choice tests we offered males of different size in
perforated tubes. Tested in light cave and epigean fish showed a significant preference for the bigger males. In
darkness with infrared a preference could only be demonstrated for the cave fish with the two males being active in
their perforated tubes. In a second type of choice tests we excluded all other signals except visual ones by offering
ths males in neighboring compartments. In these tests cave and epigean fish preferred bigger males. So, the
preference for bigger m^es on the basis of visual signals is still present and in addition female choice can be
performed in darkness in the cave dwelling population.




    188                         15:55 Saturday .                               12                               MCN
Maintenance of visual pigments in a cave living population of Poedlia mexicana (Pisces: Poeciliidae). K.E.
Koerner. Zoologisches Institut & Museum, 20146 Hamburg, Germany: E.R. Loew, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA.
A population of P. mexicana successfully colonized a lime stone cave in Tabasco, Mexico. Despite of the complete
darkness in the cave, the cave living fishes have almost normal developed eyes. Using multispectrophotometry, our
study compared the visual pigments of cave living individuals, raised in dark and light, with the pigments of an
epigean clear-water population and an epigean milky-water population. Our results do not show any appreciable
differences in ths absorption maximum of the pigments. Although some regressive and constructive adaptations to
the cave live can be found in the cave populaion, it seems, that the population does not exist long enough to reduce
colour vision. To compare intraspecific and interspecific variation, the visual pigments of the close related species P.
latipinna and P. formosaviere also examined.




    189                         16:20 Saturday                                 12                            MCN
Mapping a cave fish genome; polygenic systems and regressive evolution.                  R.L. Borowskv. Department of
Biology, New York University, Washington Square, NY 10003, USA.
To enumerate and identify the genes involved in cave fish evolution, we are mapping the genome of Astyanax
mexicanus. A blind depigmented Pachon Cave fish was crossed with an eyed pigmented surface fish. One of the
hybrids was back-crossed with a Pachon fish to produce progeny (BC) for analysis. The BC progeny exhibited
phenotypic variation in eyeball diameter, pigmentation (number of melanophores and presence of melanin), and
relative condition factor (RCF or length corrected weight). Anonymous DNA markers were generated by AP-PCR
(RAPD) and used to create a genomic linkage map (MapMaker). Factors for trait variation were placed on the
framework map using MapMaker QTL. So far, we have identified 63 markers which coalesce into eighteen linkage
groups. (The haploid number is 25 in this species.) On this map, we have placed three quantitative trait loci (QTL)
for RCF, and one each for eye size and melanophore number, in addition to the locus for albinism. At 1000 Cm total
length, the map is about 50% complete. The QTL detected already account for 44% of the variation in the mapped
traits. The results so far confirm that multiple loci are involved In troglobitic evolution for each trait, although they
suggest that the total number of major genes controlling the regressive traits in any population may be lower than
expected based on a classic quantitative genetics approach. Past work suggests that cave populations of blind
tetras may have different QTL for eye size variation. This hypothesis will be tested directly as we extend mapping to
different populations. This work is in collaboration with Horst Wilkens, Hamburg.

large flows that discharge at the nearby spring. Blind populations of Astyanax mexicanus are known frorn nearby
caves, but none were found in this sump, nor in the type locality of P. lundbergi. Repeated attempts using cave
divers to obtain additional specimens from the type locality have failed. It is hypothesized that the single specimen
known from the type locality had been displaced by flooding from a normally isolated habitat, similar to the new
locality. Mitochondrial DNA sequence data indicate that P. lundbergi is distantly related to P. phreatophila, now
known from at least 6 localities in central and northern Coahuila, but support monophyly of the genus. Sequence
data support conspeoificity of all Coahuila populations, and probable extensive interconnections of aquifers
throughout the range of the species in that state. Distributions of troglobitic invertebrates which broadly overlap with
Prietella and extend further north, as well as some hydrogeologic data, indicate that P. phreatophila may reside in
south Texas caves as well, but it has not yet been taken there. Lab stocks have not responded to attempts (including
hormonal injections) to induce reproduction, but recent experiments with temperature fluctuations have resulted in
soma behaviors suspected to be related to reproduction.




Tbo taxonomic status of the Atfcrurus frontalis complex (Serpentes; Elapktae).                 NJ. Da Silva fJr.t.
Departamento de Bioiogia. Universidade Carolica de Goias - Ave. Universitaria, 1440 - Setor Universitario - 74605-
010 - Goiania, GO - BRAZIL.; J.W. Sites (Jr.), Department of Zoology and Monte L. Bean Museum, Brigham Young
University, Provo, UT 84602 - USA.

The Micnmjs frontalis complex is an assemblage of poorly defined taxa ranging from the Cerrado regions of Central
Brazil, through eastern Bolivia and the temperate areas of southeastern Brazil, to the Pampean regions of south
Brazil, Uruguay, Paraguay, and Argentina. It is also a ve^ diverse group with up to seven entities (subspecies)
recognized. This study reports the results of morphological analysis including scutelation, color, triad pattern,
hemipenial morphology, and cranial osteology of 1,890 specimens from museums in Brazil, Argentina, Uroguay,
Paraguay, and Bolivia, including all type specimens. A fragment of 812 base pair of mtDNA including part of the ND4
protein coding gene and Histidine, Serine, and Leucine tRNAs was used to estimate phylogenetic relationships of the
South American triad coral snakes. The morphological data support the specific recognition of Micrurus frontalis,
Micrurus altirostris, Micrurus brasiliensis, Micrurus baliocoryphus, Micrurus diana, Micrurus pyrihociyptus, and
Micrurus tricolor. The recovered phylogeny supports the morphological-based division of the Micrurus frontalis
complex into the frontalis and pyrrhocryptus groups and their relationship with other taxa from the Brazilian dry­
lands.




   191                          13:15 Saturday                               CR12                               CHM
A reevaluation of the subspecies within the western hognose snake, Heterodon nasicus. C.M, Eckerman.
Department of Zoology and Genetics, Iowa State University, Ames, lA 50011 USA.
The western hognose snake {Heterodon nasicus) has been separated into three subspecies (H. n. nasicus, H. n.
gloydi, and H. n. kennerlyi) based on various morphological features. However, the status of these subspecies has
been question by different authors. This study examined >1000 specimens of H. nasicus and evaluated geographic
variation in the traits originally used to separate the subspecies. Contour maps of morphometric and meristic
characters over geographic space were generated to assess their concordance with geographic ranges of the
nominal subspecies. Analysis of variance and discriminant function analyses indicated that H. n. nasicus and H. n.
kennerlyi should be the only recognized subspecies of H. nasicus, with H. n. gloydi subsumed within H. n. nasicus.




   192                       . 13:30 Saturday                                CR12                               CHM
Multivariate morphometric variation in the coffee snake, Ninia sebae. B.E. Smith. Department of Biology, Black
Hills State University, USB #9044, Spearfish, SD 57799-9044, USA.
Traditional studies of snake systematics emphasize univariate variation in some characters, and often ignore
multivariate differentiation.   I utilized discriminant function analysis to examine multivariate morphometric
differentiation in head shape among four putative subspecies of Ninia sebae, a small semi-fossorial colubrid snake
found at intermediate elevations in Central America. Linear discriminant function analysis can be used only if
covariance matrices are the same amongst groups. If this assumption is not met, then quadratic discriminant
fonction analysis can be used, however, this test is less powerful. Techniques which compare the structure of
covariance matrices can be used to construct matrices constrained by commonality of matrix components, which
may then be used in linear discriminant function analysis to more powerfully lest a hypothesis. Using these
methods, I found that the described subspecies of Ninia sebae are not well differentiated. The species appears to
consist of two distinctive subspecies, with one wide-ranging group spread throughout southern Mexico southwards to
Costa Rica, and another narrowly confined to the Pacific versant of southern Mexico and Guatemala, isolated by the
Guatemalan highlands. These races can be distinguished using multivariate analyses, differences in dorsal
coloration, and some univariate measures. Further studies may show them to be specifically distinct.   193                        13:45 Saturday                                 CR12               ....
                                                                                              CHM
Phylogenetic relationships among populations of               the ridge-nosed rattlesnake {Crotalus willardl).
                                                                                                  I^Bi.
Zamudio and H.W. Greene, Museum of Vertebrate Zoology. UC Berkeley, 3101 Valley Life Sciences Building,
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA.
The ridge-nosed rattlesnake [Crotalus willardi) is a small montane pitviper endemic to woodlands and forests of fte
Sierra Madre Occidental. Five subspecies of C. willardi are currently recognized; the two northernmost subspecies
are restricted to patches of suitable habitat in the Madrean Archipelago or 'sky islands' of southern New Mexico and
Arizona. Due to limited distributions and strict habitat requirements, the two subspecies within the U.S. are
recognized as threatened or endangered either at the federal or state level. Crolalus willardi offers a special
opportunity to investigate the biogeography of populations inhabiting the Madrean archipelago. Previous work using
allozyme analyses and morphoTogical differentiation suggested two possible hypotheses for the evolution and
radiation of C. willardi populations: a shallow history model, implying that the northernmost populations result from a
recent evolutionary divergence, and a deep history model suggesting that the first divergences were between the
northernmost subspecies and all others. VVe used mtDNA characters to explore relationships among populations of
C. willardi and reconstruct a phylogeneSo tree for this species. Our phylogeny implies a combination of deep and
shallow histories for the differentiation of sky-island reptiles, and raises questions about current conservation
measures and their implication for the prioritization of intraspecific variation in this species.




   194                         1.4:00 Saturday           ..          CR12      ..                   CHM
Within-lsland phylogeography of Canary Island skinks.     R.P, Brown. School of Biological & Earth Sdenc^s,
Liverpool John Moores University, Uverpool L3 3AF, UK; J. Pestano, ) Depto. de Genetica, Fac. de Ciencias,
Medicas y de La Salud, Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, 35080 Las Palmas, Spain..
The pattern of geographical variation in morphology of the endemic skink Chalcides sexlineatus is highly correlated
to ecological variation within the small (1532 km^ oceanic Island of Gran Canaria. Sequencing of a fragment from
the 12S rRNA region of the mtDNA indicated considerable wtthin-island sequence divergence, and revealed the
presence of three ancient lineages. Substantial geographical structuring of these lineages explains the
morphological variation, thus refuting the prima facie case of differentiation in situ arising through climate-mediated
variation in selection pressures as the cause.
Very little introgression occurs between the principal Northern and South-Western mtDNA lineages, while
Introgression of mtDNA into foreign’ nuclear backgrounds also appeare to be limited. The time of divergence and
spatial distribution of these lineages coincided with intense volcanic activity known to have occurred dunng the past
2.8 million years In the North of Gran Canaria, indicating that they reflect ancient population refugia which
expanded to a secondary contact zone when conditions Improved. Ancient within-lsland lineages are also found in
the skink on the neighboring Island of Tenerife {Ch. viridanus), the distribution of which are similarly related to the
island's volcanic history.




   195                        14:15 Saturday                                 CR12       .                      CHM
Palm pitviper (Bothrlechls) phylogeny and the phylogenetic utility of mtDNA. T.W. Taggart, B.l. Crother and
M.E. White, Department of Biological Sciences, SLU 736, Southeastern Louisiana University, Hammond, LA 70402
USA.
Characters from the mitochondrial genome have become the most commonly used source of data in phylogenefic
analyses, despite arguments that these data are inappropriate and can result in misleading relationships. As a single
empirical test of the phylogenetic utility of mtDNA data, 12S rDNA sequences were collected, aligned, and
cladistically analyzed for all Bothriechis taxa (7 species) and the outgroup Ophyracus undulatus and compared with
a highly corroborated phylogenetic hypothesis for the same taxa based on characters derived frorn the nuclear
genome (morphology and ailozymesj. Based on our knowledge of the biology of mtDNA, the predirrted point of
incongruence was realized between the mtDNA tree and the nuclear tree. The results add to the mounting data that
indicate systematic decisions based on mtDNA phylogenies should be considered with caution.

   196 .                       14:30 Saturday ....                          CR12              ..               CHM
Multiple data sets, congruence, and hypothesis testing for the phylogeny of the basal groups of the lizard
genus Sceloporus (Squamata, Phrynosomatidae). O. Flores-Villela, Museo do Zoologia, Oniversidad Nacional
Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico; K.M. l^er. Department of Entomology, Rutgers University, New Bnrnswick, NJ USA;
M. Benabib, Institute de Ecologia, UNAM, Mexico; J.W. SitesfJr.l. Dept, of Zoology. Brigham Young University,
Provo, UT 84602 USA.
Several data partitions, including nuclear and mitochondrial gene sequences, chromosomes, isozymes, and
morphological characters, are used to test previously published hypotheses about the phylogenetic positions of basal
clades of the lizard genus Sceloporus, and the relationships of Sceloporus to the former genus Sator. Our results
confirm a recently published phylogeny (Wiens and Reeder, 1997) which groups Sator internal to Sceloporus, and
both support a hypothesis of 'transgulfian vicariance' for the origin of the former genus Sator on islands in the Sea of
Cortez. Support for internal nodes in our best tree is established through widely used indices (bootstrap proportions,
decay values), but also through congruence among different data partitions, and the consistent recovery of these
nodes by several tree-reconstnjction methods based on different assumptions. Many nodes which are supported by
a combination of several methods, including maximum and weighted parsimony, maximul likelihood, and minimum
evolution models, are only weakly supported by the traditional indices, and this "methodological concordance' is
taken as strong evidence for their placement.




   197                         14:45 Saturday                    ..         CR12                                CHM
Genetic polymorphism and taxonomic revision of the Caucasian rock                    lizard Lacerta saxicola.      R,D,_
MacCulloch. F. Jinzhong and R.W. Murphy, Centre for Biodiversity and Conservation Biology, Royal Ontario,
Museum; I. Darevsky, Zoological Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences.
Genetic diversity at 35 allozyme loci was examined in 9 populations of the taxa currently placed in Lacerta saxicola.
The data support the elevation of the subspecies Lacerta s. lindholmi and L. s. saxicola to species. The subspecies
L. s. brauneti, L. s. darevskii and L. s. szczerbald remain conspecific, although they can no longer be referred to
Lacerta saxicola. Considerable population substructuring among the latter three taxa suggest that they may now
occupy unique evolutionary tracks. Indices of genetic variability of all taxa were consistent with those of other
Caucasian Lacerta.




   198                          15:30 Saturday                               CR12                               CHM
Molecular phylogenetics and biogeographical history of pitvipers. C.L. Parkinson. Dept, of Biology, Indiana
University, Bloomington. IN 47405 USA.
Using mitochondrial DNA (12S & 16S rDNA and ND4) sequences, I investigated the biogeographical history and
phylogenetic relationships of the snakes in the subfamily Crofalinae (SerpenfesiViperidae). I have included
members from all proposed genera and, where possible, more than a single taxon to represent each genus.
Ph^ogenetic analyses were conducted using both maximum parsimony (MP) and maximum likelihood (ML) as the
optimality criteria. Monophyly of New World pitvipers is tested and determination of their sister group is presented.
Biogeographical hypotheses as to the number of invasions into South America is explored and questions concerning
the proposed paraphyly of the genera Crotalus and Bothrops are addressed. Taxonomic validity of certain Old World
genera (Protobothrops artd Ovophis} are determined, and their phylogenetic relationships are described.                             15^45 Sat jraay. . .                   CR12 ...         .
A phylogenetic enalysle of the evolution of sexually dimorphic coloration In the Yarrow's Spiny Lizard
{Scttloporus jarrovifj complex. J.J. Wiens. Section of Amphibians and Reptiles, Carnegie Museum of Natural
History,, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-4080; T.W. Reeder, Department of Biology, San Diego State University, San Diego,
CA, 92182-4614; A- Nieto Montes de Oca, Museo de Zoologia, Facultad de Ciencias, UNAM, Mexico.
As currently recognized, the Yarrow's Spiny Lizard (Sceloporus jairovii complex) exhibits amazing intraspecific
variation in male dorsal coloration, such that the range of basic colors among populations is nearly as great as that
among all reptiles (e.g.,. green, black, red, blue, yellow, gray, brown). In this study, we use phylogenetic methods to
address two basic questions; (1) how much of the color variation is intraspecific versus interspecific? and (2) what is
the evolutionary history of color variation in the S. jarrovii complex ? Parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses of
DNA sequence data (1.8 kb) from the mitochondrial 12S and ND4 genes for 17+ populations of Sceloporus jarrovii
(including the type localities of all seven subspecies) and several related species, along with morphological data,
suggest the following preliminary results: (1) Sceloporus jarrovii is polyphyletic within the torquatus species group
and consists of at least four evolutionary species, (2) striking color variation exists both within and between the
evolutionary species currently referred to S. jarrovii, (3) most of the conspicuous male color morphs seem to have
evolved independently from relatively dull colored monochromatic ancestors, and the blue color morph has evolved
twice.




   200                         16:00 Saturday                               CF112                             CHM
Molecular systematics and phylogeography of the salt marsh snakes, Nerodia clarkii, using mtDNA d-loop
sequences. K.P. Jansen. S.A. Karl and H.R. Mushinsky, Department of Biology, University of South Florida,
Tampa, FL 33620-5150 USA.
The salt marsh snake, Nerodia clarkii, is the only North American snake species restricted to brackish water habitats
and has evolved unique physiological and behavioral specializations associated with a saline environment. Two of
the three subspecies (A/, c. compressicauda and N. c. taeniata} are endemic to Florida and are threatened by
progressive destnjction of coastal wetland habitat. By using the subspecies as the focal taxonomic division in
consen/ation and management programs, we imply that the subspecies Is an independent evolutionary lineage worth
protecting. As such, the taxonomic status and evolutionary history of subspecies must be ascertained prior to
implementing conservation or management programs. Markers used in delineating two of the three subspecies have
been vague or highly variable and have failed to consistently differentiate individuals of known identity Into their
respective taxonomic group. Further, the divergence of the salt marsh snakes from an ancestral freshwater form
near the end of the Pliocene has been theorized, but with varying models. We sequenced the mtDNA control region
of individuals from the Nerodia clarkii subspecies, Nerodia fasciata subspecies, and several outgroup taxa in order to
elucidate the relationship among the salt marsh snakes and to better understand the evolutionary history of the
group.




   201               . . .   . 16:30,Satufday                               CR9                               CHM
Comparison of helminth communities in montane and lowland populations of the western fence lizard,
Sceloporus occldentalls from Los Angeles County, Califomia. S.R. Goldberg. Whittier College, Department of
Biology, Whittier, CA 90608 USA; C.R. Bursey, Pennsylvania State University, Department of Biology, Shenango
Campus, Sharon, PA 16146 USA; H. Cheam, Whittier College, Department of Biology, Whittier, CA 90608 USA.
Five hundred seventy two Sceloporus oeddentatis from two nearby populations in Los Angeles County, Califomia
were examined for helminths: 200 from the San Gabriel Mountains (montane ca. 1584 m elevation) and 372 from the
Puente Hills, Whittier (lowland ca. 150 m elevation). The component helminth community of the montane fence
lizard population consisted of four species: two species of cestodes, Mesocestoides sp. and Oochoristica scelopori
and two species of nematodes, Physaloptera retusa and Spauligodon giganticus. The component helminth
community of the lowland fence lizard population contained three species: Mesocestoides sp., Physaloptera retusa
and unidentified acuariid larvae. The two helminth communities were dissimilar in composition. Each host
population must be examined; helminth community composition cannot be assumed.

   202                         16:45 Saturday                                CR9               .       .        CHM
Trematode parasitism of the Canadian red-sided garter snake {Thamnqphls sirtalls parletalis): A study in
prevalence and Intensity. D.R. Kelly and R.W. Krohmer, Science Department, Saint Xavier University, 3700 West
103 Street, Chicago, Illinois 60655 USA.
One-hundred and ninety-four Canadian red-sided garter snakes were collected from the Interiake region north of
Winnipeg, Manitoba, over a two year period, in the spring and fall seasons of 1996 and 1997. This snake is host to a
lung inhabiting digenetic trematode of the family Pfagiorchiidae. The infection is acquired by the comsumption of
tadpoles and frogs. These intermediate hosts harbor the metacercarial cysts that may further develop into mature,
egg producing adults, when consumed. It has been reported that the minimum time requirement for the appearance
of an adult trematode in the lung is greater than eight weeks. All snakes examined for trematode infection were
preserved, measured for length, and gender determined. The adult trematodes were counted and removed, with their
locations being recorded. The data were used to evaluate ths prevalence (percent rate of infection) and intensity
(number of parasites per host). The prevalence of the trematode infection was higher in females (35%) than in males
(15%). The mean intensity was also higher in females (10+2, range: 1-65) than in males (5+1, range: 1-13). No
significant correlation between intensity and snout-vent length was found in either sex. However, there is evidence to
suggest that prevalence increses with snout-vent length. A group of long term captive (> 12 weeks) snakes were
compared to the sample of wild snakes. There were no significant differences in the mean intensities of the wild and
long-term captive animals. However, the prevalence in the females increased from 35% to 53% and increased in
males from 15% to 30%.




   203                         13:00 Saturday                                CF3                                AXL
The Influence of moonlight, temperature, hydrostatic pressure and zooplankton abundance upon the vertical
distribution and relative abundance of mesopelagic fishes in the epipelagic zone at night. T.C. MacDonald.
Florida Marine Research Institute, 100 8th Avenue S.E., St. Petersburg, FL USA , 33701; T.L. Hopkins, Department
of Marine Science, University of South Florida, 140 7th Ave. S., St. Petersburg, FL USA 33701.
Four cniises, with a 4-m’ Multiple Opening/Closing Net and Environmental Sensing System (MOCNESS), were
conducted to investigate the influence of moonlight, temperature, hydrostatic pressure and zooplankton abundance
upon the nighttime vertical distribution and relative abundance of mesopelagic micronekton in the epipelagic zone of
tile eastern Gulf of Mexico. Two hundred and fifteen trawl hauls, sampling discrete 25-meter depth strata between
the surface and 175 meters, were completed. Environmental parameters (temperature, hydrostatic pressure and
moon phase) and zooplankton abundance were recorded for each trawl haul. Additionally, measurements of ths
nighttime light field and diffuse attenuation coefficient were recorded during two 1989 cruises. Vertical distributions
fertile abundant fish species tended to be shallower during new moon phases. Two statistical methods (Canonical
Correspondence Analysis and Analysis of Covariance) indicated that hydrostatic pressure, temperature and moon
phase influenced the relative abundances of fishes and that light at depth was especially important in influencing
relative abundances during the 1989 cruises. Despite the importance of light at depth, the abundant species were
not limited to specific levels of ambient light




  '204                         13:15 Saturday                                CF3 .    .                          AXL
Effect of liqht on juvenile walleye pollock shoaling and their Interaction with predators. C.H. Rver. Alaska
Fisheries Science Center, NMFS, NOAA, Hatfield Marine Science Center, Newport, Oregon 97365 USA.
Under a 12 hr light/12 hr dark photoperiod, juvenile walleye pollock displayed a diurnal schooling and activity
pattern, characterized by cohesive shoaling during the day, with a cessation of shoaling and decreased swimming
speeds at night. Juvenile walleye pollock were not characterized by a distinct light threshold for shoaling; shoals
gradually dispersed as light levels decreased and gradually recoalesced as light levels increased. At light levels
below 2.8x10 ° mEs 'm’^ juvenile walleye pollock were so dispersed as to no longer constitute a shoal.
Exposure to simulated predation had differing effects upon fish behavior under light and dark conditions. Brief
exposure to a model predator in the dark, caused fish to swim faster than fish which had been exposed in the light.
Chronic exposure to a living predator produced similar results; fish tended to swim slower when a predator was
present in the light, but faster when a predator was present in the dark. In the light, predation can result in cohesive
shoals, but in the dark. Increased activity may accelerate shoal dispersal, suggesting that perceived predation risk
has opposite effects upon the spatial distribution of shoaling fish under light and dark conditions.   205                       , 13:30 Saturday                                CF3                                AXL
Prey-type effect on raking behavior In the osteoglossomorph fish ChHala chltala.                  B.J. Frost and C.P.J.
Sanford, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY 11549 USA.
Fishes of the subdivision Osteoglossomorpha ("bony tongues") posses a functional novelty the "tongue-bite
apparatus," located between the mandibular jaw apparatus anteriorly and the pharyngeal jaw apparatus posteriorly.
Previous work on this group described a distinct behavior known as "raking" associated with this novel feeding
mechanism. Using high-speed video (250 fields s ') and stop-frame kinematic analysis, raking behavior for two prey
types (earthworms and goldfish) was characterized in the clown knifefish {Chitala chitala}. Kinematic data will be
presented that reveals raking is a modulated behavior.




   206                         13:45 Saturday.                               CF3                   ..             AXL
Feeding ecology, activity patterns and spatial distribution of Siluriformes in a stream of Atlantic rainforest in
south-eastern Brazil. S. Buck. Universidade de Sao Paulo - Instifufo de Biociencias, Departamento de Zoologia,
PO BOX 11461, ZIP 05422-970, Sao Paulo - SP, Brazil.
The Atlantic rainforest ichthyofauna is rich in siluriforms, with many endemic species. Seyenly percent of the species
recorded in the Betari stream. Upper Ribeira Valley, Eastern Brazilian basin, are siluriforms belonging to the
following families: Loricariidae (eight species), Pimelodidae (four species), Trichomycteridae (two species) and
Callichthyidae (one species). Between June 1996 and February 1998,1 studied spatial distribution, activity patterns,
and feeding ecology of these fishes in a stream section one lelometer long. Diurnal and nocturnal transects were
made at different sites using snorkelling. Half of the studied species are distributed in patties, which water current,
depth and type of substrate influencing their distribution patterns. Except tor Otocinclus gibbosus (Loricariidae) and
Thchomycterus davisi (Trichomycteridae) all other siluriforms studied are nocturnal. The loricariids graze on algae
covering rock, mosriy diatoms, organic detritus and sediment. Corydoras barbatus (Callichthyidae) feeds on aquatic
insects and algae. The pimelodids are generalists carnivores, with Rhamdia quelen preying on fish and crustaceans,
and Rhamdioglanis frenatus preying on aquatic invertebrataes, especially insects (Trichoptera). This study is a
contribution to the knowledge on me poorly known ichthyofauna from the Atlantic rainforest.




   207                         14:00 Saturday                                CF3                    AXL
Diet overlap and resource use by five species of butterflyfish (Family Chaetodontidae) in Fiji.  D. Goulet,
Department of Biological Sciences, SUNY at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260 USA; J. Mayer, Department of Natural
Sciences, Long Island University, NY 11968 USA; A.I. Mazeroll, Department of Life, Earth and Environmental
Sciences, West Texas A&M University, Canyon, TX 79016-0808 USA.
We investigated the applicability of five species of butterflyfish as biological indicators on the Great Astrolabe Reef,
Fiji. Availability and patterns of resource use by the butterflyfish were investigated. Individuals of 3-13 pairs of each
species were followed and feeding rates and foraging areas were recorded. For four of the five species of
butterflyfish, acroporid corals constituted the dominant food in the diet, Chaetodon pelewensis and C. citrinellus were
not obligate corallivores, feeding upon coralline algae and filamentous algae. The remaining species were obligate
corallivores. Chaetodon trifascialis and C. baronessa showed a preference tor acroporid corals and can be
considered feeding specialists. Chaetodon trifasdatus is a feeding generalist, with no clear preference for any of a
wide variety of corals in the diet. Among specialists and generalists diet overlap was high, but between specialists
and generalists there was less diet overlap. In addition, foraging areas of the different species overlapped, in some
cases almost 100%, suggesting that food resources are being shared.

   208              . .       .1,4:15 Saturday                               CF3                                AXL
Influences of an exotic cordgrass on estuarine fish diets in Willapa Bay, WA. D.J. Stouder. Ohio Cooperative
Rsh & Wildlife Research Unit, Department of. Zoology, The Ohio State University, 1735 Neil Ave., Columbus OH
43210 USA; K.L. Fresh, Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Olympia USA.
Invasions of introduced species as a result of human activities have had huge impacts on aquatic ecosystems.
Furthermore, introduced species may become permanent components of these ecosystems. As a consequence it
becomes important for scientists and managers to understand the physical and biological processes within these
rapidly changing environments. We examined the effects of Spartina altemiflora invasion within an estuary along the
Washington coast. Between April and September in 1994 & 1995, we sampled fishes over mudflats and within
differently sized Spartina clones (3m, 6m, 12m, and meadows). Distribution and abundance of native fishes varied
both temporally and spatially as a consequence of the presence or absence of Spartina, as clones grew seasonally
and as different fishes recruited to the area. Cymatogaster, Leptocottus, and Oncorhynchus diets failed to
correspond to habitat use differences. Instead, their diets reflected a mix of prey derived from mudflat and Spartina-
inhabited areas. In addition to a prey mix reflective of habitats, fishes consumed large proportions of exotic prey
species (i.e., cumaceans, amphipods). The invasion of exotic species to this estuary probably proceeded along
several paths, however, the irnpact of aquaculture practices and culturing of a non-native oyster species most likely
had the greatest influence.




   209                          14:30 Saturday .                             CF3                                AXL
The relationship between the threespine stickleback, Gasterosteus aculeatus, and the cestode parasite
Schistocephalus solidus In Walby Lake, Alaska; new perspectives of the host-parasite system. D.C. Heins
and S.S. Singer, Department of EEO Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, 70118 USA; J.A. Baker,
Department of Biology, Clark University, Worcester, MA 01610 USA.
The threespine stickleback is an intermediate host of the cestode Schistocephalus solidus. Prior research has led to
the hypothesis that selection has resulted in a delay of the deleterious effects of Schistocephalus on stickleback until
after stickleback complete reproduction. Other research has concluded that any heavily infected female stickleback
are unlikely to spawn because Schistocephalus delays or inhibits ovarian maturation. The intensity, prevalence, and
severity of infection of stickleback from Walby Lake, Alaska, are inconsistent with the results of previous
investigations, showing that reproduction and high levels of infection may occur. Our data suggest there may be
previously unobserved adverse effects of parasitism on clutch parameters in parasitized stickleback females. We
will discuss possible reasons for the differences we have observed for Walby Lake after contrasting our results with
Uiose of previous studies.




   210                         14:45 Saturday . .                            CF3                                AXL
Population ecology of Rhamdioglanis ffenatus and PImelodella transitoria (Siluriformes: Pimelodidade) in a
stream from the atlantic rainforest, south-eastern Brazil. P. Gerhard. Institute de Bicciencias da Universidade
de Sao Paulo, Departamento de Zoologia, Rua rfo Matao, travessa 14, # 321, Butanta - Sao Paulo - SP, ZIP 05508-
900, BRAZIL.
Population ecology of Rhamdioglanis Irenatus and Pimelodella transitoria from the Betari river. Upper Ribeira Valley,
State of Sao Paulo, was studied by the mark-recapture method between Mar. 1987 and Feb. 1998. After eleven
monthly collections, 171 specimens of R. frenatus and 104 of P. transitoria longer than 80 mm SL were marked by
tattooing in a 2.000 m section of the river. Preliminary estimates indicate populations sizes of 300-500 individuals for
R. frenatus and 800-2500 for P. transitoria, with populations densities varying between 0.01-0.02 and 0.04-0.12
individuals m'® respectively. These catfishes are sedentary, being recaptured at the same site of previous collections
at rates as high as 85% for R. frenatus and 95% for P. transitoria. Upstream and Downstream movements were
recorded, without dear tendencies. Individual growth rates for R. frenatus and P. transitoria were 0.2 cm month-' and
less than 0.1 cm month ', respectively, but preliminary data indicate those rales may double in the rainy season.
Microhabitat distribution data obtained from captures indicate preference for pools and low migration rates betweens
pools in both species. Rhamdioglanis frenatus is solitary, while P. transitoria is gregarious, specially during daytime.The role of trenelent predators In regulating |uvenlle reef fleh abundance on small patch reefs: a preliminary
examination. D.S. Gilliam. R.L. Sherman and R.E. Spieler, Nova Southeastern University, Oceanographic Center,
8000 N. Ocean Dr., Oania, FL 33004 USA.

As part of an ongoing research program designed to investigate local reef fish recruitment processes, the importance
of post-settlement predation was examined. A series of recently completed experiments manipulated prey refugia
and resident fish abundance on small (1 m3) model patch reefs. Although these experiments were not designed to
determine the relative importance of resident versus transient predators, a portion of the data obtained, as well as
ancillary observations, support the hypothesis that transient predators (e.g. Carangids) have an important role in
regulating juvenile reef fish abundance. At the very least, our results indicate that specific studies are required to
elucidate the influence of transient predators on sm^l patch reef fish assemblages. The aim of this presentation is to
stimulate further discussion on the processes that regulate reef fish assemblages.




   212                        15:45 Saturday                               CFS                                AXL
Gradual versus event-related change in fish assemblages of pools in a small midwestem stream.                    W.J.
Matthews, Department of Zoology and Biological Station, Uiiiversity of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019; E.G. Marsh-
Matthews. Museum of Natural History and Biological Survey, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019 USA.
Fish assemblages in 14 individual pools within a 1-km reach of Brier Creek, Oklahoma, were censused by snorkeling
on 17 dates from 1982 to 1997, with inten/als between surveys ranging from 2 weeks to II years. During our period
of sampling some intervals included major floods or drought, whereas other Interv^s were ’benign*. We
summarized terr^oral variation in fish assemblages in individual pools and for the entire reach, and compared the
magnitude of changes in pool assemblages during periods with and without "events’. Fish assemblages in individual
pools changed more in response to gradual than to event-related effects. Cows affect stream fishes more than do
even rather large floods.




   213                        16:00 Saturday                                CF3                               /\XL
Aquatic, terrestrial and "global* landscape factors: which most influence local stream fish assemblages?
E.C. Marsh-Matthews. Museum of Natural History and Biological Sunrey, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK
73019 USA; W.J. Matthews, Department of Zoology and Biological Station, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK
73019 USA.
Stream fish ecology offers conflicting hypotheses about environmental and landscape factors controlling local
assemblage structure, at scales from local ’microhabitat" to "global" or macroecological. Using a large, time-
delimited data base, spanning a wide range of local settings in midwestem North America, we tested suites of
physical or landscape factors as predictors of stnjcture or emergent properties of local fish assemblages, at scales
rncluding: (1) "within reach" (aquatic); (2) local area (terrestrial); and (3) within basin, and (4)among named river
basins. In June-July 1995, we sampled stream fishes at 65 sites spanning 1700 km across Iowa, Nebraska, Kansas,
Missouri, Oklahoma and Texas. At each site all apparent microhabitats were sampled, and environmental or
landscape variables were documented. "Global* factors (rainfall, meteorological) were obtained from standard
references. Basin identity* explained much variation in composition of local fish assemblages as reflected by scores
of "sites" in a DCA based on abundance. In a PCA including all environmental/landscape variables, latitude (a
surrogate for "basin identity") was related strongly to fish assemblage composition. On the other hand, emergent
properties of assemblages (e.g., richness) were not influenced by basin or latitude. Subsequent PCAs, based
separately on wifhin-reach "aquatic" dnd local area "terrestrial" factors showed that landscape within the stream
(depth, current, presence of gravel patches) influenced species richness more than extrinsic terrestrial factors.

    .M                         1'8.1 b Saturday                              CF3                                AXL
The estuarine artenmlnimum: evidence from the lower Chesapeake Bay. C.M. Wagner. College of William &
Mary, School of Marine Science, P.O. Box 1346, Gloucester Point, VA 23062, USA.

The dramatic biological, chemical, and physical changes in the low salinity habitats of estuaries are thought to limit
the number of resident faunal taxa. Remane (1934) first described this phenomena, a species minimum occurring
near oligohaline salinities (5-8 %»), from invertebrate assemblages of large stable brackish lakes. It has since been
proffered as a general feature of the estuarine gradient, though examples from the primary literature are rare. Two
possible complications to the location of this pattern in estuarine fishes are: (1) the large number of seasonal
migratory species who exhibit changing salinity preferences with ontogeny; and, (2) ths failure to standardize species
richness estimates to a measure of sample size (i.e., rarefaction). I applied rarefaction techniques to seine and trawl
survey data to investigate whether this phenomena is evident in fish assemblages from three tributaries of the lower
Chesapeake Bay. Results of the analysis indicate a minimum can occur, and is most evident in systems with a
physically long salinity gradient. Beta diversity calculations confirmed the region of highest species turnover was
displacer] upstream from the minimum (near 0-2 %e), and coincides with the most severe changes in ionic ratios.
Hence, distance to source pools of marine and freshwater taxa appears to interact with salinity preferences to
establish ths minimum. Excursions from most favorable habitats by a highly mobile species appears spatially similar
to recnjitment survival in sessile invertebrates, and may explain the similarity in pattern between the two groups.




   215          .   ...        16:30 Saturday                                CF3                               AXL
Reproduction and early ontogeny of the sand diver, Trichonotus setiger, from Papua New Guinea.
Balon. Axelrod Institute of Ichthyology University of Guelph; E. Clark, Department of Zoology, University of
Maryland: C. Flegler-Balon, Axelrod Institute of Ichthyology University of Guelph; L.M. Benveniste, 277 West 10th
St, Apt. 6H, New York.
Obsenration Point at the northwest end of Normanby Island (Milne Bay Province) is the home of a taxocene with four
to five species of sand divers, Trichonotus, one of them ths recently described T. halstead. In 1997 and 1998 we
returned to study their early life history. Purported gill-chamber brooding was not confirmed by dissections of many
specimens. The sympatric species live in distinct harem territories or swarms on a sandy slope where they mate
soon after sunrise. T. setiger, mating over coarse sand, deposit many small eggs. Mature females (~ 8.7 cm TL) had
ovaries with 150 to 200 ooc^es. When mating is over, eggs were scooped up with sand from the mating siterushed
into the boat, and observed live under special microscopes. Deposited translucent eggs (0.6 mm ) stick to the sand
grains. The clear yolk contains one large yellowish oil globule. Development was observed at 25-26° C: after 30 min,
four cells had formed. Ten hours later, heart beat and blood circulation could be seen. Hatching occurred 13-13.5
hours after spawning. The just hatched embryos (oa. 2.2 mm TL, >38 somites) were translucent with completely
unpigmented eyes. Initially the embryos were mostly resting at the bottom, occasionally wriggling, later darting
around and into ths water column. When motionless, they slowly sank head first. At 18 h a white pigment was
obsenred around the anus, later white pigment accumulated around the notochord towards the tip of the tail, and
finally in the head region. When one day old (3 mm TL) the yolksac had decreased in size; initially, the oil globule
was about 1/4 of the yolksac length, now it took 1/3 of yolk size. At age two days the embryos had reached a TL of
4.5 mm. The snout region had become more pointed but neither jaw movements nor gut contents were observed, i.e.
exogenous feeding was not yet started . These findings will be discussed with respect to the distribution of the sand
divers and a possible direct development without a planktonic larva, a rare thing in coral reef fishes.

   216                         16:45 Saturday                               CF3                                /\XL
Characterization of feeding types of Northwest Atlantic shelf fishes.                  R.A. Rountree. University of
Massachusetts-Amherst, 48 Oregon Rd., Mashpee, MA 02649, USA; N.J. McHugh, W.L. Michaels, C.G. Milliken and
R.M. Yetter, NMFS, Northeast Fisheries Science Center, 166 Water St. Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA.
Food habits data collected on Northeast Fisheries Science Center groundfish surveys between Nova Scotia and
Cape Fear from 1981-1990 were analyzed to categorize abundant species info feeding types (e.g., piscivorus,
molluscivonjs, etc..), and to examine changes in feeding types through ontogeny. Over 83,000 stomach samples
from 51 species (13 elasmobranch, 36 teleost, and 2 cephalopod species) were included in the analysis. Predator
feeding types representing primary reliance on Annelida (Cl^tocephalus cynoglossus, Pleuronectes americanus
and Pleuronectes ferrugineus}, Arthropoda (9 species including 4 > 80%: Sebastes fasciatus. Scomber scombrus.
Raja senta, and Mustelus canis}, Mollusca (Myliobatis freminvillei and Merlucdus albidus}, Echinodermata
{Hippoglossoides platessoides'), and Fish (17 species including 4 > 90%: Pomatomus saltatrix, Carchaihinus
plumbeus, Synodus foetens, and Lophius americanus} were found. Other prey groups were relatively unimportant.
The remaining 18 species did not rely primarily on any one group. We also describe feeding types based on the
observed patterns of change among 5-10 cm predator size classes. For example, a primary piscivore (e.g. Lcfihius
americanus} relies predominately on fish throughout its sampled size range, while a positive secondary piscivore
increases (e.g., Meriuccius bilinearis, Gadus morhua}, and a negative secondary piscivore decreases (Pomatomus
saltatrirl), its reliance on fish as it grows.   217                         17:00 Saturday                              CF3                                AXL
The Influence of riparian buffer strips on fishes; are we measuring the right things? G.S. Hellman and J.O.
Harper. Institute of Ecology. University of Georgia. Athens. GA 30602 USA; D.B. Jones III. CH2M Hill. 115 Perimeter
Center Place NE. Atlanta. GA 30346 USA; P.V. Bolstad. Department of Forest Resources. University of Minnesota.
St. Paul. MN 55108 USA.
Discussions of the influence of riparian vegetation on stream health focus on the width of such buffer zones. Policy
decisions and environmental regulations similarly use riparian width as the metric of importance. We sampled
fishes and stream habitats in 12 stream segments downstream from deforested riparian patches 0 - 5.6 km long, all
downslope from densely forested watersheds. We found that the strongest predictors of fish abundance and
occunenca were area and particularly length of the riparian patch; patch width was a relatively poor predictor of fish
occurrence. Limited riparian clearing may cause minor disturbance to the fish assemblage, but streams in even a
heavily forested watershed cannot tolerate disruption of the riparian zone of much more than 1 km in length.
Riparian buffer length should be given stronger consideration in stream protection and restoration plans.




   218                         08:00 Sunday                                  17                               QVC
Sensory mechanisms underpinning feeding behavior In elasmobranchs. J.C. Montgomery. School of Biological
Sciences, University of Auckland; C. Thornbum, Kelly Tarlton's Underwater World, Auckland.
Elasmobranchs have some sophisticated feeding strategies, ranging from tail clipping bill-fishes, to locating
concentrations of patchily distributed prey. These strategies are underpinned by an equally sophisticated array of
sensory systems. To fake one example, many rays feed on buried bivalves, and dig where the prey densities are
high (Hine ef al. 1997). Behavioral studies (Montgomery and Skipworth, 1997) illustrate the potential importance of
mechanosensory systems in this feeding behavior. Both mechanosensory and electrosensory systems share a high
level of sensitivity, to the extent that behaviorally relevant inputs could be swamped by self-generated noise. One
interesting aspect of the sensory biology of elasmobranchs is that hindbrain signal processing effectively resolves
this problem (Montgomeryand Bodnzick, 1994).




   219                         08:15 Sunday                                  17                              QVC
Selective foraging behaviour of basking sharks on zooplankton in tidal fronts. D.W. Sims and V.A. Quayle,
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Plymouth. Drake Circus. Plymouth. PL4 8AA. U.K.
 Individual and grouped basking sharks {Cetorhinus maximus} filter-feeding on zooplankton at the water's surface
were tracked visually together with zooplankton sampling from their feeding paths. Along tidal slicks they exhibited
area-restricted searching behaviour and actively selected areas containing high densities of large zooplankton
above a threshold level. Basking sharks remainerf in the most profitable patches transported by tidal currents for up
to 27h and moved between patches over 24-48h periods. Between years, the location of shark foraging areas
changed according to ths effects of prevailing weather conditions on frontal boundary sharpness and the
maintenance of frontal upwellings. Our results snow that basking sharks are selective filter-feeders on specific
zooplankton assemblages and therefore useful as biological indicators of abundance trends in zooplankton species
influenced by climatic fluctuations of the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO).

   220                          08:30 Sunday.                                  IT                              QVC
Evolutionary Innovations in the feeding mechanism of elasmobranchs. C.D. Wilga. Department of Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology. University of California. In/ine. Irvine. CA 92697 USA; P.C. Wainwright, Department of
Biological Science, , Florida State Univeristy, Tallahassee, FL 32306 USA; P.J. Motta, Department of Biology,
University of South Florida, 4202 Fowler Ave., Tampa. FL 33620 USA.
A major conclusion from comparative studies of feeding mechanisms in lower vertebrates is that some of the
biomechanical couplings involved in mouth opening have been retained throughout evolution. However, recent
studies of the jaw mechanism indicate that elasmobranchs differ from other lower vertebrates in that the
geniohyoideus coupling is the primary mechanism for lower jaw depression rather than the rectus cervicus coupling.
In addition, previous studies of the feeding mechanism in lower vertebrates indicate that structural differences among
taxa may arise by the addition of a novel stnrcture or as a result of modification of the existing musculoskeletal
apparatus. Accompanying such changes, the ancestral motor pattern may be retained or the timing of motor activity
may be altered. Evolutionary innovations in the musculoskeletal apparatus mediating upper jaw protrusion in
elasmobranchs has involved both the addition of a novel feature, the dorsal preorbitalis coupling, and by the
modification of an existing structure, the levator palatoquadrafi coupling, while retaining the ancestral system, the
ventral preorbitalis coupling. These changes in the musculoskeletal apparatus have Involved conservation of the
motor pattern in the ancestral mechanism and alteration of the motor pattern in the modified mechanism.




   221                          08:45 Sunday                                  17                               QVC
Suction feeding in sharks: a kinematic analysis of feeding in the nurse shark, Ginglymostoma cirratum. PJ._
Motta. University of South Florida, 4202 East Fowler Ave., Tampa, Florida, 33620 U.S A.
Despite relatively simple feeding mechanisms, sharks exhibit a variety of feeding types. Ancestral cladodont sharks
presumably grasped and possibly swallowed their prey whole. Modern sharfe have radiated to include biting,
gouging and biting, ram-feeding, suction-feeding, filter-feeding, and crushing types. Convergence and specialization
for suction feeding have arisen in a variety of divergent extant taxa. The orectolobiform nurse shark, Ginglymostoma
diratum, is a specialized and apparently obligate suction feeder. Kinematic analysis from high speed video of five
sharks reveals a conservative feeding sequence involving mandible depression and labial cartilage protrusion,
followed by mandible elevation and labial cartilage retraction. The expansive anti compressive phases are very rapid,
with a mean duration of 92 ms. Similar to other elasmobranchs, there is significant variability among sharks in nine
kinematic variables. Within sharks, bite durations are very constant as the sharks become satiated. The suction
feeding nurse shark differs from ram feeding carcharhinid sharks by its short and relatively constant durations of
mouth expansion, minimal contribution of palatoquadrate protrusron and cranial elevation, reduced dentition,
formation of a laterally enclosed and anteriorly directed mouth, and hypertrophied abductor muscles. Continuing
studies seek functional and evolutionary patterns in shark feeding.




 . 222                          09:00 Sunday                                  17                               QVC
Mechanics and modulation of prey capture in generalists vs. specialist predators: a kinematic comparison
using two carcharhiniform sharks. L.A. Ferry-Graham. University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-2525 USA.

Recent work on teleosts suggests that attack kinematics (= behaviors) may be modified by a predator based on
specific attributes of the prey item Sharks are generally presumed to be highly visual predators and, thus, it is
reasonable to expect that they are also capable of such modulation. Work on swellsharks, Cephalosc^lium
ventriosum, however, indicated that prey size did not induce modulation. To determine the generality of this finding, I
investigated the effect of both prey size and elusivify on prey capture kinematics in a species with a more
generalized diet, the leopard shark, Triakis semitasciata. Sharks were filmed using high speed video feeding on two
sizes of ths same prey (shrimp pieces) and two mors elusive prey (earthworms and live mud shrimp). In leopard
sharks, size effects were noted for kinematic parameters related to buccal cavity expansion. Elusivity effects were
not detected for any parameters, but a performance consequence was also not detected with increasingly elusive
prey. These studies cumulatively suggest that rather than possessing a single attack behavior, generalists are
capable of kinematic modulation. They also suggest that the phrase ‘master of none* that is typically used to
describe a 'jack of all trades' generalist may not apply.A review of South African feeding studies of elasmobranch fishes: Perspectives and future directions. M.J.
Smala. Port Elizabeth Museum, P.O. Box 13147, Humewood, 6013, South Africa.
A review of the South African literature over ths last decade shows that more than 20 papers have been published
dealing with elasmobranch feeding, although many were part of general studies of their biology. They describe the
feeding of more than 50 elasmobranch species based on Identification of recently ingested prey. Accurate prey
Identification was possible in many studies using digestion-resistant prey hard parts such as cephalopod beaks and
fish otoliths, which allowed mote precise understanding of the impact of each species. The relationship between
predator size and prey choice is crucial but was often not described. Although such studies provide insights into
prey taken, on their own they are poor reflections of the complex interactions between predator and prey over time.
Studies of predator/prey interactions in the wild have been initiated and such studies are vital to clearer
understanding of predation. The large size of most chondrichthyans limits their suitability in laboratory based
experimental studies, but the rapid advances in the technology of electronic tracking devices is facilitating remote
data collection in ths wild, thereby augmenting direct obsenrations. This promising area of research has the potential
to clarify details of behaviour and feeding ecology that otherwise would be unobtainable.




   224                          09:30 Sunday        ..   . .         . .      ,17 ... ,                         OVC
Dietary changes associated with life history and sex for the sevengill shark: Implications for Intraspecific
comp^ition and resource partitioning. D.A. Ebert. US Abalone, P.O. Box 254, Davenport, CA. 95017, USA.

Dietary changes associated with life history stage and sex for the sevengill shark are analysized and discussed. Data
collected over a 15 year period were used to analyze ths sevengill shark's dietary habits. The size categories were
grouped so as to approximate this shark's life history stage; juvenile, adolescent, and adult. In addition, the diet of
male and female sharks of each life history stage was compared to note any differences between the sexes. Dietary
changes associated with an elasmobranchs life history and sexual stage of development may explain how food
resources within a given territory are partitioned such that competiton between conspecifics at different stages of life
may be reduced. A reduction in competition between conspecifics may have evolved to ensure that resource
partitioning and cannibalism would be reduced between conspecifics at different stages of life. Thus increasing
survivorship for the species during the critical early stages of life. The implications of dietary changes as related to
life history and sexual stage of development may be complex and far reaching, yet may play a critical role in the
success of elasmobranchs as a group.




   225. -                       09:45 Sunday                                  17                               OVC
The feeding ecology of elasmobranch fishes from the British Isles. J.R. Ellis and S J. Rogers, CEFAS Fisheries
Laboratory, Pakefleld Road, Lowestoft,, Suffolk, NR33 OHT, U.K.
The diets of inshore elasmobranchs from the waters of ths British Isles are reviewed from historical and
contemporary data. The feeding habits of ten of these species (Scyliorhinus canicula, Scylioihinus stellaris, Mustelus
asterias, G^eoriiinus galeus, Squab'na squab’na, Raja brachyura, R.clavata, R.microocellata, R.montaqui and
R.naevus) are discussed in relation to their comparative feeding ecology, their distributions in the Irish Sea and
English Channel, the demersal faunal assemblages to which they belong and their dentition.

Tapeworms as Indicators of elasmobranch feeding biology. J.N. Caira. Department of Ecology and Evolutionary
Biology, Univeisity of, Connecticut, Storrs, CT USA.
Tapeworms are potentially valuable indicators of elasmobranch feeding biology because their life cycles require
more than one host species and transmission between these host species is accomplished through predation. Thus,
tapeworms enter their elasmobranch hosts when the intermediate hosts in which they reside as lanrae are consumed
by elasmobranchs. The lack of life cycle data and lack of infonnation on degree of specificity for their final
Intermediate hosts currently limits the specific predictive value of tapeworms. However, some generalizations can be
made from the complete tapeworm assemblage observed in a host. Inconsistencies in the tapeworm assemblages
of related elasmobranch species can provide indirect evidence of differences in food habit. For example, the
tapeworms of megamouth are fully consistent with this shark's status as a filter feeder rather than an apex predator.
Changes in the tapeworm fauna of a host species over time may reflect age related changes in diet. For example,
the differences in the tapeworm fauna between small and large individuals of the Atlantic nurse shark may be
indicative of a shift in food habit. Depending on their specificity tor their intermediate hosts, tapeworms may act as
indicators of specific prey species consumed by a host species or Individuals.




   227                          10:45 Sunday                                   IT                               OVC
Standardized diet compositions and trophic levels of sharks. E. Cortes. Institute for Fishery Resource Ecology,
National Marine Rsheries Service/Florida State University, 3500 Delwood Beach Road, Panama City, FL 32408,
USA.
Sharks are marine consumers believed to occupy top positions in marine food webs. But surprisingly few
quantitativo estimates of trophic levels (TL) exist for this group. With the hope to better define the ecological role of
sharks in marine communities, this paper presents standardized diet compositions and trophic levels for a suite of
species. Dietary compositions were calculated from published quantitative studies using a weighted average index.
TL values of the eleven food types used to characterize the diet were obtained from published accounts and used to
calculate fractional trophic levels for 151 species representing seven orders and 21 families. Sharks as a group are
tertiary consumers (TL>4), and significant differences were found among six orders compared, attributable mainly to
differences between orectolobiformes and all other orders. Among four families of carcharhiniform sharks,
carcharhinids had significantly higher TL than triakids and scyliorhinids, but not sphymids. When compared to TL for
other top predators of marine communities obtained from the literature, mean TL for sharks was significantly higher
than for seabirds, but not for marine mammals. Trophic level and body size were positively correrated, with the fit
increasing when the three predominantly planktivorous species were omitted and when considering carcharhinids
only.




   228                          11:00 Sunday                                   17                                OVC
Review of rate of consumption, food transit and digestive efficiency in sharks.              B.M. Wetherbee. Zoology
Department, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, USA.
Sharks are important apex consumers In the marine environment and quantification of energy flow through sharks is
important for understanding their impact in marine ecosystems. However, there have been relatively few studies on
rates of consumption (daily ration) in sharks and it is difficult to generalize about the role of sharte in the flow of
energy in an ecosystem. Estimates of the daily ration of sharks generally either incorporate data on the duration and
rate of food emptying from the stomach and field observations on prey items ingested, or involve bioenergetic
models based on a balanced energy budget. Several factors that may influence rates of consumption are poorly
understood in elasmobranchs. There have been few studies on the efficiency of food digestion, absorption and
conversion to growth, and the passage of food through the digestive tract, despite the importance of these factors on
energy flow through the trophic level occupied by sharks. This study reviews the current state of knowledge on rates
of consumption, rates of food transit through the stomach and entire digestive tract, and the efficiency with which
ingested food is converted to energy stored as growth in sharks.5K6.
The Spiny dogfish is the most abundant shark in B.C. waters with biomass estimated to be approxitnateiy 200,000t.
Freauenting ^i depths within coastal shelf and slope habitats, the dogfish is a significant predator within NE Pacific
ecosystems impacting a wide variety of vertebrate and invertebrate taxonomic groups spanning serveral trophic
levels In this paper we summarize the feeding habits of the spiny dogfish in B.C. waters analyzing several data sets
collected during the 197O's and 198O's. and comparing them to published literature. In particular, we examine the
spatial and temporal variability in dogfish feeding habits and discuss the importance of recognizing bias when
attempting to estimate consumption rates of dogfish prey.




   230                          11:30 Sunday                                  17.                              ovc
Captive feeding biology of elasmobranchs. H.F. Mollet, Monterey Bay Aquarium, 886 Cannery Row, Monterey,
CA 93940, USA.
We observed large food consumption of 7.1 (s.e. 0.7, n = 17) percent body-mass per day for a captive juvenile
pelagic stingray Dasyatis violacea (disc width 44.4 cm, PIT tag # AVID 017-085-067), in a holding pool kept at 20
»C. This confirmed earlier results in the 4600 m’Outer Bay Water Exhibit of the Monterey Bay Aquanurn when 3
iuvenile pelagic stingrays were displayed for three months. It suggests possible large differences in food
consumption and con’esponding grow^ rates between captive and wild pelagic stingrays. Food consuniption and
growth rates of juvenile elasmobranchs in captivity are compared with those in the wild. The dieta^ requiremerns ot
captive temperate wafer sharks in a semi-open sea water system and pelagic stingrays in a nearly closed system
are compared with results for elasmobranchs In other aquaria.




 Measuring food consumption in elasmobranch fishes has proven to be a challenge, arid has resulted in the use of a
 variety of methods. In recent years, bioenergetics models have increased in populanty and cornpleaty. These
 models take into account energetic costs of living (metabolism, wastes, and growth) in order to estimate
 consumption requirements. Bioenergetics models have been used to estimate consurnption rates for a numter rn
 different species including lemon, sandbar, greyreef, galapagos, tiger, bull, spiny dogfish, scalloperl hamineihead
 sharks, and spiny butterfly ray. Like all models, output is reliant on the quality of input data, thus dyed
 measurements of the costs of living and how costs vary with environmenta variables and body size are needed. A
 complete model has been assembled for the lemon shark, which through laboratory and field rese^h has showri
 good cross-validation. However, accuracy of some models may be questioriable due to inclusioii ^^ta horn oUier
 species or by using laboratory data alone. Recent advances in telemet^ry techniques and captive husb^diy may
 offer new opportunities for estimating energetic parameters in both the field and laboratory. Bioenergetira models
 may also be useful in quantifying the ecological association of elasmobranchs on habitats and prey populations.




                                                                              attd
 Mu                     , *Centro de Bki^ogb             , Facutdede de Ciincias, Onivertidade de Ltsboa, P 1700
 Lisboa, Portugal.;         Nacional de Ciencias Natur^., Josd Gufidtrez Ab^al 2. 28006 Madrid, Spain.; J.
 Bosch, Dept, of Zoology. University of Texas, Austin TX 78712. USA.
 Midwife toads are a primitive group of anurans with parental care and highly simplified vocal communication.
 Several populations of Alytes have been studied in continental Spain since1987. The distributions of call
 characteristics overlapped between different population and species. The covariance between temperature and call
 duration varied between populations of different taxonomic groups. Large male reproductive advantage was found.
 Phonotaxis tests showed that calls with lower frequencies (emitted by larger males) were more attractive to females
 than calls with high frequencies. In syntopic populations of the two species there was no sign of character
 displacement in the male calls, but female preference was different than in allopatric situations. Males increase their
 calling ratewhen exposed to a nearby competitor. The response is different accordingto competitor's size and

Much of the communication behavior of anuran amphibians and other vertebrates takes place in the context of
reproduction. Many aspects of communication are dependent on, influen^d by, hormones associated with
reproductive state. Less clearly appreciated is the fact that communication signals influence hormonal state in a
variety of vertebrates. Communication and endocrine state should therefore be considered rnutu^ly tpteraOTng
systems. We have used anuran amphibians as a model for investigating this interaction. Our results indicate that the
frog auditory system (carrying information about vocal communication signals) connects with several areas of the
basal forebrain. Some of these areas contain gonadotropin releasing hormone cells while others contain populations
of catecholamine neurons. The latter populations are sensitive to circulating sex steroid honnones, and may be
involved in some aspect of reproductive endocrinology or behavior. The strong connections between auditory and
endocrine systems in frogs suggest that the reception of communication signals may influence gonads state,
^periments exposing frogs to conspecific calls support this. Males exposecf to conspecific calls showed larger
testes and changes in testes histology compared to control animals. In frogs, therefore, vocal communication signals
trigger changes in reproductive physiology as well as reproductive behavior.




   233__________                 08:45 Sunday                           .   .    14                                TWr
The use of interactive playback and call monitoring to study acoustical interactions in frogs.              J.d. Schwartz,
Division of Biological Sciences, Tucker Hall, University of Missouri, Columbia, Mo. 65211 USA.
 Male anurans of many species advertise for mates vocally in dense aggregations where they may also interact
aggressively with competitors. Recently, sophisticated experimental techniques Iwe been used to address
questions about the proximate and ultimate bases of vocal behavior of these animals. For example, with iriteraofive
playback an an^og or computer-based call synthesizer Is made to respond to a calling male after user-spectned time
delays. I will discuss how 1 have used this methodology in work on call timing and aggressive behavior. Our
understanding of the calling dynamics of choras members has also benefited from the use of rnulti-charyiel
equipment to monitor the vocal behavior of two or more males. By using such a system in my studies of Hyra
mcroceiiiala in Panama, I have found that males respond primarily to their nearest neighbors in the chonjs. These
results agree with recent findings on acoustically signaling insects. The behavior of rnales minirnizes signal overly
with individuals whose calls are most likely to seriously impair their ability to attract a female. I will also discuss data
on vocal interactions among male H. versicolor obtained in an artificial pond where my colleagues and I have
manipulated chorus density.



                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                               i



Xenopus laevis is a nocturnal Pipid whose native habitat is the murky ponds of South Africa. Two vocal behaviore
had been characterized: the advertisement call of sexually receptive males and the release call (ticking) of sexu^ly
unreoeptive females. We have recently described an additional vocal signal, a fertility advertisement called
rapping, given by females just prior to oviposition. Rapping is an acoustic aphrodisiac that stimulates m^e calling
and phonotaxis. Field and laboratory obsenzations suggest that calling is confined to only one or two rnaes at any
one time, even in densely populated ponds. We have recorded several male/male vocalizations (e.g. chirping and
growling) that might serve to establish amale vocal hierarchies at the onset of the breeding season. I mil discuss
the significance of these calls in reproductive interactions and the cellular and molecular mechanisms that contnbute
to the sexually differentiated vocal repertoire.




 nwaiicaoi* eif nw eermt «|!rine it) wjkm Btfwopian pcqMifetliem e( Bast Wean snmN bttrb (Avtos
 oaftjdlftiosus}: poralM mierocvoluiionary dwrm or apectation? A.S. Gohibteov and E.Y. Krysanov, Severtsov
 Institute of Ecof^ and Evokriion, Moscow 117071, Russia; P. BererKlzen and W.W. Oimmick, Museum of Natural
 History, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, 66045, U.SJK.
 Barbus paludinosus, a diploid, small African barb species is widely distributed from South Africa to the Hom of
 Africa. It was previously reported from the Ethiopian Rift Valley and the closely related species, B. humilis, was
 reported from Lake Tana. We found B. paludinosus in the upper reaches of the White Nile, Blue Nile, and Omo River
 drainages. This species normally has a strong serrated spine in the dorsal fin. At two localities in the upper reaches
 of the White Nile and Omo tributaries, populations are characterized by a greatly reduced dorsal spine. In the same
 drainages, barbs with the nonnal dorsal spine morphology occur about 20 ton downstream. The borderline betweeen
 forms with normal and reduced dorsal spine morphology apparently coincides with the upper limit of distribution of
 the hexapioid large barb species, the only potential predator in the naturally   235                          10:45 Sunday                                  .14                              .   THN
Communication and matbig in the midwife toads (A/ytes obstelrlcans and Alytes cistemasll). Ten years of
studies. R. Mdrouez**. "Centro de Biologia Amblental, Faculdade de Cldncias, Universidade de Usboa, P 1700
Lisboa, Portugal.; “’Museo Naclonal de Ciencias Naturales., Jose Gutidn'ez Abascal 2. 28006 Madrid, Spain.; J.
Bosch, Dept, of Zoology. University of Toxas, Austin TX 78712. USA.
Midwife toads are a primitive group of anurans with parental care and highly simplified vocal communication.
Several populations of Alytes have been studied in continental Spain since1987. The distributions of call
characteristics overlapped between different population and species. The covariance between temperature and call
duration varied between populations of different taxonomic groups. Large male reproductive advantage was found.
Phonotaxis tests showed that calls with lower frequencies (emitted by larger males) were more attractive to females
than calls with high frequencies, tn syntopic populations of the two species there was no sign of character
displacement in the male calls, but female preference was different than in allopatric situations. Males increase their
calling ratewhen exposed to a nearby competitor. The response is different accordingto competitor's size and
competitor's calling rate. Call alternation between males is non-random. Although call overlap affects negatively
female preference, call alternation does not decrease call overlap. Many of the differences observed in acoustic^
competition can be related with thedifferences In mating season length between species, and with thedifferences in
selective pressures that these two scenarios incorporate (male acoustical competition, and female choice based in
both dynamic and static call characteristics).




   236                          11:30 Sunday                                    14                                 THN
Evolutionary aspects of mating call variation In the diplold-tefraploid complex of Bufo virldls. C. Giacoma
and S. Castellano, Oipartimento di Biologia Animate, Universita di Torino, Via accademia Albertina, 17, 10123
Torino. Italy.
The asian green toads have been profitably employed as a model for the study of the evolution of vocalizations by
comparing diploid, triploid and tetrjqiloid green toads on the basis of morphometrical and acoustical parameters.
Since in green toads advertisement calls produced by males play an important role in mate choice, particular
attention is given to their differences. Diplcrid toads show signficantly larger body size and proportionally larger head
and shorter limbs than both tetrapioids and triploids, whereas no evident morphometrical differences were observed
between triploids and tetrapioids. Diploid advertisement calls have spectral and temporal properties that signiticantly
differ from those of both triploid and tetrapioid advertisement calls. Diploids produce significantly longer calls with
higher pulse-rates and lower frequencies than those of tetrapioids. Although strong associations are found between
some temporal and spectral call parameters and body size of the calling male, our analyses demonstrate that the
observed differences in advertisement calls cannot be explained as the by-product of body size differentiation only.
We address the question of the factors that could be responsible for these differences: whether they are a direct
consequence of poliploidy or, whether they should be seen as the result of an evolutionary process of diversification.




  .■237 .                    . 08:00 Sunday                                  CF5                       .   .       CHM
Testing morphometric theories on phylogenetic and environmental hypotheses: examples from characid and
atherinopsid fishes. B. Chemoff. Department of Zoology Field Museum Roosevelt Rd. at Lakeshore Drive
Chicago, IL 60605 USA.
The diversity of sizes and shapes within and among groups of fishes is one of the principal features of their
evolutionary history. To understand as much as possible about the history of size and shape evolution, two
important components must be explored: phylogeny and environment. The evolution of size and shape have often
been discussed in the context of development^ theories involving differential growth (allometry), differential timing
(heterochrony), developmental integration, etc. The purpose of this presentation will be to examine ways in which
developmental theories of size and shape diversity are tested on phylogenetic and environmental hypotheses. The
data comprise ontogenetic series of landmarks from clades of characid (Bryconops) and atherinopsid {Atherinella}
fishes, fit to a reference form, from which the relative waqis and relative-warp scores are calculated. Phylogenetic
and environmental components of fomi change among species within clades is analyzed from both partial least
squares confirmatory factor analyses. The results show that in contrast to expectations derived from the literature,
large amounts of the variance in form-change among species are explained by phylogenetic hypotheses of species
relationships.

   238                         08:15 Sunday                                  CF5                            ,   CHM
Reduction of the dorsal spine in some Ethiopian populations of East African small barb {Barbus
paludinosusy. parallel microevolutionary changes or speciation? A.S. Golubtsov and E.Y. Krysanov, Severtsev
Institute of Ecology and Evolution, Moscow 117071, Russia; P. Berendzen and W.W. Dimmick, Museum of Natural
History, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, 66045, U.SJ\.
Barbus paludinosus, a diploid, small African barb species is widely distributed from South Africa to the Hom of
Africa. It was previously reported from the Ethiopian Rift Valley and the closely related species, B. humilis, was
reported from Lake Tana. We found B. paludinosus in the upper reaches of the White Nile, Blue Nile, and Omo River
drainages. This species normally has a strong serrated spine in the dorsal fin. At two localities in the upper reaches
of the White Nile and Omo tributaries, populations are characterized by a greatly reduced dorsal spine. In the same
drainages, barbs with the normal dorsal spine morphology occur about 20 Iot downstream. The borderline betweeen
forms with normal and reduced dorsal spine morphology apparently coincides with the upper limit of distribution of
the hexapioid large barb species, the only potential predator in the naturally depauperated fish communities
inhabiting the upper reaches of the both nver drainages. The distance between locations where the form with
reduced dorsal spine occurs Is more than 200 km. These locations are separated by ths drainage system of a large
tributary of the Blue Nile, where only the normal form was found. The morphological description of the Ethiopian
populations of B. paludinosus with and without dorsal spine is presented. In order to test hypothesis about
independent reduction of ths dorsal spins in barbs from ths two distant locations ths karyological and mtDNA
comparisons wsrs mads.




   239                          08:30 Sunday                                  CF5                               CHM
Morphological differentiation between populations of the frecklebelly madtom, Noturus munitus (Teteostei:
Ictaluridae). D.A. Neely. P.M. Harris and R.L. Mayden, Biodiversity and Systematics, Box 870345, The University of
Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0345 USA.
The upper Coosa River basin poses a particularly perplexing biogeographic problem; it harbors isolated populations
of many species of fishes otherwise found below the Fall Line. Over 17 species exhibit this distributional pattern to
some degree. The already recognized high degree of endemism in the drainage {Pemina antesella, P. Jenkinsi,
Etheostoma etowahae, E. scotd, etc.) suggests the possibility of cryptic species in other, more 'Iwidespread' taxa.
We examined morphometric and meristic variation across the range of the frecklebelly madtom, Noturus munitus.
The populations in ths Etowah and Conasauga Rivers possess a unique suite of morphological characters, including
differences in shape and pigmentation, when compared with populations from the Peart, Cahaba, and Tombigbee
Rivers. We are in the process of analyzing genetic variation within this species and other closely related members of
Rabida to identify phylogenetic relationships within this complex. Conservation and biogeographic implications will
be discussed.




   240                          08:45 Sunday                                 CFS         .        .   .    ,    CHM
Did vicariance mold phenotypes of cyprinid fishes In western North America? Evidence from the Gila River
basin of Arizona. M.E. Douglas and W.L. Minckley, Department of Biology and Museum, Arizona State University,
Tempe AZ 85287-1501 USA; B.D. DeMarais, Oklahoma Biological Survey, University of Oklahoma, Norman OK
73019 USA.
Patterns of morphological variation in a group of western North American cyprinid fishes (the 'Gila robustd complex
of the Gila River basin of Arizona and New Mexico) has long puzzled fish taxonomists. Three different forms, (G.
robusta, G. intermedia, and G. nigra) are recognized, yet their basin-wide distributions are a disjunct mosaic. Several
hypotheses have been offered to accommodate this aberrant pattern: ecotypy/ecophenotypy (i.e., individual or
populational response to local conditions), hybridization/intergradation (i.e., gene flow between differentiated species
or races); and vicariance (an historical explanation related to regional hydrographic evolution). To represent these
hypotheses, 33 sample locations were scored within the basin with regard to stream size, stream elevation, stream
barriers, and paleodrainage pattern (the latter accomplished by supenmposing sites onto maps depicting drainage
patterns during six different geologic epochs). Moqihometric data, collected from 25 individuals at all 33 sites, were
then contrasted against the 9 test matrices using two- and three-way Mantel tests. A vicariance model was the only
hypothesis proficient in explaining extant diversity of fish phenotypes. Of those reconstructions used in this model,
only the Pliocene epoch was significantly associated with extant distributions of phenotypes.       241                        09:00 Sunday                                  CF5                               CHM
    Coevolutlonary hypotheses and evolution of mate discrimination in a gynogenetic species complex of
    Amazon mollies. L.A. Dries. Dept, of Zoology. University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712 USA.

    Gynogenetic female Amazon mollies (Poedlia formosa) mate with sexual males (P. latipinna} for success^
    reproduction Studies show that of males distinguish between conspecific females and gynogens, and preferentially
    mate with the former. However, the existence of gynogens indicates mate discrimination is imperfect. The Red
    Queen Hypothesis has been applied to this system suggesting the evolution of mate recognition in is a
    coevolutionary "arms race'; the lack of genetic contribution by males to gynogenetic offspring imposes selection for
    male discrimination that favors sexual females. This, in turn, imposes selection on gynogens to evolve characters
    that override male discrimination. This assumes gynogenetic females have evolved since their origination. Amazons
    originated with a hybridization between P. mexicana and P. latipinna at least several thousand years ago. If a
    coevolutionary hypothesis is true, extant gynogens should differ from ancestral gynogens. In ^s study first
    generation sexual hybrids were used as an analog for the ancestral gynogens to test this hypothesis. The predictions
    are gynogens will have an enhanced ability to attract sexual males, males will prefer gynogens over hybnds, and
    females will differ in agonistic behavior. The results of this study do not support these predictions. This suggests
    application of such hypotheses to gynogenetic systems be preceded by studies documenting the presence of
    evolutionary change in the species of interest.




       242        ..               09:15 Sunday                       .     .    CF5             . ..             CHM
    Evolutionary relationships of the species of the genus Paralabrax (Serranidae, Perciformes) based on
    morphological and molecular data. G.A. Herrera. Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County, Section of
    Vertebrates (Ichthyology), 900 Exposition Blvd., Los Angeles. CA 90007 USA.
    The sandbasses of the genus Paralabrax are New World fishes from the Eastern Pacific and Western Atlantic.
    Because the sister group relationships of the Serranin genera related to Paralabrax were unknown, they were
    resolved first. Osteological characters of the cranium and pelvic girdle support the monophyly of Cratrnus-Paralabrax-
    Centropristls. The nine species of Paralabrax share derived features of urohyal configuration, pterygiophore stmeture
    in dorsal and anal fins, and Stnicture of lateral line scales. A dadistio analysis based on morphological and molecular
    (cytochrome b gene) data suggests an early separation of two groups. One is predominantly South Amencan and
    includes 5 species: dewegeri from the Atlantic (Venezuela-Brazil), humeralis (Chile-Peru), callaensts (Ecuador), and
    albomaculatus (Galapagos). Interestingly, the species clathratus belongs to this group but is found in the
    Northeastern Pacific. The other group is composed of 4 Northern hemisphere species: loro (Central Amenra-Baja
    California), auroguttatus, maculatofasdatus and nebulifer (which are predominantly found from Baja to Central
    California). A hypothesis of relationships is presented. The species of Paralabrax seeni to have evdved recently, in
    the last 4-10 million years, in contrast with the species of Centropristis, which appear to be significantly older.




       243                         09:30 Sunday       .    .                    ...CFS                  . .        CH^
\   Comparative biogeography of two species of poeclliid fishes from Mexico. K.-c. Chen and R.L. Borowsky,
    Department of Biology, New York University. Washington Square, NY 10003, USA.
    Patterns of geographical variation in AP-PCR (RAPD) markers were compared between two species of P^ciliid
    fishes. Thirty-one populations of the variable platyfish Xiphophonjs variatus and thirteen population of the killi^h
    Heterandria ionesi vrara studied. These species overlap in range in central-eastern Mexico, in freshwaters frorn^e
    Rio Tamesi drainage, south to the Rio Nautia. Six primers revealed 266 scoreable bands in X variatus and 189 m
    H. ionesi (163 and 124 informative characters, respectively). Parsimony analysis of the data was perfoirod in X.
    variatus by heuristic search for the shortest cladograms. The data for H. Jonesi are still being gathered,_ and a subset
    of only eight populations was analysed (exhaustive search). The results support three geographically disjunct clMes
    in each spedesi a northern clade centered in the Tamesi arainage, a south-eastern clade In the lowlands of the
    Cazones, Tecolutla, Solteros and Nautia, and a south-western clade, more upstream in these nvers. We
    hypothesize that the same geographical barriers have affected the variation In both species. Relevant geographic
    barriers are not obvious, however. We suggest that the south-eastern and south-western populations are divided by
    elevation, while the northern populations are separated from the southern populations by unsuitable habitat of slow-
    flowina waters. Il Is also worth noting that populations of X evetynae are nested entirely within the geographic range
    of the south-west clade and are indistinguishable from them. This raises the question of whether it is a valid species
    or whether all of the fish in the south-west clade might really be X. evelynae, rather than X. variatus.




                                     10:45. Sunday                                CRI                              .CHM
     Inter-populatton comparison of multiple paternity in the Trinidadian guppy.            C.D. Kelly and J.-G.J. Godin,
     Department of Biology, Mount Allison University, Sacl^lle, NB, E4L1G7.

    Multiple-male mating by females and the resulting sperm competition are widespread in animals. Benefits aocreed
    by males that inseminate many females include increased reproductive success. However, the reasons underlying
    multiple mating by females are ambiguous since a single insemination can fertilize all her ova and mating involves
    potential costs to both sexes. One such cost is an increased risk of predation. Recent studies have shown that
    animals can assess the local risk of predation and, in response to high risk, females may decrease their mate
    choosiness and males may increase their use of alternative mating tactejs. If predation risk increases the relative
    frequency of sneaky copulations in males and reduces choosiness in females, then we predict a higher frequency of
    conounenf multiple paternity per brood in females originating from high-predation populations as compared to
    females from low-predation populations. To test this hypothesis, genetic data from a polymoqjhio microsatellite locus
    was employed to conservatively estimate multiple paternity in eight populations of &ie Trinidadian guppy (Poedlia
    reticulata) differing in fish predation regime. Our data suggest that, on average, the frequency of concurrent multiple
    paternity is three times greater in high-predation populations than in low-predation populations. These results further
    suggest that predation risk reduces the variance in male mating success and thus the opportunity for sexual

  244                          09:45 Sunday              .                  CFS                              CHM
Diversity and distribution of the genus "Garra"           (PlsceszCyprInidae) in Africa.      A. Getahun**’, ’Dert.of
Ichthyology.American Museum of Natural History Central park west at 79th St.,New York, NY,10024 USA; “City
College of the City University of New York USA.
The study aims at resolving the taxonomic jumble among the African species of the genus "Garra" and establish their
present geographic distribution. Extensive field collections have been made from Ethiopian freshwater bodies
where the diversity of the genus is believed to be relatively high. Available museum specimens have been
investigated. Morphology and morphometries have been used to identify the species. According to prelimina^
results, twelve forms (species?) are recognized from Ethiopia, five of which are new. Four of the "forms" are found in
six other African countries while the remaining eight are known only from Ethiopia. ‘G.dembeensis' is the most
abundant and widely distributed species found in 75% of the drainage basins of Ethiopia and in six other African
countries. Seven other species of the genus are known to occur in ten other African countries. Generally, the genus
has so far been reported from fifteen African countries. The range is from Ethiopia in the east to Guinea iri the west
and from Chad in the north to Tanzania in the south. The historical biogeography of the genus is controversial




   245                         10:15 Sunday                       .   .    . CF4                  . . .       CHM
Female preference for trait symmetry in addition to trait size in swordtail fish. M.R. Morris, Department of
Biological Sciences, Ohio University, Athens OH 45701 USA.
Interest in fluctuating asymmetries, random deviations from perfect bilateral symmetry, has spread to studies of
sexual selection because of the intriguing idea that females could use the degree of asymmetry of a male trait to
assess the genetic quality of potential mates. The evidence that females prefer males with symmetrical sexual
signals, however, has remained controversial. A problem that applies to most previous studies is that preference for
trait size can be misinterpreted as preference for symmetry, even when overall trait size is held constant, if females
assess trait size by the largest minimum on one side. If overall trait size is equal between males, the asymmetrical
males will have the maximum and minimum trait size, and so preference to mate with symmetrical males could
actually reflect a preference to avoid males with the minimum trait on one side. Xiphophorus cortezi females
preferred males with symmetrica! bar numbers when the minimum number of bars was held constant. The strength
of female preference for the symmetrical males with fewer bars was negatively correlated with the strength of
preference the same females had for bar number. These results clearly demonstrate that females preferred trait
symmetry in addition to trait size.




   246^                         10:30 Sunday                     ..   ..     CF4                     .        CHM
Female zebrafish (Danlo rerio} prefer larger males. M. Pvren. Penn Stale Erie, Station Road, Erie, PA 16563
USA.
1 tested for female preferences of male body size in zebrafish {Danio rerio). My experimental design allowed females
to view a small and a large male in adjacent aquaria. Time that females spent near males was scored from 20 min
replays of videos. The average standard length (SL) of large males was 28 mm and small males were 22 m. The
average difference between small and large male SL in individual experiments was 6.4 rnm. Females spent
significantly more time near large males (average = 647 s) than small males (average = 550 s; ind. t-test, P < 0.02).
When female time near males was scored only if the males were adjacent to the female, females also spent
significantly more time near large males (178 s) than near small males (117 s; ind. t-lest, P < 0.05). My current
experiments are to test for female preference of male yellow coloration by filtering out yellow light from expenmental
males, and to use DNA fingerprinting to identify paternity in competitive matings.




    250                         t*-.SO Sunday                .              CF4                               CHM'
The role of choice and performance in determining the diets of Juvenile sculpins. A.E. Cook. Department of
 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of, California, Irvine; Irvine, CA 92717 USA.
Diet studies often measure selectivity, or the proportion of diet made up by specific prey types compared to their
occurrence in the environment. This measure is the result of two events: the choice to attack that prey type and
whether the attack results in a successful capture. This study quantified these two events separately in the juveniles
of three species of sculpin (Cottidae) to compare their roles in detemriining the taxonomic coposifion of the diet.
Choice showed a greater influence on the occurence of harpacticoid copepods and gammarid amphipods in the diet
than performance. Significant interspecific differences in choice of harpacticoids and gammarids were found to be
correlated with differences in the occurrence of these prey types in the diets of the three species. Performance
played a greater role in detemiining the occurrence of calanoid copepods in the diet than did choice. Species and
individuals with high capture success on calanoids did not choose to attack this prey type more often than those with
lower capture success. This study indicates that classic measures of selectivity will only reflect active choice or
avoidance when capture success on a prey type is high.H. Jonesi (163 and 124 informative characters, respectively). Parsimony analysis of the data was performed in X.
varialus by heuristic search for the shortest cladograms. The data for H. Jonesi are still being gathered, and a subset
of only eight populations was analysed (exhaustive search). The results support three geographically disjunct clades
in each species: a northern clade centered in the Tamesi drainage, a south-eastern clade in the Imviands of the Rios
Cazones, Tecolutla, Solteros and Nautla, and a south-western clade, more upstream in these rivers. We
hypothesize that the same geographical barriers have affected the variation in both species. Relevant geographic
bam'ers are not obvious, however. We suggest that the south-eastern and south-western populations are divided by
elevation, while the northern populations are separated from the southern populations by unsuitable habitat of slow-
flowing waters. It is also worth noting that populations of X evelynae are nested entirely within the geographic range
of the south-west clade and are indistinguishable from them. This raises the question of whether it is a valid species
or whether all of the fish In the south-west clade might really be X. evelynae, rather than X. variatus.




    247                          10 45 Sunday                                 CF4                               CHM
Inter-population comparison of multipls paternity In the Trinidadian guppy.              C.D. Kelly and J.-G.J. Godin,
Department of Biology, Mount Allison University, Sackville, NB, E4L 1G7.

Multiple-male mating by females and the resulting sperm competition are widespread in animals. Benefits accrued
by rriales that inseminate many females include increased reproductive success. However, the reasons underlying
multiple mating by females are ambiguous since a single insemination can fertilize all her ova and mating involves
potential costs to both sexes. One such cost is an increased risk of predation. Recent studies have shown that
animals can assess the local risk of predation and, in response to nigh risk, females may decrease their mate
choosiness and males may increase their use of alternative mating tactics. If predation risk increases the relative
frequency of sneaky copulations in males and reduces choosiness in females, then we predict a higher frequency of
concurrent multiple paternity per brood in females originating from high-predation populations as comparer] to
females from low-predation populations. To test this hypothesis, genetic data from a polymorphic microsatellite locus
was employed to conservatively estimate multiple paternity in eight populations of ths Trinidadian guppy (Poedlia
reticulata) differing in fish predation regime. Our data suggest that, on average, ths frequency of concurrent multiple
paternity is three times greater in high-predation populations than in li}w-predation populations. These results further
suggest that predation risk reduces the variance in male mating success and thus the opportuniV for sexual
selection within populations.




   248 .                        11:00 Sunday                                  CF4                               CHM
Nest defense by the exotic fish, round goby (Neogoblus melanostomus), on a shipwreck In western Lake
Erie. L.P. Corkum and R.G. Wickett, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Windsor, Windsor, ON N9B


Our obsenrations of round goby nesting behaviour on shipwrecks in the western basin of Lake Erie using a video
camera indicate that these fish spawn at much greater depths (7 m) than previously reported (< 2m). Of the species
that approached ths exposed nest (rock bass, smallmouth bass, yellow perch, logperch, round gobies), most
behavioural interactions occurred between the guarding male and other round gobies. During 12 minutes of
observation, there were 63 Instances in which round gobies approached the nest and In 4 cases, intruders fed on
eggs. In response, the guarding male approached (34 times), chased (18 times) and hit (4 times) round goby
intnjders. The response by the resident goby to the presence of rock bass (1 swam by and 7 approached) resulted in
6 approaches, 4 chases and 1 hit The resident male responded to juvenile smallmouth bass (3 swam by and 1
approached) only once by approaching the intnjder. The guarding male did not respond to either logperch or yellow
perch. We anticipate that recruitment of round gobies will increase substantially in Lake Erie owing to the presence
of artificial reefs (shipwrecks) and the ability of guarding males to defend nests effectively.




   249     .                    :11:15 Sunday                                 CF4                               CHM
Context dependent alarm behavior in the estaurine fish Fundulus heteroclitus. K.K. Parker. Duke University
Marine Laboratory, 135 Duke Marine Lab rd., Beaufort, NC 28516 USA.
Fundulus heteroclitus five in tidal creeks where predation risk varies with the structure of the microhabitat and time of
year. Structure of the microhabitat varies as a function of the tides. Accurate recognition and response to predators
is essential to the sunrival of prey. This study investigated alarm behavior of adult and juvenile estuarine fish, F.
heteroclitus. Activity was determined in response to conspecific alarm chemical in relatively deep and shallow water
(aquaria and fingerbowls). In deep water, in the fall, F. heteroclitus show container dependen alarm behavior. Both
adult and juvenile fish showed a significant decrease in activity in response to alarm chemical compared addition of
control. However, in shallow fingereowls neither adults or juveniles show a decrease In activity. Adults also show
seasonal context dependent alarm behavior. In winter adults in aquaria show no change in activity in response to
alarm chemicals. Accurate responses to alarm chemicals may be those that are modulated by context, such as
water depth, that reflects the actual risk of predation. Field experiments will determine if these results extend to the

significantly more time near large males (average = 647 s) than small males (average = 550 s; ind. t-test, P < 0.02).
When female time near males was scored only if the males were adjacent to the female, females also spent
significantly more time near large males (178 s) than near small males (117 s; ind. t-test, P < 0.05). My current
experiments are to test for female preference of male yellow coloration by filtering out yellow light from experimental
males, and to use DNA fingerprinting to identify paternity in competitive matings.




   250                          11 :-3Q Sunday                              CF4                               CHM
The role of choice and performance In determining the diets of Juvenile sculpins. A.E. Cook. Department of
Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of, California, Irvine; Irvine, CA 92717 USA.

Diet studies often measure selectivity, or the proportion of diet made up by specific prey types compared to their
occurrence in the environment. This measure is the result of two events: the choice to attack that prey type and
whether the attack results in a successful capture. This study quantified these two events separately in the juveniles
of three species of sculpin (Cottidae) to compare their roles in determining the taxonomic coposition of the diet.
Choice showed a greater influence on the oocurenoe of harpaoticoid copepods and gammarid amphipods in the diet
than performance. Significant interspecific differences in choice of harpacticoids and gammarids were found to be
correlated with differences in the occurrence of these prey types in the diets of the three species. Performance
played a greater role In detennlnlng the occurrence of calanoid copepods in the diet than did choice. Species and
individuals with high capture success on calanoids did not choose to attack this prey type more often than those with
lower capture success. This study indicates that classic measures of selectivity will only reflect active choice or
avoidance when capture success on a prey type is high.




   251    .                    11:45 Sunday                             .. CF4                                CHM
Burrow distribution and diel behavior of Pholidichthys feucotaen/a (family Pholidichthyldae) on coral reefs,
Solomon Islands. E. Clark. University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742; S. Kogge, 10600 Stoneyhill Ct.,
Silver Spring, MD 20901; T. Album, 1488 Klines Run Rd., Wrightsville, PA 17368.
  Diel behavior was studied on pairs of adults living In burrows and juveniles sharing these burrows. Juveniles retire
into burrows at dusk an emerge at dawn to break into large swarms, feeding on plankton as far as 10 m from their
home burrow at depths 4 to 34 m. Adults clean their burrows by spitting out sand and carrying out rubble. At night
neither adults nor juveniles emerge from their burrows. Burrow entrances were obsenred continuously for periods of
2 to 35 hours with low light and regular video cameras. Disturbances to their burrow entrances by other fish and a
large octopus caused only a temporary break in their cleaning activity. Heads of adults emerged the most (1/3 of
total length) and stayed out longest (1/2 min) when they were not cleaning out their burrows but appeared to look
around or lunge at other fishes. They may cannibalize their young as food. The swimming and feeding behavior of
juvenile P. leucotaenia (sometimes called ■mimic catfish") do not resemble that of the venonous catfish, Plotosus
lineatus. Sixteen reefs were surveyed at Guadalcanal, and the Honda, Russell, and New Georgia islands. P.
leucotaenia were found in all except the isolated St. Marys Island.




    252                         08:00 Sunday                                GS1                               MCN
Blennies on offshore petroleum platforms: similarity of sissemblage structure among platforms and the
effect of a hurricane. T.J. Rauch. Dept, of Biological Sciences, The University of Southern Mississippi, Box 5018
Hattiesburg, MS 30406-5018 USA.
Marine fish assemblages may be viewed as being structured by deterministic or chaotic processes. To understand
factors important in structuring an assemblage of four blenniid species (Family: Blenniidae) I collected data on their
abundance and distribution in early July 1997 on six offshore petroleum platforms. Hurricane Danny passed through
the study area 50 km offshore of the Louisiana coast in mid July. Between late August and mid-September I
collected data on nine platforms in the same area. I conducted visual censuses on diagonal cross-members of the
platforms at depths of 1,5, 10, and 15 m. Blennies displayed a distinct vertical zonation with Scartella cristate
confined to the upper 2 m and Parablennius marmoreus limited to 10-15 m depths. I used Morisita's index (Im) to
investigate blenniid assemblage similarity among platforms and the effect of the hurricane. Im values were compared
to a null model of randomly generated data. Platforms were similar in assemblage structure with three of the four
depths sampled having average Im's > 1. Pre- and post-hurricane Im's averaged greater than one in three of the four
depths sampled, indicating that this disturbance did not affect these blenniid assemblages.  253          ____________ 08:15 Sunday                            -   .    GS1                               :MCN
FAD-assocIated fishes: factors affecting aggregation size and composition.                P.A. Nelson. Department of
Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5640.
I studied near-shore, juvenile reef fishes associated with floating objects along the Pacific coast of Panarna. Using
naturally-occuring flotsam and Fish Aggregation Devices (FADs), I inade observations and conducted expenments
on factors affecting group size and species composition. Increased FAD size and the presence of fouling biota
positively affected aggregation sizes and the number of fish species present. FADs hung with model fish, lead
weights and unmanipulated control FADs did not differ significantly in aggregation size or composrtion H^ever
drifting FADs deployed with live fish {Abudefduf troscheli!) appeared to recruit.addition^ fisti more
deployed without fish. The species composition of aggregations associated with dnfting flotsam' dfl^ecI frorn
aqqregations found with anchored flotsam and anchored FADs. At an array of anchor^ FADs, species composition
was predictable over days to weeks, but showed distinct changes over a penod of months.




                                08:30 Sunday                                 GS1                          MCN
   254
Pikes and muskies: mudminnows gone bad?                J.A. Ldpez. University of Washington Fish Collection, BOX
355100, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
The phylogenetic intra-relationships of esocoid fishes have been examined repeatedly in systernatio
contradictory results. The pre-Tertiary origin of the group and low Recent diversity likely contnbute to the apparent
paucity of apomorphic characters that deMie esocoid clades. Cuirently, the Esoooidei contams too                  ‘jj®
Esocidae and Umbridae, with Esox coextensive with Esocidae, and Dallia, Novurnb^, and Umbra corrjn^ng the
Umbridae. Generally, the following inter-generic relationships are accepted: {Esox {Novumbra (Dallia, Umbra))), but
the literature abounds with conflicting evidence.
Phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequence data from the 16S rRNA and cytochrome b mitrxhondrial gei^s slror^
support a previously overlooked hypothesis of esocoid relationships. Parsimony and m^imum likehhood
show a paraphylefic Umbridae in the following set of esocoid relationships; (Umbra (Dallia
Published studies of esocoid karyotypes, allozymes, and fossils offer supporting evidence for the DNA-denyed
hypothesis. A survey of published data on esocoid anatomy may reveal previously unrecognized morphological
synapomoiphies to diagnose the newly postulated clades.




                                 08:45 Sunday                                 GS1                               MCN
   255
 The phylogenetic systematics of the Goodeidae (Cyprinodontiformes). S,A,Webb, Division of Fishes - UMMZ,
 University of Michigan. 1109 Geddes Ave,, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079 USA.
 Goodeine fishes are remarkable for the degree to which they provision developing embryos A suite of physiological
 and morphological traits permits internal fertilization, pronounced matratrophy, andI Iwe birth in misiro^I group
 from Bie central plateau of Mexico. Morphological and nucleic acid ^quence (COI) data forrn the bas s of a
 phylogenetic analysis of goodeid interrelationships. Forty-one species from 18 genera compnse thei ingroup, and
 meters of the Cyprinodontidae, Fundulidae, Poedliidae, Proteridulidae, and Ox^onecfiM are lAilized as
 outgroups to polarize character states. Monophyly of the Goodeidae, and the sister-group
 Goodeinae and Empetrichfhyinae, is supported. The Prolundulidae is supported as th® s ®J®^9™®P
 Goodeidae. Earty diversification events within the Goodeinae are not well supported, potential^ indicating rapid
 radiation of the major lineages. The evolution and biogeography of the Goodeidae will be discussed.




  A praHnrirwry phytogeneflc ane^ait of the aubfamlly Amphiprioninaa (PercHormes: Pomacentridae). KL.
  Tsog, Natural History Museum, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-24^ USA.

  The Amphiprioninae is a subfamily of marine fishes, commonly called anemonefishes, composed of two genera
  (Amphiprion and Premnas) with approximately 28 species. The phylogenetic relationships within this subfamily are
  poorty understood. Although a hypothetical set of relationships has been previously proposed, the phylogeny of the
  group has never been fully examined. Previous work has suggested that the members of this subfamily are divided
  among six species complexes. At least one representative species from all six of these complexes and three
  outgroup (pomacentrid) genera were examined. Morphological characters, primarily osteological ones, were used to
  conduct a phylogenetic analysis of tills subfamily. The preliminary results will be presented and evolution of the fish­
  anemone relationship will be discussed.

  256                          09:00 Sunday                                GS1                                MCN
Morphological diversification and developmental variation in a Bahamian pupfish specif complex.
Holtmeier. Corson Hall, Ecology and Systematics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853-2701 USA.
Variation in trophic morphology is widespread in teleosts. The sources of this variation have been explored in a
number of studies, and the genetic and environmental basis for extreme variation have been identified in a vanety
of fish. Here, I address the role development plays in producing phenotypic variation in a putabye speiss complex
of the Bahamian pupfish Cyprinodon . This taxon offers an excellent opportunity to address me ongin or
morphological variation in closely related species, because sympatrioally occurring Cyprinodon ^exhibit a striking
diversity in feeding morphology and behavior, yet putative species show only partial reproductive isolation.
Offspring from three species and their hybrids were bred in the lab, and ontogenetic trajectones of their feeding
morphology were followed until maturity. In Cyprinodon , very small differences in growth rates translate into large
differences in feeding morphology. This developmental program has implications for large-scale, macroevolutionary
patterns.




   ■257   .                    09:15 Sunday                                 GS1                               MCN.
Revision of the South American shovelnose catfishes of the genus Sorubim (Slluriformes:Pimelodidae), with
a description of two new species. M.W. Littmann. Southern Illinois University, Dept, of Zoology, Carbondale, IL
62901-6501.
The systematics and'taxonomic history of the genus Sorubim (Teleostei: Pimelodidae) is unclear because of
confusing and inadequate descriptive taxonomic literature. To assess the taxonomic status of species in the genus, I
examined 347 specimens for morphological variation, including analysis of morphometry, menstics, osteology, and
pigmentation throughout the known geographic range. An extensive literature review of the fen n^ed species
allocated to Sorubim and analysis of morphological data support the recognition of four species: Sorubim lima,
widespread in the Amazon, Parana, and Orinoco basins; S. elongatus n. sp., rxcurnng in the Essequibo, Onnoco,
and upper Amazon drainages; S. caudacuspis n, sp., endemic to the Rio Magdalena and Lago Maracaibo drainages
in Northwestern South America; and S. trigonocephalus, known only from the Rio Tapajos region in Brazil. The
taxonomic revision presented includes a redesoription of the genus, recognition of two nominal species as valid,
descriotions of two new species, a dichotomous key, and distributional data for all nominal forms. Because of the
small sample sizes available for S. trigonocephalus, future study of this species is warranted. All species of Sorubim
are significant components of the ornamental fish trade and frequently found in local markets as a source of
subsistence protein.




                                09:30 Sunday                              .. GS1                               MCN ,
    258
 Phylogenetic relationships of the superfamily Poecilioidea (Cyprinodontiformes: Teleostei) as infeyed from
 morphological data. MJ Ghedotti. Natural History Museum. University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-2454 USA,

The superfamily Poecilioidea contains approximately 300 species of fishes in two families, the An^lepidae (13 spp.)
and the Poeciliidae (approx. 287 spp.). The monophyly of this superfamily has been supported by previous studies
using morphology and DNA sequence data. However, the phylogenetic relationships within the group have been
controversial. This phylogenetic analysis of over 90 transformation series and 30 representative poecilioid species
suDOorts the moiiophyly of the two included families.The poeciliine fnbes Heterandrini, Poeciliini, and
Cnesterodontini as traditionally recognized are shown to be nonmonophyletio. The facultatively viviparous speciss
Tomeurus gracilis is nested within the poeciliine tribe Cnesterodontini and represents an evolutionary loss of obligate
viviparity. Based on the phylogeny, the genus Aplocheilichthys should be restncted to the type species,
^Ixheilichthys spilauchen, and Micropanchax should be recognized as the valid genus for most wth®
^viously placed in Aplocheilichthys. The evolution of vivipanty and pelagic lacustnne habits in this group will be
discussed.




                                 'W'U'yi                                               .____ _____________ MCN
 Phylogenetic systematics of snubnose darters (Percidae) and the evolution of male breeding color. J.C.
 Porterfield. Illinois Natural History Survey, 607 East Peabody Drive, Champaign, IL 61820, USA.
 Snubnose darters are a fascinating group of fishes in the genus Etheostoma ; breeding males exhibit some of the
 most fantastic colors found in North American fishes. The results of an analysis of complete cytochrome b DNA
 sequences (1140 base pairs) for 32 species of snubnose darters and putative dose relatives are presented.
 Topologies obtained with parsimony, distance, and maximum likelihood criteria are congnient. The phylogenetic
 hypothesis supports relationships within snubnose darters that are corroborated with other evidence, although it
 differs from previous hypotheses in basal relationships. The cytochrome b gene tree suggests that snubnose
 darters are polyphyletic, with members of the subgenus Etheostoma s.s. related to one clade, and that members of
 the £ variatum species group are not closely related to snubnose darters or to Etheostoma s.s. The phylogeny is
 used for studying the evolution of several male breeding color characters that were coded and mapped onto the tree,
 and sexual selection experiments determined that these breeding colors were important to male reproductive
 success. This combination of evidence is used to propose a role for sexual selection in the differentiation of
 snubnose darter lineages and species.The phylogenetic systematics of the Goodeldae (Cyprinodontiformes). S.A. Webb. Division of Fishes - UMMZ,
University of Michigan, 1109 Geddes Ave,, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079 USA.
Goodeine fishes are remarkable for the degree to which they provision developing embryos. A suite of physiological
and morphological traits permits internal fertilization, pronounced matrotrophy, and live birth in this natural group
from the central plateau of Mexico. Morphological and nucleic acid sequence (COI) data form the basis of a
phylogenetic analysis of goodeid interrelationships. Forty-one species from 18 genera comprise the ingroup, and
members of the Cyprinodontidae, Fundulidae, Poeciliidae, Prefundulidae, and Oxyzygonectes are utilized as
outgroups to polarize character states. Monophyty of the Goodeldae, and the sister-group relationship of the
Goodeinae and Empetrichthyinae, is supported. The Prefundulidae is supported as ths sister-group to the
Goodeldae. Early diversification events within the Goodeinae are not well supported, potentially indicating rapid
radiation of the major lineages. The evolution and biogeography of the Goodeldae will be discussed.




A preliminary phylogenetic analysis of the subfamily Amphlprlonlnae (Perclformes: Pomacontrldae). K.L.
Tang. Natural History Museum, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-2454 USA.

The Amphiprioninae is a subfamily of marine fishes, commonly called anemonefishes, composed of two genera
{Amphiprion and Prenmas) with approximately 28 species. The phylogenetic relationships within this subfamily are
pooriy understood. Although a hypothetical set of relationships has been previously proposed, the phylogeny of the
group has never been fully examined. Previous work has suggested that the members of this subfamily are divided
among six species complexes. At least one representative species from all six of these complexes and three
outgroup (pomacentrid) genera were examined. Morphological characters, primarily osteological ones, were used to
conduct a phylogenetic analysis of this subfamily. The preliminary results will be presented and evolution of the fish­
anemone relationship will be discussed.




   260                          10:30 Sunday. ,                              GS1     .                         MCN
Molecular phylogeny of the gobloid fishes. C.E. Thacker. Museum of Zoology, Division of Fishes; University of
Michigan;, Ann Amor, Ml 48109 USA.
The perdform suborder Gobioidei contains an estimated 2000 species in 270 genera, found throughout the world
oceans and freshwaters. This lineage is very diverse and reductive evolution is common, m^ng traditional
morphological systematic studies particularly difficult. In an attempt to resolve relationships among gobioid groups, I
sequenced a 2022 base pair fragment of the mitochondrial penome, comprising the entire ND1 and ND2 genes for
40 gobioid species and performed phylogenetic analysis using cladistic parsimony methods. My data set includes
representatives of the Gobiidae (including all subfamilies: Gobiinae, Gobionellinae, Oxudercinae, Amblyopinae and
Sicydiinae), Microdesmidae (both subfamilies: Microdesminae and Ptereleotrinae), Kraemeriidae and Schindleriidae;
representatives of the Eleotrididae were used as outgroup taxa. Analysis of the nucleotide data yielded a single
phylogeny for which Bremer support and jackknife indices indicated weaker support in the deeper nodes. Analysis of
translated amino add data yielded two phylogenies differing only in the placement of one taxon; this phytogeny is
congruent in many respects with pobioid relationships suggested by morphological characters. My analysis provides
a broad view of gobioid relationships and, in particular, provides evidence for the relationships of the paedomorphic
Kraemeriidae and Schindleriidae within the Gobioidei.




   261                          10:45 Sunday                        ,       GS1                               MCN .
A phylogenetic study of the neotrc^ical hypopomid electric fishes (Rhamphichthyoidea: Gymnotiformes).
J.P. Sullivan. Cornell University, Division of Biological Sciences, Section of Neurobiology and Behavior, Ithaca, NY
14853, USA.
The monophyly of the rhamphichthyoid gymnotifomns is supported by previous phylogenetic studies of gymnotiform
fishes. In contrast, the status and relationships of the constituent subgroups of the rhamphichthyoids remain pooriy
understood. The goal of this work was to determine whether the currently recognized rhamphichthyoid taxa
represent monophyletic groups and to ascertain the species-level relationships among them, with spedal emphasis
on the Family Hypopomidae Mago-Leccia, 1976. An additional goal was to gain insight into the evolution of the
species-specific electric organ discharge (EOD). A phylogenetic study of 23 fnamphienthyoid species was carried
out based on mitochondrial DNA sequence data from the portions of the 12S rRNA, 16S rRNA and cytochrome b
genes and a morphological data set. Results indicate that nominal hypopomid genera Steatogenys and Hypopygus
do not form a dade with other nominal hypopomids but strongly support the monophyly of me remaining nominal
hypopomids. Additionally, the nominal species of Brachyhypopomus form a clade with five new species. Genus
Brachyhypopomus is the sister taxon to the monotypic genus Microstemarchus which together form the sister group
to genus Hypopomus. Complex EODs and a monophasio EOD appear to have arisen within the Hypopomidae
independently of these character states in outgroup taxa.

Phylogenetic relationships of the superfamily Poecilioldea (Cyprinodontiformes: Teleostei) as Inferred from
morphological data. MJ Ghedotti. Natural History Museum, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-2454 USA.

The superfamily Poecilioldea contains approximately 300 species of fishes in two families, the Anablepidae (13 spp.)
and the Poeciliidae (approx. 287 spp.). The monophyly of this superfamily has been supported by previous studies
using morphology and DNA sequence data. However, the phylogenetic relationships within the group have been
controversial. This phylogenetic analysis of over 90 transformation series and 30 representative poecilioid species
supports the monoph^ of the two included families.The poeciliine tribes Heterandrini, Poeciliini, and
Cnesterodontini as traditionally recognized are shown to be nonmonophyletic. The facultatively viviparous species
Tomeurus gracilis is nested within the poeciliine tribe Cnesterodontini and represents an evolutionary loss of obligate
viviparity. Based on the phylogeny, the genus Aplocheilichlhys should be restricted to the type species,
Aplocheilichthys spilauchen, and Micnmanchax should be recognized as the valid genus for most of the species
previously placed in Aplocheilichthys. The evolution of viviparity and pelagic laoustnne habits in this group will be
discussed.




Phylogenetic systematics of snubnose darters (Percldae) and ths evolution of male breeding color.                 J.C.
Porterfield. Illinois Natural History Survey, 607 East Peabody Drive, Champaign, IL 61820, USA.

Snubnose darters are a fasdnating group of fishes in the genus Etheostoma ; breeding males exhibit some of the
most fantastic colors found in North American fishes. The results of an analysis of complete cytochrome b DNA
sequences (1140 base pairs) for 32 species of snubnose darters and putative dose relatives are presented.
Topologies obtained with parsimony, distance, and maximum likelihood criteria are congntent. The phylogenetic
hypothesis supports relationships within snubnose darters that are corroborated with other evidence, although it
differs from previous hypotheses in basal relationships. The cytochrome b gene free suggests that snubnose
darters are polyphyletic, with members of the subgenus Etheostoma s.s. related to one clade, and that members of
the E. variatum species group are not closely related to snubnose darters or to Etheostoma s.s. The phylogeny is
used for studying the evolution of several male breeding color characters that were coded and mapped onto the tree,
and sexual selection experiments determined that these breeding colors were important to male reproductive
success. This combination of evidence is used to propose a role tor sexual selection in the differentiation of
snubnose darter lineages and species.




   263                          11:15 Sunday              _                  GS1     , .                       MCN
Speciation studies in the Percina subgenus Swainia (Percidae: Etheostomatinae). TJ. Near. Illinois Natural
History Survey.
Hypotheses concerning modes of allopatric speciation make expHcit predictions regarding patterns of phylogenetic
and biogeographic diversification. This investigation will test allopatric speciation models using phylogenetic and
biogeographic information for the subgenus Swainia, a monophyletic group of four described species in ths genus
Parana. Complete gene sequences of the mitoohondrially encoded cytochrome b have been collected from all
species of Swainia, including individuals from multiple populations of P. phoxocephala and P. nasuta. Patterns of
nucleotide variation were investigated and phylogenetic relationships were estimated using maximum parsimony,
maximum likelihood, and distance optimality criteria. Heterogeneity of nucleotide substitution rate was examined
using both maximum parsimony relative rate tests and a likelihood ratio test. Inferred phylogenetic relationships,
biogeographic patterns, and relative amounts of nucleotide divergence are used to develop hypotheses of speciation
in Swainia.




   264                          11:30 Sunday                               GS1                               MCN
Biogeography of Australian freshwater fishes: patterns of faunal occurrence in southeastern Australia. P.J.
Unrnack. Biology Department, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ 85287-1501, USA.
This presentation is part of a wider study of the biogeography of Australian freshwater fishes. Southeastern Australia
is hereby defined as coastal drainages from the Fitzroy River through Gulf of St. Vincent, including the inland Murray
system separated from coastal drainages by the Great Dividing Range. It has the following biogeographic
relationships of fishes restricted to freshwater 1) 5 of 8 species from southern Victoria also occur in the Murray
system: and 2) 18 of 27 spedes (or spedes pairs) co-occur between coastal Queensland drainages and ttie Murray
system. The relationships of an additional 6 species endemic to the Murray system are more obscure.
Biogeographic connectivity between the Murray and surrounding drainages thus appears high. Past biogeographic
explanations for these relationships have relied heavily upon river captures, making faunal distributions easily
explained. However, the last 15 years have seen a paradigm shift in the proposed evolution of the Great Dividing
Range including evidence that river captures are either non-existent or very old (> 30-60 mba). Most patterns are
congruent with present geological scenarios although exceptions exist. The new geologic conclusions are assessed
on the basis of biological evidence and new hypotheses are provided to explain present distribution patterns.                               11:45 Sunday                                GS1                              MCN
  265 .
Phylogenetic relationships and biogeography of the malagasy cichlidae. J,S- Sparks, Museum of Zoology. Fish
Division, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079 USA.
Phylogenetic relationships of the endemic Malagasy cichHds were in^stigated uang| DNA                      ^ta and
yrtornhninnJrflt
cShttblLed       evidence PrioF atteiTiDts
                    on morpXSS             to generate
                                      evide^e,         a highly supported
                                                have been%nty               and resolvedl^ck
                                                                 paVlially successful,    phylogenetic
                                                                                              o?has    hypotnes^ rar
                                                                                                               been
attributed to muted anatomical variation and a high degree of convergence/parallelism within Cichlidae. DNA
seouence data is presented corresponding to two regions of the mitochondnal genome for a representative sarnpling
of cichlid taxa, including all of the known Malagasy cichlids. The use of molecular sequence date results in a highly
resolved ohvlooenetic hypothesis for Cichlidae. However, support for higher-level relationships is relatively weak,
and may mdroX that differentiation in ancient cichlid lineages occurred over a relatively short hme
based on DNA sequence data indicate that the Malagasy cichlids (including tee Asian 9®"“®
monophyletic that tee Etropline cichlids (Etroplus from India/Sri Lanka and Pe^efrop/us from todagarear) tom a
nSuS^^up. and that the Ptychochromine cichlids (including Oigd^ia) are a monophyleho Malagasy assemblage.
Biogeography of the Malagasy cichlids, and Cichlidae in general, will also be discussed.




                                                                            GS4                               AXL
   266                         08:00 Sunday


and Fisheries Sciences, College Station, Texas, 77843, USA.
An amohibian survey was initiated at Brazos Bend State Park. Fort Bend County, Texas to assess ane^otel
observations of anuran population declines. From Febroaiy to July 1997,12 amphibian species were documented at
the paS' Sixty-nine sites used by amphibians were identified, of which 73% confain®d Bvid®ncei of              **
does not ap^ar that amphibian species are in decline at Brazos Bend State Park. In February 1998 350 metere of
PVC Dice were installed at selected sites to evaluate the effectivness of this te^nique in regard to hylid frog
populSions. These and other sites are currently being monitoring in order to gain insight to amphibian population
dynamics at Brazos Bend State Park.




                                                                            GS4                                AXL I
    267                         08:15 Sunday
 Amphibian species distribution patterns in an agriculturally-fr^ment^ tendsrape.                           and R K-
 Swihart. Dept Foresty and Natural Resources, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907-1159, USA.
 Aooarent declines of amphibian populations in many parts of the world have caused great concern 'n/^nt^are.
 This study was conducted to determine what effects agriculturally induced fragmentation of forestsi has h^ on
 amphfwan assei^lages and their distribution in a midwestem landscape. Poteritial breed™ P?®'® ®nd uptend
 areas in 30 forest patches of various sizes and degrees of isolation were intensively sampled for amph te^s fiw
 April through August 1996 and March through August 1997. Speaes present was dr^mented by using pitfall
 trapping, anuran vocalization sunreys, cover board sampling, minnow traps, and dipnetting for larva.
 Amohibian anuran and salamander assemblages were all nonrandornly distributed across the landsc^e.'
 americancus and Hyla versicolor were ubiquitous whereas the distribution of several species      Amby^ma
 ST a f^X, Plethodon cinereus. Rana clarrritans, and R. pipiens showed significant^ne^ngK
 soecies richness was significantly associated with a weighted measure of wetland permanency (WETWGT,
 D-0 0001 WETWGTC2 p=0.0029), with forest patches which have seasonal and semi-permanent w^lands
 c^nfSninq more species. PAbundanie of amphibians was significantly associated with forest proximity (LOSPR,
 □-0 0001 LOGPRC2 p=0.0037), with more isolated patches having greater amphibian ^undance. ^e_°bse
 SistribiSon Srd degree^of nStedness exhibited by Mveral amphibians suggests that these species respond to
 iandscape-levet factors.




                                 Q3:'15 SL.»\iay     ...        __________GS4           .                      -AXL
  Impacts of tknber harvesting on surface activity bi terrestrial salamanders. S.M. Knaco. CA Haas and R L
  Kirkpatrick, Department of Fisheries and Wildlife Sciences, Virginia Tech. Blacksburg, VA 24061-0321.
 Terrestrial salamanders spend the majority of their time in cool, moist refugia underground, but must surface to
 forage and breed. Although little is known about their surface activity patterns, abundance is usually inferred by
 ■counts of surface active salamanders on wet nights. Recently, such counts have been used to assess tee impacts of
 timber hanresting on terrestrial salamanders. It is assumed in these studies that the peroent of the population active
 on the surface is not altered by the treatment. We tested this assumption by conducting a mark-recapture study on
 hanrested and control plots. We found significantly different proportions active between treatments. At one location,
 tee hanrested plot had a lower peroent active than its control (Plethodon cinereus: 4.0% vs. 9.2%, p=.O21; P.
 glutinosus: 3.8% vs. 11.7%, p=.O91). At the other location, the harvested plots had a higher percent active than their
 controls (P. cinereus: 4.2% and 3.9% vs. 1.6% and 1.3%, p=.O17). At this site, surface counts indicated there were
 more salamanders on ihe harvested plots than on tee controls, but mark-recapture estimates indicated there were
 actually twice as many salamanders on the control plots.

                               08:30 Sunday                                 GS4                                AXL
  268
Response of the herpetofaunal community to three sandhill restoration teeabnente on EgUn'
Florida. A.R. Litt. Department of Wildlife Ecology and Conservation, University of Florida, Box 110430, Gainesville,
FL 32611-430.
The longleaf pine ecosystem, once widespread in the southeastern United States, has been reduced by as riiuch as
98%. Restoration of this endangered ecosystem can be a mechanism for conservation, in ari attempt to rewrse
existing damage and create more resilient communities. Restoration metlKids implemented in sandfells rpust te
based in a deep knowledge of the ecosystem to effectively recreate and manage all aspects. ^°P®®9®®P^y;
restoration success can only be evaluated by examining community response. Since reptiles and                    ^®
occupy the ecosystem at a fairly small scale, these communities may              important indicatore of microhabi^
restoi^ion success. Previous work on herpetofaunal response to disturbance regimes has                          "J®
complexity of the effects and the importance of habitat structure. Habitat requirements for ®andhHI herpetof^na are
very diverse, demonstrating the need to closely examine these communities when making managemenr^ecisions.
My^stoidyTficus^ on reptiles and amphibia/is. is one portion of a rpulS-agency investigation of ’teree s^dhill
restoration techniques on Eglin Air Force Base, Rorida: fire, oak-speafio herbicide, and mechanic! oak fetag.
Pitfall traps and drift fences were used to capture reptiles and amphibians in restoration treatment areas, control
plots and "typical' longleaf pine sandhill areas during the summer of 1997. Animds were identified to specre^
marked, sexed, weighed, measured, and visually examined. Vegetative cover date were a so collated, ^e
obiective of this project is to examine heqjetofaunal species richness and abundance, as well as population age
class structure and sex ratios, with regards to the restoration treatment and vegetative stnicture.



                               08:45 Sunday                                 GS4.                               AXL
   269
 Anuran assemblages in anthropogenically and pyrogeniMlly dfeturbed landscgjes of the
boreal forest. J.M.Constible. Department of Biology, University of Victoria, PO Box 3020 STN, CSC, Victoria bg
V8W 3N5, Canada.
Alberta-Pacific Forest Industries Inc. (AL-PAC) operates a large pulp mill in the mixed-wood boreal forest of
northeastern Alberta. The company harvests within its 6,000,000 ha Forest Management Area (™A) usingan
'ecosystem manaqemenf perspective. In other words, AL-PAC attempts to mimic fire, the dominant ri^ui^
disturbahce of the boreal forest. Five amphibian species, including two that appear to have undergone population
declines occur in the FMA. In 1997,1 sampled anuran communities at 12 lakes to investigate whether each species
showed the same relative abundance in logged, naturally burned, and undistorbed areas. ®®?Pj°y®^
surveys transect sampling, egg and larval searches, and metamorph searches. Additionally, I conducted yegel^ on
surveys on each transect to quantitatively examine differences in habitat. Preliminary results suggest that lakes with
adjacent cutblocks support the highest number of amphibians; however, this may be a function of lake size, distance
from active roads, or forest type. An analysis to separate these effects is underway.




    270                         09:00 Sunday                 .               GS4
 The effects of    forest-pasture edges on the herpetofauna of Fila CruMS, Costa Rica.                M,A. Schlaepfer,
 Department of Natural Resources, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853-3001, USA.
 Human activities tend to create highly fragmented land^apes, thereby ®’TOsing                     nnrJnfetfons^U^sfnVa
 edges. I am interested in the impacts of forest-pasture edges on the dynamic of frog and tord                   Y®^®
 nafred-olot desiqn I described the abundance and distnbution of lizards (Norops. spp.) and leafJitter frogs
 ^Eleutherodactylus spp.) in 10 forest fragments near Las Cruces. Costa Rica. Pie study took place from Febroaiy to
 June 1997 and covered both dry and wet seasons. No species was defiriitively absent frorn tee edge plots.
 Nocturnal leaf-litter frogs were generally equally abundant near forest edges and lo forest intenors. The single dium^
 eleuteerodactylid speaes, however, was consistently more abund^t in the forest 'ntenore.
 edae effects may be stronger during the day than at night. Anolme lizards were more abundant at tee ed^s during
 tee dry season but became more abundant in forest interiors during the wet season. This seasonal vanation adds a
 new dfmension to our understanding of edge effects, and carnes important practical implications for fteure stodies.
 The reproductive period of the lizards, which coincides with the rainy season, as well as lower rates of parasitism on
 anoline lizards near edges, are offered as possible explanations for the observed seasonal pattern.




     274                       , 10:30'Sunday                                GS4                  ,             AXL
  Genetic diversity in drought-impacted populations of the southwestern pond turtle, Cleinmya marmorata
  pallida. C.M. Ingram and J.W. Archie, Department of Biological Sciences, California State University. Lonq Beach
  Long Beach CA 90840-3702 USA.

  Populations that experience a large reduction in effective size are expected to exhibit a bottleneck effect which will
 include loss of heterozygosity and loss of alleles. Populations of the southwestern pond turtle, Clemmys rrtarmorata
 pallida, in Central and Southern California were impacted by an extended drought teat occurred from 1987-1992 and
 exhibited local population size decreases up to 85% during this period. I examined changes in genetic diversity in
 four populations of C. mannorata in tee drought affected area by comparing microsatellite DNA allele frequencies
 from tissue samples collected before and after this drought period. Genotypes of five microsatellite loci were
 determined to assess tee genetic diversity within these samples. Heterozygosity was used as a measurement of
 genetic diversity. Although no significant decline in heterozygosity was shown in the five loci, there was a decrease
 in the number of alleles present in tee most severed impacted population. Since most individuals teat were present
 in ths post-drought samples were sun/ivors of tee drought, the first sign of decreased genetic diversity would be tee
 loss of alleles. Changes in tee level of genetic diversity (heterozygosity) would only be detectable in subsequent
 post-drought generations.Amphibian species distribution patterns in an agricutturalty-fra^ented iandscape. M.B, Kolozsvarv and R.K.
Swihart, Dept. Foresty and Natural Resources, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907-1159, USA.
Apparent declines of amphibian populations in many parts of the world have caused great concern in recent years.
This study was conducted to determine what effects agriculturally induced fragmentation of forests has had on
amphibian assemblages and their distribution in a midwestem landscape. Potential breeding pools and upland
areas in 30 forest patches of various sizes and degrees of isolation were intensively sampled for amphibians from
April through August 1996 and March through August 1997. Species presence was documented by using pitfall
trapping, anuran vocalization surveys, cover board sampling, minnow traps, and dipnetting for larva.
Amphibian, anuran and salamander assemblages were all nonrandomly distributed across the landscape. Bufo
americancus and Hyla versicolor were ubiquitous whereas the distribution of several species including Ambystoma
tigrinum, A. texanum, Plethodon cinereus, Rana clamitans, and R. pipiens showed significant nesting. Overall,
species richness was significantly associated with a weighted measure of wetlano permanency (WETWGT,
p=0.0001, WETWGTC2, p=0.0029), with forest patches which have seasonal and semi-permanent wetlands
■containing rhore species. Abundance of amphibians was significantly associated with forest proximity (LOGPR,
p=0.0001, LOGPRC2, p=0.0037), with more isolated patches having greater amphibian abundance. The observed
distribution and degree of nestedness eidiibited by several amphibians suggests that these species respond to
landscape-level factors.




   271                       .. 09:15 Sunday. .                             CJS4                       AXL
Impacts of timber harvesting on surface activity in terrestrial salamanders. S.M. Knapp. C.A. Haas and R.L.
Kirkpatrick, Department of Fisheries and Wildlife Sciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 -0321.

Terrestrial salamanders spend ths majority of their time in cool, moist refugia underground, but must surface to
forage and breed. Although little is known about their surface activity patterns, abundance is usually Inferred by
counts of surface active salamanders on wet nights. Recently, such counts have been used to assess the impacts of
timber harvesting on terrestrial salamanders. It is assumed in these studies that the percent of the population active
on the surface is not altered by the treatment. We tested this assumption by conducting a mark-recapture study on
harvested and control plots. We found significantly different proportions active between treatments. At one location,
the harvested plot had a lower percent active than its control (Plethodon cinereus: 4.0% vs. 9.2%, p=.O21; P.
glutinosus: 3.8% vs, 11.7%, p=.O91). At the other location, the harvested plots had a higher percent active than their
controls (P. cinereus: 4.2% and 3.9% vs. 1.6% and 1.3%, p=.O17). At this site, surface counts indicated there were
more salamanders on ths harvested plots than on ths controls, but mark-recapture estimates indicated there were
actually twice as many salamanders on the control plots.




■ .272     .                    09:30 Sunday                                GS4                                AXL
Gopher tortoise {Gophenis polyphemus} movement patterns In large and small habitats: how much land Is
enough? J.O. Ott. Department of Zoology, Auburn University, Auburn AL 36849, USA., JW Jones Ecological
Research Center, Ichauway, RR 2 Box 2324 Newton, GA 31770, USA; W.K. Miohener, JW Jones Ecological
Research Center, Ichauway, RR 2 Box 2324 Newton, GA 31770, USA; M.T. Mendonga and C. Guyer, Department of
Zoology, Auburn University, Auburn AL 36849, USA.
The geographic range of the gopher tortoise has declined due to habitat desfroction and fragmentation. Protection
strategies typically include preserving patches of habitat or conserving areas occupied by tortoises, even if those
areas are restricted in size and quality. However, the patterns observed in these sites can differ from those in large,
contiguous areas where conditions may more closely resemble those under which the spedes evolved. We tracked
131 tortoises via radio-telemetry for one year on an 11,700 ha longleaf pine reserve in southwest Georgia. Male
tortoises utilized an average of 9.3 + 4.6 burrows and traveled an average total distance of 83.7 + 73.8 m during the
study period. Females utilized 4.8 ± 2.4 burrows and traveled 48.2 ± 57.7 m. The longest movemements were 6.4 km
by a male tortoise and 480 m by a female. The results of this study emphasize the need to preserve large,
contigucHJs habitats for use by gopher tortoises. Furthermore, it suggests that movement by tortoises is limited in
smair habitats, especially those surrounded by vast inhospitable areas. Data gathered within large study sites may
provide better information for the long-term preservation of this species.




   273                         09:45 Sunday                                 GS4                                AXL
Intraspecific phylogeny of the lizard Cnemidophorus sexlineatus: To conserve or not?                      P. Razzano.
Department of Biology, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY, USA, 11549.
Mitochondrial DNA sequence analyses were used to inter phylogeographic relationships among individuals of the
lizard species Cnemidophorus sexlineatus, as well as to determine whether a population of C. sexlineatus in
Michigan is endemic or recently introduced. Individuals were obtained from Colorado, Oklahoma, Indiana, Michigan,
and Florida. A PCR generated fragment which spans the mtDNA ND3 to ND4 gene region, and including the
Argenine fRNA, was sequenced for each individual. Sceloporus grammicus and C. gularis sequences were used as
outgroups.
The preliminary data cannot rule out the possibility that the Michigan population is endemic. The Florida individuals
are in a dade basal to a clade that contains Micnigan, Indiana, and Oklahoma individuals. Sequence divergence
values of the Michigan specimens range from 1.2% to 5.8%. The Indiana and Oklahoma specimens have sequence
divergence values of 1.6% to 2.3% and 1.1% to 1.5% respectively. One Colorado sample forms a clade with the C.
gularis sample, its sequence divergence is 8.3%.

                                               I II, II, 11

The effects of     forest-pasture edges on the herpetofauna of Fila Cruces, Costa Rica.                MA Schlaepfer.
Department of Natural Resources, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853-3001, USA.
Human activities tend to create highly fragmented landscapes, thereby exposing remaining habitat to the effects of
edges. I am interested in the impacts of forest-pasture edges on the dynamics of frog and lizard populations. Using a
paired-plot design, I described the abundance and distribution of lizards {Norops. spp.) and leaf-lifter frogs
{Eleutherodactylus spp.) in 10 forest fragments near Las Cruces, Costa Rica, The study took place from February to
June, 1997, and covered both dry and wet seasons. No species was definitively absent from the edge plots.
Nocturnal leaf-litter frogs were generally equally abundant near forest edges and in forest interiors. The single diurnal
eleutherodactylid species, however, was consistently more abundant in the forest interiors, suggesting that abiotic
edge effects may be stronger during the day than at night. Anoline lizards were more abundant at the edges during
the dry season, but became more abundant in forest interiors during the wet season. This seasonal variation adds a
new dimension to our understanding of edge effects, and carries important practical implications for future studies.
The reproductive period of the lizards, which coincides with the rainy season, as well as lower rates of parasitism on
anoline lizards near edges, are offered as possible explanations for the observed seasonal pattern.




   2/4                       10.30 Surid^iy                             C3S4       .     . .               AXL
Genetic diversity in drought-impacted populations of the southwestern pond turtle, Clommys marmorata
pallida. C.M. Ingram and J.W. Archie, Department of Biological Sciences, California State University, Long Beach.
Long Beach CA 90840-3702 USA.

Populations that experience a large reduction in effective size are expected to exhibit a bottleneck effect which will
include loss of heterozygosity and loss of alleles. Populations of the southwestern pond turtle, Clemmys marmorata
pallida, in Central and Southern California were impacted by an extended drought that occurred from 1987-1992 and
exhibited local population size decreases up to 85% during this period. I examined changes in genetic diversify in
four populations of C. marmorata in the drought affected area by comparing miorosatellite DNA allele frequencies
from tissue samples collected before and after this drought period. Genotypes of five microsatellite loci were
defemiined to assess the genetic diversity within these samples. Heterozygosity was used as a measurement of
genetic diversity. Although no significant decline in heterozygosity was shown in the five loci, there was a decrease
in the number of alleles present in the most severed impacted population. Since most individuals that were present
in the post-drought samples were sunrivors of the drought, the first sign of decreased genetic diversity would be the
loss of alleles. Changes in the level of genetic diversity (heterozygosity) would only be detectable in subsequent
post-drought generations.




   275      ...        .        10:45 Sunday                                 GS4                                 AXL
Amphibian abundance and community structure in fragmented peat bogs.                    M.J. Mazerolle. Department of
Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3H 4J1.
Peatlands are increasingly exploited in Europe and North America due to the demand for peal in horticulture. As a
result, these wetlands are threatened, particularly in New Bronswiok and Quebec, North America's principal peat
producers. I used drift fences and pitfall traps to investigate amphibian populations in pristine bogs and disturbed
bogs (i.e., bog remnants adjacent to peat harvesting operations) of southeastern New Brunswick. Results following
20, 592 trap nights indicate that species richness is higher in pristine bogs than disturbed bogs (range 2-7 spp.).
Rana clamitans was the only specieS sensitive to peat harvesting, while the abundance of Rana sylvatica, Rana
pipiens, Bufo americanus americanus and Rana septentrionalis did not differ between pristine bogs and bog
fragments. Captured individuals consisted almost exclusively of ranid Juveniles in both types of bogs. These data
show that peat bog harvesting has a definite influence on adjacent amphibian communities. However, additional
work will be needed to differentiate natural population fluctuations from the impacts of peat harvesting on amphibian
movements and resource (i.e., bog ponds) utilization. *




    276                         .11:00 Sunday                             GS4                            AXL
Forest canopy closure and dispersal by pool-breeding amphibians.           P.G. deMavnadier and M.L. Hunter(Jr.),
Department of Wildlife Ecology, University of Maine, Orono, Maine, 04469, USA.
For amphibians that breed in temporary pools. Juvenile dispersal is an important life history movement linking the
aquatic habitat of larvae to the surrounding forest habitat occupied by most adults. We examined whether selection
occurs for closed-canopy conditions during dispersal using pitfall traps and drift fences to sample naturally occuning,
upland populations of wood frogs {Rana sylvatica) and spotted salamanders {Ambystoma maculatum) along recently
created forest-clearcut edges in central Maine. Habitat preferences during dispersal were further investigated using
an experimental approach that quantified the movements of newly metamorphosed wood frogs cultured in artificial
pools located along an abropt forest-powerline edge. Among natural populations the abundance of Juveniles and
adults of both species declined sharply across a gradient running from relatively mature forest-interior habitat (70-90
years old) to recently clearcut habitat (2-11 years old). Similarly, in the powerline experiment. Juvenile wood frogs
showed a dispersal preference for closed-canopy habitat immediately upon metamoqjhosis, with the highest capture
rates occum'ng in microhabitats characterized by dense foliage in both the understory and canopy layers. Our
results suggest that populations of wood frogs, spotted salamanders, and other vernal pool breeding amphibian
species are likely to benefit from efforts to maintain connectivity between upland forest habitats and aquatic breeding
sites.                             11:15 Sunday                               GS4                             AXL
  277
Enhemeral aauatic habitats in tallgrass prairie: abiotic changes over time and their effects oni developmental
rme of western chorus frogs. N.M. Gerlanc, Division of Biology, 232 Ackert Hall. Kansas State University,
Manhattan, Kansas 66506 USA.
Bison wallows and intermittent streams were sampled weekly in spring 1996 and 1997^oriKonra
Natural Area, Kansas. We monitored water chemistry and development of western choms frogs (Pseu^OTS
triseriata^ as these aauatic habitats dried. Abiotic factors temporally were rnore variable iri bison wallows than in
intermittent streams even after flow stopped. Dissolved oxygen and ammonium fluctuated dium^ly in wallows, but
re“ s"n' infeXrt streaS? until just before /rylng.                      Water temperature ancphwem o°rrel^ed
nonntlvBlv to water volume in wallows, but not in streams. Eggs in bison wallows hatched at Go^er stages 21 and
22^iMthh 4 to 8 days after laying, whereas eggs in intermittent streams hatched in 14 days at abo^ Gosner stage
21      The rnaioriN of tadpoles in wallows reached Gosner stages 38 to 42 in 6 weeks, "hen waHows dned In
contrast tadpole development in streams progressed no further than stage 25 until flow_in_^^^ms, rjase^ no
tadooles vie^ beyond stage 41 when the streams dried after 16 weeks. Differences in developmental rates d these
fri^s likely resultfrom differences in water temperature and chemistry between ephemeral aquatic habitats found in
wallows and streams.




                                                                             GS4                               AXL
   278 .                        11:30 Sunday
The post-breeding migration of the European comrnon frog, Rana                                              structure
and seasonal weather. R. Tramontano. Ecology Building, Lund University, 223 62 Lund, SWEDEN.

The post-breeding migration of Flana iemporaria was studied by means of radio tracking over_3®!1®
consisted of an extensive ungrazed, uncut moist meadow where suitable foraging habitats and the Iroeding site
wTre all contiqSouTwtth each other, while in another site suitable habitats were ^parated by cultivated fields. The
study period of the first year coincided with a drought, while the study penods of the following two yeais had above
norrnal oreoioitation This enabled a factorial analysis of the effects of seasonal weather, landreape twe and sex on
miarato™^ehavior In the farmland site and during the wet years frogs moved farther from their breeding pond and
qources^f ooen water changed position more often and made longer movements when position w^ changed. In
the farmland site frogs also migrated farther and did so more directly. Nearly all differences between sitM were rnore
mdrSIIe during the wet year. There were no significant differences between the sexes, neither were any of fee
differ^ces betoeen habitets or wet and dry years sex dependent. These migration patterns are
of fee effects of habitat fragmentation on species survival and the consequences for dispersal between breeding
populations.




                                                                             GS4                                AXL
    279                          11:45 Sunday
 Influence of weather variables on movement patterns of the Northwestern salamander {Ambystoma gracile}.
 A.B. Stringer. University of VKashington, Box 352100, Seattle, WA USA.
 The influence of weather on salamander breeding activity has been well documented . However, w^eather influent
 on soecific movement patterns is not yet well understood. I investigated the influence of weather vanables on
 movements of Northwestern salamanders. Radio-tracking was conducted during the winter when this species s
 most active Both non-breeding and breeding migration movements were observed. Movements were( sigrafiran^
 correlated with both temperature increase and rain onset. This re ationship was strongest when a cold, dty penrfe
 was followed by a warm, wet period. Movements began when daily temperatures rose above a mean of 5°C a™ a
 mfeimum of 0°^, a”d more than 20mm of rain had fallen within fee last 24 hours. Dunng these penods most
 radio-fagged salamanders moved within 48 hours of the weather change and of each other. Breeding ra pratiOT
 movements were also correlated with this type of weather change and migration onset invanably began wrthin 48
 hours of the first winter thaw. Subsequent cold, dry periods were observed to temporenly suspend
 movements During extended periods of warm rainy weather, correlations between weather vanables and
 movements were rnuch weaker and tended to be better explained by individual salamander movement frequency
 patterns.




     263                         16:30 Sunday                                 P3                               .PCH
  Project Piaba- study floodplain fishes and turtles for a sustainable livelihood of riverine people in the mid­
  Rio Negro Basin, Amazonas, Brazil. N.L. Chao. R.C. Vogt, M.L. Aradjo and G. Prang, Universidade do
  Amazonas.
  Roodplain fishes in fee mid-upper Rio Negro are exploited as ornamental fishes to provide subsistence to 3000
  people in Baroelos, Amazonas (pop. 12,000; area 122,490 km’). Turtles and their eggs are the second most
  important protein resource, next to fish. This fishery constitutes over 60% of fee economic activity of the region.
  About 60 species and 20 million fishes are captured for the trade annually. A single species, the cardinal tetra
  {Paracheirodon axelrodi}, made up more than 70% of fee catch. Over fishing in some areas may be attributed to
  lack of rural employment since other extractive economies have collcujsed. Thus more people are involved in the
  fishery. El Nifio, now, as in 1982-3, is probably the principal cause of the drastic decline of the fishery. Our goals
  are to understand fee biology of this community so feat a management plan can be devised to use these resources
  on a sustainablejevel. To accomplish these goals we are studying the biodiversity and biology of the species of
  fish used in the ornamental fish trade, fee tumes used as food and trade, and the social-economic aspects of this
  fishery. It may be possible to use this resource as well as presenre it.

                                16:00 Sunday                                 P3                                PCH
  280
Nitrate pollution: A serious threat to amphibian survival.         J.p. Rou^ ^d C.A. Bishop, Canadian Wildlife
Service, Environment Canada, Box 5050, Burlington, Ontario, L7R- 4A6: J. Struger, Ecosystem Health Divison,
Environment Canada, Box 5050, Burtington, Ontario, L7R 4A6.
Nitrogen pollution from anthropogenic sources enters water bodies through runoff associated with nitrate fertilization,
livestcxtk, precipitafion, and effluents from industrial, human and animal wastes. This review
for nitrate to affect amphibian populations by comparing environmental concentrations d^nitrate in Northi Amen
waters to nitrate concentrations known to cause toxicity to captive amphibians and other speaes that
important role in amphibian eodogy. Lethal and sublethal effects in amphibians are det^ted^t nrtrate
between 2.5 and 100 mg/L. We found environmental concentrations of nitrate in watersheds Ihroughod North
America from <1 to >100 mgA.. Furthermore, amphibian food (insects) and predators (fish) are dso afleded by
these elevated levels of nitrate in surface wafers. From this we conclude that nitrate Mncentrafion^n watershed^n
North America are high enough to cause death and developmental anomalies in amphibians. In
 use of vegetated buffer strips adjacent to water courses can reduce nitrogen contamination d si^a“'and
 Ultimately’there is a need to reduce the use of fertilizers, control the lun-off of human and livestock waste and
 establish and enforce water quality guidelines for nitrate for the protection of aquatic life.




                                16:00 Sunday                                  P3                                PCH
   281
Relation of catch per unit of effort and floodplain lakes area in Amazm.               A-R. Caiyalhg, Prograrna de P6s-
Graduacao em Ecd^ia de Ambientes AquSticos , Continentals, Nupelia - Nucleo de Pesquisas emi Limnologia
Ictiologia e Aquicultura, UEM - Universidade Esfadual de Maring^; V.S. Batista, Departamento de Engenharia de
Pesca, Faouldade de Ciencias AgiArias , Universidade do Amazonas.
                                                                                                                           1
The floodolain area of 32 lakes in Lower SolimSes River (Amazon) was quantified using a radar image SAR (JERS-
1) in order to stablish correlations among these areas and fee catch per unit of effort -CPUE (total and by species) in
the lakes (effort unit = fisherman numbers 'fishery days),                                                     - W
fisherman Results showed correlation between the lake area and its floodplain area (n-32, Pearson r --
p<0 05) while there was a weak correlation of meander number and lakes floodplain area (n=32; ’'=0,4, ns),
fee lake perimeter was correlated with all variables. Catch data shows that just CPUEtot^^wasi cotoIated with t
floodolaiii area (Soearman r =0,69: p<0,05; n=8). Lacustnne species and nverine-lacustnne species did not show
correlation wife the others variables (floodplain area, lake area, perimeter and meander number). However, ^rre
Amazon fishes distribution is dependent on many others variables (fiMdplain forest size and diversity, ecow^em
priinaty production, etc.) those correlations need to be investigated based on larger sample size in order to
determinate standards.




                                 16:00 Sunday.                                 P3                               PCH
  . 282
 Artisanal fisheries in a urban reservoir: catch, effort and fishing strategies (Billing resereoir, ^o Paulo,
 Brazil) C V. Minte-Vera°'‘*. •Prograrna de Pds-Graduagao em Ecologia, UNICAMP - Universidade Estadu^ de
 Ca?npinas;M: Petre re, Depto. de Ecologia, UNESP -Universidade^^Estadual.Paifiista;present address: , Nupdlia -
 Nucleo de Pesquisas em Limnologia, Ictiologia e Aquiculture , UEM -Universiadade Estadual de ManngS.
 Rillinns reservoir (127 km2 23° 42' - 23° 45'S: 46° 27'- 46° 22'W) is the largest water body in the metropolitan region
 of S^ PaufotBrazil). Its building started in 1925 in order to supply fee city of Sao Paulo wife electncity. Dunng rnany
 years it presented low environmental quality due to fee reception of organic sewage froin the metropofitan re^on-
 JTowadays, it is has multiple uses. An intense artisanal fishery activity is present, with 191 fishermen. Laings were
 recorded daily during a year (1996). During this period 147,593 kg of fish were caughfen 3,515 fishing trips by 21.5
 fehemarVmonth in Average, wife a yield of 42 kgrtiip and 572 kg4Ishermanlfeonfe. The mam commeraalI sprcies
 caught were Nile tilapia Oreochomis niloticus (81.4% of landings in weight), ®9je‘r°'Lu':ed species, lamban
 Asfranax e/genmanniorum (13.0%) and four other species. Tilapias were caught wife castnets and beatinsI g^a^s.
 fee^ther species were caught with gillnets. Through a Principal Component Analysis it was Possible'
 mill? groups of fishermen considering the fisheries strategies, those who ery lore only tilapias and those^who emlore
       the other soedes related mainly to the ownership of fee gears. The low nohness and high dominance of few


 - Fundo Nacional do Meio Ambiento, Brasil)




     2S6         . . ..           16,00 Sunday                                 'P3 .                             PCH
  Recreational freshwater fishing In southwestern Australia. S.J. Hambleton. Murdoch University, Perth, Western
 Australia, 6150.

  The south-west coast of Australia (Darling Botanical District), as defined by the 800mm isohyet, has an area of
 some 160,000 square kilometres and 19 distinct river drainage basins. In comparison to habitats of soufeeastem
 Australia and fee Northern Hemisphere, southwestern Australia has a much reduced aquatic faunal diversity: the
 freshwaters of this region contain only 10 species of native fishes, of which eight are endemic. Wife the exception of
 Tandanus bostocki (a freshwater cattish) none of these species typically exceed 140mm in total length. This very
 low number of freshwater fish species in southwestern Australian waters is thought to be a result of the regions arid
 past climate, insular nature, low and relatively featureless topography, and low productivity of its aquatic habitats.
 The regions recreational freshwater fishery currently comprises fee introduced perch (Perea fluviatilis} and trouts
 {Salmo trutta, Oncorhynchus mykiss}, and the native decapod, Cherax tenuimanus, the third largest freshwater
 crayfish. Preliminary data suggests the temperate climate of the south-west promotes fast growth-rates of perch^et
 shortens the period during which their spawning is successful, relative to Northern Hemisphere populations. This
 paper also discusses fee likely impact of P. fluviatilis on the established C. tenuimanus fishery, given that at times
 P. fluviatiHs preys almost exclusively on this crayfish species.radio-tagged salamanders moved within 48 hours of the weather change and of each other. Breeding migration
movements were also correlated with this type of weather change and migration onset invariably began within 48
hours of the first winter thaw. Subsequent cold, dry periods were observed to temporarily suspend migrational
movements. During extended periods of warm rainy weather, correlations between weather variables and
movements were much weaker and tended to be better explained by individual salamander movement frequency
patterns.




Project Plebe- study floodplain fishes and turtles for a suatalnabls livelihood of riverine people In the mld-
RIo Negro Basin, Amazonas, Brazil. N.L. Chao. R.C. Vogt, M.L. Araujo and G. Prang, Universidade do
Amazonas.
Floodplain fishes In the mid-upper Rio Negro are exploited as ornamental fishes to provide subsistence to 3000
people in Barcelos, Amazonas (pop. 12,000; area 122,490 km^). Turtles and their eggs are the second most
Important protein resource, next to fish. This fishery constitutes over 60% of the economic activity of the region.
About 60 species and 20 million fishes are captured for the trade annually. A single species, the cardinal tetra
(Paracheirodon axelrod!), made up more than 70% of the catch. Over fishing in some areas may be attributed to
lack of rural employment since other extractive economies have collapsed. Thus more people are involved in the
fishery. El Nino, now, as in 1982-3, is probably the principal cause of the drastic decline of the fishery. Our goals
are to understand the biology of this community so that a management plan can be devised to use these resources
on a sustainable level. To accomplish these goals we are studying the biodiversity and biology of the species of
fish used in the ornamental fish trade, the turtles used as food and trade, and the social-economic aspects of this
fishery. It may be possible to use this resource as well as preserve it.




  .284                          16:00 Sunday                                 P3                . .            PCH
Response of salamander distribution to forest canopy gaps created by selective timber harvesting.                M.T.
Messere. Department of Biology, Albany University, Albany, NY 12206 USA; P.K. Ducey, Department of Biological
Sciences, SUNY at Cortland, Cortland, NY 13045 USA.
Selective timber harvesting (removal of individual frees or small groups of trees), which creates gaps in the forest
canopy, is widely practiced in public and private forests. However, the effects of this technique on herpetofaunal
populations has been incompletely studied. We examined the effect of forest canopy gaps, created by selective
harvesting, on the distribution of ths northern redback salamander, Plethodon cinereus, in a maple-hemlock forest in
central New York State. Distributions of individual salamanders were determined by searching 1 m x 1 m quadrats
along transects extending from the center of gaps into the surrounding forest. In the first year following harvest, we
found that salamander distributions did not indicate significant movement from or avoidance of gap sites. However,
salamander densities were somewhat elevated on ths edges of gaps. Data for the second year following harvest
are being analyzed.




   285                         16:00 Sunday                                  P3                               PCH
A new database available for herpetological research: Natural history and geographic distribution records
from herpetological review. J.A. Feinberg and R.L. Burke, Department of Biology, Hofstra University, Hempstead,
NY, USA, 11549.
We entered citation infomiation for all natural history and geographic distribution records from Herpetological Review
(HR), from its first issues to the present. Citations indude authors, species, keywords, and locality information. The
Hr database is available to anyone with WWW access, and can be searched in a variety of ways. This makes
preliminary literature research much quicker and more thorough than was previously possible. For example, when a
herpetologist finds a spedmen believed to be new for a county, it is now easy to determine if the species has already
been reported forthat region in HR. The HR database will be updated continually as new issues become available.
As an example of the value of this database, we examined new county record data for a collection of species {Rana
catesbeiana, Hemidactylus turcicus, and Trachemys scripta) that are commonly introduced to new areas outside
their native range. The results show the pattern of range expansion differs among the three spedes.

fisherman/month in average, with a yield of 42 kg/trip and 572 kg/fisherman/month. The main commercial species
caught were Nile tilapia Oreochomis niloticus (81.4% of landings in weight), an introduced species, "lambari”
As^inax eigenmannionim (13.0%) and four other species. Tilapias were caught with castnets and beating gillnets,
the other species were caught with gillnets. Through a Principal Component Analysis it was possible to detect two
main groups of fishermen considering the fisheries strategies, those who explore only tilapias and those who explore
also the other species, related mainly to the ownership of the gears. The low richness and high dominance of few
species on landings are indicative of communities under stressing condition. The dominance-okNile tilapia is
attributable to a combination of factors as ability to consume plankton and tolerance to low dissolved oxygen
contents. (Financial agencies: CNPq -Conselho Nadonal de Desenvdvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico,6rasil; FNMA




Recraatlonal frashwater flabing In soutfiwastern Australia. S.J. Hambleton. Murdoch University. Perth, Western
Australia, 6150.
 The south-west coast of Australia (Darling Botanical District), as defined by the 800mm isohyet, has an area of
some 160,000 square kilometres and 19 distinct river drainage basins. In comparison to habitats of southeastern
Australia and the Northern Hemisphere, southwestern Australia has,a much reduced aquatic faunal diversity; the
freshwaters of this region contain only 10 species of native fishes, of vvhich eight ate endemic. With the exception of
Tandanus bostocki (a freshwater cattish) none of these species typically exceed 140mm in total length. This very
low number of freshwater fish species in southwestern Australian waters is thought to be a result of the regions arid
past climate, insular nature, low and relatively featureless topography, and low productivity of its aquatic habitats.
The regions recreational freshwater fishery currently comprises the introduced perch (Perea fluviatilis) and trouts
(Salmo tnitta, Oncorhynchus mykiss), and the native decapod, Cherax tenuimanus, the third largest freshwater
crayfish. Preliminary data suggests the temperate climate of the south-west promotes fast growth-rates of perch, yet
shortens the period during which their spawning is successful, relative to Northern Hemisphere populations. This
paper also discusses the likely impact of P. fluviatilis on the established C. tenuimanus fishery, given that at times
P. fluviatilis preys almost exclusively on this crayfish species.




   287                          16:00 Sunday                         .    .   PS                              PCH
Combining herpetofaunal education and conservation efforts in the NY State amphibian and reptile Atlas.
P.K. Ducey and M. Chapman, Department of Biological Sciences, SUNY at Cortland, Cortland, NY, 13045, USA.
The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation has been directing the NY Amphibian and Reptile
Atlas, a state-wide, ten-year survey of the herpetofaunal populations which relies heavily on volunteer participation.
Using an SSAR grant-in-aid-of-herpetology for education, we initiated a project to increase the educational value of
the Altas for young people and to increase their partidpafion as contributors. To encourage participation, biology
teachers in over 70 high schools were contacted directly with information about the project. Other teachers were
reached via a museum exhibit at SUNY Cortland and a web page. The web page (www.cortland.edu/herp/) contains
identification keys and photographs of local spedes, information about the Atlas, and web resource links.
Participating high school classes also received educational packets containing frog call tapes, books to aid field
identification, field survey tips. Atlas handbooks and newsletters, and information on herpetofaunal conservation.
Students from across the state are now participating.




   288                         16:00 Sunday                           .   . ..P3                               PCH
The fish survey: A key management component for the Canadian environmental effects monitoring
program. S.C. Ribev. S.L. Walker and E. Porter, Environment Canada, National EEM Office, 351 St. Joseph Blvd,
Sth Floor, Hull, Quebec KIA 0H3.
In 1992, the Canadian government passed amendments to the Pulp and Paper Effluent Regulations (PPER) under
the Fisheries Act, which included a requirement for mills to conduct an Environmental Effects Monitoring (EEM)
program. The purpose of EEM is to assess the adequacy of national regulations for protecting fish, fish habitat and
the use of fisheries resources. One key component of EEM is a fish survey (FS), which involves sampling two
sentinel species from an exposure area and examining gross population oharaderisfics. EEM requirements specify
growth, reproduction and survival as key assessment endpoints for fish. The primary objective of the first sunrey
(Cyde 1) was to determine variability in the measured parameters and determine sample sizes using power analysis
for subsequent cycles. Following the completion of Cycle 1, a number of refinements to the EEM program have
been implemented. The purpose of this paper is to review the changes to the FS component of EEM and discuss
the use of the FS data in decision making. Difficulties with the FS component and alternative approaches to the fish
survey {e.g., mesocosms) currently being explored will also be presented.                                                                              P3                                  PCH
  289 .                         16:00 Sunday
Bomb craters and roaring F-15s: An aquatic faunal survey and nonindigenous species asse^ment of Ayon
Pafk Air F^rVRa^^t" Florid “ J.D. Evert and L.G. Nico, Rodda Caribbean Science Center. U.S. , Geological
Survey: 7920 NW 71st St; Gainesville, FL 32653,. USA.
Avon Park Air Force Range is a federal military reservation occupying 42,900 hectares in Fonda’s G^^^ter
Everglades Region. Prior to this study, the area was one of the more pooriy ^mpled sites for fishesi in all “ajjal
Florida In addition to bomb craters, aquatic habitats include the Kissimmee River canal and associated rernnant
meander channels. Lake Arbuckle (1550 ha), several small lakes; blackwater streams; extensive marshes,
hardwood cvoress and pine swamps; cattle ponds; and ditches. As part of an aquatic faunal survey (1995-1997),
wVdocum’enfad presence of 44 fish species (representing 17 fish families), eight         and one nonindi^nous
riam and two native crayfishes Introduced foreign species captured in the area included walking catfish (C/anas
Sch"s)“t!!^i^; (^re“hromfe aureus), grass carp (Cfenophaomgodon We/fa) and Asm clam Corbicu a
fluminea Two natives eastern mosquitofish (Gambus/a holbrooH) and least killifish (Heterandna formosa}, were
byTar the most abundant and widespread fishes. Compared with much of Florida artmp^falTn’a^few^arels T
to moderate (e.q., cattle throughout, water diversion in some sections, penodic artillery fire in a few areas ).
Relative to many environments in peninsular Rorida, numbers and densities of nonindigenous fishes in the rang
are low.




                                 13:00 Sunday                                                                     OVC
   290 .
Estimates of daily ration and a bioenergetic model for the blackiiose shark, Carcharhlnus acronr^.
CaifOTn, National Marine Fisheries Service, 3500 Delwood Beach Road P^ama City, FL 32408, USA, G.R.
Parsons, Biology Department, University of Mississippi, University, MS 38677, USA.
nailv ration estimates and bioenerqetic models for blacknose sharks, Carcharhirtus acronotus, were developed from
            eXrimX on rlietab^sm and growth at 28±2.0'>C. Size-specific rnetabolir: rates were determmed
closed-svstem respirometry and growth estimated through sharks held in captivity. Daily ration 'was estirnated for
sharte 05 OaT^ I 5           and 3.5 kg using the equation of Winberg (1956). Da y ration (%body weighVday
deCTMsed with b^y size and was estimated as 1.56 for smallest sharks and 0.87        largest sharks based on a die
of menhaden Brevoortia spp. General energy budgets were constructed for each size class. No estirnation of
reproductive investment was made because all individuals were determined to be immature. Routine JJ'etabolism
generally accounted for the largest percentage of the energy budget but^^ffered among e cfass
^creased with body size from 60% of the energy budget in small sharks (0.5-0.8 kg) to 71 /o for the largest s^rKs.
In contrast growth of somatic tissue was highest in small sharks (mean=9.9%) but was 1.5 A for the larger sharks.




                                                                                17                                .OVC
    291                           13:15 Sunday
  Modulation of the feeding behavior of the horn shark H^rodontus                                             P
 Department of Biology, University of South Ronda, 4202 East Fowler Ave., Tampa, Ronda 33620 USA.
 Manv fishes are caoable of modulating prey capture behavior according to prey size or elusiyity. The physical
 attributes of the orev appear to affect attack behavior, but factors such as position or location of prey may also Ibe
 imoortent This study tests the hypothesis that capture behavior can be modulated according to prey ^cessibility,
 uT^Phigtvspeed%deo WnS analysis, pre? capture, events are exarnined for tee horn.shade .Hetero^ntus
 francisd Each individual encounters three feeding situations: (1) squid pi^es resting freely ort a plattora, (2)
 attached to a platform; and (3) fitted snugly in a tube. Using suction behavior, H. franc/sci successMy captei^es prey
 in each feediiig situation with a common series of kinematic events. However, repeated bites            pa atod^adrate
 orotnjsion occur during attached feedings, and the labial cartilages extend to form a seal around tee tube openiiig
 during tube feedings. Average bite duration for three individuals is approxirnafely 124 ms, ®hhough signific^t inter-
 indivi^ual variation is observed Preliminary analyses show that H. francisa is capable of modulating the duration of
         "                 ^Xring capture, such as mandible elevation and palatoquadrate protrusion/retraction.
 according to the accessibility of the prey.




     29b                                  Sunday                                 !4                                THN
  Historical InfluencM on receiver biases: Artificial neural network models of call recognition in ths tungara
  frog, Phyaalaemua puatulosus. S.M. Phelps. Department of Zoology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
  78712 USA.
  Studies employing historical methods have shown that .preexisting biases in the sensory systems of females are
  capable of driving the evolution of male traits. I used artificial neural network models ~ computer simulations
  emulating real nervous systems - to test whether receiver biases could be directly influenced by tee evolutionary
  history of tee female sensory apparatus. Neural networks were given an evolutionary histo^ approximating that of
  the tungara frog^oruone of various control histories. I found that not only does evolutionary history influence receiver
  biases, but that networks with a history approximating that of tee tungara frog were best at predicting female
  responses to many novel heterospecific calls. The neural networks demonstrate patterns of preference that are
  clearly vestiges of past selection pressures, and make novel predictions about the preferences of real females.

  292 .                        13:30 Sunday                                    17                                ovc
The effects of scale on the feeding kinematics of the nurse shark, Ginglymo^oma cirratum.                M.P.
and P J Motta, Department of Biology, University of South, Florida. LIF 136, 4202 E. Fowler Ave, Tampa FL 33620
USA.
Successful inertial suction feeding depends, in part, on the speed of the feeding sequence. One
important to the speed of this behavior is the size of the animal. The effects of scale on the muscular dynamicsi d
aquatic vertebrates are still uncertain. We present data on the scaling of the prey capture kinematics of the nurse
shark, Ginglymostoma cirratum, an inertial suction feeder. Morphometries of the head andI feedingi apparatus were
analyzed in twelve specimens ranging from 71 to 244 cm TL. These data indicated isometnc growth of the feed ng
apparatus. The kinematics of prey capture in another twelve specimens (33 to 268 cm) were                        9^
speed video and subsequently analyzed. The maximal excursions of angular vanables reniained constant through
ontogeny, while the maxima of the linear excursions increased. The time required to reach the
of the kinematic variables also increased with increasing animal size. The.slop^ oiThe,log-trapsformedwere
not significantly different from 0.333, thus these data are consistent with a model of muscular scaling inibal y
proposed for largemouth bass by Richard and Wainwright (1995). This pattern of scaling does not appear to apply to
 sharks in general.




                                13:45 Sunday                                   .17                               OVC
   293 .
Food habits of the smooth dogfish (Mustelus canis}, dusky shark {Carcharhinus obscurus}, Atlantic
sharpnose shark {Rhizoprionodon terranovae}, and the sand h^r (C^cbanas ^teorus) from^^the noi^w^t
Atlaritic Ocean. J.A. Musick and J. Gelsleichter, Virginia Institute of Marine Science, School of Manne Science, The
College of William and Mary in Virginia, Gloucester Pt.. VA 23062.
Diet and feeding habits of the smooth dogfish (Mustelus canis}, Atlantic sharpnose shark (^Koprfanodon
teranovae), dusky shark (Carcharhinus obscurus} and the sand tiger (Carchanas taurus} were
analysis of stomach contents. Diet in M. canis was relatively homogeneous and was dominated by cru^aceans.
ronsfating mostly of rock crabs. Cancer irroratus. Diet in R. terranovae was more heterogeneous and consisted
largely of crustaceans and teleosts, in similar levels of prey importance. Use of cumulativeprey curves as a
measure of precision indicated that data was insufficient to fully desenbe the diets of C. °bscurus and C. ^arus.
Nonetheless, these data suggested that both species are generalized feeders and consume a vanety of teleost and
elasmobranch prey. Further studies are necessary to fully charactenze diet in these two species. In addition, more
data are necessary to examine ontogenetic, seasonal and substrate-related shifts in diet for all of the species
investigated.




                                 13:30 Sunday                                   .14                               THN
    294
 Kin recognition, sexual selection, and mate choice in toads. B. Waldman, Department of Zoology. University of
 Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
 Long-term field studies of sexual selection in the explosively breeding American toad, Bufo ame^ani^, revea\ onty
 weak evidence of non-random mating based on size. Although advantages may accrue to fernales teat ^br^d wte
 larger males, levels of male-male competition and opportunities for fernale choice                           9? H?*?
 philopatry predict that close inbreeding should be common. Genetic analyses suggest to tee contrary teat. (1) in
 natural populations toads largely avoid close inbreeding, and (2) males' advertisement calls ®nc^e informatran
 about their genetic identities. To examine whether females can assess their relatedness to males by h®anng^^ttteir
 calls I conducted laboratory playback experiments. The responses of female subjects to males calls, broadca^
 alternately were analysed as a function of their relatedness to each of the males (determined by nwltil^us DNA
 finaerorintino) Females discriminated between calls based on kinship, consistently oneriting towai^ calls of the
 oenetxiallv less similar male. Responses were similar to field-recorded calls and to synthesised calls (controlling for
 call duration and number of pulses). Females showed no preference if equally related to each filing male. Jtrese
 results suggest teal mate choice is more strongly influenced by selection to avoid close inbreeding than by se
 selection for other characters.




    298                          14:00 Sunday                                  CE10                                OVC
 Corneal pathology associated with the attachment of OmmatokoHa elongata (Copepoda: Lernaepodidae)
 (Grant) to the cornea of Greenland sharks (Somnlosua microcephalus}. J.D. Boiucinska. Dept of Biology,
 University of Hartford. West Hartford, CT USA; H.E. Whiteley, Dept of Pathobiology, University of Connecticut,
 Storrs, CT USA; J. Tretfel Jr, Dept of Biology. University of Hartford, West Hartford, CT USA; G.W. Benz, Southeast
 Aquatic Research Institute and Tennessee Aquarium, Chattanooga, TN USA.
 Eyes from six Greenland sharks, Somniosus microcephalus, infected with the parasitic copepod Ommatokoita
 elongata were collected Arctic waters of Victor Bay, Northwest Territories, for study. Transformed adult female
 copepods, one per eye, were firmly attached to tee corneas by an anchoring structure (the bulla), and each bulla was
 associated with an opaque area on the cornea. In addition to opacities associated with copepods at the t'me of
 collection, there were several randomly distributed, small, round to irregular, full-thickness corneal opacities which
 were not associated with copepods. The sclera at the limbus of infected eyes was thickened at the radius
 corresponding to the feeding range of the copepod. Histologically, corneal epithelial ulceration and heterophilic
 keratitis, disruption, mineralization, and detachment of Bowman's membrane, thinning, disorganization,
 mineralization,
 _■____ a          a_ *_fibrosis
                  and            of tee _comeal
                           _a _______           substantia
                                          ____ a__ __ a__»a»_ propria,a*and focalathinning
                                                                        _ _____               Descemenfs
                                                                                           of __
                                                                                   ______ »•_               membrane
                                                                                                 ___ ««a-_________ •«»_were
                                                                                                                       ___important This study tests the hypothesis that capture behavior can be modulated according to prey accessibility.
Using a high-speed video kinematic analysis, prey capture events are examined for the horn shark, Heterodonijs
francisd. Each individual encounters three feeding situations: (1) squid pieces resting freely on a platform; (2)
attached to a platform; and (3) fitted snugly in a tube. Using suction behavior, H. francisd successfully captures prey
in each feeding situation with a common series of Wnematio events. However, repeated bites with palatoquadrate
protrusion occur during attached feedings, and the labial cartilages extend to form a seal around the tube opening
during tube feedings. Average bite duration for three individuals is approximately 124 ms, although significant infer-
individual variation is observed. Preliminary analyses show that H. francisd is capable of modulating the duration of
some kinematic events during capture, such as mandible elevation and palatoquadrate protrusion/retraction,
according to the accessibility of the prey.




Histoiicar influence* on receiver biases: Artificial neural network models of call recognition In the tungara
frog, Physalamtua pustulosua. S.M. Phelps. Department of Zoology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
78712 USA.

Studies employing historical methods have shown that preexisting biases in the sensory systems of females are
capable of driving the evolufion of male traits. I used artificial neural network models - computer simulations
emulating real nen/ous systems - to test whether receiver biases could be directly influenced by the evolutionary
history of the female sensory apparatus. Neural networks were given an evolutionary history approximating that of
the tungara frog, or one of various control histories. I found that not only does evolutionary history infiuence receiver
biases, but that networks with a history approximating that of ths tungara frog were best at predicting female
responses to many novel heterospecific calls. The neural networks demonstrate patterns of preference that are
clearly vestiges of past selection pressures, and make novel predictions about the preferences of real females.




   296                          15:15 Sunday                                    14                               THN
The influence of evolutionary history on signal recognition In tungara frMS.                 MJ. Rvan. Department of
Zoology, University of Texas, Austin TX 78712 USA; A.S. Rand, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, 900
Jefferson Drive, Suite 2207, Washington DC 20560.
We have been using the advertisement call system of tungara frogs {Physalaemus pustuiosus) and their close
relatives to attempt to understand the evolution of communication systems. We have analyzed the advertisement
calls and phylogenetic relationships of members of the Physaiaemus pustuiosus species group and three other
congeners as outgroups. Using these data we have estimated calls at ancestral nodes and tested tOngara frog
female preferences for these calls. Here we address the follovring questions: (1) How conservative is the evolution
of various call characters; (2) How do individual call rriiaracters infiuence advertisement call recognition
(heterospecific call versus white noise) and discrimination (heterospecific call versus conspecific call); and, (3) Does
the degree of plesiomorphy of a call character differentially influence call recognition and discrimination. Our results
suggest that: (1) calls do not evolve as tightly coordinated suites of characters, but instead are arrays of more or less
plesiomorphic or derived characters; (2) that call discrimination and recognition might be influenced differently by
some call characters than others; and, (3) that the degree of plesiomorphy of a call character might have some effect
on these tasks.




   297            .   ..        16:00 Sunday                                   14                               THN
Visual signaling In anuran amphibians. W. Hddl. Institute of Zoology, Univ, of Vienna, Althanstrasse 14, A-1090
Wien, Austria; A. Amezquita, Department of Biosoiences, Univ, of the Andes, A.A. 4976, Bogota, Colombia.
Visual displays are known In both intra- and intersexual anuran communication. We compare the patterns of visual
signaling among seven anuran families and discuss the ecological contexts in which they may have evolved. We
classified visual cues used during intraspecific interactions as discrete character states and mapped them onto a
phylogenetic tree based on morphological characters. Groups of behavioural patterns are apparent and closely but
not exclusively associated with anuran families. By adding ecological characteristics and geographic distributions of
the involved sp^es to the matrix, the resulting patterns suggest visual displays to be more similar between species
of the same family. As striking exceptions, similar displays are performed by two across- family groups of species.
Diurnal, neotropical leaf-litter inhabitants and mainly aposematic species in the Brachycephalidae, Bufonidae and
Dendrobatidae exhibit an Impressive variety of visual displays involving predominantly anterior parts of the body.
Stream-side breeding, cryptic species in the Leptodactylidae, Myobatrachidae, Hylidae and Ranidae constitute
another probably converaent group, which includes both nocturnal and diurnal species exposed to constant high
ambient noise levels, "nriey perform conspicuous visual displays by extending or ‘flagging' the posterior limbs.
However, Hyta parviceps and Phyltomedusa spp., which advertise and breed at ponds, perform similar displays. The
observed patterns suggest that complex visual communication may have evolved under two ecological scenarios.
One is associated with the shift to diurnality and the other with breeding at tropical mountain streams. (Foot­
flagging displays of Hyiodes asper and Staurois latopatmatus are' shown in film and video scenes) 5

larger males, levels of male-male competition and opportunities for female choice vary. High levels of natal
philopatry predict that close inbreeding should be common. Genetic analyses suggest to the contrary that: (1) in
natural populations toads largely avoid close inbreeding, and (2) males' advertisement calls encode information
about their genetic identities. To examine whether females can assess their relatedness to males by hearing their
calls, I conducted laboratory playback experiments. The responses of female subjects to males' calls, broadcast
alternately, were analysed as a function of their relatedness to each of the males (determined by multilocus DNA
fingerprinting). Females discriminated between calls based on kinship, consistently orienting toward calls of the
genetically less similar male. Responses were similar to field-recorded calls and to synthesised calls (controlling for
call duration and number of pulses). Females showed no preference if equally related to each calling male. These
results suggest that mate choice is more strongly influenced by selection to avoid close inbreeding than by sexual
selection for other characters.




Comeal pathology associated with the attachment of Ommatokoita alangata (Copepoda: Lernaepodidae)
(Grant) to the cornea of Greenland sharks {Somnloaus mleracaphalu^. J.D. Borudnska- Dept of Biology,
University of Hartford, West Hartford, CT USA; H.E. Whiteley, Dept of Patfiobiology, University of Connecticut,
Storrs, CT USA; J. Trettel Jr, Dept of Biology, University of Hartford, West Hartford, CT USA; G.W. Benz, Southeast
Aquatic Research Institute and Tennessee Aquarium, Chattanooga, TN USA.

Eyes from six Greenland sharks, Somniosus microcephalus, infected with the parasitic copepod Ommatokoita
elongata were collected Arctic waters of Victor Bay, Northwest Territories, for study. Transformed adult female
copepods, one per eye, were firmly attached to the corneas by an anchoring structure (the bulla), and each bulla was
associated with an opaque area on the cornea. In addition to opacities associated with copepods at the time of
collection, there were several randomly distributed, small, round to irregular, full-thickness corneal opacities which
were not associated with copepods. The sclera at the limbus of infected eyes was thickened at the radius
corresponding to the feeding range of the copepod. Histologically, corneal epithelial ulceration and heterophilio
keratitis, disruption, mineralization, and detachment of Bowman's membrane, thinning, disorganization,
mineralization, and fibrosis of the comeal substantia propria, and focal thinning of Descemenrs membrane were
observed. Mild heterophilio and mononuclear scleritis at the limbus that was continuous with anterior uveitis was
also present. We conclude that parasitism by O. elongata could lead to severe visual impaimnent in Greenland
sharks. However, our current research is directed at understanding the physiology of the normal and altered visual
apparatus in this sperries. We are examining retinal enzymes and analyzing the photopigment prosthetic group.




   299                             14:15 Sunday      . .   .                   CE10                                OVC
The identity of the spotted eagle ray, Aetobatus narinarl - a parasitological perspective. K. Jensen and J.N.
Caira, Department, of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of, Connecticut, Storrs, CT USA.
Spiral intestines of rays identified as Aetobatus narinari, from the Gulf of California, the Gulf of Thailand and the
Timor Sea were examined for tapeworms. Light and electron microscopy of these worms revealed faunal differences
among individuals from these localities. Rays from Mdxico hosted several different species in the order
Tetr^hyllidea. Rays from Thailand and Australia hosted species belonging to file order Lecanicephalidea, but, the
species of lecanicephalideans differed between the two localities. Although these differences may simply reflect
differences in intermediate host availability, it is possible that these data are Indicative of differences in the specific
identities of the rays. Host morphology seems to support the latter explanation. Although rays from all three Irxalities
exhibited dark dorsal surfaces with white spots, size and distribution of these spots differed substantially. Additional
differences were seen in the angle of the anterior margin of the pectoral fins and in snout length. Combined these
data lead us to suspect that the of spotted eagle ray found in the Eastern Pacific might not be conspecific with those
found in the two localities In the Indian Ocean. In addition, based on our data, the conspecific identity of the spotted
eagle rays from Thailand and Australia is questionable.




    300.       ,     .    ..   .   14:30 Sunday                                CE10                               OVC
Identifying cryptic carcharhinifonn shark species: tapeworms as diagnostic tools. C.J. Healy and J.N. Caira,
Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, University of, Connecticut, Storrs, CT USA.
Tetr^hyllidean tapeworms are restricted to elasmobranch hosts and can be highly host specific; in fact, some
species parasitize single species of elasmobranchs and thus may assist in identifying elasmobranch species. Spiral
intestines of Prionace giauca, Galeocerdo cuvier, Eusphyra biochii, 4 Sphyma species, 2 Negaprion species, 3
Rhizoprionodon species, and 19 Carcharbinus species from locations including the western North Atlantic Ocean,
Gulf of California, and Timor Sea off of northern Australia were examined for tetraphyllideans in the temily
Onchobothriidae. Species of the genera Dicranobothrium, Phoreiobothrium, and Ptatybothrium were found to be
restricted iri distribution to carcharhiniform sharks and were found in most of the species examined. Many of the
onchobothriids found are new to sdence and currently undescribed. Our results suggest that the host species
exarriined are parasitized by at least 1 strictly host specific onchobothriid species. In some cases, more than 1 host
specific onchobothriid species was found in a single host species. For example, Negaprion acutidens hosted 3 new
species of Phoreiobothrium that were not found in the other 30 species of carcharhiniform sharks examined. These
results suggest that each carcharhiniform species may possess a unique parasite fauna that could be used as a
diagnostic tool for species identificafion.E



       301                         14:45 Sunday                                  CE1O                                 OVC
    Buoyancy in deep-sea sharks from the Chatham Rise. New Zealand. B.M. Wetherfaee. Zoology Department,
    University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, USA.
    Although deep-sea sharks approach neutral buoyancy through a large oily liver that contains low-density lipids such
    as squalene, there have been few comparisons of buoyancy within and among species of sharks. Buoyancy and
    chemical composition of the liver oil of sharks collected in deep-water trawls from the Chatham Rise, New Zealand
    were compared. Although there appears to be strong selection for neutral buoyancy in these sharks, buoyancy
    characteristics of sharks varied with species, size, sex and reproductive state. Livers of smaller sharks contain more
    squalene and are less dense than livers of larger sharks. However, livers of larger sharks contain a greater
    proportion of oil than livers of smaller sharks, and the whole body of sharks is nearly uniformly neutrally buoyant
    regardless of size of shark. Livers of mature male sharks contain more squalene and are less dense than those of
    mature females, but the non-liver tissue in females is less dense than that of males, and the whole bodies of both
    sexes are equally neutrally buoyant. Regulation of buoyancy of species of sharks found in shallow water differs
    considerably from that of deeper species, and appears to rely more on hydrodynamic lift provided by lifting surfaces
    such as fins.




       302                          15:30 Sunday       . ,                        CE10                               OVC
    Kinematics of shark pectoral fin movements and their implications for lift-production.                    M.P. Robinson,
    Department of Biology, University of South Florida, LIF 136,, 4202 E. Fowler Ave, Tampa FL 33620 USA.
    Elasmobranchs, negatively buoyant animals, must produce dynamic lift to avoid sinking. Current models of shark
    locomotion assume that lift is produced posteriorly by the heterocercal caudal fin and anteriorly by the pertoral firis
    and head. These two components of lift produce torques at the center of mass that negate one another. All inodels
    have assumed that the pectoral fins are static during swimming. Using a dual video camera system I r^orded spiny
    dogfish, Squalus acan&iias, swimming in a large flume. Marks placed on the fins divided them into separate
    segments. Three-dimensional kinematic analyses of these individual segments of the fins and head of the shark
    demonstrated manipulation of the pectoral fins by the sharks during swimming. The angle of the pectoral firi was
    modified during steady swimming and was correlated with the position of the caudal fin during its beat. An index of
    lift was calculated for each fraction of the pectoral fin and head. The head appears to produce significantly more lift
    during steady swimming and while the animal is ascending In the water column. The negative lift produced by the
    pectoral fins appears to be Important in angling the animal down when It begins a descent




       303                         , 15:45 Sunday                                CE10                                 OVC
    Preliminary analysis of factors Influencing swimming speed of the subadult lemon shark [Negaprion
    brevirostris) at BiminlLagoon, Bahamas. J.C. Sterk. Bimini Biological Reid Station, Bimini, Bahamas; S.H.
    Gniber, Bimini Biological Field Station, Bimini, Bahamas, University of Miami RSMAS, 4600 Rickenbacker
    Causeway, Miami, FL 33149, USA.
    Influence of time of day, location of shark and tracker experience on swimming speed was examined in seven
    subadult lemon sharks using speed sensing transmitters. Of nine sharks caught using long line gear between
    January 1997 and August 1997, seven, ranging in size from 160 cm to 183 cm, were fitted with a combination of two
    telemetry transmitters. The devices, a 75 kHz coded transmitter for identification and a 68 kHz transmitter for sp^d
    sensing were mated with cable ties and fixed to the shark with metal darts at the base of the first dorsal fin.
    seven sharks were tracked for a total of 450 hours with at least one continuous, 24 hour track for each shark. The
    longest continuous track was 88 hours. Using GIS and standard statistical methods a first analysis of swimming
    speeds did not revei any significant differences according to time of day. Daytime and nighttime swimming speeds
    averaged 0.33 body lengths per second (bl/s), while crepuscular speeds averaged 0.32 bl/s. In addition, burst-speed
    events did not appear to show any correlation with time of day. GIS analysis of swimming speed and shark location
    showed average speeds to be slightly slower in areas adjacent to mangroves. Swimming speeds were noted to
    decline steadily from 0.45 bl/s with the first 4 sharks tracked to a steady 0.32-0.33 bl/s for the final three sharks. Inis
    suaaested that tracker experience can significantly Influence the speed of a shark. Detail^ analysis of^e tracking
    continues. The bioenergetic significance of these trackings will be discussed. Supported by the US Office of Naval
    Research, the Bimini Biological Field Station and tire Earthwatch organization




        307                          13'00 Sliitday                               CAI                                 CHM
     Consequences of pesticide accumulation in anuran populations. R.W. Russell. Great Lakes Lab for Fisheries
     and Aquatic Sciences, Dept, of Fisheries and Oceans, 867 Lakeshore Rd., Burlington, ON, L7R 4A6: S.J. Heonar
     Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1; G. Mouland, Point Pelee National Park, RR#1,
     Leamington, ON, N8H 3V4; G.D. Haffner, Great Lakes Institute for Environmental Science, University of Windsor,
     401 Sunset Ave., Windsor, ON, N9B 3P4. •

    Environmental contamination with anthropogenic chemicals has been implicated in the decline and disappearance of
    amphibians from many localities around the world. Point Pelee National Park in southern Ontario has lost 5 of 10
    amphibian species in the last 50 years. Habitat loss has occurred but cannot account for the number of amphibian
    extirpations documented in the park. Similar aniphibian losses have not occurred at nearby wetlands. Amphibian
    extirpations at Point Pelee follow a period of DDT application in orchards. DDT and metabolite concentrations were
    greatest in terrestrial arpphibians (Pseudacris crucifer and Bufo americanus} and least in aquatic amphibians (Rana
    clamilans and Rana pipiens). High pesticide concentrations were measured in reptilian predators of amphibians,
    however pesticide concentrations measured in predatory fish were much lower than in snakes of similar trophic
    position. Trophic magnification of pesticides was observed only in the terrestrial food web. Pesticide accumulation in
    amphibians was positively related to site contamination. These data collected in southern Ontario indicate that the
    historic use of pesticides may be an important determinant of local distribution of amphibians and their predators.

   304                   .    . 16:00 Sunday                                CE10                                 OVC
Odontologicat variations in the dentition of the manta ray (Manta blrostris). J.A. Bourdon. 33 Nordica Drive,
Croton-on-Hudson, NY 10520 USA.
The study of Neogene batoids requires an understanding of extant species. An in-depth understanding of the
ondontological characteristics of the living fish is needed because fossil material is largely limited to teeth and
dermal denticles. Although cursory descriptions of dentitions are often provided, these descriptions usually lack the
detail required for paleontological purposes. I initiated a study of a Manta birostris dentition in an effort to identify
manta-like teeth from the Miocene of North Carolina. These teeth, which are commonly referred to as "simple peg­
like", were more variable then anticipated and clearly reflect their mobulid origin.




   305          . . .           16:15 Sunday             .        ..        CE10                 ..      .       OVC
 Tooth replacement rate of the great white shark, Carcharodon carcharias (Linnaeus, 1758). J.C. Bruner,
Laboratory for Vertebrate Paleontology, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
T6G 2E9.
 Analysis of 31 jaws of Carcharodon cardrarias, from specimens ranging in total length from 143.5 to 460.9 cm, finds
a range in tooth replacement rate of the Second Lateral tooth family of (Upper Jaw/Lower Jaw) 106.24/113.59 days
for young individuals to 225.90/242.18 days for old Individuals using the Strasburg Plot Method. The Second Lateral
tooth family of the upper and lower jaws gives the best estimates of tooth replacement rate. Upper and lower jaws
demonstrate fluctuating asymmetry within the number of tooth positions. The range in dental formulae of the
upper/lower jaw for this sample is: 11 to 15 - 0 -12 to 14 /11 to 16 - 0 -11 to 15. One male (NOAA-NMFS Tag #610,
TL 149.5 cm) taken off New Jersey in the Northwest Atlantic, has a very minute parasymphysial tooth in the upper
right jaw. This is the first report of a parasymphysial tooth present in a White Shark and is considered here as an
atavistic character. Using the tooth replacement rate of 106.24 days/toofh, and previous reports of near term White
Shark embryos with 3 to 4 full tooth sets present in their alimentary canals, an estimate of when tooth replacement
begins prior to parturition and therefore a minimum estimate of gestation period for the White Shark can be
calmlated as 425 days.




   306                           16:30 Sunday                ..        .      CE10          ..    .               OVC
Trabecular prismatic cartilage: a novel solution to strengthening the jaws of a cartilaginous fish.                  A.P^
Summers. Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, UMASS Amherst, Amherst. MA 01003 USA.
A synapomorphy of the cartilaginous fishes (Chondriohthyes) is that some, or all, of the skeleton is composed of
calcified cartilage known as prismatic cartilage. The surface of prismatic cartilage is a mosaic of plates of calcium
apatite crystals called tesserae. These tesserae surround a core of hyaline cartilage much as the rind surrounds the
pulpy fruit of an orange and serve to stiffen the skeletal element. In both jaw cartilage of the cownose ray, Rhinoptera
bonasus, struts of calcification run through the hyaline cartilage core. Cownose rays feed on mollusks, ophiuroids
and other hard prey. Tooth plates of adults show distinct wear patterns where the prey is usually cnjshed. A sagittal
section through this 'trabecular cartilage' shows that the starts are positioned so as to prevent buckling in this area.
The common ancestor of cartilaginous and bony fishes is thought to have had a bony endoskeleton. The lamellar
bone of the tesserae and vertebrae of chondrichthians is evidence that the skeleton has not lost osteogenic potential
entirely. The data presented here indicate that a novel developmental and biochemical process is also at work in the
cartilage. Data from neonate individuals indicates that the process of trabeculation is not epigenetic, but rather is part
of a fixed developmental pattern. Bone is typically strengthened through endosteal deposition and trabeculation. In a
remarkable example of convergence, multiple layers of tesserae and stmt formation serve the same purpose in
cartilage.




    310 ,         .              13:45 Sunday                                 CAI                                chm
A study of the herpetofaunal assemblages In the floodplain habitats of the Kissimmee River. C.J. Farrell and
MA. Donnelly, Rorida International University, Arts and Sciences/Biological Sciences, North Miami, FL 33181 USA.

This study examined herpetofaunal assemblage structure in three floodplain habitats (broadleaf marsh, wetland
forest, and wetland shrub) of the Kissimmee River. The Kissimmee River is the subject of a large-scale restoration
project and its success will be evaluated by analyzing changes in the associated biotic assemblages. This study
provides the baseline data necessary for evaluating the effects of restoration based on changes in herpetofaunal
assemblages. Data were collected for 12 consecutive months from August 1996, to July, 1997, using nocturnal
visual encounter sunreys. Results will be presented describing species occurrences and abundances, species­
habitat associations, and faunal similarity among sites.   303                           15:45 Sunday                                  CE10                               OVC
Preliminary analysis of factors influencing swimming speed of the subaduH lemon shark {Negaprion
brevJrostrfs) at BlmihlLagoon, Bahamas. J.C. Sterk. Bimini Biological Reid Station, Bimini, Bahamas; S.H.
Gruber, Bimini Biological Field Station, Bimini, Bahamas, University of Miami RSMAS, 4600 Rickenbacker
Causeway, Miami, FL 33149, USA.
Influence of time of day, location of shark and tracker experience on swimming speed was examined in seven
subadult lemon sharle using speed sensing transmitters. Of nine sharks caught using long line gear between
January 1997 and August 1997, seven, ranging in size from 160 cm to 183 cm, were fitted with a combination of two
telemetry transmitters. The devices, a 75 kHz coded transmitter for identification and a 68 kHz transmitter for speed
sensing were mated with cable ties and fixed to the shark with metal darts at the base of the first dorsal fin. The
seven sharks were tracked for a total of 450 hours wi^ at least one continuous, 24 hour track for each shark. The
longest continuous track was 88 hours. Using GIS and standard statistical methods a first analysis of swimming
speeds did not reveal any significant differences according to time of day. Daytime and nighttime swimming speeds
averaged 0.33 body lengnis per second (bl/s), while crepuscular speeds averaged 0.32 bIZs. In addition, burst-speed
events did not appear to show any correlation with time of day. GIS analysis of swimming speed and shark location
showed average speeds to be slightly slower in areas adjacent to mangroves. Swimming speeds were noted to
decline steadily from 0.45 bl/s with the first 4 sharks tracked to a steady 0.32-0.33 bl/s for the final three sharks. This
suggested that tracker experience can significantly influence the speed of a shark. • Detailed analysis of the tracking
continues. The bioenergefio significance of these trackings will be discussed. Supported by the US Office of Naval
Research, the Bimini Biological Field Station and the Earthwafch organization




   307                           13:00 Sunday. .                       ., ..   CAI                                CHM
Consequences of pesticide accumulation In anuran populations. R.W. Russell. Great Lakes Lab for Fisheries
and Aquatic Sciences, Dept, of Fisheries and Oceans, 867 Lakeshore Rd., Burlington, ON, L7R 4A6; S.J. Hecnar,
Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1; G. Mouland, Point Pelee National Park, RR#1,
Leamington, ON, N8H 3V4; G.D. Haffner, Great Lakes Institute for Environmental Science, University of Windsor,
401 Sunset Ave., Windsor, ON, N9B 3P4. •
Environmental contamination with anthropogenic chemicals has been implicated in the decline and disappearance of
amphibians from many localities around the world. Point Pelee Nation^ Park in southern Ontario has lost 5 of 10
amphibian species in the last 50 years. Habitat loss has occurred but cannot account for the number of amphibian
exfirpations documented in the park. Similar amphibian losses have not occurred at nearby wetlands. Amphibian
extirpations at Point Pelee follow a period of DDT application in orchards. DDT and metabolite concentrations were
greatest in terrestrial amphibians (Pseudacris crucifer and Bufo americanus) and least in aquatic amphibians [Rana
clamitans and Rana pipiens). High pesticide concentrations were measured in reptilian predators of amphibians,
however pesticide concentrations measured in predatory fish were much lower than in snakes of similar trophic
posifion. Trophic magnification of pesticides was observed only in the terrestrial food web. Pesticide accumulation in
amphibians was positively related to site contamination. These data collected in southern Ontario indicate that the
historic use of pesticides may be an important determinant of local distribution of amphibians and their predators.




   308      .       .           13:15-Sunday                                   GAI                                CHM
A comparison of Inventory sampling methods for a neotropical herpetofaunal assemblage In Iwokrama
Reserve. M.H. Chen and M.A. Donnelly, Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University, Miami,
FL 33199 USA.
This study will explore the efficiency of different inventory sampling methods for an assemblage of lowland tropical
amphibians and reptiles. The goal of this research is to identify which methods give the most accurate description of
a herpetofaunal assemblage. Data were collected from the Iwokrama International Centre for Rain Forest
Conservation and Development in central Guyana. Four different methods (day visual encounter survey, night visual
encounter survey, leaf litter plots, and opportunistic collecting) were used to examine the assemblage stnjcture.
Results will be presented examining the variation in descriptors of amphibian and reptile species diversity among
different populations and different methods. It is important for researchers to develop standard standard methods for
sampling assemblage structure. Inventory sampling provides information on assemblage structure and baseline
species diversity data for future comparisons. Therefore, these data are critical in the quest to discover the
relationship between species loss and ecosystem function.




   309                           13:30 Sunday                                  CAI                                CHM
Amphibian monitoring, varlablltty, and sample size: lessons from the literature. P.C. Eagle. Pennsylvania
State University, c/o Patuxent Wildlife Research Center, 12100 Beech Forest Road , Laurel, MD 20708-4038 USA;
S. Droege, Patuxent Wildlife Research Center, 12100 Beech Forest Road , Laurel, MD 20708-4038 USA; J.P.
Gibbs, Slate University of New York, Syracuse, NY 13210 USA.
Counts of amphibians over time were compiled from published accounts. At ths time this abstract was written, 37
studies have yielded 110 separate count series for 45 amphibian species. Counts were analyzed to determine
series mean, detrended standard deviation, and subsequent coefficient of variation (CV). Studies have been
categorized according to taxonomic group, sampling method, study region, and count type (index vs. population
estimate). Initial analyses indicate significant differences among count CVs based on count type, with CVs from
population estimates being significantiy lower than index CVs (p = 0.016). While sample sizes were low, there are
further indications that CVs of counts of terrestrial and stream salamanders are much lower than most anuran and
pond-breeding salamanders. We are currently adding counts to the database as new studies arise. We will also
demonstrate the impact of variability on power and sample size requirements for monitoring programs using the
program MONITOR. Finally, we plan to use studies providing within season data and multiple site data to
characterize the various components of count variance among sampling error and yearly variation.

   306                           16:30 Sunday                                 CE10        ..   .                 OV.C
Trabecular prismatic cartilage: a novel solution to strengthening the Jaws of a cartilaginous fish.                  A.P.
Summers. Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, UMASS Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003 USA.
A synapomorphy of the cartilaginous fishes (Chondrichthyes) is that some, or all, of the skeleton is composed of
calcified cartilage known as pnsmatic cartilage. The surface of prismatic cartilage is a mosaic of plates of calcium
apatite crystals called tesserae. These tesserae surround a core of hyaline cartilage much as the rind surrounds the
pulpy fruit of an orange and serve to stiffen the skeletal element. In both jaw cartilage of the rxnvnose ray, Rhinoptera
bonasus, struts of calcification run through the hyaline cartilage core. Cownose rays feed on mollusks, ophiuroids
and other hard prey. Tooth plates of adults show distinct wear patterns where the prey is usually crushed. A sagittal
section through this 'trabecular cartilage' shows that the struts are positioned so as to prevent buckling in this area.
The common ancestor of cartilaginous and bony fishes is thought to have had a bony endoskeleton. The lamellar
bone of the tesserae and vertebrae of chondrichthians is evidence that the skeleton has not lost osteogenic potential
entirely. The data presented here indicate that a novel developmental and biochemical process is also at work in the
cartilage. Data from neonate individuals indicates that the process of trabeculation is not epigenetic, but rather is part
of a fixed developmental pattern. Bone is typically strengthened through endosteal deposition and trabeculation. In a
remarkable example of convergence, multiple layers of tesserae and strut formation senre the same purpose in
cartilage.




   310                           13:45 Sunday                                  CA1                                CHM
A study of the heipetofaunal assemblages In the floodplain habitats of the Kissimmee River. C J. Farrell and
MA. Donnelly, Florida International University, Arts and Sciences/Biological Sciences, North Miami, FL 33181 USA.
This study examined herpetofaunal assemblage structure in three floodplain habitats (broadleaf marsh, wetland
forest, and wetland shnjb) of the Kissimmee River. The Kissimmee River is the subject of a large-scale restoration
project and its success will be evaluated by analyzing changes in the associated biotic assemblages. This study
provides the baseline data necessary for evaluating the effects of restoration based on changes !n herpetofaunal
assemblages. Data were collected for 12 consecutive months from August, 1996, to July, 1997, using nocturnal
visual encounter surveys. Results will be presented describing species occurrences and abundances, species­
habitat associations, and faunal similarity among sites.




   311                           14:00 Sunday                                  CAI                               CHM
Automated acoustical monitoring of anuran amphibians In New Brunswick, Canada. K.L. Oseen. Department
of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax NS, B3H 4J1; R.J. Wassersug, Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology,
Dalhousie University, Halifax NS, B3H 4H7.
As part of a long-term amphibian monitoring program, automated acoustical recorders were placed at five sites in
two national parks in New Bninswick during the summer of 1997. Each recorder took a one minute long acoustical
sample every hour from early May until the end of August, for an average of 110 recording days per recorder.
Analysis of acoustical samples revealed the presence of five anuran species, Pseudacris crucifer, Rana catesbeiana,
Rana clamitans, Rana syh/atica, and Bufo americanus. A sixth species, Rana pipiens, was detected on only one
occasion. Three species also found in New Brunswick (Hyla versicolor, Rana palustris, and Rana septentrionalis')
were not detected at any of ths sampled sites. Chorus activity patterns changed over the breeding season for each
species. In general, chorus activity was highest between the hours of 10 pm and 5 am, although calling individuals
were frequently recorded throughout the day. We also compared two acoustical sampling protocols (one min every
hour vs. 12 s every 15 min). Both strategies detected the same species richness, but showed subtle differences in
anuran activity patterns. Comparison of calling activity with meteorological data is currently underway.




  ■312                           14:15 Sunday                                  CAI                               CHM
Herpetofaunal populations of an urban lake/wetland ecosystem in central New York. P.K. Ducev. Department
of Biological Sciences, SUNY at Cortland, Cortland, NY, 13045 USA.
Onondaga Lake lies in the Syracuse NY urbanization zone surrounded by industrial, commercial, and residential
areas. The lake has been greatly impacted by a century of industrial waste dumping and sewage discharge. Since
1994, herpetofaunal sunreys have been conducted in the lake and adjacent terrestrial and wetland areas using
transecris, quadrats, trapping arrays, select point sampling, and calling surveys spanning all active seasons. The
Onondaga Lake ecosystem was found to support reduced herpetofaunal diversity and population sizes compared to
less disturbed areas in the region. No amphibians breed in the lake itself or in any wetland with direct connections to
the lake. Frve anuran and two salamander species utilize runoff-filled wetlands adjacent to the lake. Remediation
efforts in the ecosystem should include retention of isolated wetland as sources of animals for recolonization                               14:30 Sunday                                CAI                              CHM
  313
Effects of clearcutting on amphibian and reptile communities of temporary ponds in a managed pine
flatwoods. E.A. Domingue. USDI, US Geological Sunrey, BRD, 320 Laurel Valley Road, Townsend, TN 37882.

The heroetofaunal community of a slash pine flatwoods ecosystem of north-central Honda was monitored from
AugusfTggS through August 1994, October 1995 through September 1996, and November 1996
Drift fences with ninnel traps and PVC pipe refugia were used to gather baseline data on the herpetofaunal
community using nine temporary ponds and the adjacent uplands, before and after a timber harvest study ponds
rannnd in sizo frZ o Ol - 0.71 ha. Forty-five species (16 amphibian, 29 reptile)were recorded. Effects of
clearcutting and site preparation included significant short-term changes in both amphibian and mptile
abundance. As compared with the control, amphibian numbers were higher on ‘ti®                             th^^first
siimmprs Dost-harvest (P < 0 001 P = 0.0137, respectively). Reptile numbers were higher on the clearcut in the first
SS Jnh?(pTaa)'n.^’ye« fhree (1997) fo°amphibians and year two (1996) for reptiles, relative abundance
on the clearcut site returned to numbers comparable to those, observed on ^®                            27 SD^-
amohibians and reptiles was documented with distances ranging from 16 - 692 m (Mean - 98.1, n - 47, bu-
145.9y Thus some amphibians and reptiles are using large areas of the flatwoods, including upland habitat and one
or more ponds.




                               14:45 Sunday                                CAI                               CHM
   314
Effects of selection logging on the relative abundance of breeding arnphibtoiis within tolerarit hardwood
forests of Ontario. L. Enright. Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontano, N1G 2W1.

Many of Ontario's amphibian species occur in forested areas of the Great Lakes-Sf.
soecies are potentially suscepme to habitat disturbance and alteration associated with selection loggmg proto^js
used to XaaroSv-Sd, tolerant hardwood forests in these areas. In 1995, I began a research program to
determine whether and if so, by what mechanism(s), selection logging affects ^phibian diversity and
abundance at breedinq sites. Iri 1996 and 1997, I compared amphibian abundance concurrently with habitat
characteristics of’ (a) 10 ephemeral breeding pools adjacent to logging roads, (b) 10 ephemeral breeding pools
within forest stands' logged 2-3 years prior to being surveyed, and (c) 10 ephemeral br^ding pools in forest st^ds
that had been left undi^urbed for at least 30-40 years. Results of nocturnal, time constrained surveys of breeding
adult abundance at these pools suggest that selection logging does not affect the abundance of breeding adults as a
group However, when I analyzed data for each species seperately, I found that although selection fogging does not
aooear to affect the relative abundance of Spring Peepers, Wood Frogs appear to be more abundant in undistutoed
forestoth^ in logged forests during the early part of the breeding season. The rel®«ve abundance of Ame^an
Toads was consistently higher in breeding pools within logged f®’’®®*.
Stepwise multiple regression analysis suggests that venation in amphibian abundance can be explained best by
variation in the duration of these ephemeral pools.




                                15:30 Sunday                                CAI                              CHM
    315
 How important Is statistical power when testing hypotheses of amphibian decline? J.C. MacDonald.
 Brooks Department of Zctology, University of Guelph, Ontario, NIG 2W1; L.J. ®*^'f®®®'
 Canadian tWidlife Service, Box 5050 Burlington, Ontario L7R 4N0; K.A. Judge, Department of Zoology, University of
 Guelph, Ontario, N1G 2W1.
 The jargon of statistical power has invaded the vocabulary of almost every conservation biologist rJespite being
 largely^absent from the literature as applied methodology. With 7®P®®‘*° ®PP^'‘’'?"            ™henThe^^^^
 refers to the probability of correctly rejecting the null hypothesis (that there is no decline) when the aternawe
 hypothesis is true (a decline is occurring). Clearly we want high power in our monitonng programs ®° ®®J®      “
 the chance of maWnq a Type II error fe., failing to detect a decline that is occurririg). However, .^®®y
 monitoring programs^ likely do not have the necessary power to satisfactonly reduce foe possibihty that ^toal
 declines are occurring even though some studies suggest stability and have data-sets that exceed 10 years. Her^
 wVreSew the concepts of statistical power as they apply to detecting populatiOT declines. We then raloiflate an
 estimate of power for fong-term data on bullfrogs (Rana catesbeiana] and wood frogs 0^®"®                kn hnw an
 the problems associated with maximizing power in amphibian monitonng                  J^® „ ®°g
 understanding of power should influence both the design of monitonng programs and management expectations.




     319                  .      T3<15 Sunday__________________              GS1__________________            MCN
  fritraspecffic motecular systematics of the sabine shiner, Notri^is sablnae (Teieostei:          Cyprinldae).   ME.
 Bajfiy, Department of Biology, Saint Louis University, 3507 Laclede Avenue, St. Louis, MO 31303-2010 USA.
 Prior 10 1991, foe sabine shiner, Notropis sabinae, was known only from drainages west of the Mississippi River. In
 the process of describing the Yazoo shiner, N. rafinesquei, Suttkus noted the presence of N. sabinae within the
 Yazoo River, a system which lies east of the Mississippi River. Further sampling uncovered yet another eastern
 population within foe Big Black River system. Upon preliminary examination, the latter population appears Itf show
 morphological novelties for this group. Given the diversity exhibited among populations of N. sabinae, a genetic data
 set was assembled to aid in defining operational taxonomic units (OTUs, sensu Mayden and Wood, 1995) within this
 species, and to suggest avenues for further study. Sequences were collected from the mitochondrial cytochrome b
 gene from individuals representing the geographic range of this species and were subjected to phylogenetic and
 population-level analyses. In all analyses, the Big Black River population was strongly supported as monophyletic
 and distinct from any other population.

                                15:45 Sunday                                 CAI                               CHM
  316
Translocation of amphibians into mitigated and existing wetlands-a review of a new protocol. J.T. Julian and
J.H. Howard, Department of Biology, Frostburg State University, Frostburg, MD 21532 USA.
Previous amphibian relocation, repatriation, and translocation programs have proven most success^ wheri
introducing individuals in early developmental stages. Over the next 2 years, we will introduce     masses of ta^et
amphibian species into artificial ponds in mitigated and existing wetland areas at       Gap State
Three pairs of constructed ponds (approximately 18.5 m®) are arranged so one shallow pond (< .4m in d^th) and
one deep pond (> .45m in depth) comprise each pair. The shallow ponds will facilitate establishment of s^l, less
abundant anuran species by excluding larger species with longer developrnent^ stages. To monitor migration all
ponds are encircled by drift fencing with both pitfall and funnel traps. Introduced egg masses will be monitored by
recording percent hatching success and larvae will be monitored by tracking tadpole ^oravorship via weeWy
population estimates using a quadrat box sampling technique. Metamorphosed individuals captured while disperang
from the ponds will be marked with toe-clipping to determine if they return to breed m subsequent seasons.
Additional marking schemes include freeze branding metamorphosed salamandere and photqidentification of
 anurans Additional constructed ponds in adjacent areas are being monitored for unaided colonization.




                                16:00 Sunday                                  CAI                               CHM
   ■317
Amphibians and reptiles of the Georgian Bay islands. D. Brittan, Office of the Secretary of State parte). Edifice
Jules Leger, 11th Floor, Hull, Que, KIA QMS; J.P. Bogart, Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ontario, NIG 2W1.
Forming a large eastern embayment on Lake Huron, Georgian Bay comprises a b^y of water approximate y the
same size as the state of Vermont. Bounded in the west by the limestone arc of the Niagara esoarprnent, and in the
west by the Canadian Shield, the Bay encompasses some of Ontano s most spectacular                        ®®'^®’ '*,'®
also one of the province's richest areas for amphibians and reptiles, with 35 species f®®®^^®''’f®®*               J"
Georgian Bay Islands National Park, Beausoleil Island alone, at an area of 1100 ha, supports 32 ®’5^®®®JP®®"®®’
Among the resident herpetofauna are the regionally rare Spotted Turtle, Eastern Hcignose Snake, Eastern Fox
Snake and Eastern Massasauga. During the summers of 1995 and 1996, herpetofaunal surveys were conducted on
43 of the approximately 30,000 islands in Georgian Bay. This talk will provide an overview of the varied habitats and
herpetofauna of this region, as well as a discussion of the biogeographic points of interest.




    318                          13:00 Sunday                                 GS1                                MCN .
 Comparisons of assimilation efficiency and gut characteristics in two species of herbivorous datn^selfishes
 (Stegastes dorsopunicans and S. planitrons). A. Cleveland, Department of Biological Sciences Box 5640 NAU
 Hagstaff AZ, 86011 -5640 USA.
  As consumers of 60-99% of reef primary productivity, herbivorous fishes occupy a pivotal role in channeling energy
 alonTfoe reef food chain. I examined feeding physiology and ecology/ of two terntonal heibivorous damselfishes
 commonly found among the coral reefs of the San Blas Archipelago, Republic of Panama. I measured               i®.®9ib,
 out retention time, and total and nutrient-specific assimilation efficiencies and made interspeafio cornpansons
 between the dusky damselfish (S. dorspopunicans} and the threespot damselfish (S. planif^s}. Re atiw gut lerigth
 is significantly different between the two damselfish species. Dusky damselfish have a relative gut length ratio (gut
 tengtwSato Tengfo) d 1.20 and a Zihler indes ((gut length/(weightA1«) » f42. Values for fo^s threesp^^^
 damselfish are 3 01 and 824 respectively. Despite striking differences in RGL and Zl, the gut retenflqn time is the
 same for both species. Additionafly, only protein assimilation efficiency (and thus total ®®®"r"'®J®® ®^®'®?^\''^P®®
 between species; significantly more protein is assimilated by the threespot '*®™®'’®h 'ha®‘he dusky damselfish.
 The^e results have several important Implications. First, as both species feed on the same algal diet, the greater
 SsWiXn eScy o® foJ foreespot damselfish may translate into faster growth rates and pre^r reproducbve
 caoacitv Second It has long been held that relative gut length ratios of herbivorous fishes fell
      most herbivorous damselfishes in the range of 5. The significantly lower relative 9Ut leng^ of dus^ d^^lfis^

                                           questions the apptlcabWity of such characters in phylogenetic analyses.




    322                     ,    14:00' Sunday              _____________ GS1                                    MCN
 Are you considering transplantantion as a management tod? Be cautious - mixing gene pods may be more
 harmful than helpful due to outbreeding depression. J.P. Hernandez-Martich. The University of Georgia
 Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, Drawer E, Aiken, SC 29802 USA.
 Mixing gene pools may cause outbreeding depression (OD). However, it is unknown what kind and degree of
 between-mate dissimilarity should exist for OD to occur. The Optimum Outbreeding Paradigm (OOP) predicts
 inbreeding depression (ID) tor offspring of close relatives. As similarities between mates decrease, offspring fitness
 increases, reaches an optimal level and then decreases to levels below parental fitness (I. e., OD occurs).
 Populations of eastern mosquitofish {Gambusia holbrooki: Poeciliidae) from foe Piedmont and Coastal Plain of two
 drainages were used as sources of fish for seven crosses and six pure controls each replicated in four mesocosms.
 OD occurred in populations of some crosses between fish from different regions and/or drainages. There were
 significantly more extinct populations among those founded with fish from the same vs. different region/drainage
 sections (7of 20 vs. 3 of 32). Population size and growth rate, fecundity and juvenile survival were significantly lower
 for populations of crosses of fish from different regions and/or drainages than for those of their controls. I examined
 potential predictors of OD and the per-locus number of unshared alleles (Nu) between sources was the best
 predictor under the OOP. Optimum outcrossing and OD are expected when Nu = 0.25 and >0.45, respectively.nypotnesis is true Decline is occurnngj. vieany we wani nign power in our moniionng programs so as lo minimize
the chance of making a Type II error (i.e., failing to detect a decline that is occurring). However, many amphibian
monitoring programs likely do not have the necessary power to satisfactorily reduce the possibility that actual
declines are occurring, even though some studies suggest stability and have data-sets that exceed 10 years. Here,
we review the concepts of statistical power as they apply to detecting population declines. We then calculate an
estimate of power for long-term data on bullfrogs (Rana catesbeiana) and wood frogs (Rana sylvatica] to investigate
the problems associated with maximizing power In amphibian monitoring programs. We also comment on how an
understanding of power should influence both the design of monitoring programs and management expectations.




   31                          13 :15 Sunday                              GS1 ..               . .  .  MCN
Intraspecific molecular systematics of the sabine shiner, Notropla sablnae fTeleostei: Cyprinidae). ME
Raley. Department of Biology, Saint Louis University, 3507 Laclede Avenue, St. Louis, MO 31303-2010 USA.

Prior to 1991, the sabine shiner, Notropis sabinae, was known only from drainages west of the Mississippi River. In
the process of describing the Yazoo shiner, N. rafinesquei, Suttkus noted the presence of Al. sabinae within the
Yazoo River, a system which Iles east of the Mississippi River. Further sampling uncovered yet another eastern
population within the Big Black River system. Upon preliminary examination, the latter population appears to show
morphological novelties for this group. Given the diversity exhibited among populations of Al. sabinae, a genetic data
set was assembled to aid in defining operational taxonomic units (OTUs, sensu Mayden and Wood, 1995) within this
species, and to suggest avenues for further study. Sequences were collected from the mitochondrial cytochrome b
gene from individuals representing the geographic range of this species and were subjected to phylogenetic and
population-level analyses. In all analyses, the Big Black River population was strongly supported as monophyletic
and distinct from any other population.




   320                          13:30 Sunday                                 GS1                              MCN
Quick and accurate identification of triggerfishes (Balistidae) using PCR with species-diagnostic
mitochondrial (12S/16S) primers. H.A. Balchowsky. Nova Southeastern University, Oceanographic Center, 8000
Ocean Drive, Dania, FL 33004 USA.
Identification of ichthyoplankton (eggs, larvae, and juveniles) can be a challenging task due to their small sizes and
dynamic development. This problem is particularly acute for tropical and subtropical ichthyoplankton, most of which
can be identified to family-level only. As part of a broader initiative to develop molecular markers for tropical and
subtropical fish identification, we report on the utility of mitochondrial ribosomal gene sequences for triggerfish
species identification. A 1,510 bp fragment, containing portions of the mitochondrial ribosomal genes (12S, 16S) and
the complete tRNA valine gene, was sequenced from six triggerfish species (4 genera) inhabiting the western central
Atlantic Ocean. Forty-three sequences were examined to assess intra- and interspecific variation. Intraspecific
differences were minor (less than 0.5%); however, sufficient interspecific differences occur within this locus to allow
the design of robust species-specific PCR primers. When tested in a multiplex PCR assay, these primers yielded
species-diagnostic size fragments that unambiguously identified all 4 genera and 4 of the 6 species. Distinction
between the two Canthidermis congeners (0.9% interspecific variation) was not possible using this approach;
however, these congeners were readily distinguished using RFLP analysis of the PCR amplicon, we suggest that
molecular genetic approaches can provide a robust and rapid method to tackle long-standing problems in the
identification of fish species.




   321                          13:45 Sunday                                 GS1                               MCN
Evolution of karyotypes, reproductive organs, and trophic structures In the Goodeidae (Pisces:
Cyprindontiformes) based on nuclear and mithochondrial DNA phylogenies: The continuing sa^. L.E.
Thompson. The University of /Uabama, Department of Biological Sciences, Box 870345, Tuscaloosa, Alabama
35487-0345 USA.
The family Goodeidae is a distinct North American lineage of freshwater fishes and is comprised of two monophyletic
subfamilies (Empetrichthyinae and Goodeinae). Empetrichthyinae contains all egg-laying species and Goodeinae
contains all viviparous spedes. The Goodeinae is recognized as a monophyletic group based on the presence of
unique morphological traits associated with internal fertilization and viviparity. The classification of goodeids has
been based largely on variation of reproductive and trophic characters. A molecular phylogenetic hypothesis is
presented based on the cladistic analysis of mtDNA (portions of the 16s rRNA, control region, and c^ochrome b
genes) and nDNA (a portion of the tyrosine kinase X-src gene) of representative goodeid fishes. The comparative
method based on the molecular phylogeny was used to reconstruct the evolution or key characters traditionally used
in the classification of the group such as: trophotaeniae (external projections of the embryonic gut that absorb
maternal nutrients), karyot^es, and tooth and jaw structures. The phylogeny agrees with some but not all
conclusions from earlier studies regarding phylogenetic relationships and reproductive and trophic character
evolution.

Deiween irie uusivy                 fjui9fjvpunn;aiiat ariu uie uiiwtsopui                           neiauve yui leiiyiii
is significantly different between the two damselfish species. Dusky damselfish have a relative gut length ratio (gut
length/standard length) of 1.20 and a Zihler indes ((gut length/(weighM/3)) if 3.42. Values for the threespot
damselfish are 3.01 and 824 respectively. Despite striking differences in RGL and Zl, the gut retention time is the
same for both species. Additionally, only protein assimilation efficiency (and thus total assimilation efficiency) varies
between species; significantly mote protein is assimilated by the threespot damselfish than the dusky damselfish.
These results have several important implications. First, as both species feed on the same algal diet, the greater
assimilation efficiency of the threespot damselfish may translate into faster growth rates and greater reproductive
capacity. Second, it has long been held that relative gut length ratios of herbivorous fishes fall between 2 and 21,
with most herbivorous damselfishes in the range of 5. The significantly lower relative gut length of dusky damselfish,
unquestionably an herbivore, challenges trophic classifications based on relative gut length ratios. Third, gut
moqihologiss are often used in phylogenetic analyses. These two damselfish are closely related congeners yet their
gut morphologies vary significantly. This questions the applicability of such characters in phylogenetic analyses.




                                                                                              MCN
Are you considering transplantantion as a management tod? Be cautious - mixing gene pods may be more
harmful than helpful due to outbreeding depression. J.D. Hemandez-Martich. The University of Georgia
Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, Drawer E, Aiken, SC 29802 USA.

Mixing gene pools may cause outbreeding depression (OD). However, it is unknown what kind and degree of
between-mate dissimilarity should exist for OD to occur. The Optimum Outbreeding Paradigm (OOP) predicts
inbreeding depression (ID) for offspring of close relatives. As similarities between mates decrease, offspring fitness
increases, reaches an optimal level and then decreases to levels below parental fitness (i. e., OD occurs).
Populations of eastern mosquitofish (Gambusia holbrooki: Poeciliidae) from the Piedmont and Coastal Plain of two
drainages were used as sources of fish for seven crosses and six pure controls each replicated in four mesocosms.
OD occurred in populations of some crosses between fish from different regions and/or drainages. There were
significantly more extinct populations among those founded with fish from the same vs. different region/drainage
sections (7of 20 vs. 3 of 32). Population size and growth rate, fecundity and juvenile survival were significantly lower
for populations of crosses of fish from different regions and/or drainages than for those of their controls. I examined
potential predictors of OD and the per-locus number of unshared alleles (Nu) between sources was the best
predictor under the OOP. Optimum outcrossing and OD are expected when Nu = 0.25 and >0.45, respectively.




   323                          14:15 Sunday                                  GS1                               MCN
Evolution of the biomechanical attributes of long bones in fish, amphibians, and reptiles.               G.M. Erickson.
Biomechanical Engineering Division, Mechanical Engineering Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-
3030 USA.
Long bones are the major skeletal elements of vertebrate appendages. The radiations of many vertebrate clades
were facilitated by locomotory innovations Involving these elements (e.g. the terrestrial diversification of tetrapods)
and thus it is necessa^ to understand how these elements changed biomechanically to more fully understand
vertebrates evolution. Biomechanical attributes of long bones such as strength, modulus, and loading conditions are
well documented in avian and mammalian taxa. However, data for taxa from outgroup clades are virtually non­
existent and the results from the few studies that have been conducted are not in accord with those obtained for bird
and mammal bones. In order to provide a better understanding of skeletal evolution, I conducted a series of
biomechanical tests on long bones from a diversity of fish, amphibians, and reptiles that possessed basal locomotory
attributes within their respective clades. Evolutionary trends were assessed using phylogenetic character analysis.
The results suggest; 1) material properties (strength, modulus, and failure strain) did not vary throughout evolution,
2) in vivo strain regimes increased Independently in birds and mammals, 3) the capacity of long bones to functionally
adapt is a plesiomorphic osteichthyan trait, and 4) size and shape changes were the primary means by which long
bones changed to meet evolutionary locomotory challenges.




   324                          14:30 Sunday                                 GS1                               MCN
Comparative locomotor kinematics of three stingray species (Taeniura lymma, Dasyatls americana, and D.
sabina}. L.J. Rosenberger. University of Chicago, Dept. OBA, 1027 E. 57th, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
Locomotion in stingrays occurs as waves are propagated along their broadly expanded pectoral fins and can range
from being undulatory to oscillatory. This study compares swimming behavior in three stingray species (Taeniura
lymma, DasyaBs americana, D. sabina} differing in fin design (disc shape) as measured by aspect ratio (AR). Three-
dimensional video recordings captured swimming kinematics over a range of velocities for the three species.
Results indicate that D. americana (highest AR) has a significantly lower wing beat frequency and lower number of
waves than the other two species. Wing amplitude, as a percentage of wing span, differs significantly in T. lymma
(highest) and D. sabina (lowest). The results of frequency and number of waves corroborate previous studies
suggesting that higher aspect ratio fins tend to have a lower frequency and lower number of waves than low aspect
ratio fins; however, the amplitudo data does not lit the prediction of high AR fins having greater amplitude. Overall, D.
americana falls more toward the oscillatory end of the continuum and T. lymma falls toward the undulatory end, with
D. sabina somewhere in between these two.   325                 . ,      14:45 Sunday                                   GS1                                MCN
Light attenuating molecules In the lens of the fish eye.            M. Posner. Dept, of Biological Sciences, Univ, of
Southern California, Los, Angeles, CA, 90089; Section of Vertebrates, Natural History Museum of Los, Angeles
County, 900 Exposition Blvd., Los Angeles, CA, 90007 USA.
The ocular lens of fishes contains mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs), which attenuate short wavelengths of light.
The causes for the varied distribution of MAAs in the lenses of different fish species are still in question. In this study
I examined the lenticular MAA content of 42 flatfish species (order Pleuronectiformes) from nine families to
investigate the controlling factors on lens pigmentation and changes in pigmentation during ontogeny. MAAs were
actively transporteri and concentrated by fie lens from the surrounding humors in the eye. These MAAs produced
two absorbance peaks when analyzed spectrophotometrically, one near 320 nm and another near 360 nm. The
relative amounts of different MAAs in the lens was correlated with phylogeny, while the total MAA concentration
reflected the depth distribution of each species. Species living in deeper water contained lower concentrations of
MAAs. Both the total amount of MAAs and their relative proportions changed during ontogeny. MAAs began
accumulating after settlement, and increased in concentration with standard length. The phylogenetic trend in the
relative proportion of MAA peaks suggests that lens pigmentation is under genetic control. This control is not
exerted by the lens itself, but may occur at the level of food metabolism.




   326                        ...16:00 Sunday                                  GS1                                MCN
The effects of chronic and periodic acute hypoxia on the growth and physiology of Juvenile southern
flounder, Paralichthys lethostigma. J.C. Tavlor. Department of Zoology, Box 7617, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC , 27695.
Dissolved oxygen (DO) is proving to be one of the most important determinants of Juvenile fish growth and survival
in our estuaries. Laboratory experiments were conducted to determine the effects of chronic hypoxia and periodic
acute hypoxia on the growth, metabolic rate and blood hematocrit of juvenile southern flounder, Paralichthys
lethostigma. Fish were maintained in aquaria having constant salinity (15 psu) and temperature (25 °C) and
exposed to constant normoxia (6 mg 02 P-l), constant hypoxia (2.75) an intermediate level (4.5), and a diel
oscillating treatment (daily mean = 4.5 mg 02 k^l). Results from the blood hematocrit analysis indicate a
secondary stress response to the nocturnal hypoxia in the oscillating treatment resulting in increased blood
hematocrit levels. Flounder also exhibited limited growth in the low DO treatment (1.9 % Wt d*-1, p<0.001)
suggesting a species-level limiting oxygen concentration for growth between the low (2.75) and intermediate (4.5)
DO levels. Furthermore, fish in the oscillating treatment realized growth similar to the intermediate treatment
indicating that daily growth is a function of the daily mean DO concentrations. This hypothesis is supported by the
dramatic overcompensafion in the afternoon routine respiration rates exhibited by the oscillating treatment. Further
work is necessary to address the synergistic effects of temperature and variable DO on the grrjwth and physiology
of juvenile estuarine dependent fish.




  . 327                          16:15 Sunday                                  GSI                                MCN
The influence of temperature on the otolith-somatic growth relationship for Juvenile southern flouiKier,
Paralichthys lethostigma. D.D. Davis. NCSU; Dept, of Zoology; Box 7617; Raleigh, NC 27695-7617 USA.
Temperature effects on the ofolith-somatio growth relationship of southern flounder, Paralichthys lethostigma were
determined in order to back-calculate somatic growth rates of wild-caught fish. Laboratory growth experiments were
conducted to measure the somatic and otolith growth of juvenile flounder at five temperatures: 17, 20, 25, 30, and 33
°C. To measure growth rates of wild-caught fish, temperatures were continuously monitored and fish were collected
in a known flounder nursery area. With slow somatic growth and/or low temperatures (17 and 20 °C), ring counts
from laboratory fish were underestimated. Otolith growth (OG) was significantly correlated with temperature (T) and
somatic growth (G) with the strongest relationship measured at areas near the sulcus on the right otolith: OG =
0.2352(G) +■ 0.0481 (T) - 0.5842 (R® = 0.74). Increment counts from fish exposed to 17 and 20 °C were
underestimated; therefore, reliable estimates of growth could not be obtained. Therefore, this otolith-somatio growth
equation can only be used for temperatures greater than 25 °C. In this case, predicted growth rates were 2.7 -15.7
% d''-*! showing that flounder are not growth limited in North Carolina estuaries.




   :331__________________ 13:30 Su'-iday                ________________ eS4                    _____________ -AXL,
Ecology and habitat use of juvenile box turtles at Egmont Key, Florida. A.M. Hamilton. Department of Wildlife
Ecology and Conservation, 303 Newins-Ziegler, HaH, University of Rorida, Gainesville, FL 32611 USA.
Studies on box turtles (Terrapene Carolina baun} on Egmont Key have been ongoing since 1991. This island off the
west coast of Florida is home to more than 2000 turtles. During previous fieldwork, large numbers of juveniles were
found. Data on size, habitat, and activity were recorded. Beginning in June 1997, I began an intensive study of
juvenile habitat use and movement patterns. Through November, a total of 192 juveniles were located and
marked. Thread trailers were attached to 59 juveniles (<121mm) that were tracked until die thread ran out
(generally within four days). I recorded canopy cover density and species composition along trails at 10m
intervals. Juveniles were found primarily under dense, low ground cover, and frequently travelled at the ecotone
between dense canopy and more open areas. Small juveniles (<65mm) were mostly found during the hottest part
of the day, and appeared to be basking; at other times, they chose forms under Australian pine needles.
AddiSorially, juvenile habitat use varies with body size. These habitat data can be used to assist in planning island

   328                           16:30 Sunday                                 GS1                                MCN
Comparative physiology of metabolic rate and thermal tolerance: physiological parameters for Investigating
macroecological patterns. W.l. Lutterschmidt. University of Oklahoma, Dept, of Zoology, Univ, of Oklahoma,
Norman, OK 73019.
Distributional patterns of species result in part from their ability to tolerate physiologically the environmental extremes
characteristio within their geographical range. Macroecology attempts to reveal relationships between organisms
and their environments by investigating statistical patterns of abundance and distribution. In such analyses, species
serve as replicates where the relationship between range and body size is used to understand how physical space
and ecological resources are partitioned to create fie unique distributions of species. However, these studies often
fail to consider the underlying physiological capacities and tolerances that are most likely to be the limiting factors in
determining distributions. I measured temperature dependent metabolic rate and high temperature tolerance in
several ectothermio species in a attempt to investigate two subsidiary principles of Shelford's law and determine if
physiological parameters are better predictors of distributional patterns than are measures of body size. After
controls tor phylogeny, I found species-specific plasticity of metabolic rate and high temperature tolerance to predict
better the statistical patterns of ger^raphic range size and latitudinal range among the fishes and snakes studied.
These findings support Shelforas idea that the distributions of species often are governed by the environmental
factor for which species have the narrowest tolerance range or least adaptability.




   329                           13:00 Sunday                                  GS4                                 AXL
Patterns of variation in spring emergence by black rat snakes (Elaphe obsoleta obsoleta). G. Blouin-Demers.
P.J. Weatherhead and K.A. Prior, Department of Biology, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, On,
K1S 5B6.
Substantial individual variation in timing of emergence from hibernation has been reported among reptiles, although
few studies have addressed the causes of that variation. Here we report patterns of spring emergnece by black rat
snakes (Elaphe obsoleta obsoleta}, observed at 13 communal hibernacula in eastern Ontario from 1992 to 1997.
Although we found significant variations in timing of emergence among years and among hibernacula, we found no
evidence of a simple latitudinal gradient in mean emergence dates. Within hibernacula, significantly more snakes
emerged on days with high maximum air temperatures, but maximum air temperature only explained a small amount
of the variation among years in emergence dates. Larger individuals emerged earlier than smaller individuals and
females tended to emerge earlier than males. Condition was not a significant factor determining timing of
emergence in our black rat snake population. Based on these results, we proposed the preparation for reproduction
hypothesis which states that mature individual snakes emerge earlier than immature individuals to prepare their
gonads for reproduction.




  ■330                           13:15 Sunday                                  GS4                       AXL
Movement patterns and microhabitat use of the brown tree snake, Boiga irregularis.             C.S. Clark. Ohio
Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit Ohio State University, 1735 Neil Avenue, Columbus OH 43210 USA.
The Brown Tree Snake (BTS), Boiga irregularis, is a nocturnal, arboreal species accidentally introduced to the
island of Guam, and associated with the loss of most of the island's native forest vertebrates. Little Is known about
the movement patterns of this species or that of other nocturnal, arboreal snakes. I investigated the overnight spatial
movement patterns of BTS using two tracking devices; standard radio telemetry and a quilting cocoon of cotton
thread (240 m), which delineated the snake's path. I recorded microhabitat data at every one meter interval along
the tracking thread path. Ten BTS were tracted a minimum of 30 meters ( mean = 92.9 m). The total distances
moved were on average twice the straight-line distance from initial capture/release location to refugium. There was
no significant correlation between body size and percentage of movement above ground, mean height above ground,
or mean height of forest canopy used. There was a significant positive relationship between mean support diameter
and BTS body size (R square = 0.596, P = 0.0148). There was also a significant positive relationship between
available forest rxjnnectivity and snake pathways. Snakes used certain plants in disproportion to their occurrence in
the forest according to relative stability or degree of connectivity.




                                 •’4.13-SLi^day       . ._______               GS4          .         .             AXL
Prey preference in neonate brown water snakes, Nerodia taxispilola.                   M.S. Mills. University of Georgia,
Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, Drawer E, Aiken, SC 29802, USA.
I experimentally tested innate prey preference in brown water snakes, Nerodia taxispilota. Nerodia laxispilota is a
piscivorous species, and adults consume primarily catfishes (Ictaluridae). Six prey odors (4 fish, 2 amphibians) and
a water control were presented on cotton swabs to 13 neonate individuals housed individually in aquaria. Fish odors
elicited more tongue flicks than amphibian odors, with catfish (Ictalurus punctatus] odors receiving the most tongue
flicks. These results support field results that indicate N. taxispilota prefers fish, especially catfish. Basic foraging
ecology and its relationship to recent toxicological studies will also be discussed.in a Known nounaer nursery area, wnn Slow somatic growtn ano/or low temperatures ( ana                "U), nng counts
from laboratory fish were underestimated. Otolith growm (OG) was significantly comelated with temperature (T) and
somatic growtn (G) with the strongest relationship measured at areas near the sulcus on the right otolith: OG =
0.2352(G) + 0.0481 (T) - 0.5842 (R’ = 0.74). Increment counts from fish exposed to 17 and 20 °C were
underestimated; therefore, reliable estimates of growth could not be obtained. Therefore, this otolith-somatic growth
equation can only be used for temperatures greater than 25 °C. In this case, predicted growth rates were 2.7 -15.7
% d*-A1 showing that flounder are not growth limited in North Carolina estuaries.




Ecology and habitat uaa of Juvenile box turtles at Egmont Kay, Aorlda. A.M. Hamilton. Department of Wildlife
Ecology and Conservation, 303 Newins-Ziegler . Hall. University of Rorlda, Gainesville, FL 32611 USA.
Studies on box turtles ijerrapene Carolina baurii on Egmont Key have been ongoing since 1991. This island off the
west coast of Rorida is home to more than 2000 turtles. During previous fieldwork, large numbers of juveniles were
found. Data on size, habitat, and activify were recorded. Beginning in June 1997, I began an intensive study of
juvenile habitat use and movement patterns. Through November, a total of 192 juveniles were located and
marked. Thread trailers were attached to 59 juveniles (<121 mm) that were tracked until the thread ran out
(generally within four days). I recorded canopy cover density and species composition along trails at 10m
intenrals. Juveniles were found primarily under dense, low ground cover, and frequently travelled at the ecotone
between dense canopy and more open areas. Small juveniles (<65mm) were mostly found during the hottest part
of the day, and appeared to be basking; at other times, th^ chose forms under Australian pine needles.
Additionally, juvenile habitat use varies with body size. These habitat data can be used to assist in planning island
restoration and management.




   332                           13:45 Sunday                                  GS4                                 AXL
Distribution of the diamondback terrapin, Malaclemys terrapin , in South Carolina salt marshes.                      E.M.
Levesque and J.E. Fauth, Graduate Program in Manne Biology, University of Charleston, Grice Marine Biological
Laboratory, 205 Fort Johnson Road. Charleston, SC 29412-9110, USA; WA Roumillat, South, Carolina Department
of Natural Resources/ Marine Resources Division, USA.
The diamondback terrapin, Malaclemys terrapin, is the only species of estuarine turtle. The range of Malaclemys
extends along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts from Cape Cod to Corpus Christi. Terrapins were nearly hunted to
exfinctiori in the early 1900s due to the popularity of terrapin soup. In the years following intense commercial harvest
of terrapin, some populations of Malaclemys have recovered. However, although commercial harvesting is no
longer a threat to Malaclemys, the stability of terrapin populations is being challenged by incidental drowning in crab
traps and habitat destruction. Malaclemys terrapin is frequently caught incidentally in trammel nets used by Inshore
Fisheries, South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Marine Resources Division. Inshore Fisheries, has
been recording incidental catches of Malaclemys since January 1995. The objective of this study is to determine the
distribution of M. terrapin in South Carolina based on incidental catches and physical and geographical data
recorded by Inshore Rsheries. The effects explaining most of the variation in terrapin distribution are month and
individual location of a sample within one of six major sampling sites. The long-term collection of this data will allow
monitoring of Malaclemys populations in regions supporting large crabbing industries and areas undergoing coastal
development.




   333_____________              14:00:Sunday_____________________ GS4_____________________ AXL
Activity and behavior of nesting yellow-blotched map turtles (Graptemys fiavimaculata} and their nest
predators. M.J. Coulombe-Moore. B.D. Home and R.A. Selgel, Department of Biological Sciences, Southeastern
Louisiana University; Hammond, LA 70402-0736 USA.
Populations of the yellow-blotched map turtle {Graptemys fiavimaculata) are known to be declining throughout their
limited range. As a result of this decline, the U.S. Rsh and Wildlife Senrice placed this species on the Federally
Endangered Species list in 1991. Low nesting success and high rates of nest depredation are among the
contributing factors to this decline, but little is known about nesting behavior and activity or the behaviors of nest
predators. We studied nesting behavior, nesting activity, and the behaviors of nest predators of G. Havimaculala on
the Pascagoula River in Southeastern Mississippi during 1997. Over 182 hours of observations were made from a
blind from 28 May to 13 August. Most nesting attempts occurred between mid May and late July. Nesting was
exclusively diurnal; although nesting attempts occurred throughout the day, nesting peaked between 1500-1700
hours. Of the 48 nesting attempts observed, only 11 females completed oviposHion. Although the presence of the
observer/blind did not significantly affect the completion of oviposition once the female entered the beach, the
number of nesting attempts increased when the obsenrer/blind was not present. The only diurnal nest predators
observed were fish crows {Corvus ossifragous) and fire ants {Solenopsis Invicta).                 Rsh crows were highly
aggressive in attacking nests, sometimes driving away nesting females. In six of 21 monitored nests, humans either
directly or indirectly influenced nest mortality. Additionally, of the over 78 nests found, only six survived to hatching.

mreaa (24U m), wnicn aeiineated tne snake s path. I recorded microhabitat data at every one meter interval along
the tracking thread path. Ten BTS were tracked a minimum of 30 meters ( mean = 92.9 m). The total distances
moved were on average twice the straight-line distance from initial capture/release location to refugium. There was
no significant correlation between body size and percentage of movement above ground, mean height above ground,
or mean height of forest canopy used. There was a significant positive relationship between mean support diameter
and BTS body size (R square = 0.596, P = 0.0148). There was also a significant positive relationship between
available forest connectivity and snake pathways. Snakes used certain plants in disproportion to their occurrence in
the forest according to relative stability or degree of connectivify.




Prey preference In neonate brown water snakes, Nwodta tsixlspllota.                  M.S, Mills. University of Georgia,
Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, Drawer E, Aiken, SC 29802, USA.

I experimentally tested innate prey preference in brown 'water snakes, Nerodia taxispilota. Nerodia taxspUota is a
piscivorous species, and adults consume primarily catfishes (tctaluridae). Six prey odors (4 fish, 2 amphibians) and
a water control were presented on cotton swabs to 13 neonate individuals housed individually in aquaria. Rsh odors
elicited more tongue flicks than amphibian odors, with catfish [Ictalurus punctatus) odors receiving the most tongue
flicks. These results support field results that indicate N. taxispilota prefers fish, especially catfish. Basic foraging
ecology and its relationship to recent toxicological studies will also be discussed.




   335                          14:30 Sunday                                 .GS4                                AXL
Do incubation-induced changes to a lizard's phenotype affect its vulnerability to predators? S.J. Downes and
R. Shine, School of Biological Sciences, University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.
Recent work on a variety of reptiles provides strong evidence that incubation temperatures can influence many
aspects of a hatchling's phenotype (i.e., size, shape, activity, locomotor performance, etc.). However, although these
traits seem likely to affect the hatchling's fitness, few studies have tested this assumption. Vulnerability to predation
is one plausible way that phenotypic modifications could affect an organism's fitness. Therefore, we incubated the
eggs of lizards at temperatures similar to the extremes of natural nests, and examined both the response of
hatchlings to predator (snake) scent and actual vulnerability in staged encounters in the laboratory. We used two
species of montane Australian scincids: one heliotherm (Lampropholis delicate} that deposits eggs in relatively warm
nests, and one thigmotherm (Nanoscincus maccoyf) that lays In relatively cool nests. For both species, our results
show that incubation temperature affects both an individual's response to predator scent and its vulnerability to
predation. These patterns are complex, and change with the age of the hatchling, perhaps through differential growth
rates and changes in activity patterns. Nevertheless, these experiments support the notion that incubation-induced
modifications to a lizard's phenotype may be biologically significant, and that some of these effects are mediated
through predator-prey interactions.




. -336                          14:45 Sunday       .                         GS4                                AXL
Intrapopulational variation in demographic patterns and reproductive traits of gopher frogs {Rana capita) in
Mississippi. S.C, Richter and R.A. Seigel, Department of Biological Sciences, Southeastern Louisiana University,
Hammond, LA 70402-0736 USA.
      Since 1995, we have been studying the only known population of gopher frogs {Rana capita) in Mississippi to
investigate variation in reproductive traits and population demography. Adult size structure, adult survivorship,
reproductive success, and juvenile recruitment were monitored through the combination of a complete drift fence and
egg mass sunreys. There was extensive variation both among and within years in adult traits including infra- and
intersexual differences in size, rate of return to the breeding site, survivorsnip, and breeding-season weight loss.
Reproductive success and timing of mortality in eggs and lanrae also varied among years. We found no repeatability
among years in the relationship between the number of females, egg masses, and emerging juveniles. These data
suggest that monitoring through the exclusive use of either egg mass surveys or drift fences may not accurately
determine the status or anuran populations. In addition, the wide variation we found among years indicates that
short-term studies are inadequate in understanding amphibian population dynamics.   337                          15:30 Sunday                                  'GS4
Sex and the single female: when do males become unnecessary? M-L- Bpbyn, Dept, of Palaeobiology, and
CBCB, Royal Ontario Museum, 100 Queen's Park, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5S 2C6.
Whiotail lizards of the species genus Cnemidophorus range across the southwestern U.S. info South America.
They occupy a yariety of habitats and, although they yary in behaviour and ecology, are rnorphologicaliy
conservative. At some point in their evolutionary history, different combinations of species have hybndized to form
all-female, self-cloning species. Using information from allozymes, skull morphology, and mitochondnal DNA
sequences genes, I am sorting out the evolutionary relationships among North Amencan species of
Cnemidophorus to determine: (a) how closely related species have to be to fonn viable, hybnd unisexuals, (b)
whether morphological arid ecological similarities among the various species result from commoni descent or
adaptation to similar environments; (c) how and when these lizards speclated and got to where we find thern today.
Results to date suggest that some of the incredible speciation in Cnemidophorus is due to rapid fragmenfafm arid
isolation during the Late Pleistocene, but that some speciation events may have occurred much earlier. This is
leading to interesting speculations about the origins of unisexuality in this fascinating group of lizards.




   338                           15:45 Sunday                                 GS4                             __A)^
Offspring sex ratio variation In northern water snakes, Nerodia sipedon.            ICK, K'S^er, P.J VVeatherheaiJ and
G.P. Brown, Department of Biology, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By, Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 5B6,
Prosser, Department of Biology, McMaster, University, Hamilton, Ontario..
Wo used data from 88 litters of northern water snakes (Nerodia sipedon} to test predictions about how mothers
should adaptively vary the sex ratios of their offspring. Sex ratios did not vary with birth date, but larger mothers
produced significantly more daughters, and mothers producing larger offspring produced significantly more
dauqhters Because neonate size did vary with maternal size, the two significant sex ratio patterns were
independent of each other. Although these relations provide clear evidence that sex ratios vaned non randomly, only
the relation between sox ratio and neonate size was consistent with our predictions if females vary sex ratios
adaptively. The limited evidence on neonatal sex ratios for other snake species also indicates vanation that is non
random but not necessarily adaptive. Better understanding of these patterns will require information on the factors
that differentially affect the fitness of male and female neonates.




   ■339                          16:00 Sunday             ,                   .GS4                                 AX£_
The reproductive ecology and natural history of the northern leopard frog, Rana piplens, in a reh^ilitated
wetland in northeastern Ohio. A. Collier and O. Lowell. Department of Biological Sciences. Kent State University.
Kent. OH 44242.
We examined the reproductive ecology and natural history of Rana pipiens in a recently rehabilitated wetland in
Barberton, Ohio during the spring and summers of 1996 and 1997. Spawning took place within a three week penod
beginning in late March when water temperatures exceeded 11 “C. Egg deposition was                            Kn
waters af an average depth of 9 cm. No masses were deposited at depths greater than 20 cm. An estimated 556,000
eqqs were deposited by 203 breeding females. 67% of these masses were attached to either emergent, or non-
emerqent Juncus eflusus, Typha angustifolia, or T. latifbiia. Juvenile frogs metamorphosed in mid June at an
average snout-vent length of 302 mm and a weight of 5.4 g. Mark-recapture analysis reveled a mortality rate
suffered between the egg and juvenile stage of over 99%. The stomach contents of 13 adult and 19 juvenile R.
pipiens contained invertebrates belonging largely to the insect orders Coleoptera, Hemiptera and Hornoptera.
Although juvenile frogs consumed more individual prey items than adults (t = 2.196, p<0.05), neither ^eci^ized on
active or inactive prey (X2 = 3.84, p<0.05). Juvenile frogs in this population failed to reach sexual maturity within their
first season of growth.




    3.43     ..                  .16:00 Sunday                                 GS2                                PCH
             '■®®P‘’'®*°ry rates of Juvenile southern stingrays (Dasyatls americana}, and the effects of tonic
 Immobility on these systems. W-R. SiHiman, Millersville University, Millersville. PA; National Aquarium in
 Baltimore, Baltimore, MD.

 This study WM performed to establish a mean cardiac and respiration rate in juvenile southern stingrays ( Dasyatis
 arnen^a). Thirteen stingrays (23 to 36.6 cm disk width) were used to establish a “normar cardiac and respiratory
 rate. The sex, size ^d individual proved to show no significant change in their respiratory rate. Sex proved not to
 be significant in relation to their heart rate; yet an allometric relationship was found between their heart rate and body
          A niarginal correlation was found between the cardio-respiratory rates. Further analysts found this
 relationship to be a function of time; therefore, showing that these systems were out of phase varied between
 individuals. Tonic immobility (TP) was induced in nine of the Juvenile southern stingrays while their cardiac and
 respiratory rates were monitored. The onset of Tl was correlated with a significant decrease from their •normal"
 cardiac and respiratory rates. The results from the preliminary Tl study showed correlation's mentioned earlier*
 including an lalometric relationship between heart rate and body size. Therefore, Tl causes the cardiac and
 respiratory rates to slow, ultimately resulting in the animal to exhibit the classic “limp” response.

  340                          16:15 Sunday                           .       GS4                              __A^
Patterns of frog communities from marshes of the Great Lakes area: amultivariate analysis of habitat and
development factors. N.J. Heifertv. University of Toronto, Zoology Department, Toronto, ON, M5S 3G5.

Sunreys of calling amphibians in marshes located in Ontario and the Great Lakes’ states were conducted by
volunteers from April to July in 1995 through the Marsh Monitoring Program. Data from 304 marsh sites were
obtained and showed that frog community composition is related to marsh vegetation structure and diversity,
surrounding habitat and landuse, and human alterations to marshes. Correspondence analyses showed p^ems in
frog assemblages that were related to geographic location, species abundance and habitat preferences. One-way
ANOVAs of correspondence analysis axes of environmental variables with frog species showed significant
differences for some species. These analyses indicate that frog community composition and presence of a species
are influenced by the habitat and quality of marshes available in the Great Lakes area.




  .341            .             16:30 Sunday                              .   GS4                                 AXL
Ecology of an equatorial African leaf-litter herpetofauna, Kibale National Park, Uganda.                    J.P. Vonesh,
Department of Zoology, 223 Bartram Hall, University of Rorida, Gainesville, Forida 32611, USA.
Plot sampling was used to compare the wet and dry season litter herpetofaunas of three forest types in Kibale
National Park, Uganda. Species richness, abundance, and evenness were measured in pristine, selectively logged,
and exotic pine forests, A repeated measures design was also employed to examine whether Reus natalensis
fruiting events influence litter arthropod and herpetofaunal abundances. The diets of the six most common leaf lifter
anurans were examined to determine important prey-taxa. The richest herpetofaunas were in the pine and ogged
forests. Lizard richness, abundance, and diversify were greatest in the pine forest. Anuran abundance in the logged
forest was double that of the other forests, while diversity was highest in the unlogged forest. The number of
herpetofauna in all sites declined during the dry season, with the distribution of captures indicating limited use of hill­
tops during that season. Relative to Kibale, other tropical wet forests of similar latitude and elevation support a
rouqhly equivalent species richness but at higher densities. This paucity of litter herpetofauna at Kibale does not
appear to result from low prey availability, for though the abundance of many prey arthropods increases under
fruiting F. natalensis, there is no corresponding increase in herpetofaunal densities.




   342                __________ 16:45 Sunday                                  GS4
Reptile diversity in a disturbed tropical forest landscape. R.E. Glor, A.S. Flecker and M.F. Wasson, Section of
Ecology and Systematios, Cornell University, Ithaca. NY 14853, USA.
Throughout the tropics, mature forests are rapidly being replaced with pastures, gardens, and plantations. The goal
of this study was to examine the reptile diversify in different agricultural land use regions in and around Los Haitises
National Park, Dominican Republic. Transects and trapping grids were used to sample reptiles in nine land use
types; active pasture, oil palm and cacao plantations, abandoned pasture, cacao, and conucos (home gardens), and
relatively undisturbed forests and karstio hilltops (mogotes).
 Results indicate that faunal composition varies significantly between land use types. Species richness and
 abundance per sample were highest on the undisturbed mogotes and lowest in the active pastures. Several rare
 species of geckos (Sphaerodactylus} were found exclusively on the mogotes. Anolis lizards representing five
 different ecomorphs were the most abundant lizards in all habitats with each ecomorph being present wherever the
 appropriate microhabitat was available. Differences in diversity between land use regions were analyzed using
 ordination plots, diversity indices, and cluster analyses. The results of these analyses suggest that the preservation
 of undisturbed habitats is critical to the conservation of reptile biodiversity.




    346                         16:00 .Sunday                                 GS2                                 PCH
          population stwrture of groupers In the Western Atlantic. M.S. Zateoff. University of Chariesfon, SC,
 205 Fort Johnson Road, Chariesfon. SC 29412 USA; R.W. Chapman. SCDNR, Marine Resources Div 217 Fort
 Johnson Road, Charleston. SC 29422 USA.                 -r   .      ,              cco uiv.,   run

 The short-term, localized nature of grouper spawning aggregations and unequal sex ratios due to protogyny renders
 many groupers particularly vulnerable to fishing pressure and therefore in need of special management te^niques
The degree of genetic variation within a species can allow recognition of distinct stocks which is essential for
 sucressful managernent. Larval dispersal, and therefore gene flow, may also be indicated by the lack of genetic
Mructuring of a species. The genetic variation that has been found in species such as gag grouper (Sedberry et al
in prep) should be qualified by the existence or non-existence of such differences in other species with similar life-
histo^ strategies. The extent of genetic variation within species separated by a known geographic barrier can serve
as a baseline against which to interpret population differentiation within species that exhibit little or no such physical
separation within their range, such as gag. The purpose of this study is to determine the genetic relationships among
several grouper species that have ranges encompassing the southeastern U.S., Caribbean, and Brazil using
molecular genetics techniques. Within this western Atlantic distribution, freshwater input from the Orinoco and
Amazon nvers may form a barrier for recruitment to the north from southerly populations. If populations of these
species are ^eiAvely iMlated by this barrier, genetic divergence may have occurred between them and can be
measured m the form of inherited mitochondrial DNA differences. Samples of Mycteroperca bonaciwere collected
from several U.S. and Canbbean locations and Brazil. Preliminary results from restriction fragment lennth
Dolvmnmhi.Qrrtft rtf mtnMA will ha rauiauuaH            ______                     ___ —-------------The reproductive ecology and natural history of the northern leopard frog, Rana pipiens, in a rehabilitated
wetland In northeastern Ohio. A. Collier and O. Lowell, Department of Biological Sciences, Kent State University,
Kent, OH 44242.
We examined the reproductive ecology and natural history of Rana pipiens in a recently rehabilitated wetland in
Barberton, Ohio during the spring and summers of 1996 and 1997. Spawning took place within a three week period
beginning in late March when water temperatures exceeded 11 °C. Egg deposition was most concentrated in shallow
waters at an average depth of 9 cm. No masses were deposited at depths greater than 20 cm. An estimated 556,000
eggs were deposited by 203 breeding females. 67% of these masses were attached to either emergent, or non-
emergent Juncus effusus, Typha angustifoliat or 7. latifoiia. Juvenile frogs metamorphosed in mid June at an
average snout-vent length of 302 mm and a weight of 5.4 g. Mark-recapture analysis revealed a mortality rate
suffered between the egg and juvenile stage of over 99%. The stomach contents of 13 adult and 19 juvenile R.
pipiens contained invertebrates belonging largely to the insect orders Coleoptera, Hemiptera and Hornoptera.
Although juvenile frogs consumed more individual prey items than adults (t = 2.196, p<0.05), neither specialized on
active or inactive prey p<2 = 3.84, p<0.05). Juvenile frogs in this population failed to reach sexual maturity within their
first season of growth.




   343                      16:00 Sunday                            652                             . PCH
Cardiac and respiratory rates of Juvenile southern stingrays (Oasyat/s amerlcana), and the effects of tonic
Immobility on these systems. W.R. Silliman. Millersville University, Millersville, PA; National Aquarium in
Baltimore, Baltimore, MD.

This study was performed to establish a mean cardiac and respiration rate in juvenile southern st'ngrays ( DasyaSs
americana). Thirteen stingrays (23 to 36.6 cm disk width) were used to establish a “normal’ cardiac and respiratory
rate. The sex, size and individual proved to show no significant change in their respiratory rate. Sex proved not to
be significant in relation to their heart rate; yet an allometric relationship was found between their heart rate and body
mass. A marginal correlation was found between the cardio-respiratory rates. Further analysis found this
relationship to be a function of time; therefore, showing that these systems were out of phase varied between
individuals. Tonic immobility fTT) was induced in nine of the juvenile southern stingrays while their cardiac and
respiratory rates were monitored. The onset of Tl was correlated with a significant decrease from their “normal”
cardiac and respiratory rates. Ths results from the preliminary Tl study showed coirelation’s mentioned earlier;
including an lalometric relationship between heart rate and body size. Therefore, IT causes the cardiac and
respiratory rates to slow, ultimately resulting in the animal to exhibit the classic ’limp’ response.




   344            _              16:00.Sunday                                  GS2                                PCH
The fathead minnow (Pimephales promeias} In western boreal lakes:        Will forest harvesting affect
population-level processes? A.J. Danylchuk. Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, ,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2E9,.
Harvesting of Alberta's boreal forest is increasing dramatically. Predicted effects of forest hanresting on lakes in this
region involve increases in nutrient loading and primary productivity. In turn, these changes may affect fish by
modifying food resources and increasing winter oxygen depletion rates. The fathead minnow is common to small
lakes in the western boreal forest. Because it is often the most abundant, or only fish present, the fathead is an
important component of aquatic food webs in this region. However, little is known about the basic ecology of fathead
populations inhabiting these lakes. The objectives of my research are to determine: 1) what factors regulate fathead
populations in boreal Alberta lakes; and 2) how potential changes in environmental conditions resulting from forest
harvesting may affect these populations. My research is divided into three components: i) the intensive study of four
fathead populations before and after experimental forest harvesting; ii) an extensive survey of populations inhabiting
lakes throughout the boreal forest of Alberta; and iii) mechanistic pond experiments. Together, these three
components should provide important insights into the factors and mechanisms regulating fathead populations, and
allow ms to assess the effects of forest harvesting on fathead populations in this region.




   345                          16:00 Sunday                                   GS2                                PCH
Phylogeny of anoles: morphological and combined analyses. S. Poe. Texas Memorial Museum; Department of
Zoology, University of Texas at Austin; Division of Amphibians and Reptiles, National Museum of Natural History,
Washington, DC 20560 USA.
Anole lizards (Anoiis, Phenacosaunjs', formerly Chamaeleolls, Chamaelinorops) are important study subjects for
organismal and evolutionary biology. Evolutionary interpretation of the numerous comparative data tor these species
requires a phylogeny. The content of and relationships within several small groups of anoles have been clarified by
many workers. Despite recent molecular work and reanalysis of morphological data, the higher level phylogeny of
anoles has remained unresolved due to the paucity of characters used and the large number of species (at least
350) in the clade. Furthermore, it is believed that the few morphological and molecular data available for anoles are
incongruent. I assembled a new morphological data set of approximately 80 characters scored for 171 anole species
to address several objectives: 1) Estimate the higher level phylogeny of anoles using morphological data combined
with chromosome, DNA, and allozyme data from the literature, 2) fest the monophyly of previously recognized
species groups, 3) test the monophyly of Anoiis relative to other anole genera, 4) Test whether this new
morphological estimate is significantly in conflict with existing molecular data sets.

Reptile diversity In a disturbed tropical forest landscape. R.E. Glor. A.S. Recker and M.F. Wasson, Section of
Ecology and Systematics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
Throughout the tropics, mature forests are rapidly being replaced with pastures, gardens, and plantations. The goal
of this study was to examine the reptile diversify in different agricultural land use regions in and around Los Haifises
National Park, Dominican Republic. Transects and trapping grids were used to sample reptiles in nine land use
types; active pasture, oil palm and cacao plantations, abandoned pasture, cacao, and conucos (home gardens), and
relatively undisturbed forests and karstic hilltops (mogotes).
Results Indicate that faunal composition varies significantly between land use types. Species richness and
abundance per sample were highest on the undisturbed mogotes and lowest in the active pastures. Several rare
species of geckos (Sphaerodactyius} were found exclusively on the mogotes. Anoiis lizards representing five
different ecomorphs were the most abundant lizards in all habitats with each ecomorph being present wherever the
appropriate microhabitat was available. Differences in diversity between land use regions were analyzed using
ordination plots, diversity indices, and cluster analyses. The results of these analyses suggest that the preservation
of undisturbed habitats is critical to the conservation of reptile biodiversity.




   346                      16:00 Sunday'                          GSg      . . ..                    pCH
Genetic population structure of groupers In the Western Atlantic. M.S. Zaleoft. University of Charleston, SC,
205 Fort Johnson Road, Charleston, SC 29412 USA; R.W. Chapman, SCDNR, Marine Resources Div., 217 Fort
Johnson Road, Charleston, SC 29422 USA.

The short-term, localized nature of grouper spawning aggregations and unequal sex ratios due to protogyny renders
many groupers particularly vulnerable to fishing pressure and therefore in need of special management techniques.
The degree of genetic variation within a species can allow recognition of distinct stocks which is essential for
successful management. Larval dispersal, and therefore gene flow, may also be indicated by the lack of genetic
structuring of a species. The genetic variation that has been found in species such as gag grouper (Sedberry et al.
in prep) should be qualified by the existence or non-existence of such differences in other species with similar life­
history strategies. The extent of genetic variation within species separated by a known geographic barrier can serve
as a baseline against which to interpret population differentiation within species that exhibit little or no such physical
separation within their range, such as gag. The purpose of this study is to deteimine the genetic relationships among
several grouper spedes that have ranges encompassing the southeastern U.S.. Caribbean, and Brazil using
molecular genetics techniques. Within this western Atlantic distribution, freshwater input from the Orinoco and
Amazon rivers may form a barrier for recruitment to the north from southerly populations. If populations of these
species are effectively isolated by this barrier, genetic divergence may have occurred between them and can be
measured in the form of inherited mitochondrial DNA differences. Samples of Mycteroperca bonacivtere collected
from several U.S. and Caribbean locations and Brazil. Preliminary results from restriction fragment length
polymorphisms of mtDNA will be reviewed.



   347                          16:00 Sunday                                  GS2 .                              PCH
The comparative development of the postcranial skeleton in a normal and mutant strain of zebrafish, Danio
rerlo. L.O. Lapsys and T. Grande, Loyola University Chicago, Dept, of Biology, 6525 N. Sheridan Rd., Chicago, IL,
60626, USA.
The zebrafish, Danio rerio, has become a popular model organism in the field of vertebrate development. However,
very little is known about the morphology of this fish especially during the stages after hatching. For example, the
normal development of the vertebral column, specifically the caudal fin, has gone without critic^ examination. The
ossification patterns of the dermal and chondral bone are yet to be defined. In this study, the development of the
caudal fin was examined as a series from egg to adult. The noimal wild-type zebrafish was then compared with a
mutated strain. The specimens were either cleared and stained or sectioned for histological observations. The
development of the vertebral column including the caudal fin was mapped and illustrated. The results of this study
provide valuable comparative information for researchers working with zebrafish and for those investigating the
vertebral column formation and ossification.




   348                          16:00. Sunday                                 GS2                               PCH
Using GIS to analyze the spatial distribution of nests of the common snapping turtle, Chelydra serpentina.
J.J. Kolbe. Iowa State University, Department of Zoology & Genetics, Ames, lA, 50011, USA.
Few studies exist that attempt to analyze the spatial distribution of turtle nests. This study utilizes the analytical
capabilities of Geographic Information System (GIS) software to examine the spatial distribution of common
snapping turtle nests in relation to each other and to the physical characteristics of the landscape. Seven years of
nest location data from a sand prairie along the eastern snore of the Mississippi River are included in this analysis.
Nests were found to be significantly clustered in their distribution over the entire study site. Additionally, a higher
proportion of nests were located in sand blowouts (i.e., areas of exposed sand with no vegetation) than expected
based on area ratios of landcover. Other factors, not included in the spatial analysis, were identified as potential
influences on turtle nest location. This study highlights the utility of GIS in the area of spatial analysis.    349      .                  16:00 Sunday                           .       GS2                             .PCH
Diet and Coloration In Female Convict CIchlids {CicMasoma niarofysclatum}.                J.K. Jackson and V. Rush,
Center for Ecology, Evolution and Behavior, 101 Morgan Building, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, 40506-
0225, USA.
Many sexual selection models predict the evolution of male ornamentation. Female sexually dimorphic features are
less well understood. Female convict cichlids {Cichlasoma nigrofasciatum}, Central American stream-dwelling fishes,
are more colorful than males. Males and females form pair bonds to defend a territoiy and care for young for several
weete. Prior to pair formation,, females develop gold flecks in their fins and along their ventral surfaces. These
colorful females often court males and show aggression toward other females. Orange coloration in fish is derived
from catotenoid pigments in their diets. One hypothesis for the production of such coloration is that it shows that arj
animal is a good forager and is in good physical condition. This hypothesis was tested in a laboratory expenm^t
using 64 female convict cichlids housed separately. The females were divided into 4 groups and fed one of me
followino four diets: good quality food with and without carotenoids, poor quality food with and without carotenoids.
After 3 months, the reflectance spectra of the females' gold flecks were measured and compared with their physical
condition, fecundity, egg carotenoid content and body lipid content. This study provided insight into the relationship
between diet and coloration in females.




    350                        16:00 Sunday                        .       .   'GS2             .               PCH
Swallowing In elapid snakes: does the palatine dragger/erector model predict behavior?               A. Deufel, Lehigh
University, Biological Sciences, 31 Williams Dr., Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA.
The morphology of the palatine bone has previously been used to predict the swallowing behavior of elapid snakes,
splittinq the family into palatine draggers (terrestrial and aquatic hydrophiines) and palatine erectors (all other
elapids) To test this behavioral prediction, swallowing was videotaped in two palatine draggers (Acanmopnis
an&rcticus and Oxyuranus scutellatus) and three palatine erectors (Dendroaspis polylepis, Na/a pallida, and
Ophlophagus hannah). In hydrophiines the pterygoid and palatine move as a unit, showing only slight lateral or
ventral bending along the entire length of the bar. Maxilla and prefrontal show a high degree of antero-latera!
excursion. In the other elapids protraction depresses the palato-pterygoid joint, rotating the palatine vertically.
Maxillary anri prefrontal excursion are more limited. Snout rotation along the long axis is greater in hydrophiines anti
Dendroaspis than in the remaining elapids. In all snakes maxillary depression always closely followed retra^on of
the palato-pterygoid bar. Whereas the dragger/erector model generally predicts palahne movements, the
relationship of these movements to the kinesis ofthe rest of the skull remains obscure.




    351                         16:00 Sunday                                   GS2          .            ^__PCjrt
Effect of substrate Ingestion during feeding on buoyancy of mink frog larvae, Rana septentrlonalis. S.L.
Rondeau and J.H. Gee. Department of Zoology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB. R3T 2N2.
Aquatic organisms must maintain an optimal buoyancy to minimize energy expended in Itxjomotion and holding
vertical position In the water column. Little is known of the Importance of lungs of larval anurans in buoyancy
regulation. Benthic tadpoles feed on a variety of substrates and could ingest substrate particles ultimately affecting
buoyancy. Our research determines if: 1) Mink Frog larvae, Rana septentrionalis, ingest substrate particles during
feeding, 2) tadpole weight in water is significantly increased, and 3) tadpoles respond by altenrig lung volume
correcting buoyancy. Our results showed conclusively that these events occured. Silt particles doubled tadpole
weight in water and lung volume increased almost 4 times maintaining buoyancy. Experiments with starved tadpoles
placed on silt showed that the digestive tract was filled over 48 h and during this time, increases in weight and lung
volume occured concurrently and a constant buoyancy level was maintained. Buoyancy regulation was immediate
and precise.




                                 •j'S.'CO Sujiaay,    ___________              GS2______ ,                      PCH!
                                                         Inscutpta) population. T.S.B. Akre. Department of Biology
George Mason University Fairfax, VA, USA.

J         ® largw study on aspects of the ecology of wood turtle (Clemmys insculpta] population in northern Virginia
                                                         ^^93 wetB detected by palpation and radiography in 1996
and palpabon in 1997. In June 1996,13 gravid turtles were treated with argenine-vasotocin to induce opposition in
the laboratory Seven of thirteen (54%) laid complete clutches. Clutch size averaged 10.23 eggs/female with a
?■ u?                                  wood turtles were monitored by radio-telemetry and visual-search methods.
Ercht (57%) were recaptures from 1996. Two recaptures did not become gravid. Clutch size averaged 9 5
egg^emale from two wild nests found during this time. Comparison will be made with data collected during the 1998
nesting season and with previously studied, more northeity populations

   352                         16:00 Sunday                                 GS2                  .             PCH
Estimation of the genetic variability of a fragmented population of brook char (Salvelinus fontinalis) In
western Pennsylvania using microsatellites. C.J. Lee. R.J. McPherson and F. Ammer, Biology Department,
Clarion University. Clarion, PA 16214, USA; T. Martin, School of Forest Resources, The Penn State University,
University Paik, PA 16802, USA; L. Bematchez, Department de Biologie, GIROQ, Universite Laval, Sainte-Foy,
Quebec G1K7P4.
The structure of a brook char (Salvelinus fontinalis) population inhabiting a polluted watershed in western
Penns^vania was assessed by estimating allelic variation at three microsatellite loci. The Mill Creek watershed is
relatively intact in its upper reaches, however, acid mine drainage-fouling of the lower portion’has made it largely
uninhabitable and has isolated brook char populations into smaller unaffected tributaries. We have estimated the
interpopulation and intrapopulation heterogeneity in tributary populations of brook char both within and above the
polluted portion of the system. We will also present an analysis of the brook char strain annually stocked into the
upper portion of the watershed.




   353                          16:00 Sunday                                 GS2                               PCH
Mitochondrial dna analysis of wild brook char {Salvelinus fontinalis) populations In north western
Pennsylvania using PCR-SSCP. F.K. Ammer. R.J. McPherson and C.J. Lee, Biology Department, Clanon
University, Clarion, PA 16214, USA; T. Martin, School of Forest Resources, The Penn State University. University
Park, PA 16802, USA; L. Bematchez, Department de Biologie, GIROQ, Universite Laval, Sainte-Foy, Quebec G1K
7P4.
Wild brook char populations are an ecologically and economically important species inhabiting cold water
ecosystems of western Pennsylvania. A considerable portion of the Mill Creek watershed in Clarion and Jefferson
counties is severely acidified due to acid mine drainage (AMD), and contains high concentrations of aluminum.
Pollution from AMD in the main stem of Mill Creek has effectively fragmented the watershed by isolating brook char
subpopulations in several of the smaller, non-impacted tributaries. To examine the effects of habitat degradation and
fragmentation on these populations, we used polymerase chain reaction single strand conformation polymorphism
(PCR-SSCP) analysis to access genetic variability in mitochondrial DNA. With this method, sequence-specific
conformations exhibit distinctive electrophoretic mobility on non-denaturing polyacrylamide gels. SSCP analysis of
haploid cytotypes in conjunction with microsatellite DNA analysis of diploid genotypes will provide explicit information
pertaining to the overall genetic character of Isolated subpopulations. Data obtained from this study may prove
valuable in developing future conservation and management programs for Salvelinus fontinalis.




   354                          16:00 Sunday                                 GS2                                PCH
Recreational disturbance and a desert stream fish community: Detecting ecological effects of environmental
impact. J.M. Sanoington. Department of Biological Sciences, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 4505 Maryland
Parkway, Box 454004, Las Vegas, NV 89154-4004 USA.
Research was conducted in the North Fork of the Virgin River within Zion National Park, Utah, USA, to investigate
the effects of chronic recreational disturbance on the native fish community. Fish were sampled both in river areas
with high levels of recreational disturbance and in river areas with low levels of recreational disturbance during the
summer of 1997. Communities in both areas were dominated by Virgin River spinedace {Lepidomeda mollispinis
mollispinis} and desert sucker (Catostomus darid). Community diversity was similar in both areas at the beginning of
the summer but was significantly lower in high disturbance areas later in the summer due to lower abundance of
desert sucker in these areas. Benthic algal biomass is being compared between low and high disturbance areas to
test the hypothesis that lower abundance of desert sucker in high disturbance areas is a result of lower algal
biomass, their primary food source, in these areas. Recreational disturbance priinarily disturbs the over substrate,
possibly reducing algal biomass in high disturbance areas. Surveys for larval fish indicate that larval densities were
similar in low and high disturbance areas early In the summer but significantly lower in high disturbance areas later in
the summer. This result is suggestive that recreational disturbance may increase larval mortality in high distumance
areas. Interestingly, a major flash flood event at the end of the summer effectively "reset*; the sy^em, redistnbuting
fish species equally between low and high recreational disturbance areas and Increasing diversity in both areas.




   358                          09:30 Monday                                 CF13                               CHM


                                               liLCmer, Department of Biological Sciences, Old Dominion

Mm                                   fhe family Sparidae (Percifoimes, Percoidei) are examined. Mitochondrial DNA
                             cytochrome b gene (1140brt from representative genera of the family Sparidae are used
CnoriHM®          960600 sod subfaTiiily (Boopsinae, Sparinae, Denticinae, Pagellinae) level relationships within
Spandae. Phylogenetic analysis using parsimony was conducted with members of the family Moronidae as
outgroup Sequence data are also used to examine the relationships of the superfamily Sparoidea to other percoid
superfamilies classically related to the sparids (Haemuloidea and Lutianoidea).*                    VVIWW* I I                              ItniVMIMAVW               VWWV >■ ■ VW^^IVWWIV WTM • iwiwa
vertical position in the water column. Little is known of the importance of lungs of larval anurans in buoyancy
regulation. Benthic tadpoles feed on a variety of substrates and could ingest substrate particles ultimately affecting
buoyancy. Our research determines if: 1) Mink Frog larvae, Flana septentrionalis, ingest substrate particles during
feeding, 2) tadpole weight in water is significantly increased, and 3) tadpoles respond by altering lung volume
correcting buoyancy. Our results showed conclusively that these events occured. Silt particles doubled tadpole
weight in water and lung volume increased almost 4 times maintaining buoyancy. Experiments with starved tadpoles
placed on silt showed that the digestive tract was filled over 48 h and during this time, increases in weight and lung
volume occured concurrently and a constant buoyancy level was maintained. Buoyancy regulation was immediate
and precise.




  •355                        16.00 Sunday                         GS2 ..                         PCH
Reproduction In a Virginia wood turtle (Clemmys Insculpta) population. T.S.B. Akre. Department of Biology
George Mason University Fairfax, VA, USA.

As part of a larger study on aspects of the ecology of wood turtle (Clerrmys insculpta) population in northern Virginia,
data on reproduction were collected in 1996 and 1997. Eggs were detected by palpation and radiography in 1996
and palpation in 1997. In June 1996,13 gravid turtles were treated with argenine-vasotocin to induce oviposition in
the laboratory. Seven of thirteen (54%) laid complete clutches. Clutch size averaged 10.23 eggs/female with a
mode of 10. In June 1997, 14 female wood turtles were monitored by radio-telemetry and visual-search methods.
Eight (57%) were recaptures from 1996. Two recaptures did not become gravid. Clutch size averaged 9.5
eggs/female from two wild nests found during this time. Comparison will be made with data collected during the 1998
nesting season and with previously studied, more northerly populations.




   356                       .. 16:00 Sunday                                 GS2                                PCH
Initial results in a resampling survey of Nebraska amphibians as a test for declines. D.S. McLeod. School of
Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68588-0188, USA.
 An inventory of historical sites for amphibian larvae was conducted to verify or reject the hypothesis that amphibian
populations have declined in Nebraska over the past twenty years. In the early 1970’5 larval sampling was used as
a means of surveying these ponds as a part of an exercise in mapping amphibian distributions within the state.
Because amphibian larvae remain in a pond for a much longer time than do the reproducing adults, such a
methodology allows rapid acquisition of distributional data. Larvae were found al 100% of the ponds sampled during
the 197O’s, with a range of one to five species found per pond. During the 1997 field season between one and four
species were found at any one site (accounting forthose ponds which has no lanzae present). More importantly, only
58% of the ponds sampled were occupied by amphibian larvae. Of the 10 commonly occurring species of
amphibians in Nebraska, two (Hyta chrysoscelis and Bufo cognatus) were not found represented by larvae during the
sampling period, and one species {Acris crepitans) was found at only one site. Spea bombifrons, found at 25% of
the sites sampled in the 197O’s, was found at only 8% of the sites during 1997. While conclusions cannot be made
until further work is completed, this data suggests that declines have occurred in Nebraska's amphibian populations.




   357         ,              09:15 Monday                                 CF13                               CHM
Mitochondrial DNA variation in desert pupfish. A.A. Echelle. R. Van Den Bussche and T. Malloy, Zoology Dept,
arid OWa. Coop. Fish and Wildl. Res. Unit, Oklahoma State Univ., Stillwater, OK 74078 U.S.A; C.O. Minckley, U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, Parker, AZ 85344 U.S.A: P.C. Marsh, Center for Environ. Stud., Arizona Stale Univ.,
Tempe, AZ 85287 , U.S.A..
We used single-stranded conformation polymorphism analysis to identify variant haplotypes in a 333-bp region near
the 3' end of the mitochondrial ND2 gene in desert pupfish Cyprinodon macularius. Approximately 250 specimens
were examined from 10 localities throughout the geographic range of the species. For each SSCP variant,
specimens from separate populations were subjected to automated DNA sequencing. Results support recognition of
two groups: 1) the Rio Sonoyta population of C. m. macularius and the Quitobaquito pupfish C. m. eremus, and 2)
ths populations of C. m. macularius from Laguna Salada, the lower Colorado River Delta, and the Salton Sea area.
Levels of sequence divergence and patterns of geographic variation in occurrence of haplotypes support recent
divergence times within these two groups, and indicate a relatively long history of isolation between the two groups.

Research was conducted in the North Fork of the Virgin River within Zion National Park, Utah, USA, to investigate
the effects of chronic recreational disturbance on the native fish community. Fish were sampled both in river areas
with high levels of recreational disturbance and in river areas with low levels of recreational disturbance during the
summer of 1997. Communities in both areas were dominated by Virgin River spinedace (Lepidomeda mollispinis
mollispinis) and desert sucker {Catostomus dark!). Community divers!^ was similar in both areas at the beginning of
the summer but was significantly lower in high disturbance areas later in the summer due to lower abundance of
desert sucker in these areas. Benthic algal biomass is being compared between low and high disturbance areas to
test the hypothesis that lower abundance of desert sucker in high disturbance areas is a result of lower algal
biomass, their primary food source, in these areas. Recreational disturbance primarily disturbs the river substrate,
possibly reducing algal biomass in high disturbance areas. Surveys for lanral fish indicate that larval densities were
similar in low and high disturbance areas early in the summer but significantly lower in high disturbance areas later in
the summer. This result is suggestive that recreational disturbarice may increase larval mortality in high disturbance
areas. Interestingly, a major flash flood event at the end of the summer effectively "reset* the system, redistributing
fish species equally between low and high recreational disturbance areas and increasing diversity in both areas.




   358                           09.30 Monday   ...                       CF13                              CHM
Phylogenetic relationships of the family Sparidae (Perciformes: Percoidei) based on complete cytochrome b
sequence data. T.M. Orrell, School of Marine Science, Virginia Institute of Marine Science, College of William and
Mary, Gloucester Point, VA 23062 USA; K.E. Carpenter, Department of Biological Sciences, Old Dominion
University, Norfolk, Virginia 23529 USA.

The phylogenetic relationships of the family Sparidae (Perciformes, Percoidei) are examined. Mitochondrial DNA
sequences of the complete cytochrome b gene (1140bp) from representative genera of the family Sparidae are used
to elucidate the generic and subfamily (Boopsinae, Sparinae, Denticinae, Pagellinae) level relationships within
Sparidae. Phylogenetic analysis using parsimony was conducted with members of the family Moronidae as
outgroup. Sequence data are also used to examine the relationships of the superfamily Sparoidea to other percoid
superfamilies classically related to the sparids (Haemuloidea and Lutjanoldea).




   359     .                   09:45 Monday                                 CF13                              CHM
Phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial ND2 and ND4L genes in the genus C)rprinella and related cyprinid
fishes. R.E. Broughton. Section of Ecology and Systematics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853-2701 USA; J.R.
Gold, Department of Wildlife and Fisheries Sciences, Texas A&M University, USA.
We have obtained sequences of the entire mitochondrial ND2 and ND4L genes (1344 nucleotides) from 30 species
of North American cyprinid fishes. Twenty-four of these are currently recognized as members of the genus
Cyprineiia, or have been suggested to be included in Cyprinella. For most species, several individuals from
geographically distant localities were included for a total of 59 OTUs. Phylogenetic analysis, employing equal
weighting of all characters, yields a single most parsimonious tree. This tree is similar to Gibbs' phylogeny of
Cyprinella and supports his scattered-tuberoles and linear-tubercles groups except for the placement of C. caerulea.
The mitochondrial phylogeny also has substantial similarity with Mayden's analysis of Cyprinella and supports his
placement of C. caerulea in the linear-tubercles group. The primary difference with Mayden's phylogeny is
placement of the root. In the present case, C. callistia appears to be most basal while the C. lutrensis group of
southwestern species, and its sister group of C. spiloptera, C. whipplei, and C. venusta, appear most derived. When
transversion changes were weighted three times transitions, a single tree was obtained that differed from the equal­
weight tree in the placement of a clade containing C. caerulea, C. leedsi, C. callitaenia, C. callisema, and C. nivea.
This placement is inconsistent with both Mayden's and Gibbs' analyses suggesting that unequal weighting is
unjustified. Our analysis also suggests that recognition as Cyprinella of some species formerly considered Hybopsis
may be warranted.




  . 360                        10:30 Monday                                 CF13. ,                           CHM
Molecular phylogeny of lower euteleosts. T. Saruwatari. Ocean Research Institute, Univerisly of Tokyo, Nakano,
Tokyo, 164-8639, JAPAN; I. Oohaia and T. Kobayashi, National Research Institute of Aquaculture, Tokai-Gun, 516-
01, JAPAN; N. Takeshita, National Fisheries University, Shimonoseki, 759-65, JAPAN; J.W, Orr, National Marine
Fisheries Service, CIN C15700, Seattle, WA. 98115-0070, USA; R.M. McDowall, NIW AR, P.O.box 8602,
Christchurch, New Zealand.

The phylogenetic relationships of lower euteleosts is still a target of debate among ichthyologists. We have taken a
molecular approach to solve this long standing problem in ichthyology. mtDNA sequence data was obtained from at
least one species of following ten families; Alepocephalidae, Aplochitonidae, Argentinidae, Balhylagidae, Galaxiidae,
Lepidogalaxiidae, Osmeridae, Plecoglossidae, Retropinnidae, and Salangidae. Oncoibynchus mykiss and Esox
niger were used as outgroup. The obtained tree exhibits the mesopelagic Argentinidae, Alepocephalidae and
Balhylagidae forming a distinct clade as the primitive sister group of the remaining families. Southern Hemisphere
families, less Retropinnidae, formed a distinct clade and branched off next. Retropinnidae formed the sister group of
Northern Hemisphere families Osmeridae, Plecoglossidae. and Salangidae. Plecoglossus altivelis is the sister group
of Salangidae and together form a sister clade of Osmeridae. We are hoping to add more OTU to our analysis
before the meeting to give a more detailed phylogeny of this controversial group. .   361                            10:45 Monday                                   CF.13          CHM
Notograptidae: sister to Acanthoplesiops (Acanthoclininae, Plesiopidae). R.D. Mooi. Vertebrate Zoology,
Milwaukee Public Museum, 800 West Wells St., Milwaukee, Wl 53233-1478 USA; A.C. Gill, The Natural History
Museum, Cromwell Rd., London SW7 5BD.
The family Notograptidae contains one genus, Notograptus Gunther, and five nominal species known only from
northern Australia and New Guinea. Monophyly of the family is supported by numerous apparent autapomorphies
(e.g., anterior expansion of the median ethmoid, highly reduced gill-arch skeleton, composite A1+A2 section of the
adductor mandibulae, which originates broadly on the skull). Traditionally, the family has been considered a
blennioid or trachinoid, but in 1993 we suggested a relationship with acanthoclinine plesiopids. Here, we re-examine
this relationship and find strong evidence to place Notograptus among acanthoclinines (continuous free margin of
lower lip; head naked; dorsal and anal fins with high numbers of spines and low numbers of segmented rays;
reduced number of branched caudal-fin rays and total rays). Additional evidence supports a sister taxon relationship
with Acanthoplesiops, a derived acanthoclinine genus (symphyseal flap on lower lip; reduced hypural 5; reduced
hypurapophysis). This hypothesis helps to resolve the relationships among Acanthoplesiops by clanfying the polarity
of an otherwise equivocal character (autogenous middle radials of dorsal- and anal-fin pterygiophores). It also
produces a general pattern of distribution of the Notograptus^-Acanthoplesiops clade that compliments that of its
congeners.




   362                            11:00 Monday                                 . . CF13                                CHM
A preliminary phylogenetic investigation of the interrelationships among the extant species of the family
Triacanthodidae. F. Santini. Department of Zoology, University of Toronto &, CBCB, Royal Ontario Museum,, 100
Queens Park, M5S 2C6, Toronto Ontario.
A phylogenetic systematic analysis of the extant species of the family Triacanthodidae (Tetraodontiformes), using
morphological characters (obtained from the examination of the external morphology and osteology) is being
conducted in order to establish ths existing evolutionary interrelationships among the several taxa. Once the
phylogenetic tree is obtained it will be possible to start formulating hypothesis about the evolutionary mechanisms
that have lead to the origin of this bizarre looking deep-sea group. The preliminary results of this study are
presented and discussed.




   363                           11:15 Monday                                    CF13                               . CHM
Molecular phylogeny of Ictaluridae with emphasis on the Mexican blindcats, genus Prietella. F.J. Garcia de
Leon. Institrjto Tecnologico de Ciudad Victoria, Cd. Victoria, Tamaulipas, Mexico; D.A. Hendrickson, Texas Memorial
Museum, Texas Natural History Collections, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712-1100 USA; D.M. Hillis, Zoology
Department, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712 USA.
  Sequences were obtained for mitochondrial cytochrome-b (648 bases) and 12S rRNA (390 bases) of representative
  Ictalurids [Ameiunjs natalis, Ictalunjs punctatus, Pylodictus olivaris, Noturus insignis, N. gyrinus, N. flavus, Prietella
  cf. lundbergi, P. phreatophila} and a single Bagrid (Mystus sp.), considered on the basis of morphological characters
 to be the sister group of the Ictaluridae (Pinna 1993). Phylogenetic relationships were investigated in PAUP ver.
  4.0.0d56 (D. Swofford, Smithsonian Institution), using combined gene sequences with branch and bound and the
  maximum parsimony optimality criterion. 194 characters were found to be informative. The single best tree
  (Ameiurus(lclalurus(Prietella[Pytodictusl,Noturus})})) had a score of 682, and consistency index = 0.6716. The next
  best tree was 2 steps longer. Prietella was monophyletic in the optimal tree, but constraining the tree to include the
 traditional Prietella + Noturus sister-group relationship (Taylor 1969; Amemiya ef al. 1986; Lundberg 1982, 1992)
  required an additional 9 steps (C.l. = 0.6628), and 100 of the possible trees were more parsimonious than any tree
  including this traditional relationship. A likelihood ratio test indicated the traditional Prietella + Noturus relationship to
  be a significantly poorer fit to the data compared to the optimal free, although some other alternatives are not
  significantly different from the placement of Prietella as sister to Pylodictus + Noturus. Divergence between the two
  species of Prietella is substantial, but the P. phreatophila analyzed (22 specimens from 8 sites) were nearly invariant
 for both genes, with only single bass substitutions in each gene in the northernmost population. It appears that P.
..frirASViPfSi/seuJbJSa lono breisn leotoearf tnprri    In Co^huUa,                                            anwns eq^LUfera




                                   •ia:4G Monday                         ______ _________________________ pyc
 ^pecta of the life history of the Pacific electric ray, Torpedo caHfornlca (Ayres), In central and southern
 CsRfornia. lA. Neer and G.M. Cailliet, Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, P.O, Box 450, Moss Landing, California
 95039 USA.

Pacific electric rays were collected from central and southern California rom July 1994 through January 1996 for an
age and growrth, reproduction and demography study. Vertebral centra were used for ageing. The maximum age
estimate from vertebral centra was 16 years. The von Bertalanffy growth model provided the best fit to the size at
age estimate data, predicting an asymptotic total length (TL) of 1372 mm for females and 921 mm for males
Estimated size (and age) at sexual maturity is 600 mm TL (6 years) for males and 840 mm TL (11 years) in
females. Pacific electric rays have a owfecundityof approximately 17 young per litter. Time of partuition could not
be determined. Instantaneous mortality estimates (z) ranged from 0.048 to 0.277, depending on the longevity
estimates used. Best demographic estimates indicate that the Pacific electric ray population is al or slightly
exceeding a stable equilibrium with a generation time of 12.7 to 14.7 years.

  .364                          11:30 Monday                               .CF13                              CHM
A review of western north Atlantic species of Bembrops, family Percophidae, with descriptions of three new
species and additional comments on two eastern Atlantic species. B.A. Thompson. Coastal Rsheries Institute,
Wetland Resources Building, Louisiana State University,Bafon Rouge, Louisiana 70803-7503 USA; R.D. Suttkus,
Tulane University Museum of Natural History, Belle Chasse, Louisiana.
Ths Atlantic members of the genus Bembrops were examined from approximately 700 specimens, using meristic,
morphometric, and pigment characters to redescribe six species: B. anatirostris, B. gobioides, B. greyi, B. heterurus,
B. macromma, and B. magnisquamis. Three new species are recognized: one species known only from the
Bahamas Islands and two forms widespread in the Caribbean Sea. The three new species possess wide dorsal
saddles. Fin ray, scale, and vertebral counts, although overlapping, separate the nine species into high,
intermediate, and low meristic species groups. Bembrops gobioides, B. gieyi, and one new species are sexually
dimorphic in caudal pigment with females having a black ocellus that is lacking in males. Both sexes possess black
caudal spots in two of the new species. Each of the nine Atlantic species examined possesses distinctive patterns of
black pigment in the first dorsal fin. Bembrops anatirostris is unique in the genus having the second dorsal spine
elongated in males and B. macromma Is unique in having the dorsal surface of Its eyes scaled. The eastern Atlantic
fonri presently considered the same species, B. heterurus, found off eastern South America, may represent an
undescribed species. The nine species are generally separated by depth strata within each geographical region,
with few syntopic collections.




   365                          11:45 Monday                                CF13                               CHM
Gambusla and Belonesox are sister taxa but Brachyrhaphis is not a Gambuslini (Cyprinodontiformes:
Poeciliinae). C.M. Rodriquez. Museo Nacional de HIstoria Natural, Plaza de la Cultura, Santo Domingo, Dominican
Republic.
Rosen and Bailey (1963) placed Gambusia, Belonesox and Brachyrhaphis in the tribe Gambuslini on the basis of
moqjhological data, and this action was corroborated by Rauohenberger (1989). On the basis of cytochrome b gene
of the mithochondrial genome, Mojica et al (1997) found that Belonesox was not closely related to the other two
genera above. A cladistic analysis of Poeciliinae based on morphology shows that the tribe Gambuslini is
polyphyletic if Brachyrhaphis is included. Gambusia and Belonesox are sister taxa based on the hook of rays 4p and
5a of the gonopodium, the shape of the gonactinostal complex and the ligastyle. Brachyrhaphis does not belong to
Gambuslini; instead, it is more closely related to Alfaro with which it shares the position and pattern of migration of
the ligastyle. Mojica et al's hypothesis and the implications of their cladograms are discussed in the context of
incongnjence between ths morphological and molecular data.




   366                          10:30 Monday                                 CE8                               OVC
A first glance at pelagic shark catches in the Azores. A.A. Silva. G. Menezes and J.J. Pereira, Universidade dos
Acores, Departamento de Oceanografia e Pesoas, PT-9900 Horta, Portugal.
This paper reports a first attempt to estimate pelagic shark catches in the northeastern Atlantic Ocean around the
Azores. Blue shark (Prionace glauca} and shortfin mako {Isurus oxyrinchus) commercial catches reported for the
Azorean archipelago as well as non-reported fishing data from logbooks of swordfish longliners operating in the area
are presentee! for the period 1993-1996. Three major fleet components catching pelagic sharks are identified
according to vessel characteristics and fishing regime: open deck wooden boats, small covered deck boats (gross
tonnage less than 100 tons) and large covered deck boats (GRT exceeding 100 tons). The latter vessel class lands
most of the catches In Portuguese and Spanish mainland ports, accounting for 86-89% and 71-85% of the total
estimated blue shark and mako catches taken In the Azores during the study period. Catch rates for blue shark and
swordfish exhibit a pronounced seasonal and asynchronic nature. While the highest catch levels for the former
species are obtaineefin the Spring (averaging 807 Kg/1000 hooks), the fishing season for the latter targeted species
is from August to February. The implications of this pattern for future management are discussed. Blue shark bycatch
represents a major proportion of the total catches taken by the Azorean swordfish longline fishery, reaching a
minimum and a maximum of 39% and 91% respectively dunng October and June. Blue shark catches have been
gradually increasing over the period 1993-1996, peaking at an estimated maximum of 2,433 mt in 1996. Shortfin
mako catch levels have increased to an estimated maximum of 76 mt in 1995, followed by a decline to 54 mt in
1996. An observed increase of pelagic shark catch rates over the study period is probably due to a shift of fishing
effort towards pelagic sharks during times of low abundance of swordfish.




   370                .        11:30 Monday                                 CE8                               OVC
                               flower garden banks national marine sanctuary by pelagic elasmobranchs. J.N.
EhildS, Wildlife & Fisheries Sciences Dept., Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA, 77843-2258.
Tile Hower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary consists of three topographic highs in the northwestern Gulf of
Mexico, that support the northernmost coral reefs on the North American continental shelf. These banks are
seasonally inhabitated by a variety of pelagic elasmobranchs, which often occur in considerable numbers To date
20 elasmobranch species have been reported or recorded in the Sanctuary. Seasonal occurrence, size and soci^
organization will be presented for several of the pelagic elasmobranchs known to frequent the Sanctuary. ’   363                               11:15 Monday                                CF13                                CHM
Molecular phylogeny of Ictaluridae with emphasis on the Mexican bllndcats, genus Prietella. F.J. Garcia de
Leon. Institute Tecnoldgico de Ciudad Victoria, Cd. Victoria, Tamaulipas, Mexico; D.A. Hendrickson, Texas Memorial
Museum, Texas Natural History Collections, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712-1100 USA; D.M. Hillis, Zoology
Department, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712 USA.
Sequences were obtained for mitochondrial cytochrome-b (648 bases) and 12S rRNA (390 bases) of representative
lotalurids [Ameiurus natalis, Ictalurus punctatus, Pylodictus olivaris, Noturus insignia, N. gyrinus, N. fiavus, Prieteiia
cf. iundbergi, P. phreatophiia} and a single Bagrid (Mystus sp.), considered on the basis of morphological characters
to be the sister group of the Ictaluridae (Pinna 1993). Phylogenetic relationships were investigated in PAUP ver.
4.0.0d56 (D. Swofford, Smithsonian Institution), using combined gene sequences with branch and bound and the
maximum parsimony optimality criterion. 194 characters were found to be infonnative. The single best tree
{Ameiurus(lctalunjs(Pneteiia{Pylodictus{Noturus}))'i) had a score of 682, and consistency index = 0.6716. The next
best tree was 2 steps longer. Prietella was monophyletic in the optimal tree, but constraining the tree to include the
traditional Prietella + Notunjs sisfer-group relationship (Taylor 1969; Amemiya ef al. 1986; Lundberg 1982, 1992)
required an additional 9 steps (C.l. = 0.6628), and 100 of the possible trees were more parsimonious than any tree
including this traditional relationship. A likelihood ratio test indicated the traditional Prietella + Noturus relationship to
be a significantly poorer fit to the data compared to the optimal tree, although some other alternatives are not
significantly different from the placement of Prietella as sister to Pylodictus + Noturus. Divergence between the two
species of Prietella is substantial, but the P. phreatophiia analyzed (22 specimens from 8 sites) were nearly invariant
for both genes, with only single base substitutions in each gene in the northernmost population. It appears that P.
Iundbergi has long been isolated from congeners in Coahuila, but that subterranean interconnections among aquifers
have atlowed for relatively recent or continuing gene flow among populations of P. phresdophUa.




    367                       ...    10:45 Monaay                   . ..   .      CE8         ...                    OVC
Aspects of the life histora of the Pacific electric ray. Torpedo caHfornlca (Ayres), In central and southern
California. J A. Neer and G.M. Cailliet, Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, P.O. Box 450, Moss Landing, California
95039 USA.

Pacific electric rays were collected from central and southern California rom July 1994 through January 1996 for an
age and growth, reproduction and demography study. Vertebral centra were used for ageing. The maximum age
estimate from vertebral centra was 16 years. The von Bertalanffy growth model provided the best fit to the size at
age estimate data, predicting an asymptotic total length (TL) of 1372 mm for females and 921 mm for males.
Estimated size (and age) at sexual maturity is 600 mm TL (6 years) for males and 840 mm TL (11 years) in
females. Pacific electric rays have a owfecundity of approximately 17 young per litter. Time of partuition could not
be determined, instantaneous mortality estimates (z) ranged from 0.048 to 0.277, depending on the longevity
estimates used. Best demographic estimates indicate that the Pacific electric ray population is at or slightly
exceeding a stable equilibrium with a generation time of 12.7 to 14.7 years.




. .368                              T1:00 Monday                                CE8                                 OVC
Atlantic shark management update: developing a combined fishery management plan for Atlantic sharks,
tunas, and swordfish. M.B. Schulze. K. Brewster-Geisz and R. Lent, Highly Migratory Species Management
Division, National Marine Rsheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 1315 East-West
Highway, Silver Spring, MD 20910 USA.
The Highly Migratory Species (HMS) Management Division of the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) is
responsible for management of Atlantic tunas, swordfish, billfish and sharks. Thirty-nine species of Atlantic sharks
are grouped into 4 management units - large coastal sharks, pelagic sharks, small coastal sharks, and prohibited
species. In the 'Report to Congress: Status of the Rsheries of the United States’ (September, 1997), NMFS
identified all large coastal sharks and prohibited species as overfished, and pelagic and small coastal sharks as
fully fished. The Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act of 1996, as amended, requires
that all species designated as overfished must have fishery management plans (FMPs) or FMP amendments that
include rebuilding plans submitted for Secretarial review within one year (September, 1998) and that NMFS
establish an advisory panel for each FMP or amendment. The HMS Management Division is developing a
combined HMS plan, with assistance from an HMS Advisory Panel, which will build on the existing plans for sharks
and swordfish and will add a new management framework for tunas. An FMP amendment for Atlantic billfish will be
prepared separately. An update on the status of the HMS plan will be provided.




   369                              .11:15 Monday                               CE8                                 OVC
Experimental homing in juvenile lemon sharks, Negaprion brevlrostris, at Bimini, Bahamas. S.M. Clermont.
Zoological Institute, University of Copenhagen, Tagensvej 16, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark; S.D. Gruber, Bimini
Biological Reid Station, RSMASAJniversity of Miami, 4600 Rickenbacker Causeway, Miami, FL 33149-1098.
This study represents the first eimerimental trials on an elasmobranch's ability to return home from an unfamiliar
area. Ten juvenile lemon sharks (66.0 to 96.0 cm total lengths) were tagged with ultrasonic transmitters and their
home ranges determined over a minimum of 3 days of tracking. Thereafter they were recaptured and experimentally
displaced 4 km off shore, south of the island. From late October 1997 to February 1998, seven displacements during
daylight and three displacements at night were performed. Sharks were tracked for between 2 and 14 hours, and in
all ten cases successfully returned to their home ranges. Ths behavioral pattern of the sharks at the time of release
was characterized by circling and vertical migrations suggesting that they were attempting to orient to sensory cues
in a way similar to homing pigeons. Further, sharks released at night appeared to change course to a more direct
route home at sunrise, suggesting that visual cues may play an important role in the final stages of homing.
Therefore, we are testing the hypofriesis that sharks are able to use the position of the sun as a cue for orientation.
Rnally, we are carefully documenting the behavior of sharks at the time of release to give insight into possible
mechanisms of orientation. Supported by the Rorida State Department of Education with a grant to SHG.

   366                         10:30.Monday ..                             CE8                               OVC
A first glance at pelagic shark catches in the Azores. A.A. Silva. G. Menezes and J.J. Pereira, Universidade dos
Acores, Departamento de Oceanografia e Pescas, PT-9900 Horta, Portugal.
This paper reports a first attempt to estimate pelagic shark catches in the northeastern Atlantic Ocean around the
Azores. Blue shark (Prionace glauca) and shortfin mako (Isurus oxyrinchus) commercial catches reported for the
Azorean archipelago as well as non-reported fishing data from logbooks of swordfish longliners operating in the area
are presented for the period 1993-1996. Three major fleet components catching pelagic sharte are identified
according to vessel characteristics and fishing regime: open deck wooden boats, small covered deck boats (gross
tonnage less than 100 tons) and large covered deck boats (GRT exceeding 100 tons). The latter vessel class lands
most of the catches in Portuguese and Spanish mainland ports, accounting for 86-89% and 71-85% of the total
estimated blue shark and mako catches taken in the Azores during the study period. Catch rates for blue shark and
swordfish exhibit a pronounced seasonal and asynchronic nature. While the highest catch levels for the former
species are obtained in the Spring (averaging 807 Kg/1000 hooks), the fishing season for the latter targeted species
is from August to February. The implications of this pattern for future management are discussed. Blue shark bycatch
represents a major proportion of the total catches taken by the Azorean swordfish longline fishery, reaching a
minimum and a maximum of 39% and 91% respectively dunng October and June. Blue shark catches have been
gradually increasing over the period 1993-1996, peaking at an estimated maximum of 2,433 mt in 1996. Shortfin
mako catch levels have increased to an estimated mawmum of 76 mt in 1995, followed by a decline to 54 mt in
1996. An observed increase of pelagic shark catch rates over the study period is probably due to a shift of fishing
effort towards pelagic sharks during times of low abundance of swordfish.




   370                          11 ;30 Monday                              CE8.    ..                        OVC
Seasonal habitat use of the flower garden banks national marine sanctuary by pelagic elasmobranchs. J.N.
Childs. Wildlife & Fisheries Sciences Dept., Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA, 77843-2258.

The Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary consists of three topographic highs in the northwestern Gulf of
Mexico, that support the northernmost coral reefs on the North American continental shelf. These banks are
seasonally inhabitated by a variety of pelagic elasmobranchs, which often occur in considerable numbers. To date,
20 elasmobranch species have been reported or recorded in the Sanctuary. Seasonal occunence, size, and social
organization will be presented for several of the pelagic elasmobranchs known to frequent the Sanctuary.




   371                         11:45 Monday                                 CE8                               OVC
Archival tagging of school sharks In southern Australia. J. Stevens. CSIRO MarineResearch, GPO Box 1538
Hobart Tas 7001, Australia.
School sharks, Galeorhinus galeus, are an important commercial species in the Australian Southern Shark Fishery.
A current project is using archival tags to try and answer certain questions on vertical distribution, 'onshelf and
'offshelf movement components, Tasman Sea distribution, pupping migrations and pupping areas. A 'dummy'
tagging eiqieriment was carried out to evaluate the suitability of internal versus externally located tags and between
unstreamlined and hydrodynamically shaped external tags. The overall recapture rate after three years was 15% and
although unstreamlined external tags vrere returned at a lower rate (11%) than streamlined externals (16%) and
internal tags (19%) these differences were not statistically significant. In November 1997, 30 archival tags were
deployed on school sharks in waters off South Australia; these tags were mounted externally on the first dorsal fin
and were semi-streamlined. One tag was returned after 7 days and another after 23 days. No further returns have
been made to date. Both recaptures showed an interesting diurnal vertical migration between as deep as 500 m
during the day to near the surface at night. Geo-positioning from the light data are discussed. Immediate plans are to
release a further batch of fish with internal tags.




   372                         08:00 Monday          .   .                 CE6                               QVC
Age and growth of the spiny butterfly ray, Gymnura altavela. A. Piercy. Department Of Biology, Christopher
Newport University, 50 Shoo Lane, Newport News, VA 23062 USA; J. Gelsleichter and J.A. Musick, Virginia Institute
of Marine Science, School of Marine Science, College of William and Mary, P. O. Box 1346, Gloucester Pt., VA
23062 USA.
Age and growth of the spiriy butterfly ray, Gymnura altavela, was estimated from growth increments visible in the
vertebral centra of 175 individuals. Data were comprised of 93 males and 82 females, ranging in size from 250
(embryos) to 2020 mm in disk width. Rays were only collected in August and September (1995-97), thus vertebral
increments were assumed to be deposited annually for the purposes of ageing. Vertebral centra were sectioned
longitudinally and annuli counted multiple times. Precision of vertebral ageing was estimated using the index of
average percent error. Back-calculated size-at-age data were used to estimate von Bertanlanffy growth function
parameters to describe sex-specific and overall patterns of growth. This study represents a major contribution to
general information on this poorly-studied species.   373    . .                   08:15 Monday                                CE6                               OVC
A preliminary demographic analysis of the bigeye thresher shark, Aloplas superclliosus. C.T. Chen and K.M.
Liu, Department of Rshery Science, National Taiwan Ocaean, University, Keelung 202, Taiwan.
Population growth and exploitation of Alopias superciliosus were estimated by demographic analyses using best
known life history parameters. Life history tables were constmcted by using both estimates of natural mortality (M) of
0.1316 and age-specific natural mortality for maximum ages of 30. Fecundity was 1 and age at maturity was at age
12. With age-specific mortality, the population increase rate was 1.2%/year, and the generation time was about
16.45 years without exploitation. Sensitivity analyses indicated that the mortality of juvenile stage was the most
senshive factor in input parameters and net reproductive value was the most sensitive factor in computed
parameters. The net reproductive value, generation time and intrinsic population growth rate decreased with the
increase of fishing mortality. At F=0.1 and fishing started at age 12, the population increase rate was 0.3%/year, and
the generation time was 17.0 years with age-specific natural mortality. The bigeye thresher population would decline
when F^O.t and fishing started at age 10.




   374                      .   08:30 Monday                                 CE6                          .   OVC
A comparison of a stage-based model and a yield per recruit model of the sandbar shark (Carcharhinus
plumbeus}. K.K. Brewster-Geisz and T.J. Miller, Chesapeake Biological Laboratory, University of Maryland Center
for Environmental Science, Solomons, MD 20688, USA.
A stage-based model of sandbar shark populations indicates that fishing mortality (F) needs to be reduced to 0.08 to
ensure sustainability of the population. This model assumes the natural mortality (M) is 0.10. However, stage-based
models do not consider the effect size limits may have on the fishery. We have used a yield per recruit (YPR)
analysis to examine the effects of adopting different size limits in the fishery. We used various growth parameter
estimates, an age of recruitment of 1, and M = 0.10. Based on estimates from Casey ef. al (1985), peak YPR occurs
at a combination of F = 0.40 and an age of first capture of 10 years or approximately 144 cm fork length (fl). When
growth parameter estimates from Casey and Natanson (1992) are used, peak YPR occurs at a combination of F =
0.30 and an age of first capture of 10 years or approximately 99 cm fl. Maximum YPR for F = 0.08, predicted by the
stage-based model, is approximately 80% of the peak YPRs found above, and occur at an age of first capture of
approximately 6 years. With growth parameters estimated for 1991 to 1992 from Sminkey and Musick (1995), peak
YPR occurs at an F = 0.45 and an age of first capture of 9 years or approximately 124 cm fl. In this case, maximum
YPR for F = 0.08 is approximately 75% of the peak YPR estimated and occurs at an age of first capture of
approximately 5 years. These results suggest that in order to have a stable population, YPR for each set of growth
parameter e^’mates must be 20 to 25% smaller than the peak YPR.




   375                          08:45 Mort^            .                    CE6                               OVC
Local occurrence of basking sharks (Cetorhinus maximus Gunnerus) in relation to spatio-temporal patterns
of zooplankton abundance. TJ. Thom. M.J. O'Connell, M.C. Lucas and L. Joplin, Department of Biological
Sciences, University of Durham, DH1 3LE, England, UK; A. Downie, Scottish Natural Heritage, Maritime Group 2
Anderson Place, Edinburh, EH6 5NP,Sootland, UK.
The distribution of basking sharks (Cetorhinus maximus} around the Isle of Arran in the Clyde sea area on the west
coast of Scotland, UK was investigated during July 1997. A network of shore based volunteers conducted visual
searches between 06-00 and 22-00 from seven vantage points for a total of 1538 hours over 20 days between July 6
and 28. Twenty-nine sightings were recorded. A plankton sampling programme was carried out in the same area
and over the same time period. The majority of shark sightings occurred in the afternoon and evening corresponding
to an increase in zooplankton abundance during this period. Three peaks in shark sightings occurred over the study
period which followed peaks in zooplankton abundance with a lag of one to three days. The spatial distribution of
shark sightings was also associated with the distribution of zooplankton in the area. Increases in the number of
sharks occurred when zooplankton dry weights were at the maximum normally found in the area. This study, has
shown, therefore, that fine-scale spatio-temporal variability in the distribution of basking sharks can be explained in
terms of patchiness in the distribution and abundance of zooplankton.




   379                          09:45 Morday                                 CE6                              OVC
Sharks associated with the gulf menhaden Brevoorlla patronus fishery and their relevance to shark
populations of the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico. J.A. de Silva. Department of Oceanography and Coastal
Sciences, Louisiana State University, 153 Howe-Russell Geoscience, Baton Rouge LA 70803. USA; R.E. Condrey
and BA Thompson, Department of Oceanography and Coastal Sciences, Coastal Fisheries Institute, CCEER,
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge LA 70803-7503. USA.
We describe the shark bycatch in the U.S. gulf menhaden fishery; their species composition, fates, distribution and
estimate the annual number of sharks caught by the fishery. Ten species of sharks were identified, with blacktip
sharks Carcharhinus limbatus accounting for 50% of those obsenred. Approximately 75% of the sharks encountered
died, 12% were released disoriented and 8% were released healthy. Using loglinear and logit models we determined
spatial and temporal patterns in the shark bycatch. Contrasts revealed the odds of observing a fishing set with shark
bycatch was significantly greater in June-August than September-October. The odds of observing shark bycatch
during April-May was also significantly different from September-October. However, these differences were only
apparent east of 93 degrees W (central Louisiana). For the 1994 and 1995 fishing seasons we estimated an annual
take of approximately 30,000 sharks. Stomach analyses on sharks indicated that the menhaden schools were
functioning as a foraging base tor those sharks captured. While detailed age and growth information were not
collected, comparisons to length distributions in the literature indicated that the fishery appears to be impacting the
summer nursery grounds of sharks in the northern Gulf of Mexico.

   376                         09:00 Monday                                  CE6                               OVC
Length-at-birth of the sandbar shark, Carcharhinus plumbeus, in Delaware Bay. R.R. Merson. Department of
Biological Sciences, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, Rl 02881, USA; H.L. Praft(Jr.), National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, National Marine Fisheries Service, Northeast Rsheries Science Center, 28 Tarzwell Dr.,
Narragansett, Rl 02882-1199, USA.
Young-of-the-year sandbar sharks grow in length before their umbilical scars are healed. This study takes that into
account by separating umbilical scar healing stages and produces a more accurate length-at-birth than studies which
report the tenths of sandbar sharks with open umbilical scars. We examined 798 sandbar sharks captured by gill
net or longline in Delaware Bay between 1995 and 1997. Six distinct umbilical scar healing stages were termed cord­
remains, open-fresh, partly-healed, mostly-healed, well-healed and none. Sharks with the three earliest umbilical
healing stages did not differ in length, thus represented the length-at-birth. The mean length-at-birth is 49.3 cm ±0.3
cm fork length (95% confidence interval, n=238) with a range of 40 to 55 cm fork length in Delaware Bay. Our
results are comparable to published reports of sandbar length-at-birth along the US east coast and therefore do not
support the hypothesis that sandbar sharks are bom 'somewhat' smaller in the northern pupping range.




   377                         .09:15 Monday                                .CE6                          .    OVC
History and management of the dogfish fishery of British Columbia, Canada. R. Bonfil. Fisheries Centre, UBC,
2204 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4.
The fishery for dogfish (Squalus acanthias} of British Columbia is one of the oldest shark fisheries in the world. This
paper describes the main features in the long evolution of this fishery. It also analyses the current situation and the
management system of the fishery. Presently, this is a small fishery characterized by strong market limitations.
Although there is a reasonably modem management system for the fishery, the apparent success to keep the
dogfish stocte at healthy levels for the major part of the 125+ years of the fishery is more a product of the lack of
strong demand for dogfish which has offered a fortuitous protection to the stock. Some suggestions for
improvements to the stock assessment and possible ways to develop the fishery are given.




 . 378                         09:30 Monday                                 CE6      ,                        OVC
Catch and effort data of whale sharks In the Philippines. A.A.S.P. Yaptinchay, Kabang Kalikasan ng Pilipinas
(WWF-Philippines), No. 32-A Maalindog St. UP Village, Diliman, Quezon City 1101, Philippines; R. Uy, Mantangale-
Alibuag Resort, Balingoan, Misamis Oriental; M.N.R. Alava. Marine Laboratory, Silliman University, Dumaguete City
6200, Philippines.
Catch volume and trade of the whale shark fishery for the 1997-1998 season was monitored by WWF-Philippines
and Silliman University. Methods of data collection include site-visits to coastal villages involved in whale shark and
manta fishery, market surveys, fishers’ intenriews and daily landing-site enumeration. Eight fishery sites were
identified in the 1997 season, tha major landing sites of which were in Pamilacan, Bohol and Talisayan, Misamis
Oriental. A fishery site in Sorsogon, Luzon is recently operational for the 1998 season. Fishery profiles and changes
in activity patterns related to whale shark fishery in these sites are presented. Increasing fishing effort, due to
increasing demand, and decreasing catch per unit effort characterized the fishery. Management strategies employing
Integrated Conservation and Development-projects protecting both whale sharks and the fishing population
dependent on them was recommended in the previous year. This recommendation is being evaluated against a
government directive on total ban on whale shark fishery and trade.




   382                       , 11:00 Monday                                 CA11                              THN
Reproductive success in the bullfrog, Rana catesbelana.            J.C. MacDonald and R.J. Brooks, Department of
Zoology, University of Guelph, Ontario, N1G 2W1.

We studied mating behavior and reproductive success in a wild, northern population of bullfrogs (Rana
catesbelana}. The predominant selective mechanism in this system was female choice. Male bullfrogs gathered
annually at traditional chorusing sites where they competed aggressively or employed alternate mating strategies in
an attempt to acquire mates. Females entered the choruses briefly to select a mate, engage in amplexus, and
deposit eggs. Compared with males that were unsuccessful in obtaining mates, reproductively successful males
were larger, had longer tenures in the choruses, spent more of their tenure calling, and had previous chorusing
experience. Male size was related to reproductive effort with larger males losing proportionately more weight over
the chorusing season. In females, dutch volume was positively related to body size with large females depositing
egg masses up to three times larger than those of small females. There was no evidence of assortative mating by
body size. We also postulated that, because of a low population density, this system may best be described as a lek
in contrast to the resource-defense system described previously for this species .. 375                         08:45 Monday .            .   ..              CE6                               QVC
 Local occurrence of basking sharks (Cetorhinus maximus Gunnerus) In relation to spatio-temporal patterns
 of zooplankton abundance. T.J, Thom. M.J. O'Connell, M.C. Lucas and L. Joplin, Department of Biological
Sciences, University of Durham, DH1 3LE, England, UK; A. Downie, Scottish Natural Heritage, Maritime Group 2
Anderson Place, Edinburh, EH6 5NP,Scotland, UK.
The distribution of basking sharks (Cetorhinus maximus} around the Isle of Arran in the Clyde sea area on the west
coast of Scotland, UK was investigated during July 1997. A network of shore based volunteers conducted visual
searches between 06-00 and 22-00 from seven vantage points for a total of 1538 hours over 20 days between July 6
and 28. Twenty-nine sightings were recorded. A plankton sampling programme was carried out in the same area
and over the same time period. The majority of shark sightings occurred in the afternoon and evening corresponding
to an Increase in zooplankton abundance during this period. Three peaks in shark sightings occurred over the study
period i^ii^ followed peaks in zooplankton abundance with a lag of one to three days. The spatial distribution of
shark sightings was also associated with the distribution of zooplankton in the area. Increases in the number of
sharks occurred when zooplankton dry weights were at the maximum normally found in the area. This study, has
shown, therefore, that fine-scale spatio-temporal variability in the distribution of basking sharks can be explained in
terms of patchiness in the distribution and abundance of zooplankton.




   379                       09.45 Monday.                         CE6                         OVC
 Sharks associated with the gulf menhaden Brevoortia patronua fishery and their relevance to shark
 gopulations of the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico. J.A. de Silva. Department of Oceanography and Coastal
  ciences, Louisiana State University, 153 Howe-Russell Geoscience, Baton Rouge LA 70803. USA; R.E. Condrey
 and BA Thompson, Department of Oceanography and Coastal Sciences, Coastal Fisheries Institute, CCEER,
 Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge LA 70803-7503. USA.
Wo describe the shark bycatch in the U.S. gulf menhaden fishery; their species composition, fates, distribution and
estimate the annual number of sharks caught by the fishery. Ten species of sharks were identified, with blacktip
sharks Carcharhinus limbatus accounting for 50% of those observed. Approximately 75% of the sharks encountered
died, 12% were released disoriented and 8% were released healthy. Using loglinear and logit models we detemiined
spatial and temporal patterns in the shark bycatch. Contrasts revealed the odds of observing a fishing set with shark
bycatch was significantly greater in June-August than September-October. The odds of observing shark bycatch
during April-May was also signifioantly different from September-October. However,' these differences were only
apparent east of 93 degrees W (central Louisiana). For the 1994 and 1995 fishing seasons we estimated an annual
take of approximately 30,000 sharks. Stomach analyses on sharks indicated that the menhaden schools were
functioning as a foraging base for those sharks captured. While detailed ago and growth information were not
collected, comparisons to length distributions in the literature indicated that the fishery appears to be impacting the
summer nursery grounds of sharks in the northern Gulf of Mexico.




   380                          10:30 Monday                                CA11                                THN
Density effects of oophagous tadpoles of Chirbtaius elffingeri, (AnuraiRhacophoridae): Importance of
material brood care. Y.-C. Kam and Y.F. Tsai, Department of Biology, National Changhua University of
Education, Taiwan; C.F. Lin and Y.S. Un, Dept of Zook, National Taiwan University, Taiwan.
  We studied the density-dependent aspects of growth, development, and survivorship of arboreal tadpoles of
 Chirixaius eifUngeri in bamboo forests at the Experimental Forest of the National Taiwan University at Chitou,
Taiwan, from May-Septeinber 1995. Newly hatched tadpoles were randomly assigned to one of the three
treatments: low (LD), medium (MD), and high density (HD) (six, 18, and 54 tadpoies/bamboo stump, respectively),
and each treatment consisted of 15 replicates. Tadpoles are obligatorily oophagous; thus, growth, development, and
survivorship of tadpoles are totally dependent upon trophic egg availability. Tadpoles in all treatments increased in
mass during development, but LD and MD tadpoles grew faster and weighed signifioantly heavier than HD tadpoles
by week 5. During the first 5 weeks of development, the biomass increase of tadpoles (BMI) in successful nests was
substantially greater than zero and was significantly different between treatments, indicating that female frogs are
capable of increasing the supply of trophic eggs as the tadpole number increased in MD and HD treatments. Body
size at metamorphosis was density-dependent but the time required to reach metamorphosis was not, which was
different from earlier studies on pond breeders. This discrepancy is probably due to the different feeding habits (i.e.,
herbivory versus oophagy) and size-selective feeding behavior. Results suggest that the energetic reserves of
female frogs for brooding strongly affect the growth, development, and survivorship of tadpoles.




   381                      ,   10:45 Monday                                CAII                               THN
Contributions to the life history of the redback salamander: preliminary evidence for kin recognition. D.C.
Fgreslgr and C.L. Anders, Biological Sciences, Towson University, Towson, MD 21252 USA.
We tested two questions critical to the reproductive life history of the redback salamander (Pielhodon cinereus): (1)
Do females recognize and preferentially brood their own eggs during pair-wise discrimination trials? (2) Are
hatchlings able to recognize their mother using substrate-bome chemical cues, and if so, is this ability innate or
learned? To address the first question, we tested brooding females collected from the field within a few days of
oviposifion. They were given a choice of their own eggs and those of a conspecific female, and their association
monitored over a 24 h period. To address the second question we cottected 60 females within 24 h post-oviposition,
and divided thern into two groups. The eggs of group 1 were raised by their mothers until they hatched. The eggs
of group 2 were isolated on filter paper throughout development. Beginning at 2 weeks post-hatching, each juvenile
was tested twice (24 h each) in pair-wise trials contrasting unmarked filter paper with filter paper scented with
matema odors. Our results confinn maternal egg recognition in P. cinereus, and we present preliminary data
suggesting that juveniles chemically imprint on their mother during the prolonged maternal brooding period.

    378                          09:30 Monday                               ,    CE6                             ovc
 Catch and effort data of whale sharks in the Philippines. A.A.S.P. Yapfinchay, Kabang Kalikasan ng Pilipinas
 (WWF-Philippines), No. 32-A Maalindog St. UP Village, Dillman, Quezon City 1101, Philippines; R. Uy, Mantangale-
 Alibuag Resort, Balingoan, Misamis Oriental; M.N.R. Alava. Marine Laboratory, Silliman University, Dumaquete City
 6200, Philippines.
 Catch volume and trade of the whale shark fishery for the 1997-1998 season was monitored by WWF-Philippines
 and Silliman University. Methods of data collection include site-visits to coastal villages involved in whale shark and
 manta fishery, market sunreys, fishers' interviews and daily landing-site enumeration. Eight fishery sites were
 identified in the 1997 season, tha major landing sites of which were in Pamilacan, Bohol and Talisayan, Misamis
 Orien^. A fishery site in Sorsogon, Luzon is recently operational for the 1998 season. Fishery profiles and changes
 in activity patterns related to whale shark fishery in these sites are presented. Increasing fishing effort, due to
 increasing demand, and decreasing catch per unit effort characterized the fishery. Management strategies employing
 Integrated Conservation and Development projects protecting both whale sharks and the fishing population
 dependent on them was recommended in the previous year. This recommendation is being evaluated against a
 government directive on total ban on whale shark fishery and trade.




    382                         11:00 Monday                                 CA11                          'THN
 Reryoductive success in the bullfrog, Rana catesbeiana.             J.C. MacDonald and R.J. Brooks, Department of
 Zoology, University of Guelph, Ontario, NIG 2W1.

We studied mating behavior and reproductive success in a wild, northern population of bullfrogs (Rana
catesbeiana}. The predominant selective mechanism in this system was female choice. Malo bullfrogs gathered
annually at traditional chonjsing sites where they competed aggressively or employed alternate mating strategies in
an attempt to acquire mates. Females entered the choruses briefly to select a mate, engage in amplexus, and
deposit eggs. Compared with males that were unsuccessful in obtaining mates, reproductively successful males
were larger, had longer tenures in the choaises, spent more of their tenure calling, and had previous chorusing
experience. Male size was related to reproductive effort with larger males losing proportionately more weight over
the chonjsing season. Iri females, clutch volume was positively related to body size with large females depositing
egg masses up to three times larger than those of small females. There was no evidence of assortative mating by
body size. We also postulated that, because of a low population densify, this system may best be described as a lek
in contrast to the resource-defense system described previously for this species




   383                          11:15 Monday                            .       CAII                            THN
Maternal care and tadpole survival in Dendrobates pumilicr. Are food and shelter really enough? M Maple
School of Biological Sciences, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506 USA.
I conducted field studies to determine the influence of female Dendrobates pumilio on offspring survival through two
forms of maternal care; rearing site selection and nutritional provisioning. Female D. pumilio transport tadpoles from
hatching sifes to water-filled leaf axils where they are tended until metamorphosis. I assessed availability and
variability of rearing axils (pH. temperature, water volume, height, cover), female choice of rearing sites, and effects
of site characters on tadpole sunrival. Rearing sites are abundant and highly variable. While female choice is best
predicted by a combination of low height and pH. tadpole sunrival is best predicted by variance in axil temperature.
These results suggest that although females deposit their tadpoles non-randomly, rearing site selection does not
influence tadpole fitness. Females return to tadpole rearing sites to provide eggs for their tadpoles to eat throughout
development. I observed females tending tadpoles to determine the influence of provisioning on tadpole fitness.
Provisioning behaviors such as time to first feeding, frequency of feedings, and number of eggs per feeding are
highly variable. Although there is substantial variation in provisioning, preliminary analyses indicate that predation
teSor                      provisioning on tadpole survival, limiting the potential for further evolution of provisioning




   384                       .. 11:30Monday               .                     CAII                            THN
 Reproductive trade-offs In the red-backed salamander, Plethodon cinereus: The effects of parental care. K.
Warging, J.C. Maerz and D.M. Madison. Department of Biological Sciences, Binghamton University (SUNY),
Binghamton, New York, 13902-6000 USA.                                                                                 '
Iteroparous animals that have substantial investment in parental care should invest energy differentially into growth
     repnxlurtion according to size and age. Smaller, younger animats should invest more energy in growth for
future reproductive benefits, while larger, older animals should invest more energy in reproduction and parental
care. In this study, 22 gravid female red-backed salamanders {Plethodon dnereu^ were induced to oviposit in the
                      brooding behavior was recorded for salamanders with body sizes ranging from 34 mm to 53
mm SVL Female body size was positively correlated with clutch size. Females that oviposited atypically and/or
terminated parental care by oophagy were significantly smaller than females who reared their clutches normily.
 inese results suggest that smaller females may forego reproduction to invest in growth, while larger females should
always invest in reproduction.   385                          08:00 Monday                                  :GS1                               MCN
Female preferences for multiple male traits in the advertisement calls of the neotropical hylld Smilisca
phaeota. N.A. Guda. Dept, of Zoology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Males of the hylld Smilisca phaeota have complex advertisement calls which show an large amount of variation in
several frequency related traits. Two of these traits were found to be negatively correlated with each other in the
natural population studied. Female preferences for male calls were tested in and around the correlation of these two
traits. Initial results demonstrated that females have directional preferences for both traits when measured
Independently.
Females were found to have preferences which exert a stabilizing effect on the correlation in the two trait space. As
a result of these preferences, the directionality of preference for any one trait taken independently can change
depending on the relation of that trait to a sceond trait.




 . 386 .                        08:15 Moiiday                                 GS1                                MCN
Biparental care In a neotropical bromeliad-breeding tree frog, Osteocephalus planiceps.                    L-F- Haugen,
University of Oklahoma, Department of Zoology, Norman, Oklahoma 73019 USA.
The reproductive behaviors of a bromeliad-breeding tree frog, Osteocephalus planiceps (Hylidae) were studied in
Amazonian Peru. Pairs of this species form where males defend oviposition terntoiies (i.e. bromeliads), and females
return periodically to amplex with the males to lay fertilized trophic eggs" for their developing tadpoles. To
determine the extent of biparental care and how biparental care and resource defense affect the mating system, I
relocated bromeliads within a 1-ha study area into clumped versus isolated oviposition sites. In addition, 12 artificial
bromeliads were provided so that egg deposition and tadpole survival could be monitored at those sites. All matings
in the study site were recorded for a five-month period, and the number of metamorphs produced in the artificial
bromeliads was used to evaluate individual reproductive success. Although males and females fomn monogamous
pairs due to site-fidelity, several ecological factors seem to maintain a rather fluid mating system. Limited oviposition
sites, relative proximity of oviposition sites (one male's territory may include more than one oviposition site and,
therefore, can potentially accommodate more than one female), and high predation pressure all contribute to
continuous changes in the mating system.




   387                         08:30 Monday                                  GS1                             .   MCN
Diversifying selection due to female preferences and males that respond appropriately in the neotropical
hylid Smilisca phaeota. N.A. Guda. Dept, of Zoology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Females of the hylid Smilisca phaeota were found to have significantly different preferences for rnale advertisment
calls under different simulated chorusing behaviors. Male Smilisca phaeota often try to overlap their calls with those
of another male. This behavior is common but not ubiquitous. Females presented with a pair of test calls given in an
overlapping sequence that was controlled for lead calling. Females preference was found to be significant and
opposite that of females given the same pair of test calls in an alternating sequence.
Male chorusing behavior was found to reflect the apparent diversifying selection from female preferences. Male­
male interactions were recorded in the field using males of noticably different call types. Males which had a lower
dominant frequency correspond to the male type chosen by females when test calls were given alternately. Males
with a higher dominant frequency correspond with the test calls that were chosen by females in the overlapping test.
Interactions of male-male pairs in the field have shown that males behave in a way that would be expected by the
female choice.




   39.1                  ..     09:3G'.McFday.        .__________________ . 'GSl_________          .             MCN
Pr^crtion and int^rMMIon of the abundance of alligators in lentic environments. J.D. EverPA. ’Department
of Zoology Univeraty o Ronda Gainesville, Florida,, USA 32611; ‘’US Geological Survey- Biological Resources
Division,, Gainesville, Florida, USA 32653.
Previous analyses indicated that American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis] population densities in 60 Florida
lakes were significantly correlated with parameters historically used to evaluate system trophic state (total
P.U                          walef column chlorophyll a, and water transparency). Recent examination of these and
other data have begun to reveal some interesting patterns regarding environmental factors and the abundance of
this crocodili^. Wligator density was uncorrelated with limnetic zone fish biomass and only slightly correlated with
littoral zone fish biomass, but was strongly correlated with whole-lake fish biomass (r® = 0.45, p < 0.0001), Other
S’JIlEn”'® J      factors which were found to covary with alligator population size were lake color (r® = 0.37 p <
                           coverage (r® = 0.28, p = 0.0015); those whicn were inversely related were mean lake depth
(r' = 0.49, p < 0.0001) arid percentage of human-developed shoreline (r® = 0.38, p < 0.0001). Finally, while as
much as 55% of the variation in alligator population densities among lakes could be accounted for by total
phosphoojs (p < 0.0001), multiple linear regressions using other parameters (plant coverage, water transparency,
      fish biornass) could account for up to 78% of the variation in abundance (p < 0.0001). These models are
discussed with respect to ecological processes present in lakes and their usefulness to game managers and to
scientists who attempt to detect human impacts on populations.

   388                         08:45 Monday                                  GS1                             MCN
Mating system of the green anaconda (Eunectes murinus') in the Venezuelan Llanos.             J.A. Rivas. University of
Tennesse, Dept of FEB. Knoxville TN 37996-0900.
Sexual selection and mating system theories predict that individuals will be more selective the higher the mating
investment they make. Hence, animals that do not make a high reproductive investment will increase their fitness by
increasing number of matings, while animals that have a high investment per mating will be “choosy”. While studying
the mating system of the anaconda, we opportunistically collected 45 breeding aggregations for six years. Femies
lie apparently passive in shallow wafer while the males coil around her (males number from 1 to 17, with a mean of
3.8). No fights or ritualized displays were seen among the males. Each female is attractive to males for about four
weeks throughout the breeding season, which lasts from mid-February to mid-May. Longer males were found with
heavier females (r= 0.48; p= 0.008) and the latter were courted by a greater number of males {r= 0.44; p= 0.02 ).
This suggests that males prefer to court females with higher fecundity and breeding status, since random mating
would not produce this tendencies. Due to the short time that the breeding season lasts (in respect to the duration
of the breeding ball), and the fact that receptive females are not clumped together, it is unlikely that one male can
find many females in one season. Although a lot remains to be studied, it appears that the mating system of the
anacondas is polyandric; where males select the more fecund females.




   389                         09:00 Monday                                 GS1                                MCN
Diet and reproduction of the Common Death Adder (Acanthophis antarcticus} from Papua New Guinea: Lack
of ecological convergence with vipers? C.L. Spencer. Dept, of Herpetology, California Academy of Sciences,
Golden Gate Park, San Francisco, CA 94110-4599.
Common death adders (Elapidae) from Australia have convergent reproductive and dietary adaptations with vipers.
They reproduce biannually, show ontogenetic shifts from endothermic to ectothermic prey, and are ambush
predators. I examined 208 Acanthophis antarcticus from the collections of the California Academy of Sciences.
Morphometric data, sex, age, seasonal reproductive status, size of eggs or follicles, and stomach and hindgut
contents were determined. Preliminary results suggest that approximately 30% of snakes had hindgut or stomach
contents. Some examples of hindgut and stomach contents included lizard eggs, insect legs, a skink jaw,
unidentified bone fragments, and possibly fur. Therefore these death adders appear to prey mostly on ectotherms.
Sizes of adult Australian Acanthophis antarcticus from previous studies were on average 30% larger than the Papua
New Guinea specimens examined. Initial results show that the majority of females from Papua New Guinea were
gravid in December, implying annual reproductivity. Thus these smaller snakes are not displaying convergent
ecological characteristics with vipers like their Australian counterparts.




   390                        ..09:15 Monday                                 GS1                               MCN
Ecomorphological evolution of the feeding biology of crotaphytid lizards.                A.K. Lappin. Department of
Integrative Biology and Museum of Vertebrate Zoology,, 3060 VLSB„ University of California,, Berkeley, CA 94720-
3140 USA.

Crotaphytid lizards exhibit a morphological trend in several musculo-skeletal characteristics of the trophic apparatus
that are correlated with ecological and behavioral attributes, particularly concerning saurophagy and durophagy.
Quantification of bite-force performance of taxa representing the primary crotaphytid morphotypes, with respect to
trophic apparatus structure, provides performance parameters that relate trophic apparatus structure to dietary
ecology and feeding behavior. Data on trophic apparatus musculo-skeletal structure, bite-force performarice, feeding
behavior, and dietary ecology permit the generation of testable predictions of ecomoqjhological relationships for
other crotaphytid taxa. Examination of crotaphytid feeding biology within a comparative phylogenetic framework
reveals that crotaphytids exhibit concordant evolution among trophic apparatus morphology and performance, dietary
ecology, and feeding behavior. In addition, increased saurophagy, together with correlated specializations at several
levels, appears to have evolved convergently within the Crofaphytidae.




   ■394                         10:45 Monday.                                GSl                               MCN
                                                 structural complexity on predator inspection behavior in coral
Are ; Am Arb^.^TrtS^OMl'lS USA^’“'^ Resources & Environment; University of Michigan; 430 East University

 Predator inspection behavior was invesUgated in three sympatric species of coral reef fish that differed in body
 morphology, and in two habitats that differed in structure complexity. If was hypothesized that the deep-bodied
 species would exhibit the riskiest behavior during predator inspections due to their protection from gape-limited
 predators, and that the shallow-bodied species would be risk-averse. It was also expected that the riskiest
 inspection behavior would occur in the most complex habitat, due to the presence of prey refuges. Bluehead
wras^, the species most at risk due to the slender body morphology, inspected the predator at greater distances
than the other speaes (ocean surgeonfish, foureye butterflyfish). The percentage of inspections tended to increase
with increased body depth across species, indicating risk-averse behavior by the wrasse. Inspection distances
decreased in complex habitats tor wrasse and surgeonfish, but not butterflyfish, the species with the greatest body
depth. Similariy the percentage of inspections fended to increase in the complex habitat for wrasse and
surgeonfish, but not butterflyfish These data suggest that individuals assessed their overall predation risk related to
body morphology and adjusted their inspection behavior, whereas habitat complexity differences played a minor role
in predator inspection behavior.                                                   ’                 ’hemales or the hylid Smilisca phaeota were found to have significantly different preferences for male advertisment
calls under different simulated chorusing behaviors. Male Smilisca phaeota often try to overlap their calls with those
of another male. This behavior is common but not ubiquitous. Females presented with a pair of test calls given in an
overlapping sequence that was controlled for lead calling. Females preference was found to be significant and
opposite that of females given the same pair of test calls in an alternating sequence.
Male chorusing behavior was found to reflect the apparent diversifying selection from female preferences. Male­
male interactions were recorded in the field using males of noticably different call types. Males which had a lower
dominant frequency correspond to the male type chosen by females when test calls were given alternately. Males
with a higher dominant frequency correspond with the test calls that were chosen by females in the overlapping test.
Interactions of male-male pairs in the field have shown that males behave in a way that would be expected by the
female choice.




   •391, .                  .  . <39-30 Monday                           GS1                    .        MCN
Prediction and Interpretation of the abundance of alligators In lentic environments. J.D. Everf-r*. "Department
of Zoology, University of Rorlda, Gainesville, Rorlda, , USA 32611; **US Geological Survey- Biological Resources
Division,, Gainesville, Florida, USA 32653.

Previous analyses indicated that American alligator (Alliaator mississippiensis) population densities in 60 Rorida
lakes were significantly correlated with parameters historically used to evaluate system trophic state (total
phosphorus, total nitrogen, water column chlorophyll a, and water transparency). Recent examination of these and
other data have begun to reveal some interesting patterns regarding environmental factors and the abundance of
this crocodilian. Alligator density was uncorrelated with limnetic zone fish biomass and only slightly correlated with
littoral zona fish biomass, but was strongly correlated with whole-lake fish biomass (r® = 0.45, p < 0.0001). Other
environmental factors which were found to covary with alligator population size were lake color (r® = 0.37, p <
0.0001) and macrophyte coverage (r® = 0.28, p = 0.0015); those which were inversely related were mean lake depth
(r®= 0.49, p < 0.0001) and percentage of human-developed shoreline (r® = 0.38, p < 0.0001). Finally, while as
much as 55% of the variation in alligator population densities among lakes could be accounted for by total
phosphorus (p < 0.0001), multiple linear regressions using other parameters (plant coverage, water transparency,
and fish biomass) could account for up to 78% of the variation in abundance (p < 0.0001). These models are
discussed with respect to ecological processes present in lakes and their usefulness to game managers and to
scientists who attempt to detect human impacts on populations.




   392                         09:45 Monday                                  GS1                               MCN
Environmental variation and socioecology. J.C. Maerz. Department of Biological Sciences, Binghamton, NY
13902-6000 USA.
 Animal dispersion patterns are influenced by the distribution and abundance of resources and other individuals, both
of which are features of the local environment. A previous study indicates that moisture determines the extent to
which food and mates are limited for red-backed salamanders (Plethodon cinereus}, so predictable differences in
moisture levels between populations may result in different dispersion patterns. I monitored shelter use and
cohabitation at two sites (wetter vs. drier) using mark-recapture to determine whether shelter fidelity and incidence of
cohabitation differ between sites. Both males and females at the wetter site demonstrated lower fidelity, but only
females at the wetter site exhibited greater incidence of intrasexual cohabitation. Welter site males showed low
occurrences of intrasexual cohabitation, as did drier site males and females. These results indicate that
salamanders in wetter habitats may not hold fixed territories, probably in response to increased food availability.
Low fidelity arid low intrasexual cohabitation by wetter site males may indicate the existence of ephemeral mating
territories. Differences in spacing patterns in response to local environmental conditions may have important
repercussions for salamander population dynamics and sexual selection.




   393                          10:30 Monday                                 GS1                               MCN.
Spatial and temporal components of fishes In Ohio River embayments. P.O. Cray. Ohio Cooperative Rsh &
Wildlife Research Unit, B & Z Bldg., 1735 Columbus Ohio USA 43210.
The United States has approximately 55 x 10® km of rivers. From this total only 1.9% are considered worthy of
Federal protection (< 100,000 km), due primarily to human induced changes on ths landscape. The Ohio River
exhibits anthropogenic scars, as do the embayments associated with the river. Between Parkersburg, WV and
Cincinnati, OH I sampled six embayments with different geomorphology, upstream landuse, and habitat conditions.
Fishes were collected from these habitats using both gill nets and electrofishing equipment from April through
October 1997. I examined habitat use patterns over different spatial scales and found variable patterns in both
micro- and macro-scale habitat use. For example, sunfish (Lepomis sp.) used near shore areas in all embayments.
Gizzard shad {Dorosoma cepedianum) were collected everywhere in shallow embayments and only in open water
areas in deep embayments. On a landscape level fish densities changed as a result of up- mid- or downstream
location within an embayment. Integrating information on landuse, physical characteristics, and fish assemblages
over different spatial ^d temporal scales will result in a more complete understanding of the factors influencing
these patterns. This information has the potential to inspire better conservation and restoration efforts for these
unique habitats along the Ohio River.

Crotaphytid lizards exhibit a morphological trend in several musculo-skeletal characteristics of the trophic apparatus
that are comelated with ecological and behavioral attributes, particularly concerning saurophagy and durophagy.
Quantification of bite-force performance of taxa representing the primary crotaphytid morphotypes, with respect to
trophic apparatus structure, provides performance parameters that relate trophic apparatus structure to dietary
ecology and feeding behavior. Data on trophic apparatus musculo-skeletal structure, bite-force performance, feeding
behavior, and dietary ecology permit the generation of testable predictions of ecomorphological relationships for
other crotaphytid taxa. Examination of crotaphytid feeding biolc^y within a comparative phylogenetic framework
reveals that crotaphytids exhibit concordant evolution among trophic apparatus morphology and performance, dietary
ecology, and feeding behavior. In addition, increased saurophagy, together with correlated specializations at several
levels, appears to have evolved convergently within the Crotaphytidae.




   394           .            10:45 Monday                            GS1                              MCN
Tbe effect of body morphology and habitat atructural complexity on predator inspection behavior In coral
reef fishes. C. Gerstner. School of Natural Resources & Environment; University of Michioan: 430 East University
Ave.; Ann Arbor, Ml 46109-1115 USA.

 Predator inspection behavior was investigated in three sympatric species of coral reef fish that differed in body
morphology, and in two habitats that differed in structural complexity. It was hypothesized that the deep-bodied
species would exhibit the riskiest behavior during predator inspections due to their protection from gape-limited
predators, and that the shallow-bodied species would be risk-averse. It was also expected that the riskiest
inspection behavior would occur in the most complex habitat, due to the presence of prey refuges. Bluehead
wrasse, the species most at risk due to the slender body morphology, inspected the predator at greater distances
than the other species (ocean surgeonfish, foureye butterflyfish). The percentage of inspections tended to increase
with increased body depth across species, indicating risk-averse behavior by the wrasse. Inspection distances
decreased in complex habitats for wrasse and suigeonfish, but not butterflyfish, the species with the greatest body
depth. Similarly, the percentage of inspections tended to increase in the complex habitat for wrasse and
suroeonfish, but not butterflyfish. These data suggest that individuals assessed their overall predation risk related to
body morphology and adjusted their inspection behavior, whereas habitat complexity differences played a minor role
in predator inspection behavior.




   395                           11:00 Monday                                 GS1..                             MCN
Spatial isolation in drainage lakes ; implications for community ecology of fishes.                 J.D. Olden. Dept of
Zoology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 365.
Although lakes are often Inter-connected waterbodies, few studies have examined isolation among lakes as a
determiiiant of fish species diversity and/or community composition. In this study I examine the fish species
composition and spatial arrangement of 52 lakes located within two south-central Ontario watersheds, and assess
the degree of spatial isolation between lakes. Measures of lake isolation incorporated watercourse distance, lake
elevation, upstream watercourse distance, and waterbodies as fish "stepping stones". Many of these isolation
measures were based on ecological considerations, i.e. the "challenges" a fish faces in moving between lakes, as
compared to the straight-line distance between sampling locations which is.often used in studies of this nature. Eight
isolation measures were examined for their degree of association with patterns in fish species composition. The
results indicated that conventional straight-line distance between lakes does not accurately portray the degree of
isolation. This study illustrates the Importance of examining alternative measures of lake isolation when exploring
patterns in fish species distributions, since the isolaflon of waterbodies increase the rate of local extinotion.
Therefore, interconnected lakes could potentially provide a "rescue effect" for lakes with threatened aquatic fauna.




   396                          11:15 Monday                                  GSI                               MCN
Mechanisms influencing sizes and survival of age-0 fathead minnows [PImephales promelas} In two different
nutrient regimes. S.C.H. Kiesling. University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E9.

Factors that affect growth rate (e.g. food supply) should affect Juvenile survival and thus year-class strength since the
principle sources of mortality for young fish-predation and starvation-are size dependent. In 1996, experimental
ponds (area=360 m®/pond) were used to study the effects of nutrient addition on production, growth and survival of
age-0 fathead minriows. Each pond was divided in half; one side was treated regularly with inorganic fertilizers (P,
N) to maintain nutrient concentrations at levels three times higher than control sides. Chi a was measured to be 7
fold gi^eater in treated versus untreated pond sides. Number of eggs hatched and end-of-season age-0 fish survival
and sizes were also greater in the treated pond sides. We analyzed otolith microstructure to investigate the
ntechanisms behind the observed contrasts in age-0 lengths and survival in the different nutrient regimes. Hatching
distributions and back-calculated age-0 fish lengths were compared with those observed throughout the season.
Surprisingly, preliminary results suggest age-0 fish survival was not directly influenced by size-selective mortality.
Instead, treatment survivors hatched over the entire spawning season; control sunrivors hatched primarily in the
second half of the spawning season. These results suggest that conditions during early periods of growth can
influence lengths and survival of age-0 fish. Since over-winter mortality (examined during a 1995-96 experiment)
was found to be strongly size-selective, it follows that mechanisms acting In the first few weeks after hatching can
ultimately affect the number of fish recruited to the next spawning season.   397                          11:30 Monday                                  GSI                               MCN
Life history of the flavin shiner, Pteronotropls signipinnis, from a Mississippi blackwater stream.                B. W.
Albanese. Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Southern Mississippi. Hattiesburg, MS 39406-5018.
The life history of the flagfin shiner, Pteronotropis signipinnis, was described from a population occurring in a second-
order blackwater stream in southeast Mississippi. Analysis of length frequency histograms indicated a life span of
one to two years. Females were reproductive from April to mid-August. Sex ratio was not significantly different from a
1:1 ratio. Adult males were larger and more heavily pigmented near the abdomen than females. All females reached
sexual maturity by 27 mm SL and produced multiple clutches of ova. Clutch size ranged from 12 to 101 ova and was
significantly correlated with SL. Mean mature oocyte diameter was 0.88 mm (range 0.76 to 0.96).




   398                         11:45 Monday                                  GSI                               MCN
Revisiting a "textbook example" of natural selection in the wild: a field test of threat display convergence In
threespine sticklebacks. R.J. Scott. Bioibgy. Clark University. Worcester. MA 01610. USA.

Freshwater populations of threespine stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) exhibit a tremendous amount of adaptive
variation in a number of traits. One classic example is male nuptial colouration in populations from the Chehalis
River drainage basin in Washington State. Males in these populations assume a jet-black nuptial colouration,
rather than the red underside and blue-green dorsum that is typical of the species. A widely cited, yet poorly tested,
hypothesis to account for the evolution of the black nuptial colouration in these populations is the threat display
convergence hypothesis. The hypothesis contends that the black nuptial colouration evolved in response to
competition for nesting territories with the co-distributed Olympic mudminnow (Novumbra hubbsi), which is also
black, territorial for nest sites and breeds at the same time of year as stickleback. The hypothesis produces the
prediction that mudminnows have a greater impact on the reproductive success of typical, red male sticklebacks
than on that of black male sticklebacks.         I tested this prediction by manipulating the presence/absence of
mudminnows and the colour type of stickleback present in screened exclosures in several wetland areas (typical
nesting habitat for both species). Also, I condurrted several field surveys of nesting sticklebacks to determine (i) the
frequency and outcome of interactions between nesting sticklebacks and mudminnows and (ii) the temporal
development of black nuptial coloration.




   399                        .08:00 Monday                                 GS4                                 AXL
A molecular phylogenetic analysis of the relationships among the Iguanid lizard genus Liolaemus: testing
alternative biogeographic hypotheses. J.A. Schulte(ll). Washington University Campus Box 1137 St. Louis, MO
63130-4899 USA.
Liolaemus is a large genus of lizards in the family Iguanidae with greater than 160 species distributed throughout the
southern half of South America on either side of the Andes. Relationships among Liolaennjs species remain
unresolved. Approximately 1800 bases of aligned mitochondrial DNA sequence data were obtained from regions
encoding the ND1, ND2, COI, and eight transfer RNA genes. A phylogenetic hypothesis is generated for 55 ingroup
species and four outgroup species. Four alternative biogeographic hypotheses are suggested for the early
diversification of Liolaemus. The most parsimonious tree is highly suggestive of an east-west vicariant split due to
the uplift of the Andes at least 10-15 million years ago.




   403                          C3.00.Monday                    .            GS4                                 AXL
A reinterpretation of the rostral element of Peltophryne (Anura: Bufonidae) and Its utilization as support for
the moiio^yly of the group. J,P, Prgmuk, Division of Herpetology, Natural History Museum and Biodiversity
Research Center, and Department of Systematics and Ecology, The University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-

 The nine species of Peltophryne are endemic to the islands of the Caribbean, ranging from Cuba to the Virgin
Islands. Pregill (1981) presented three synapomorphies to support the monophyty of Peltophryne (with the exception
of P. nuviatica): tn© maxillao extend anteriorty to meet in front of the premaxillae; the zygomatic ramus of the
squamosa! extends ventrally to abut the maxilla; and the zygomatic and ventral rami of the squamosa! are connected
by a flange. These characters are redescribed and their phyiogenetic utility is discussed; In particular, the "rostral*
element is reinterpreted and presented as support for the monophyly of the entire group. Based on crania!
morphology arid geographic proximity, Bufo granulosus has been proposed as the sister taxon to Peltophryne;
compansons of the morphology of the these taxa are made. A preliminary analysis of the phylogenetic relationships
of the nine species of Peltophryne was conducted using characters from osteology and external morphology; tne
results of this analysis are presented.

   400                           08:15 Monday                                 GS4                                 AXL
 Mt DNA phylogeography of the sagebrush lizard, Sceloporus graciosus, in California. L.J. Frabotta and J.W.
Archie, Department of Biological Sciences, California Slate University, Long Beach. Long Beach CA 90840-3702

We surveyed tnitoohondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequence variation in the sagebrush lizard (Sceloponjs graciosus) from
throughout California, as well as populations from Oregon. Utah. New Mexico, and Baja California, including all three
currently recognized subspecies. We used these data to estimate the intraspecific phylogeny and to develop a
biogeographic scenario to account for the geographic structure of this species. We sequenced -900 bp of the
mtDNA ND4 gene and adjacent tRNAs from 26 populations of S. graciosus (including S. arenicolus) and five putative
outgroups (S. scalaris, S. jarrovii, S. ciarkii, S. occidentaiis, and S. variabiiis). The phylogenetic hypotheses best
supported by the data do not support the currently recognized subspecies as evolutionary units. The present
distribution of S. graciosus in California is represented by four distinct clades: southern Great Basin (including S.
arenicoius), eastern + southwestern Siema, northern California + Coast Ranges, and Peninsular Ranges. A scenario
for the historic biogeography of S. graciosus is consistent with current views of the geologic and climatic changes in
California during the past 20 million years.




   401                          08:30'Monday .                                GS4                                AXL
Comparative osteology and phylogenetic relationships of the pelobatid frogs (Anura: Pelobatidae). A.M.
Maglia, Division of Herpetology. Natural History Museum and Biodiversity Research Center, and Department of
Systematics and Ecology, The University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-2454, USA. Lawrence, KS 66045-2454,
USA.
Among archaeobatrachians, the largest and most poorly known group is the Pelobatoidea. Within this group, the
morphology and relationships of frogs in the genera Peiobates, Scaphiopus, and Spea remain poorly understood. I
compared the osteology of these taxa using cleared and double-stained and dry-skeletal preparations. Spea and
Sc^hiopus share several morphologies, including absence of quadralojugals, presence of palatine processes of the
facial processes of the maxillae, long vomerine postchoanal processes, and completely cartilaginous sternums.
Spea is characterized by poorly developed maxillary processes of the nasals and the lack of well-developed
posteromedial processes of the parasphenoid. I reassessed the phylogenetic relationships of these frogs using
osteological characters sampled from all recognized taxa of Peiobates, Scaphiopus, and Spea, and one species
each of Megophrys, Leptobrachium, Pelodytes, Rhinophrynus, Xenopus, Limnodynastes, and Discoglossus as
outgoup taxa. Preliminary results support Peiobates as the sister group to Scaphiopus. This may ba an artifact of
convergences in skull morphology relating to the degree of hyperossifioation of these taxa or may indicate an
evolutionary history of these frogs that disagrees with the currently accepted phylogeny.




 ■ 402                          08:45 Monday               .                 GS4                                 AXL
Freeze avoidance and terrestrial overwintering in the northern cricket frog, Acris crepitans.                 J.T. Irwin.
Department of Zoology, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio 45056 USA.
Anurans inhabiting northern locales survive the winter by avoiding cold through aquatic hibernation or burrowing, or
by tolerating freezing of their tissues. This study describes the ovenwintering strategy of the most aquatic of the North
American hylids, the northern cricket frog (Acris crepitans). Laboratory choice tests indicated that cricket frogs
choose terrestrial hibernacula, especially under leaf litter in shallow depressions, when faced with decreasing
temperatures. However, unlike Bufo and some Pseudacris, cricket frogs did not burrow when air temperatures
dropped, even when faced with desiccating conditions. Surprisingly, cricket frogs are not freeze tolerant like most
other nearctic hylids that hibernate in terteslrial sites. Given these data, field searches were conducted and cricket
frogs were found hibernating in crayfish burrows and other cavities along the pond's edge - sites which provide full
protection from freezing. In conclusion, cricket frogs can neither burrow nor sunrive freezing, and therefore require
pre-existing subterranean sites to successfully overwinter. Thus, I suggest that habitat quality and winter severity be
explored as possible causes of this species' decline in the northern portion of its range.




   406                   .     09:45 Moraay                                  gS4
Patterns of pa^morphrais and metamorphosis In the striped newt (Notophthalmus perstriatus) at a north
Florida Mndhills prmd. S.A. Johnson, Department of Wildlife Ecology and Consenmtion, Univereity of, Rorida 303
Newins-Ziegler Hall, Gainesville, FL 32611-0430 USA.

A population of striped newts was monitored during three consecutive years to determine patterns of
p^domorphosis and metanwrphosis. The study site, Ono Shot Pond, is a temporary pond located on the Katharine
Ordway Preserve-Carl Swisher Memorial Sanctuary, Putnam Co., Rorida. Newts were sampled monthly via dip net
thr^ghout the study period and a continuous drift fence was erected around the pond during the second halt of the
stu^ pen^. In ^e first year, very few newts undenivent metamorphosis; the vast majority of lanrae appeared to
mature and breed as paedomoqihs. Few aquatic adults contributed to reproductive output in year one In contrast
me year two cohort was characterized by a large percentage of metamoqjhosis as well as paedomorohosis. Over
1,200 newts left the pond as efts in the fall of year two. Like year one though, few aquatic adults contributed to
reproductive oi^ut in year two. In years one and two. paedomorphic individuals underwent metamorphosis during
me following Spnng/Summer. Very few lanrae were encountered in year three. As a result, relatively few efts
emigrated in the fall of year three. However, there was a large immigration of individuals (>2,000) from the
surrounding uplands. Although paedomorphosis occurred, the vast majority of reproductive newts were aquatic
adults rn year three.A molecular phylogenetic analysis of the relationships among the Iguanid lizard genus Llolaemus: testing
alternative biogeographic hypotheses. J.A. SchuHeflll. Washington University Campus Box 1137 St. Louis, MO
63130-4899 USA. .
Uolaemus is a large genus of lizards in the family Iguanidae with greater than 160 species distributed throughout the
southern half of South America on either side of the Andes. Relationships among Uolaemus species retnain
unresolved. Approximately 1800 bases of aligned mitochondrial DNA sequence data were obtained from regions
encoding the ND1, ND2, COI, and eight transfer RNA genes. A phylogenebc hypothesis is generated for 55 ingroup
species and four outgroup species. Four alternative biogeographic hypotheses are suggested for the early
diversification of Uolaemus. The most parsimonious free is highly suggestive of an east-west vicariant split due to
the uplift of the Andes at least 10-15 million years ago.




   403        ... ...          09.00 Monday                                 GS4                                AXL
A reinterpretation of the rostral element of Peltophryne (Anura; Bufonldae) and Its utilization as support Im
the monophyly of the group. J.B. Pramuk. Division of Herpetology, Natural History Museum and Biodiversity
Research Center, and Department of Systematics and Ecology, The University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-
2454, USA.
 The nine species of Peltophryne are endemic to the islands of the Caribbean, ranging from Cuba to the Virgin
Islands. Prepill (1981) presented three synapomorphies to support the monophyly of Peltophryne (with the exception
of P. fluviatica): the maxillae extend anteriorly to meet In front of the premaxillae; the zygomatic ramus of the
squamosal extends ventrally to abut the maxilla; and the zygomatic and ventral rami of the squamosal are connected
by a flange. These characters are redescribed and their phylogenetic utility is discussed; in particular, the "rostral*
element is reinterpreted and presented as support for the monophyly of the entire group. Based on cranial
morphology and geographic proximity, Bufo granulosus has been proposed as the sister taxon to Peltophryne;
comparisons of the morpholow of the these taxa are mads. A preliminary analysis of the phylogenetic relationships
of the nine species of Peltophryne was conducted using characters from osteology and external morphology; the
results of this analysis are presented.




   404                         09:15 Monday                                 GS4                                AXL
Adaptation to life in estuarine environments In the northern water snake (Nerodla sipedori). P.L. Martin and
W.M. Roosenburg, Ohio University, Dept. Bio Soi., Irvine Hall, Athens, Ohio 45701 USA.
The purpose of this investigation was to identify differences in resource allocation strategies between freshwater and
brackish water populations of the Northern Water Snake, Nerodia sipedon. Vfe also sought evidence that
populations of the Northern Water Snake ate adapting to estuarine environments. Gravid females were collected
from two brackish and two freshwater sites. The snakes' reproductive outputs were estimated using relative clutch
mass, adjusted for female condition. Neonates from each erivironment were raised in both freshwater and 25% sea
wafer to determine the environmental effects on growth, metabolism, and survival. Freshwater snakes allocated
40% more energy to reproduction than estuarine snakes. The growth rates of both groups were reduced in 25% sea
water. However, the freshwater neonates raised in 25% sea water became bloated and suffered 40% mortality. The
metabolic rates of estuarine snakes was significantly higher in both environments, llie results indicate that
freshwater snakes allocate a greater proportion of their energy to growth and reproduction, while estuarine snakes
incur a higher maintenance cost. Sufficient physiological and behavioral differentiation has occurred between these
ecologically distinct populations such that freshwater snakes suffer a substantially reduced fitness in estuarine
environments.




   405                         09:30 Monday                             .... GS4                               AXL
Kinematic analysis of prey ingestion behavior in the scleroglossan lizard, Cnemidophorus lemnlscatus
(Telidae). L.P. McBrayer. Dept, of Biological Sciences. Ohio University. Athens. OH. 45701 USA.

Although models for gape cycle evolution in primitive tetrapods have been proposed, little data exists on the feeding
kinematics in lizards. Of those studies published in this area, very few have described prey ingestion in
scleroglossan lizards. Ths goal of the present study is to investigate feeding kinematics in the rainbow whiptail
(Cnemidophorus lemnlscatus; Telidae) In relation to existing models of prey ingestion in primitive tetrapods. Feeding
behavior in the rainbow whiptail was studied using high-speed video with gape cycle kinematics quantified by the
construction of kinematic profiles from digitized landmark data of lizards ingesting crickets, in all feerfing bouts
observed. C. lemnlscatus used oral prehension as the sole means of prey capture. During prey ingestion, the tongue
is used extensively to manipulate and swallow prey items. Patterns of gape kinematics in this species will be
discussed in light of existing models of kinematic evolution and used to refine current ideas and questions regarding
prey ingestion in lizards.

Freeze avoidance and terrestrial overwintering In the northern cricket frog, Acris crepitans.                 J.T. Irwin.
Department of Zoology, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio 45056 USA.
Anurans inhabiting northern locales survive the winter by avoiding cold through aquatic hibernation or burrowing, or
by tolerating freeang of their tissues. This study describes the overwintering strategy of the most aquatic of the North
American hylids, the northern cricket frog (Acris crepitans). Laboratory choice tests indicated that cricket frogs
choose terrestrial hibernacula, especially under leaf litter In shallow depressions, when faced with decreasing
temperatures. However, unlike Bufo and some Pseudacris, cricket frogs did not burrow when air temperatures
dropped, even when faced with desiccating conditions. Surprisingly, cricket frogs are not freeze tolerant like most
other nearctic hylids that hibernate in terrestrial sites. Given these data, field searches were conducted and cricket
frogs were found hibernating In crayfish burrows and other cavities along the pond's edge - sites which provide full
protection from freezing. In conclusion, cricket frogs can neither burrow nor survive freezing, and therefore require
pre-existing subterranean sites to successfully overwinter. Thus, I suggest that habitat quality and winter severity be
explored as possible causes of this species' decline in the northern portion of its range.




   406                           09;45 Monday                                  GS4               ..               AXL
Patterns of paedomorphosis and metamorphosis In ths striped newt INotopMhalmus perstrlatus) at a north
Florida sandhills pond. S.A. Johnson. Department of Wildlife Ecology and Conservation, University of, Florida, 303
Newins-Ziegler Hall, Gainesville, FL 32611-0430 USA.
A population of striped newts was monitored during three consecutive years to determine patterns of
paedomorphosis and metamorphosis. The study site. One Shot Pond, is a temporary pond located on the l^tharine
Ordway Preserve-Carl Swisher Memorial Sanctuary, Putnam Co., Florida. Newts were sampled monthly via dip net
throughout the study period and a continuous drift fence was erected around the pond during the second half of the
study period. In the first year, very few newts undenwent metamorphosis; the vast majority of larvae appeared to
mature and breed as paedomorphs. Few aquatic adults contributed to reproductive output in year one. In contrast,
the year two cohort was characterized by a large percentage of metamorphosis as well as paedomorphosis. Over
1,200 newts left the pond as efts in the fall of year two. Like year one friough, few aquatic adults contributed to
reproductiyo output in year two. In years one and two, paedomorphic individuals underwent metamorphosis during
the following Spring/Summer. Very few larvae were encountered in year three. As a result, relatively few efts
emigrated in the fall of year three. However, there was a large immigration of individuals (>2,000) from the
surrounding uplands. Although paedomorphosis occurred, the vast majority of reproductive newts were aquatic
adults in year three.




    407                          13:00 Monday                                CR11                                THN
Variation In reproduction and its association with the maternal phenotype within a population of the
Galapagos lava lizard (Microlophus delanonis). M.A. Jordan. Department of Biology, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.
Physical aspects of the maternal phenotype are recently recognized as important covariates of the nature of
reproduction (ie size vs. number of eggs). We document variation in reproductive phenology, total clutch mass,
clutch size and egg mass' among seasons and years within a natur^ population of Galpagos lava lizards
[Microlophus (=Tropidunjs) delanonis). Maternal size correlates with total clutch mass, clutch size, and egg mass
but does not affect the pattern of variation in these traits among time periods. We estimated maternal condition (a
measure of energy reserve) and found that it has a significant, positive relationship with each component of
reproduction. However, the differences among time periods remained after controlling for this factor. We did not
find the expected negative relationship between clutch size and egg mass after controlling for both maternal size and
condition. All variables were positively correlated with rain that fell one month prior to opposition. While maternal
characteristics explain some seasonal and annual variation In components of reproduction, we propose that
remaining temporal variation may be a response to differences between seasons In direct selection on eqqs and/or
hatchlings.




   408                         .13:15 Monday                                 CR1.1.                              THN
The impact of female fecundity on parturition date In the rattlesnake. SIstrurus miliarius. T.M. Farrell and P.G.
May’*’. "Biology Department. Stetson University. DeLand, FL 32720 USA; "Biology Department, Stetson University,
DeLand. FL 32720 USA.
In many birds, clutch size is positively correlated with breeding date. Price el al. (1988) presented a model that
suggested this is due to differences in female nutritional condition. A similar phenomena occurs in S. miliarius. We
collected data on parturition date and litter size for 153 gravid females collected over a six-year period in central
Rorida. There are consistently strong correlations between total litter mass or litter size and parturition date in these
snakes. Annual variation in meaii parturition date appears to be driven by annual variation in clutch mass, not in
annual variation in climatic conditions. The correlation between parturition date and litter size is not due to
enhanced thermoregulatory abilities for larger snakes since snake size is only weakly correlated to parturition date.
The relationship between litter mass and parturition date also occurs in several other species of snakes. Ironically,
the model developed by Price et al. appears to work better for snakes and other capital breeders than It does for
birds and other Investment breeders.  .409           _ _________ 13:30 Monday         ..             .          CR11
Patterns of reproduction In leaf-litter lizards of Costa Rica.       J.H Waddle and M.A. Donnelly, Department of
Biological Sciences. Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199 USA.
Little is known about seasonal patterns in the reproductive phenology of many species of tropical reptiles. Seve^
reseamherTha^ demonstrated how reproductive patterns are related to seasonal and annual cycles.^Sfa*es «
the reoroduction of tropical lizards have suggested that wet and dry seasons play a role in the timing of      action
and reSuiS of Ses Lizard specimens collected from Costa Rica oyer a two-year period have been
examined for reproductive condition. This collection offers an ideal data set for the study of rep^uctive patterns in
a diverse q^pPof Neotropical leaf-lifter lizards. Gonad length in males and the number and length of ovdu^i eggs
Fn Ses^re reoordeif. Spatial and temporal analysis of these data provides informabon on the
reproductive phenology. Results will be presented for several species of lizards including Sphenomoiphus chemei
and Nofops limifrons.




                                13:45 Monday                                 CR11                               THN
   410
Reproductive characteristics of the arboreal lizard Urosaurus
mavIaa & Ramfr^zoBautista Instituto de Biologia, UNAM, Departamento de Zoologia, CP 70-153 C.U, Ar 04biu,
Mexico 2^ Distrito®Federd; LJ. Vitt, 2Oklahoma Museum of Natural History and Department of Zoology, University
of OWahorna, Norman, OK 73019, USA.
The reproductive cycle is described for females and males of Urosaurus bicarinatus sidled from 1988 to 19901 near
rhamela Jalisco Mexico. Male reached sexual maturity at 38.0 mm snout-vent length (SVL) at an age 8 mo, white
females reached sexual maturity at 40.0 mm SVL at an age of 9 m. Testes of adult males began to 'h^ease irisize
in early April, maximal testes mass occurred in June-August, and testes begati to d^rease in
minimut^ize in October Maximal testicular growth was associated with icreasing photoperi^ arid temperature, bid
not wrth^precipitation. Erilarged vitellogenic follicles first appeared during mid-May in fernales. ^®'"^®®
oviductal eaas from June to^September. Vitellogenesis, follicular growth, and egg production were associated with
tocreastoq P?MStion Nine sampled females (15%) had evidence of two clutches, and 5 fema es (85«/^ ted
Sddence^ofone clutch; data on marked lizards showed evidence that some fernales lay up ’o *hree_du^s. ^Ctech
^MbSerJ on ovidudal eggs was 5.4 ± 1.1 (4-8). Clutch size was positively correlated withfem^e.SVL.
 Reprodurdive potential for females that laid two dutches was 10-11 eggs, and tor females with three ^^es
 rprwoductive DOtential may be as high as 15 eggs. Temperature, photopenod, and precipitation were the proximate
Si^f^mSwSe^of ^es Ind femalel%production. Reproductive charaderistics of t/rosaurvs bi^nnatus
 from Chamela are similar to those of many other temperate and subtropical lizard species living in seasonal
 environments.



                                                                              CR11                              THN
    411 .                        14:00 Monday
 Geographic variation and environmental determinants of reprodurrtive output in the desert tortdse.
 I mJch US Geolooioal Surrey Department of Biology, University of California, Riverside, P.A. Medioa, U.S.
 Geologic^ Survey, Las Vegas Reid Station; H.W. Avery, U.S. Geological Survey, Department of Biology, University
 of California, Riverside.
 Three study sites were established in California in the spring of 11997 «^pariId a muJti-^ar
 uarifltinn in rporoductlve outDut of desert tortoises: Joshua Tree National Park (JiHtt), Mojave Naxionai rreserve
 (MOIAVE) and an area of land leased by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) for wind ene^y' productran near
 Palm Springs (MESA). At MESA, 9 out of 10 monitored females produced a total of ®99®,:,9!Jf’SXh
 nroduced second clutches and one produced a third clutch. Clutch size ranged from 2-8 eggs. M^^

 considered, a significantly positive relationship was detected (R2=0.26, P-0-04) The ^riiest gate or egg layi g
 occuired between April 18-23. The last clutch was oviposited sometime after July 3. At ^REE, onfy 1 of 8 females



  rainfall and associated production of annual food plants.




  Locomotor performance and reproductive success using DNA fingerprinting In male Eastern Fence Lizards,
  Sceloporus undulatus. G.J. Haenel and H.B. John-Alder, Cook College, Rutgers University, 84 Lipman Drive, New
  Brunswick, NJ 08901-8525, USA; LC. Seitz, Laboratoire d'Ecologie, CNRS URA 258, Universite Pierre et Marie
  Curie, 7 quai St. Bernard, Case 237, F-75252 Paris Cedex 05, France .
  Variatiori in locomotor performance may have important implications for fitness. Endurance can vary greatly (>10X)
  among lizards within a single population. We are using DNA fingerprinting in a natural population of the Eastern
  Fence Lizard, Sceloporus undulatus, to investigate the relationship of endurance to reproductive success. We
  studied a population of Eastern Fence Lizards in the New Jersey Pine Barrens to determine characteristics such as
  homerange, body size, and survivorship. Endurance was measured by running lizards on a treadmill at constant
  speed. Maternity was determined by having females lay their eggs in the lab. We established paternity by comparing
  minisatellite DNA fingerprint profiles of offspring hatched in the lab to the DNA fingeqjifnt profiles of their mothers
  and all potential fathers found on the field site. Reproductive success was measured as the number of clutches sired
  by each male. DNA fingerprinting data reveals a significant positive correlation between endurance and reproductive
  success. Male-female homerange overlap is a poor indicator of paternity in this population, and larger males tended
  to mate with larger females. Because endurance Is variable and positively related to reproductive success, selection,
  at least at the phenotypic level, can operate on endurance in this population.

                                                                            CR11                                THN 1
  412                          14:15 Monday
An analysis of clutch frequency using three separate methodologies Iti the yellow-blotched map
Graptemys flavimaculata. B.D. Home. M.J. Coulombe-Moore, R.A. Seigel and R.J. Brauman, Southeastern
Louisiana University, Hammond, LA 70402 USA; J.A. Shelby and M.T. Mendonca, Auburn University, USA.
Assessing population viability requires accurate determination of reproductive rates and demographic yariable^ In
1993, Seigel and Brauman used a population viability analysis (PVA) to predict the                                 J
threatened yellow-blotched map turtle, Graptemys flavimaculata. Their prelimina^                 Soi               inr
flavimaculata was declining rapidly, partially due to a diAch frequency toat        _mud^i lower           di5d?es per
most other species of map turtles (1.1 clutches per year in G. flavimaculata ^paied to three or more dirtr^es per
year in other^Graptemys). However, Seigel and Brauman calculated dutch frequency using a ^mbination Jhark
recapture and X-ray analysis, and inherent problems were apparent, especially relatively few
and the inability of X-rays to determine the presence of enlarged follicles. Examination of fem
condition via dissection was not possible due to the threatened status of the species, but historical data suggested
the possibility of up to three clutches per year in this population. In 1997, we delermmed c uteh ^'equericy by   use
of ultrasonography. Of 97 females examined 8.2% were barren (no visible follicular growth earlyjn the nesting
 season) and^ 91.7% had visible enlarged follicles and/or shelled eggs. Of the females w^
 13.4% had multiple size classes of follicles, indicating a maximum clutch frequency of 1.2 el^<^s                 P®
 year Thus measurements of dutch frequency using X-ray analysis and mark recapture were very rrom^rable to
 data from ultrasonography. In addition, our data suggest that some females might not be reproductively active each
 year. The conservation implications of these data will be discussed.



                                14:30 Monday                              .. CR11                                THN •!
   413
Seasonal fluctuations in the reproductive hormones in male and female ydlow blotched map turtles
/Graotemvs flavimaculata). J.A. Shelby and M.T. Mendonca, 331 Funchess Hall, Dept, of Zoology and VVildife
Auburn University, AL 36849, USA; B.D. Home and R.A. Seigle, Dept, of Biological Saences, Southeast Louisiana
University, SLU 814, Hammond, LA 70402, USA.
Clutch frequency has been found to be low (1 / season) in female yellow blotched map turtles. Graptemys
ffavimaculata in comparison to other closely related map turtles (3-6 f season). To deteimine if exposure to
Dollutanfs in their habitat is affecting reproduction, blood samples were collected and analyzed for sex steroid levels
by rStemunoa“^e levels^ reproductive hormones were assessed from Apri to October for m^s and
females In a multiple clutching species, one would expect to see elevated levels of estradiol (E) in the plasma of
females during vitellogenesis. Our data indicate that E levels are low throughout the season fiS ±4.6 pg/ml) nsing
siqnificantly in^May ^.8 ± 8 pg/ml). Males exhibited a normal seasonal cycle of testosterone (T). T levels were low
in%e spring and increased gradually over the summer months, and then peaked in September and October, with the
maximum levels in September (10.5 ± 3.3 ng/ml).




                                 14:45 Monday                                 CR11                               THN
    .414
 Spatio-temporal aspects of timber rattlesnake {Crotalus horridus) mating tehavlor.            E.M, M^owan ato DM
 Madson Department of Biological Sciences, Binghamton University (SUNY), Binghamton, New York, 13902-6000
 USA.
 The spatial distribution and timing of sexual receptivity of female snakes are important detenrinants ofsriake iteling
 svstems. Vie examined spatio-temporal aspects of timber rattlesnake mating behavior through radiotetem^no
 rXtnitnrinn of female snakes The onset of mating activity, indicated by the the arrival of courting mal^, was
 synchronized within a four day period in late July, despite females being 1-5 km apart. Most
 t^urred during the first three weeks of August. Females enhanced their spatial predictabi ity by becoming attractive
 to males during shedding at discrete rock outcrops, and by moving between spatially distent otAcrops "hen
 receptive. Our Endings suggest female rattlesnakes increase male competition, and hence the quality of mates,
 through active advertisement of sexual receptivity at low personal cost.




    ■418                         .13:00 Monday____________                    CF13_________ ,            CHM
  Molecular systematics of the darter subgenus Nothonotus.               R.M. Wood and M.E. Raley, Department of
  Biological Sciences, Saint Louis University, 3507 Laclede, St. Louis, MO 63103-2010 USA.

 The darter subgenus Nothonotus is a monophyletic assemblage of 20 species that are united by a suite of
 morphological characters. The most recent investigation info systematic relationships among fishes in this clade
 (Wood, 1996) was based primarily on allozyme date and addressed relationships among only 16 of 20 described
 species in the subgenus. The present stud/represents the first phylogenetic analysis of the entire subgenus and is
 also the first attempt at elucidating the evolutionary history of these fishes with a molecular data set. A phylogeny for
 members of Nothonotus based on cytochrome b sequences will be presented and compared with the allozyme
 based phylogeny. Implications of the molecular free with respect to morphological evolution within the subgenus and
 biogeography of the central highlands physiographic province will be discussed.of California, Riverside.
Three study sites were established in California in the spring of 1997 as part of a multi-year study to examine
variation in reproductive output of desert tortoises: Joshua Tree National Park (JTREE), Mojave National Preserve
(MOJAVE), and an area of land leased by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) for wind energy production near
Palm Springs (MESA). At MESA, 9 out of 10 monitored females produced a total of 72 eggs. Of these females, 6
produced second clutches and one produced a third clutch. Clutch size ranged from 2-8 eggs. Modal clutch size was
4 eggs. Mean clutch sizes were 4.33 and 5.00 eggs for first and second clutches, respectively. First clutch size was
positively correlated with carapace length fR2=0.29) but not significantly (P=0.14). When all clutches were
considered, a significantly positive relationship was detected (R2=0.26, P=0.04) The earliest date of egg laying
occurred between April 18-23. The last clutch was oviposited sometime after July 3. At JTREE, only 1 of 8 females
produced a single clutch (5 eggs). At MOJAVE, 12 of 18 monitored tortoises •produced 43 eggs in 12 single clutches
with no subsequent clutches. Clutch size ranged from 1-7 eggs with modal clutch size of 3-4 eggs. Mean clutch size
was 3.58 eggs. Larger females produced larger clutches and the relationship between the two variables was almost
significant (Ri2=0.32, P=0.055). Most of the variation observed appears to be related to differences among sites in
rainfall and associated production of annual food plants.




  415                       15:30 Monday                             CH11                              THN
Locomotor performance and reproductive success using DNA fingerprinting In male Eastern Fence Lizards,
Sce/oporus undulatus. G.J. Haenel and H.B. John-Alder, Cook College, Rutgers University, 84 Lipman Drive, New
Brunswick, NJ 08901-8525, USA; L.C. Seitz, Laboratoirs d'Ecologie, CNRS URA 258, Universite Pierre ef Marie
Curia, 7 qua! St. Bernard, Case 237, F-75252 Paris Cedex 05, France .
Variation in locomotor performance may have important implications for fitness. Endurance can vary greatly (>10X)
among lizards within a single population. We are using DNA fingerprinting in a natural population of the Eastern
Fence Lizard, Scelopoius undulatus, to investigate the relationship of endurance to reproductive success. We
studied a population of Eastern Fence Lizards in the New Jersey Pine Barrens to determine characteristics such as
homerange, body size, and survivorship. Endurance was measured by running lizards on a treadmill at constant
speed. Maternity was determined by having females lay their eggs in the lab. We established paternity by comparing
minisatellite DNA fingerprint profiles of offspring hatched in the lab to the DNA fingerprint profiles of their mothers
and all potential tethers found on the field site. Reproductive success was measured as ths number of clutches sired
by each male. DNA fingerprinting data reveals a significant positive correlation between endurance and reproductive
success. Male-female homerange overlap Is a poor indicator of paternity in this population, and larger males tended
to mate with larger females. Because endurance Is variable and positively related to reproductive success, selection,
at least at the phenotypic level, can operate on endurance in this population.




   416                      . ..   15:45 Monday                             CR11                               THN
Embryonic development of Sceloporus lizards: do cold climates favor rapid development? R.M. Andrews, T.
Mathies, C.P. Qualls and F.J. Qualls, Department of Biology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University,
Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.
Rapid embryonic development is a potential adaptation to cold climates. We tested this hypothesis for nine species
of Sceloporus lizards from four species groups and one species of Urosaurus, an outgroup, using observations
corrected for incubation temperature and hatchling size. Phylogenetioally based comparisons indicated that relatively
rapid development is characteristic of the scalaris species group and relatively slow development is characteristic of
the undulatus species group. Comparisons within these lineages were therefore used to determine if developmental
rate was related to climate, as judged by elevation and latitude. Within the scalaris species group, the
developmental rates of cool climate populations of S. aeneus and S. scalaris were not faster than that of a warm
climate population of S. scalaris. Within the undulatus species group, the developmental rate of a cool climate
populations or species were faster than that of a warm climate population or species for only one of five comparisons
(S. undulatus hyadnthinus from both Missouri and Virginia had tester development than S. wood! from Florida). In
general; developmental rates of Sceloponjs are lineage specific and do not appear to be adapted to local climates.




   417                             T 6:00 Monday                           CRH                                 THN.
Developmental arrest determines embryonic stage at ovlpositlon In the lizard, Urosaurus omatus. T. Mathies
and R.M. Andrews, Department of Biology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA.
Determinants of embryonic stage at oviposition in the oviparous lizard, Urosaurus omatus were investigated to gain
insight into the reason(s) that most squamate reptiles oviposit when embryos reach stage 30. Eggs experimentally
retained in utero past the normal time of oviposition were compared with control eggs that were obtained at the
normal time of oviposition and incubated in incubation medium. Retention resulted in developmental arrest of
embryos at embryo stages 30.0-30.5. Embryogenesis could be re-initiated at any time up to at least 29 days pqst the
normal time of oviposition by removing eggs from the oviducts and incubating them in incubation medium.
Developmental arrest per se, did not affect the time it took eggs to hatch once eggs were removed from the oviducts.
Hatching success of these eggs was high (87%). Snout-vent length, hydration of body tissue, and locomotor
performance of hatchlings, were negative^ related to the time spent in developmental arrest. Retention of eggs had
no apparent adverse efrects on females. Developmental arrest, if widespread among squamates, would account for
the obsenred distribution of embryo stages at oviposition and may constitute a major constraint on the evolution of
viviparity.

The spatial distribution and timing of sexual receptivity of female snakes are important determinants of snake mating
systems. We examined spatio-temporal aspects of timber rattlesnake mating behavior through radiotelemetric
monitoring of female snakes. The onset of mating activity, indicated by the the arrival of courting males, was
synchronized within a four day period in late July, despite females being 1-5 km apart. Most pairings (7 of 9)
occurred during the first three weeks of August. Females enhanced their spatial predictability by becoming attractive
to males during shedding at discrete rock outcrops, and by moving between spatially distant outcrops when
receptive. Our findings suggest female rattlesnakes increase male competition, and hence the quality of mates,
through active advertisement of sexual receptivity at low personal cost.




   418                          13:00Monday        .                   ., CF13           . . .
Molecular systematics of the darter subgenus Nothonotus. R.M. Wood and M.E. Raley, Department of
Biological Sciences, Saint Louis University, 3507 Laclede, St. Louis, MO 63103-2010 USA.

The darter subgenus Nothonotus is a monophyletic assemblage of 20 species that are united by a suite of
morphological characters. The most recent Investigation into systematic relationships among fishes in this clade
(Wood, 1996) was based primarily on allozyme data and addressed relationships among only 16 of 20 described
species In the subgenus. The present study represents the first phylogenetic analysis of the entire subgenus and is
also the first attempt at elucidating the evolutionary history of these fishes with a molecular data set. A phylogeny for
members of Nothonotus based on cytochrome b sequences will be presented and compared with the alozyme
based phylogeny. Implications of the molecular tree with respect to morphological evolution within the subgenus and
biogeography of the central highlands physiographic province will be discussed.




   419                         13:15 Monday                                 CF13                                CHM
Molecular systematics of the darter subgenus Ozarka (Teleostei; Percldae): with reference to placement of
the monotypic subgenus Psychromaster. T.B. Sullivan and R.M. Wood, Dept, of Biology, Saint Louis University,
3507 Laclede Avenue, SL Louis, MO 63103-2010, USA.
The subgenus Ozarka is composed of Etheostoma boschungl, E. craginl, E. pallididorsum, E. punctulatum, and E.
Irisella. While the first four species are morphologically similar to one another, the fifth species, E. trisella was
placed in this subgenus primarily on the basis of life history parameters presumed to be synapomorphic for ths
subgenus. The Inclusion of E. trisella in subgenus Ozarka left subgenus Psychromaster monotypic (containing only
E. tuscumbla] and of uncertain evolutionary placement with respect to remaining darter taxa. The purpose of this
research is to evaluate the monophyly of subgenus Ozarka and develop a phylogenetic hypothesis for relationships
among the component species. Additionally, placement of subgenus Ozarka with respect to the sole member of the
subgenus Psy^romaster will be discussed. DNA sequences derived from the cytochrome b gene, of the
mitochondrial genome, form the data set for these analyses. Sequences were collected from all members of the two
ingroup subgenera and several outgroup taxa. These data were then subjected to maximum parsimony analysis
using the PAUP computer program in order to evaluate monophyly and find the most parsimonious evolutionary
reconstruction for members of the group.




   .420..                       13:30 Monday                                 CF13                               CHM
Evolutionary relationships of the broadtail madtom (Noturus sp.).               J.M. Gradv. Department of Biological
Sciences, Unviersity of New Orleans,, New Orleans, LA 70148 USA; R.Q. Bennetts and J.M. Quattro, Department of
Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina USA; F.C. Rhode, North Carolina Division of Marine Fisheries
USA.
The broadtail madtom (Noturus sp.) was first reported from Atlantic Coastal drainages in North and South Carolina.
Subsequent surveys revealed a broader geogr^hic distribution, including a morphologically divergent population in
Lake Waccamaw. We used mitochondrial rDNA sequences to test the monophyly of the broadtail madtom and Its
hypothesized sister-group relationship with the speckled madtom (Al. leptacanthus). Parsimony and maximum
likelihood analyses or 596 bp from 12S and 16S rDNA indicated that broadtails are polyphyletlc and closely related to
the margined madtom (AZ. insignis}. Also, ribosomal DNA sequences did not support monophyly of the subgenus
Schllbeodes. VJe surveyed vanation in two additional mitochondrial genes, cytochrome b and ND2, to test polyphyly
of the broadtail madtom and to reconstruct relationships among broadtail populations, with emphasis on the
morphologically divergent Lake Waccamaw broadtail. Variation in 546 bp from cytochrome b and ND2 confirmed
polyphyly of broadtails; Cape Fear R. broadtails are genetically divergent and sister to a AZ. insignis and Pee Dee R.
broadtail lineage. The morphologically distinct Lake Waccamaw broadtail is not monophyletic. While formation of
Lake Waccamaw has apparently contributed to peripatric speciation in other lineages, morphological divergence of
lake broadtails appears to be ecophenotypic variation.  421                           13:45 Monday                              ..CF13                            .CHM
Geometric morphometries as cladistic characters; evaluation using armored catfishes.                     S. Schaefer,
Department of Ichthyology, American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street, New York, NY
10024-5192, U.S.A.
Zelditch and Rnk have argued that the method of thin-plate splines decomposed by its partial warps can yield
phylogenetically informative characters, which can be subjected to the same tests of homology and character
independence as are applied to conventional morphological characters. Suitability of the method for cladistics has
been challenged on both theoretical and empirical grounds. The hypoptopomatine lorioariids were used to evaluate
the method by examining the extent to which geometric morphometric characters thus identified are congnient with
respect to the generic-level phylogeny for the group established on the basis of independent morphological
characters. Of 15 partial warps describing head shape derived from 18 homologous landmarks, six yielded
potentially infomiative contrasts between six ingroup and two outgroup taxa. Two contrasts were congruent with the
phylogeny, three were incongnrent, and one was autapomorphio. Two incongnient characters mapped identically
onto me cladogram, suggesting non-independence. Partial warp homology and the extent to which the method
converged upon stable definitions of characters were examined via empirical simulations involving permutation of
key parameters.




   422                           14:00 Monday                     .        CF13
Revision of the loricarild catfish genus Cochliodon and the evolution of wood-eating.              J,W- Armbruster,
Division of Ashes, Smithsonian Institution. Washington, DC 20560, USA.
In fishes, only two distantly related groups of suckermoufh armored catfishes (Loricariidae) are known to eat wood:
Panaque and the Hypostomus cochliodon species group. The two groups share several modifications to the skull for
increasing muscle attachment sites and have large, spoon-shaped teeth set in highly angled Jaws which they use to
remove small shavings from submerged logs. Studying the morphological evolution of wood-eating in Panaque is
made difficult because Panaque is part of a larger group of fishes which share many of the modifications necessary
for wood-eating but which do not eat wood. The H. cochliodon group, on the other hand, appears to have been
derived from strictly algivorous species; thus, the transition to wood-eating can be better examined. The H.
cochliodon group was found to contain several undescribed species including several that appear to have teeth
intemiediate between the long, thin teeth used lor algivory in most Hypostomus and the short, spoon-shaped teeth
used for xylophagy in the H. cochliodon group. In this study, the H. cochliodon group was revised and a phylogeny
was produced containing most of the species groups of Hypostomus to assess the evolution of the morphology
associated with xylophagy.




   423                           14:15 Monday                         .    CF13                .     .        CHM
Phylogenetic relationships of the suckermouth minnows, genus Phenacoblus, inferred from parsimony
analyses of nucleotide sequence, allozymic and morphological data (Cyprinidae: Cypriniformes). W.W..
Dimmick. University of Kansas, Museum of Natural History, Lawrence. KS 66045; B.M. Burr, Department of Zoology,
Southern Illinois University al Carbondale, IL 62901, U.S A
We investigated the phylogenetic relationships among the five species of the genus Phenacoblus (Cyprinidae;
Cypriniformes) using a combined analysis of molecular and morphological characters. The nucleotide characters
were comprised of 208 potentially infomiative sites among a total 1773 aligried base pairs from several segments of
mitochondrial genes encoding the large and small RNA subunits, the valine transfer RNA, and the ND2 protein
coding gene. Allozyme products from 23 polymorphic loci and 9 morphological characters that were taken from the
literature were also included in the total evidence analysis. Third position codon sites were demonstrated to be
saturated for transitional changes and unsuitable for phylogeny reconstroefion among the species studied here. The
total evidence phylogeny is isomorphic with Mayden's (1989) morphological hypothesis. Phenacoblus mirabilis was
found to be basal, followed in ascending order by P. teretulus, P. catostomus, P. crassilabrum and P. uranops.




    427                    ..    ..15:45 Monday                             CF13                              CHM
 Description of a rock-dweling dchlid (Teleostel; Clchlidae) of the Pseudotropheus wllllamsl complex from
 Lake Malawi, Malawi, Africa. J.R. Stauffer Jr. School of Forest Resources, Penn State University, University Park,
 PA 16802 USA; K.A. Kellogg, University of Massachusets, Amherst, Massachusets USA.
A new species of the cichlid fish genus Pseudotropheus Regan (Teleostel: Cichlidae) from Lake Malawi is
described. The new species is a member of the Pseudotropheus williamsi (Gunther) complex. Pseudotroheus
williamsi is the type species of the genus. Pseudotropheus, which is a polyphyletic grouping of several species of
rock-dwelling dchlids from Lake Malawi. Recently, those members of Pseudotropheus that possessed a moderately
sloped ethmo-vomerine block and a swollen rostral tip were placed in the genus Metriadima Stauffer, Bowers,
Kellogg and McKaye. In addition to the P. williamsi complex, Pseudotropheus now contains species belonging to the
Pseudotropheus timheops Regan, Pseudotropheus elongatus Fryer, and Pseudotropheus aggressive complexes,
as well a group of miscellaneous forms such as Pseudotropheus fainzilberi Staeck. We are now restricting
Pseudotropheus to only those forms that are sister species of P. williamsi. Because of this restriction, all former
members, with the exception of Metriadima are without a generic name, we propose that they be placed in
Ctenochromis Pfeffer. Since the group is polyphyletic any generic placement is regarded only as a nomenclatural
action and does not suggest phyletrc affinities.

                                                                                                                            J


  424                           14:30 Monday                                CF13                                CHM
Two new species of Dermogenys (Hemiramphidae) from Brunei (northwestern Borneo), including their
phylogenetic relationships. A. Downino-Meisner. Division of Ashes, Reid Musuem of Natural History, Roosevelt
Road at Lake Shore Drive, Chicago, IL 60605 USA.
The biogeographic realm of southeast Asia has long interested biogeographers partly because it contains many large
islands, such as Borneo, that are both biological and geologic composites. The species of the halfbeak genera
Dermogenys and Nomortiamphus, restricted to southeast Asia, have the potential to elucidate some of the complex
area relationships of this region. Within the genus Dermogenys, taxonomic problems have lead to the widespread
use of the name D. pusilia in both museum collections and throughout the aquarium literature, underestimating the
diversity of this genus. As part of an ongoing revision of these genera, several undescribed species have beeri
discovered. Two of these species are described from material taken in recent collecting surveys to Brunei
(northwestern Borneo). For one species, Bnmei represents the westernmost part of its range which includes
Sarawak, Sumatra, and the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula. This species has its closest relatives distributed
throughout mainland Asia and Java. The other species, endemic to Brunei, has distinctly different phylc^enetic
affinities, within a clade including species from Sabah, southern Kalimantan, several southwestern Philippine islands,
and the southwestern arm of Sulawesi. These distribution patterns are discussed and diagnostic characters for
Dermogenys and each of the new species are presented.




   425                          14:45 Monday                                 CF13                         .     CHM
A new species of sculpin (Cottidae: Cottus) from the mid-Atlantic region of the eastern United States. A.P.
Kinziaer and R.L. Raesly, Department of Biology, Frostburg State University, Frostburg MD USA 21532; D.A. Neely.
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alabama. Tuscaloosa AL USA 35487.
The blue ridge from of Cottus bairdi is elevated to species status. This new species is distributed in eight mid­
Atlantic slope drainages (Susquehanna, Bush, Patapsco, Patuxent Potomac, Rappahannock, James, and Roanoke)
and the Nanticoke River drainage on the Delmarva Peninsula. It is distinguished from the closely related C. bairdi by
the absence of a basicaudal notch and an unique electrophoretic mobility at the CK-A locus. Although C. bairdi and
the new species are largely allopatric, syntopic populations occur in Wills Creek, Potomac River drainage, as a result
of stream piracy. Allozyme and morphological data from Wills Creek indicate incomplete reproductive isolation within
a narrow zone of hybridization occuring between the new species and C. bairdi. Phylogentic relationships generated
by BIOSYS-1 and PAUP of 15 allozyme loci are discussed.




   426                          15:30 Monday                                 CF13                              CHM
Three new Brycon species with comments on their relationships.                  A.M. Zanata, Museu de Zoologia da
Universidade de Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.
Several generic names have been proposed in the past for some species or groups of species currently included in
Brycon, such as Megalobrycon, Chalcinopsis, Bryconexodon, Catabasis, Othonophanes, Triurobrycon and
Holobrycon. Holobrycon was proposed by Eigenmann to include Brycon pesu, based on the absence of fontanels
and was recently synonymized with the genus Brycon. Ongoing studies about the relationships of Brycon species
have revealed that Brycon pesu and three new species of Brycon present several derived characters that could
justify the separation or these species in a distinct genus, such as the total absence of fontanels, supraoccipifal spine
covered by scales, nasal bones with well developed laminar processes, ventral portion of anterior ceratohial
relatively straight, and urohial with lateral wings pointed. Brycon pesu was originally described for the Essequibo
and Mazaruni rivers, Guiana. The new species are reported from the brazilian Amazon drainage, such as Rios
Negro, Tocantins, Xingu, and Tapajos. These species can be distinguished from each other on the basis of
osteological characters, and external morphological features such as shape and color of the adipose, anal, and
caudal fins. Phylogenetic analysis including S. pesu and the three new species suggests that they are closely
related to Chalceus, Brydnus and Alestes.




   430                           16:30 Monday                                CF13                               CHM
  Phylogenetic relationships of labrid fishes: analysis of morphological characters.                    M.W. Westneat.
Department of Zoology, Reid Museum of Natural History, Chicago, IL 60605 USA.

The Labridae is a diverse, circumtropioal family of marine fishes composed of over 700 species in over 80 genera.
Relationships among labrid genera, among the labrid subgroups cunently recognized, and affinities between the
Labridae and other perciform families are poorly understood. In this study, a character survey of labrid osteology,
musculature, connective tissues, neuroanatomy, and internal organs is presented. Taxa examined included
members of all labrid tribes, as well as scarid and odacid fishes that are nested within the Labridae. Outgroups
examined include cichlids, pomacentrids, embiotocids, gerreids, sparids and other perciform taxa. New osteological
features include morpholo^ of the neurocranium, axial skeleton, and pterygiophores. Phylogenetically Informative
characters were discovered in the abductor musdes of the pectoral fins, the inclinator muscles of the dorsal fin,
caudal musculature, and the shape of the myomeres. Useful characters of internal anatomy include the coiling
Eattems of the gut and neuroanatomical features. Brain structure is particularly character-rich. Conclusions: The
  abridae are clearly monophyletic based on numerous new characters. Weak support continues for labroid
monophyly. Most previous labrid tribes and subfamilies are not natural groups. Scarids and odacids are labrids.
Morphology yields high resolution power for labrid and labroid relationships.Phylogenetic relationships of the suckermouth minnows, genus Phenacobius, Inferred from parsimony
analyses of nucleotide sequence, allozymic and morphological data (Cyprinidae: Cypriniformes). W.W.
Dimmiek. University of Kansas, Museum of Natural History. Lawrence, KS 66045; B.M. Burr, Department of Zoology.
Southern Illinois University at Carbondale. IL 62901. U.S.A.
We investigated the phylogenetic relationships among the five species of the genus Phenacobius (Cyprinidae:
Cypriniformes) using a combined analysis of molecular and morphological characters. The nucleotide characters
were comprised of 208 potentially informative sites among a total 1773 aligned base pairs from several segments of
mitochondrial genes encoding the large and small RNA subunits, the valine transfer RNA. and the ND2 protein
coding gene. Allozyrne products from 23 polymorphic loci and 9 morphological characters that were taken from the
literature were also included in the total evidence analysis. Third position codon sites were demonstrated to be
saturated for transitional changes and unsuitable for phylogeny reconstruction among the species studied here. The
total evidence phylogeny is isomorphic with Mayden's (1989) morphological hypothesis. Phenacobius mirabiiis was
found to be basal, followed in ascending order by P. teretuius, P. catostomus, P. crassiiabrum and P. uranops.




  427                        15.45 Monday                               CFIS                              CHM
Description of a rock-dwelling ctehlld (Teleostel: CIchlidae) of the Pseudotropheus willlamal complex from
Lake Malawi, Malawi, Africa. J.R. Stauffer Jr. School of Forest Resources, Penn State University, University Park,
PA 16802 USA; K.A. Kellogg, University of Massachusets, Amherst, Massac^usets USA.
A new species of the cichlid fish genus Pseudotropheus Regan (Teleostel; Cichlidae) from Lake Malawi is
described. The new species is a member of the Pseudotropheus wittiamsi (Gunther) complex. Pseudotroheus
wiiiiamsi is ths type species of the genus. Pseudotropheus, vmich is a polyphyletic grouping of several species of
rock-dwelling cichlids from Lake Malawi. Recently, those members of Pseudotropheus that possessed a moderately
sloped ethmo-vomerine block and a swollen rostral tip were placed in the genus Metriadima Stauffer, Bowers,
Kellogg and McKaye. In addition to the P. wiiiiamsi complex, Pseudotropheus now contains species belonging to the
Pseudotropheus tropheops Regan, Pseudotropheus elongatus Fryer, and Pseudotropheus aggressive complexes,
as well a group of miscellaneous fonns such as Pseudotropheus fainzilberi Staeck. We are now restricting
Pseudotropheus to only those forms that are sister species of P. wiiiiamsi. Because of this restriction, all former
members, with the exception of Metriadima are without a generic name, we propose that they be placed in
Ctenochromis Pfeffer. Since the group is polyphyletic any generic placement is regarded only as a nomenclatural
action and does not suggest phyletic affinities.




   428                         16:00 Monday                                 CF13                               CHM
A new species of the family Percophidae from the Philippines with comments on Indo-Pacific Bembrops.
B.A. Thompson. Coastal Fisheries Institute, Wetland Resources Building, Louisiana State University.Baton Rouge,
Louisiana 70803-7503 USA; R.D. Suttkus, Tulane University Museum of Natural History, Belle Chasse, Louisiana.
There are currently six spedes of the genus Bembrops recognized from the Indo-Padfio: B. caudimacula, B.
platyrhynchus, B. filifera, B. nematopterus, B. curvatura, and B. morelandi. Recently, a distinctive from of Bembrops
charaderized by a series of narrow dorsal saddles from the naps to the caudal peduncle and a darkly -pigmented
spinous dorsal nn has been recognized from ths Philippines Islands. Similar to several spedes of Bembrops, there
is sexual dimorphism in genital papilla size (males large, females small) and caudal fin spot (present females, absent
males). The new species has 28 vertebrae (9 precaudal, 19 caudal) similar to all Indo-PacIfic Bembrops. This
differs from Atlantic forms that, as a group, varies from 27 to 30. The suborbital branch of the cephalic canal system
is very abbreviated in the new species, with only 3 pores; several other Indo-Pacific species have a more fully-
developed suborbital canal with as many as 12 pores. The new form lacks elongate spines in the dorsal fin,
distinctive from B. filifera and B. nematopterus. A review of museum materials suggests that one or more forms
relegated to synonymy may be valid or additional undescribed spedes are present in the Indo-Padfic.




   429                          16:15 Monday                                 CF13                         CHM
Molecular systematic assessment of the status of Carpiodes forbesi Hubbs.          H.L. Bart Jr. and K.R. Piller.
Tulane University Museum of Natural History, Belle Chasse, LA 70037, USA; D.L. Hurley, Tulane University, Dept, of
Cell and Molecular Biology, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA.
Suckers of the genus Carpiodes (carp suckers) are widely distributed across the eastern United States, southern
Canada, and northern Mexico. Three species of Carpiodes are currently recognized: C. carpio, C. cyprinus, and C.
velifer. However, the ranges of eacii of these species are believed to contain additonal undescribed and
unrecognized forms. In a landmark paper on Catostomidae published in 1930, Carl Hubbs commented on the
distinctiveness of the large bodied, short-quilled, elongate form of qulllback from the Illinois River, which Forbes and
Richardson had earlier (1908) referred to as C. thompsoni. Hubbs renamed the species C. forbesi, but cast doubt on
Its validity, stating that it may be a hybrid between C. cyprinus and C. carpio. In Fishes of South Dakota, Bailey and
Anum (1962), citing Hubbs doubts and Trautman's suggestion that shape variation in some Ohio C. cyprinus was
ecophenotypic, relegated C. forbesi to the synonomy of C. cyprinus. We used partial sequences from the
cytochrome-b gene to reassess the distinctiveness of C. forbesi. Sequences were generated from mtDNA extracted
from Wisconsin River (Upper Mississippi River) and Lake Ponohartrain populations of C. velifer and C. cyprinus and
'C. forbesf like specimens of C. cypnnus from the Wisconsin River. Sequence data was subjected to maximum
parsimony analysis using PAUP 3.1. Phylogenetic implications of this analysis will be presented, along with a
discussion of ths taxonomic status of C. forbesi.

Three new Brvcon species with comments on their reiationships^A^M^anata^Musei^^ZoolQgi^da
Universidade de Sao Paulo. SP. Brazil.
Several generic names have been proposed in the past for some species or groups of species currently included in
Brycon, such as Megaiobiycon, Chaidnopsis, Bryconexodon, Catabasis, Othonophanes, Triurobrycon and
Hoiobrycon. Hoiobrycon was proposed by Eigenmann to include Brycon pesu, based on the absence of fontanels
and was recently synonymized with the genus Brycon. Ongoing studies about the relationships of Brycon species
have revealed that Brycon pesu and three new species of Brycon present several derived characters that could
justify the separation of these species in a distinct genus, such as the total absence of fontanels, supraoccipital spine
covered by scales, nasal bones with well developed laminar processes, ventral portion of anterior ceratohial
relatively straight, and urohial with lateral wings pointed. Brycon pesu was originally described for the Essequibo
and Mazaruni rivers. Guiana. The new species are reported from the brazilian Amazon drainage, such as Rios
Negro. Tocantins, Xingu, and Tapajos. These species can be distinguished from each other on the basis of
osteological characters, and external morphological features such as shape and color of the adipose, anal, and
caudal fins. Phylogenetic analysis including B. pesu and the three new species suggests toat they are closely
related to Chalceus, Brydnus and Aiestes.




   430                      16:30 Monday                        CF13                                           CHM
  Phylosenetlc relationships of labrid fishes: analysis of morphological charactera.                     M.W. Westneat.
Department of Zoology, Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, IL 60605 USA.
The Labridae is a diverse, circumtropical family of marine fishes composed of over 700 species in over 80 genera.
Relationships among labrid genera, among the labrid subgroups currently recognized, and affinities between the
Labridae and other perdform families are poorly understood. In this study, a character sunrey of labrid osteology,
musculature, connective tissues, neuroanatomy, and internal organs is presented. Taxa examined induded
members of all labrid tribes, as well as scarid and odadd fishes that are nested within the Labridae. Outgroups
examined include cichlids, pomacentrids, embiotocids, gerreids, sparids and other perdform taxa. New osteological
features indude morpholo^ of the neurocranium, axial skeleton, and pterygiophores. Phylogenetically informative
characters were discovered in ths abductor musdes of the pectoral fins, the inclinator musdes of the dorsal fin,
caudal musculature, and the shape of the myomeres. Useful characters of internal anatomy indude the coiling
patterns of the gut and neuroanatomical features. Brain structure is particularly character-rirm. Condusions: The
Labridae are clearly monophyletic based on numerous new characters. Weak support continues for labroid
monophyly. Most previous labrid tribes and subfamilies are not natural groups. Scarids and odacids are labrids.
Morphology yields nigh resolution power for labrid and labroid relationships.




   431                           16:45 Monday                                 CF13                                CHM
Progress report on the monophyly of the Rhombosoleidae (Pisces; Pleuronectiformes) with notes on
Psammodiscus ocellalus and Oncopterus darwinii. A.-C. Guibord and F. Chapleau, University of Ottawa,
Department of Biology, 30 Marie-Curie, Ottawa, Ontario KIN 6N5; J.M. Diaz de Astarloa, Departamento de Ciendas
Marinas, FacuKad de Ciendas Exadas y Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata, Funes 3350, 7600 Mar
del Plata, Argentina.
The family Rhombosoleidae is composed of nine genera distributed in Australia, New Zealand and South America.
We have examined the phylogenetic status of two genera: the Indo-Paoilic Psammodicus and the South American
Oncopterus. The former genus shows a caudal skeleton that is typical of what is observed in the Samaridae while
the latter has a series seconded canals perpendicular to the lateral line which resembles the series found in the
South American achirines (Achindae). A complete osteological sunrey of all rhombosoleid species and outgroups
combined with a review of the morphological characters used in past studies will be used to clarify the phylogentic
status of these two genera and examine the monophyletic status of the family Rhombosoleidae.




   432                          13:00 Monday                                  .CA3                               ..AXL
Effects of the presence of fish on the suitability of breeding sites to Ambystoma maculatum. D. Cunnington,
R.J. Brooks and J. Edmonds. University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, NIG 2W1.
The presence of predatory fish is thought to restrict successful breeding by many amphibians, including Ambystoma
maculatum (the spotted salamander), to temporary ponds. Evidence is accumulating, however, that A. maculatum
sometimes breeds successfully in the presence of fish. I investigated the co-occurrence of breeding A. maculatum
and fish in 11 lakes in Algonquin Park, Ontario. Stepwise multiple regression was used to determine the relative
importance of the effects of the presence/absence of fish, pH, Secchi depth, lake area, and the forest type
surrounding the lakes on the density of egg masses in lakes. Variation in egg mass density among the lakes was
significantly related to the presence/absence of fish (excluding Salvelinus fontinalis}, but was not related to any of the
other habitat variables. The lanrae were palatable to fishes, but lanrae successfully reached metamorphosis in at
least one lake despite the presence of fish. Although presence of fish was the most important factor in the suitability
of a breeding site to A. matxrlatum, fish did not completely exclude A. maculatum. The use of refuges, spatially
complex habitats, and a bet-hedging life history, are potential ways in which A. maculatum can reproduce despite the
presence of fish.  433                         .13:15 Monday                               CA3                           .     AXL
Diel activity patterns of the sympatric Poison Dart frogs Dendrobates auratus and D. pumilio in Costa Rica.
B.M. Graves. Department of Biology, Northern Michigan University, Marquette, Ml 49855.
Activity of Dendrobates auratus and D. pumilio in Northeastern Costa Rica was monitored at 45 min intervals
throughout daylight hours on nine days in late-June and eariy-July 1997. Activity of D. pumilio peaked early m the
morning, declined steadily to mid-day, then remained at relatively low levels through the afternoon. A<*vity of p.
auratus peaked later in the day, and was more consistent throughout the day than was activity of p. pumilio.
Dendrobates auratus was usually found on the ground, and no association was found between percent of individuals
on elevated perches and observation time. In contrast, there was a clear peak in use of elevated perches by D.
pumilio which occurred shortly after sunrise. A significant positive relationship between rainfall and activity was
evident for D. pumilio, but not for D. auratus. These data demonstrate differences in activity patterns between these
congeners, in spite of many ecological similarities




   434                         13:30 Monday                                 CA3            .                 JA^
A telemetric study of the home ranges and movement patterns of the mountain yellow-legged frra Rana
muscosa in Dusy Basin. Kings Canyon National Park. K.M. MaHhews. K.L. Pope''’ and D.B. Court, 'US Forest
Service Pacific Southwest Research Station, P.O. Box 245, Berkeley, CA 94701, USA; California Polytechnic State
University, San Luis Obispo, Department of Biology, San Luis Obispo, CA 93407, USA.
Rana muscosa was once common throughout high elevation areas of the Sierra Nevada but has declined pnmarily
due to widespread stocking of non-native trout. To understand Rana muscosa habitat needs, we initiated a
telemetric study in 1997 to determine home ranges and movement patterns during the summer and fall when their
high elevation habitats (>3000 m) are accessible. We used radio transmitters and GPS to map the ocations of 24
frogs in Dusy Basin. During the summer frogs were distributed throughout the basin in a variety of lakes, m August
12 tagged frogs showed no movement away from the small lakes where they were originally captured and tagged,
and their home ranges were small (within 50 m). In September 8 of 9 frogs moved up to 200 m away from their
original capture lakes. By October, when lakes began freezing, frogs were found in only two lakes along the
shoreline in deep crevices or under rock ledges. This initial telemetry study of Rana muscosa indicates they are
more widely distributed during the summer, and become more restricted in their distribution as the lakes freeze.
Future restoration strategies should ensure their access to their summer and winter habitats.




   435                         13:45 Monday                                CA3                        ...      AXL
Mountain yellow-legged frog habitat use and movement patterns In a high elevation basin in Kings Canyon
National Park: a mark-recapture study. K.L. Pope*’*’ and K.R. Matthews, “US Forest Service Pacific Southwest
Research Station, P.O. Box 245, Berkeley, Ca 94701, USA; ‘■California Polytechnic State University, San Luis
Obispo, Department of Biology, San Luis Obispo, CA 93407, USA.
We are studying the movement patterns of Rana muscosa to determine seasonal habitat use relied to
hibernation, breeding activity and feeding. Passive integrated transponders (PIT tags) were inserted into 471 adult
froqs in Dusy Basin, Kings Canyon National Park (elevation 3470m) during the summer of 1997. Recapture surveys
were conducted between August and October when the activity cycle ended and lakes began to freeze. Throughout
August all recaptured frogs remained in the same water body where they were originally fagged. Frogs were
observed feeding and sunning in daylight hours during this period. By mid September, a high percentage of frc^s
were recaptured in different water bodies than where they were originally tagged. Frogs moved froni the 12 water
bodies ttiey were found during the summer feeding period to only 2 lakes in the basin. One of the lakes was small
and shallow (<.2 ha, <2 m deep) while the other was the largest lake in the basin (4.3 ha, 9 m deep). Above-water
activitv greatly declined after this movement period. This study will be continued in 1998 to gain information about
movement between overwintering habitats and breeding sites and movement between brewing and feeding sites.
Because Rana muscosa has declined throughout the Sierra Nevada, understanding their habitat requirements will be
crucial in managing remaining populations.




   •439                         14:4iS Mangay .                             CAS                                AXL
 Herpetological communities in four watersheds under different silvicultural management in the Ouachita
 llflountains, Arkansas, USA. P.A. Shipman*-*’ and S.F. Fox, “Department of Zoology, 430 LSW, Oklahoma Slate
 University, Stillwater, OK 74078 U.S.A; ‘■Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, U.S. Geological Survey
 Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078 U.S.A; R. Thill, Wildlife Habitat and Silvicultural Lab, Nation^
 Forest Service, Nacogdoches, TX 75962 U.S.A; P. Tappe, School of Forest Resources, University of Arkansas -
 Monticello, Monticello, AR 71656 U.S.A.
We summarize preliminary results of the mid-point data collection for a large- scale, long-term field study of herp
communities and the influence of habitat and landscape environmental variables in the Ouachita Mountains of west­
central Arkansas, USA.. This study is one component of Phase III of the Ouachita Mountains Ecosystem
Management Research Project and is a cooperative effort involving the Ouachita National Forest, Weyerhaeuser
Coiraany, the National Couricil of the Paper Industry for Air and Stream Improvement, Oklahoma Stale University,
the Oklahoma Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, the University of Arkansas Monticello, and the Souftem
Forest Experiment Station of the National Forest Service. The primary objective is to strengthen our knowledge of
habitat relationships of amphibians and reptiles at both the stand and landscape level using four 1500 to 3800 ha
watersheds with different histories of silviculture and intensity of timber management. Thus far, the most intensively
managed watershed is lower in diversity per plot (a - diversity) for both amphibians and reptiles, whereas ordination
indicates that this watershed is greater in diversity among plots (p - diversity) tor both taxa.

  436                          14:00 Monday                                CA3                   ..           AXL
Use of discarded aluminum beverage cans by selected North American amphibians and leptiles.                     M-R.
Jennings*-^. ®U.S. Geological Survey, Biological Resources Division, , 39913 Sharon, Avenue, Davis, CA 95616,
USA; “Research Associate, Dept, of Herpetology, California Academy of Sciences, Golden Gate Park, San
Francisco, CA 94118, USA.
Over the past 35 years, discarded aluminum beverage cans have become a common item of litter in niar^ parts of
North America. Although the shape, volume, and opening of these caris have changed many times over the years,
there use as shelter by selected invertebrates, fishes, amphibians, reptiles, and small mammals indicates that these
anthropogenic items may provide suitable hiding places In otherwise desolate habitats. Over the p^t 2 years, I
have collected over 10,000 discarded aluminum beverage cans under a wide variety of conditions in California,
Nevada, Oregon, and Washington. Although a significant number of cans contained dead invertebrates, most were
found to be devoid of amphibians and reptiles. However, a small number of cans were found to house Pacific
treefrogs (Hyta regilia}, southern alligator lizards {Elgan'a multicarinata}, western skinks {Eumeces skinonianu^,
western fence lizards {Sceloponjs cxxidentalis}, and side-blotched lizards (Uta stansbunana). Some of the lizards
observed in these cans were found to be in various stages of decomposition. The individual preferences of
amphibians and reptiles for selected beer and soft drink cans will be discussed.




   437                         14:15 Monday                                CA3                   .            AXL
Abundance and age distribution of three species of Ranid amphibians in Algonquin Provincial Park,
Canada. R.J. Brooks. K.A. Judge and J.C. MacDonald, University of Guelph, Department of Zoology, Guelph,
Ontario, NIG 2W1; L.J. Shirose, Canada Centre for Inland Waters, P.O. Box 5050, Burlington, Ontario, L7R 4A6.
There has recently been concern that amphibians are declining in abundance and diversity on a global scale &nce
1985, the population dynamics of three species of Ranid amphibians (Rana catesbeiana, Rana clamitans and Rana
septe’ntrionalis) have been investigated using intensive mark-recapture techniques. The focus of this long-term study
is to test whether these species are experiencing declines in the relatively pristine environment of the Wildlife
Research Area of Algonquin Provincial Park, Ontario. To date, the study indicates that population sizes of all three
species of Ranids fluctuate from year to year. However, there is no evidence of significant decreases in abundance
or mean body size, or of shifts in the age distribution over the 10-year sampling period. This suggests that over the
time scale of our study, broad environmental factors such as increased ultraviolet radiation or global warming, are
not important determinants of amphibian abundance in this region.




   438                         14:30 Monday                                 CA3 .                              AXL
Overwintering habitats of radio-impianted green frogs, Rana clamitans. V.S. Lamoureux and D.M. Madison,
Department of Biological Sciences, Binghamton, N.Y. 13902-6000 USA.
Winter's freezing temperatures exert a major selective force on temperate frogs and toads. The selection of an
overwintering site that provides protection from freezing is critical forthose species without freeze tolerance. Many
freeze intolerant frogs, such as the green frog (Rana clamitans}, are commonly assumed to overwinter at the bottom
of shallow, eutrophic, breeding ponds. Although anurans overwintering in pond bottoms would avoid freezing, these
environments are highly anoxic for the majority of winter. Since adult ranids cannot tolerate anoxia for even limited
periods of time, it is unlikely that pond bottoms would be suitable overwintering sites. Anurans may need to undergo
extensive movements in search of suitable overwintering sites that remain unfrozen and provide adequate oxygen for
survival We used radio implants to determine overwintering habitats of the green frog in southern New York state.
In late fall, green frogs moved 80-480 m from their summer breeding ponds to streams and seeps that remained
flowing and unfrozen throughout winter. We suggest that these sites are chosen because they remain unfrozen and
remain well oxygenated.




   442 ..      ..              13:30 Monday                                GS1                               MCN
How vsnom-conductlng fangs are formed. K, Jackson, Museum of Comparative Zoology. Harvard University
Cambndge,, MA 02138, U.S.A.

Venom-delivery systems occur in at least four families of snakes. In viperids, elapids, and atractaspidids, the venom-
aehvery system is front-fanged, and consists of a hollow fang and a venom gland associated with compressor
muscles, which squeeze venom into a duct, which cam’es it to the proximal end of the fang, where it enters the
wnom canal. In venomous colubrids the fang is grooved rather than hollow, and positioned at the posterior end of
me maxilla. It is not known how many times the venom-delivery system has been independently derived in snakes.
This study was initially undertaken to determine how venom-conducting fangs form during development in differerit
groups of snakes, in the hope that fois might shed light on the question of how venom-conducting fangs were arrived
at evolutionarily. It was found that published descriptions of fang formation in snakes disagree about how fangs are
formed. This disagreement is discussed along with developmental differences between fangs in embryonic snakes
and replacement fangs in adult snakes, and their implications for reconstructing the evolutionary history of snakesW^ar^studyiri^he movement patterns of Rana muscosa to determine seasonal habitat use related to
hibernation, breeding activity and feeding. Passive integrated transponders (PIT tags) were inserted into 471 adult
frogs in Dusy Basin, Kings Canyon National Park (elevation 3470m) during the summer of 1997. Recapture surveys
were conducted be^een August and October when the activity cycle ended and lakes began to freeze. Throughout
August all recaptured frogs remained in the same water body where they were originally tagged. Frogs were
observed feeding and sunning in daylight hours during this period. By mid September, a high percentage of frogs
were recaptured in different wafer bodies than where they were originally tagged. Frogs moved from the 12 wafer
bodies they were found during the summer feeding period to only 2 lakes in the basin. One of the lakes was small
and shallow (<.2 ha, <2 m deep) while the other was the largest lake in the basin (4.3 ha, 9 m deep). Above-water
activity greatly declined after this movement period. This study will be continued in 1998 to gain information about
movement between overwintering habitats and breeding sites and movement between breeding and feeding sites.
Because Rana muscosa has declined throughout the Sierra Nevada, understanding their habitat requirements will be
crucial in managing remaining populations.




Herpatological communities In four waterstwds under different silvicultural management in the Ouachita
Mountains, Arkansas, USA. P.A. Shipman*-** and S.F. Fox, “Department of Zoology. 430 LSW, Oklahoma State
University, Stillwater, OK 74078 U.S.A; **Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, U.S. Geological Survey,
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078 U.S.A; R. Thill, Wildlife Habitat and Silvicultural Lab, National
Forest Service, Nacogdoches, TX 75962 U.S.A; P. Tappe, School of Forest Resources, University of Arkansas -
Monticello, Monticello, AR 71656 U.S.A.
We summarize preliminary results of the mid-point data collection for a large- scale, long-term field study of herp
communities and the influence of habitat and landscape environmental variables in the Ouachita Mountains of west­
central Arkansas, USA.. This study is one component of Phase III of the Ouachita Mountains Ecosystem
Management Research Project and is a cooperative effort involving the Ouachita National Forest, Weyerhaeuser
Company, the National Council of the Paper Industry for Air and Stream Improvement, Oklahoma State University,
the Oklahoma Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Researr^h Unit, the University of Arkansas Monticello, and the Southern
Forest Experiment Station of the National Forest Service. The primary objective is to strengthen our knowledge of
habitat relationships of amphibians and reptiles at both the stand and landscape level using four 1500 to 3800 ha
watersheds with different histories of silviculture and intensity of timber management. Thus far, the most intensively
managed watershed is lower in diversity per plot (a - diversity) for both amphibians and reptiles, whereas ordination
indicates that this watershed is greater in diversity among plots (|5 - diversity) for both taxa.




   440                          13:00 Monday                                GS1                               MCN
Application of a modified index of biotic integrity to detect changes in fish assemblages in a historically
de^aded river system. R.B. Evans. The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996 USA.

The New River, a tributary of the Big South Fork of the Cumberland River in northeast Tennessee, has been
degraded by siltation associated with coal mine drainage. Electrofishing samples from 42 localities in 1996 revealed
recent increases in ths range of intolerant species and the return of extirpated fishes to the river system. A modified
index of biotic integrity (IBI), relative to the New River, was compiled using components of fish assemblages
(metrics) that reflect the impacts of siltation. Replicate fish samples were obtained by using a bootstrap resampling
algorithm that enabled tests for significant differences among IBI scores. Comparisons of IBI scores from 13
electrofishing samples completed in 1977 and repeated during 1996 indicate that the health of fish assemblages and
water quality have improved during the past two decades.




   441                         13:15 Monday.        .    .   ,              GS1                               MCN
Cryptic though not concealed: phylogenetic relationships of Aslan leaf-litter frogs revealed through
mitochondrial DNA sequences (Anura: Megophyridae). A. Lathrop. Royal Ontario Museum, Centre for
Biodiversity and Conservation Biolo^, 100 Queen's Park, Toronto, Ontario, Ml E 4W9.
Ths family Megophryidae is distributed throughout Southeast Asia and includes more than 85 species among its
seven genera. At present, there is virtually nothing known about the inter-generic relationships of the family. Some
ideas have been put forth for some of the genera or for the group as a whole, but these hypotheses have been
largely based on intuition, and not supported by a phylogenetic analysis. I will discuss the results of a phylogenetic
analysis of DNA sequences from 21 species, representing 6 of the 7 genera of Megophryidae, The parsimony
analysis was preformed using 1624 base pairs from mitochondrial genes 12S and 16S in which 650 sites were
infonnative. The data from the two genes were analyzed separately and in a combined analysis. The results from
the two data sets are highly congruent. There is strong support for the subfamily Leptobrachiinae (Dubois) and
Megoph^inae (Noble) as has been suggested from morphological data. Patterns of relationships within these
subfamilies will be discussed.

UVerWinieniig sue iriai pruviues piuiouiiuil liuill          lO vnuvai                  wniiv^ut homo ivretwiuw. mwij
freeze intolerant frogs, such as the green frog (Rana clamitans), are commonly assumed to overwinter at the bottom
of shallow, eutrophic, breeding ponds. Although anurans overwintering in pond bottoms would avoid freezing, these
environments are highly anoxic for the majority of winter. Since adult ranids cannot tolerate anoxia for even limited
periods of time, it is unlikely that pond bottoms would be suitable ovenwintering sites. Anurans may need to undergo
extensive movements in search of suitable ovenwintering sites that remain unfrozen and provide adequate oxygen for
survival. We used radio implants to determine ovenwintering habitats of the green frog in southern New York state.
In late fall, green frogs moved 80-480 m from their summer breeding ponds to streams and seeps that remained
flowing and unfrozen throughout winter. We suggest that these sites are chosen because they remain unfrozen and
remain well oxygenated.




How vonom-conducting fangs are formed.                K. Jackson. Museum or Comparative Zoology, Harvard University.
Cambridge,, MA 02138, U.S A.

Venom-delivery systems occur in al least four families of snakes. In viperids, elapids, and atractaspidids, the venom­
delivery system is front-fanged, and consists of a hollow fang and a venom gland associated with compressor
muscles, which squeeze venom into a duct, which carries if to the proximal end of the fang, where it enters the
venom canal. In venomous colubrids the fang is grooved rather than hollow, and positioned at the posterior end of
the maxilla. It is not known how many times the venom-delivery system has been independently derived in snakes.
This study was initially undertaken to determine how venom-conducting fangs form during development in different
groups of snakes, in the hope that this might shed light on the question of how venom-conducting fangs were arrived
at evolutionarily. It was found that published descriptions of fang formation in snakes disagree about how fangs are
formed. This disagreement is discussed along with developmental differences between fangs in embryonic snakes
and replacement fangs in adult snakes, and their implications for reoonstrocting the evolutionary history of snakes.




   443                            13:45 Monday                                GS1                                MCN
A description of flight in the flying snake, Chrysopelea paradisi. J.J. Socha. Department of Organismal Biology
and Anatomy, University of Chicago, 1027 East 571h St., Chicago, IL 60637 USA.
Passive (gliding) flight has been studied in some vertebrate fliers, but is essentially unexplored in the flying snakes of
the genus Chrysopelea. Four specimens of Chiysopelea paradisi were videotaped in flight from a height of 11
meters. Seventy-five total flights were recorded. For comparison, locomotion of the snake in water and on land were
also recorded. Chrysopelea is capable of beginning its flight either in mid-air or from a controlled launch. In a
launch, the body is coiled back against the substrate, then sprung forward horizontally. By the end of the launch, the
body is flattened dorsoventrally from head to venL In Hight the snake undulates laterally in a swimming-like motion
with the body in a plane parallel with the ground. The amplitude of undulation in air is more than twice that of
undulation in water. Over the course of a flight, the frequency of undulation decreases. Upon landing, the snake
contacts the ground tail first, then body, and head last. The snake is capable of extensive maneuvering in flight, able
to turn ninety degrees within a meter. Video clips of the flight will be shown.




   444                          14:00 Monday                                  GS1                                MCN
Phylogenetic relationships of the Kinostemon flavescens species group Inferred from complete
mitochondrial control region sequences. J.M. Serb. Illinois Natural History Survey, 607 E. Peabody Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820 USA.
Subspecifio designations within the wide ranging yellow mud turtle, Kinostemon flavescens, have been
controversial. Identification of the four subspecies of K. flavescens (K. f. flavescens, K. f. arizonense, K. f.
durangoense, and K. f. spoonerij, have been based on nondiscrete morphological characters and biogeography.
Three previous phenetic studies of the K. flavescens species group, using morphometric characters, resulted in
conflicting taxonomic conclusions. In order to assess evolutionary relationships among pdpulations of K. flavescens,
complete gene sequences (1100 base pairs) of the mitochondrial control region were analyzed using parsimony,
maximum likelihood, and distance methods. Historical biogeographic patterns, inferred from the generated
phylogeny, were used to test hypotheses of climatic change during the Pleistocene (e.g. the Prairie Peninsula
regiori). The structure and evolution of the control region in Kinostemid turtles was characterized and compared to
other vertebrate taxa, including fish, birds, and mammals.   445                         14:15 Monday . .                            'GS1             .               MCN
Diet overlap and parasite assemblage structure In Atchafalya River Basin fishes.               B.J. Wright and D.A.
Rutherford, School of Forestry Wildlife and Fisheries. Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, 70803.
We collected adults of seven fish species from lake, canal, and flooded swamp sites to determine trophic overlap
and tacfos structuring parasite assemblages. White bass Morona chrysops, are specialists for normoxic ( Dissolved
Oxygen >4 mg) lake and riverine habitats while warmouth Lepomis gulosus, spotted gar Lepisosteus occulatus and
bowfin, Amia calva, are hypoxic ( DQ.< 2 mg) wafer specialists preferring bayous and swamps. Crappies, Pomoxiso
nigromaculatus and P. annularis and largemouth bass. Microptenis salmoides, are considered to be generalists for
habitat and feeding guilds. Bluegill, L. macrochirus, was considered an invertivore habitat generalist. Fish diets and
trophically transmitted parasites were examined to determine diet similarity among species and the importance of
host phylogeny, diet and habitat in stoicturing parasite assemblages. Host ecology was a more important
determinant of parasite assemblages than phylogeny, and parasite distributions indicated some resource partitioning
among fishes examined. Generalist parasites did not occur in all host species they are known to infect These
results suggest fine scale resource partitioning within fish trophic guilds and stronger partitioning by habitat
preference.




   446                        14:30 Monday               ..                GSI                                  MCN
Evolutionary enodcrinology of accelerated metamorphosis bi spadefoot toads. D.R. Buchholz and T.B. Hayes,
Department of Integrative. Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California. Berkeley, CA 94720 USA.
Spadefoot species in Scaphiopus and Spea have short larval periods compared to their closest relatives in
Pelobates. We examined two potential explanations for differences in length of the lan/al period between genera.
First, histological examination of thyroid gland development in representatives of all spadefoot genera. Scaphiopus
couchii, Spea multiplicata, and Pelobates syriacus, showed that colloid appeared earlier in Sp. multiplicata and later
in Sc. couch//compared to Ph. synacus, suggesting differences in differentiation of the thyroid axis. Second, tissue
sensitivity and responsivity to thyroid homione was examined using an in vitro tail tip assay, where tail shrinkage
was measured in response to exogenous thyroid homnone. Total area and perimeter of four tail tips in each of six
thyroid hormone concentrations (0, 0.5,1,2, 4, 8nM) at three developmental stages (Gosner stages 28, 33, and 37)
per species (Sc. couchii, Sp. multiplicata, and Ph. syriacus} were measured daily for fourteen days. Sc. couchiitails
shrank in response to 2-8 nM tri-iodothyronine, compared to 4-8 nM for Sp. multiplicata and Pb. syriacus tails. At 4
and 8nM, Sc. couchii and Sp.multiplicata tails shrank faster than P. synacus tails. Scaphiopus and Spea may have
achieved higher metamorphic rates from increased responsivity to thyroid hormone, and Scaphiopus may have
improved upon this mechanism by increasing its sensitivity to thyroid hormone.




   447                         14:45 Monday                                GS1                  .      .        MCN
Tale of two puffers: Do motor patterns change with a shift in muscle insertion?                     J.E. Austin and P.C.
Wainwright, Dept, of Biological Sciences. Florida State, University, Tallahassee, FL 32306 USA.
Durophagous fishes of the order Tetraodontiformes use stalwart teetii and jaws to process prey. Idiosyncratic in their
reliance on oral manipulation and crushing during feeding, they possess a relatively complex adductor mandibulae
musculature as compared to those fishes of the ancestral, pharyngeal jaw-processing persuasion. A1 and A2
adductor mandibulae muscles orchestrate the closing and biting forces. Dog-faced pufferfishes in the genus Arothron
possess a plesiomorphic insertion of the A2 muscle on the lower jaw. Southern puffers of the genus Sphoeroides, in
contrast, have a novel shift in A2 insertion from the dentary to the maxilla. Lack of linkage between anatomical
change and subsequent functional consequence serves to reinforce motor pattern conservation during muscle
evolution. Electromyographic recordings of jaw muscles from both genera were taken as puffers fed on prey of
varying texture (fiddler crabs and shrimp). Quantified with EMG variables Including burst duration, relative onset and
intensSy, motor pattern differences were manifest only in an across-the-board earlier onset of adductor firing in
Southern puffers.




                                 16:15 Monday                                 GSI                                MCN
Variation in offspring characteristics of SIstrunis mlllarlus, Slstrurua catenatus, Thamnophis sirtalls,
Thamnophb la'oxlmua, and Nerodia rhombHer. implications for studies of optimal offspring size. MA.
Pilgrim, University of Arkansas. Department of Biological Sciences, Fayetteville, AR, 72701 USA; T.M. Farrell and
P.G. May, Stetson University, Department of Biology, DeLand. FL, 82720 USA; R.A. Seigel, Southeastern Louisiana
University, Department of Biological Sciences, Hammond. LA, 70402 USA.
When studying snake reproductive ecology, offspring characteristics are one of the most difficult reproductive traits
to quantify in a natural setting. Field enclosures allow an investigator to house gravid females in a semi-natural
setting; this provides critical data on offspring characteristics as well as the relationship between a mother’s
characteristics and those of her offspring. During the summers of 1992-1996, we used field enclosures to house 94
gravid Sistrurus miliarius until parturition. During the summers of 1996-1997, we used field enclosures to house
gravid Sistrurus catenatus (N=24), Thamnophis sirtalis (N=36), Thamnophis proximus (N=19) and Nerodia rhombifer
(N=14) until parturition. Data collected from these females and their offspring were used to examine within and
among litter variation in offspring characteristics. In addition, we used these data to evaluate a number of
hypotheses generated by optimal offspring size theory.

   448                       , 15:30 Monday                                    GS1                        . .     MCN
A field population of bullfrog tadpoles with a highly female-biased sex ratio. L.C. Rania and C.R. Propper,
Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff. Arizona 86011, USA.
The timing of the occurrence of sex differentiation is variable among anuran amphibians. While some frog species
erdiibit sexual differentiation after metamorphosis, others differentiate during the larval period. In order to determine
the timing of sexual differentiation in the bullfrog, Rana catesbeiana, we collected 82 tadpoles from a fish hatchery in
northern Arizona. Upon histological examination we found that differentiation was evident by Gosner Stage 35.
Furthermore, among differentiated animals, 88,6% of the popijlation was female, with only 11.5% of the population
being male. Two of the male specimens had poorly organized seminiferous tubules with oocytes embedded within
the testicular tissue. One female had a polynuclear oocyte. We cannot say what may have affected this population
of bullfrog tadpoles, but our histological results suggest that these animals may have been exposed to some form of
xenobiotic contamination.




   449                          15:45 Monday                                  GSI .. .                    MCN
The effects of xenobiotics on larval development in the bullfrog (Rana catesbeiana}.         S.G. Faraoher, L.C.
Rania and C.R. Propper, Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona University. Flagstaff, Arizona 86011,
USA.
Xenobiotic compounds have been hypothesized to disrupt normal growth and development and induce gross
morphological mutations and abnornialities. Embryonic exposure to endocrine disnjpting compounds may alter the
formation of endocrine tissues, leading to abnormalities in the timing or outcome of the sexual differentiation of
gonadal tissue. Previous research demonstrated the occurrence of gonadal abnormalities in juvenile alligators
collected from a contaminated lake site (Guillette, Crain, and Rooney, 1997). In a study examining the
developmental timing of sexual differentiation of Rana catesbeiana from a local fish hatchery, we were surprised to
find a highly skewed, female biased sex ratio (Rania, ef al., personal txjmmunication). Histological preparations
revealed abnormalities in the differentiation of the gonadal tissue of many of these individuals. One hypothesis from
this result is that some xenobiotic compounds may be affecting sexual differentiation in R. catesbeiana. Vie
conducted two experiments to test this hypothesis. First, we treated larval R. catesbeiana with endosulfan, a locally
sprayed pesticide that is known to be weakly estrogenic. We found significanf differences in weight and mortality
among 4 treatments (3 concentrations anti a control) over a three week period. Next, we treated larval fl.
catesbeiana with zineb, a commonly used herbicide in the U.S.. We found no statistical differences in weight or
length among 5 treatments (4 concentrations and a control), although there were significant differences in mortality.
These data suggest that larval bullfrogs exposed to pesticides may suffer deleterious effects.




    450                          16:00 Monday                                  GSI                                 MCN
Reef fishes from Parcel Manuel Luis Marine State Park, MaranhSo, NE Brazil.                    L.A. Rocha and I.L. Rosa,
Universidade Federal da Paraiba, CCEN - Departamento de Sistematica e Ecologia, Joao Pessoa, PB - 58059-900,
Brazil.
The Parcel Manuel Luis Marine State Park (PEM), off MaranhSo State. NE Brazil, is a large reef (18 km by 6 km)
virtually unstudied biologically. Due to difficulty of access, a still unknown fish fauna is found in the area. This work Is
being developed in collaboration with the Maranhao State Environmental and Hydric Resources Bureau. It's main
gois are to determine the composition and stnjcture of the fish community, and to contribute to the management
plan of the PEM. Data are being obtained through undenvater obsenrations, photographs and spear fishing. The
method used to determine the community structure is the stationary visual census. In three expeditions (between
August 1997 and January 1998) 103 species belonging to 47 families were recorded. The purple chromis, Chromis
scotti, previously known only from the Caribbean and United States coasL was collected at PEM, where juveniles
and aoults were frequently seen close to the bottom in depths between 18 and 30m. Regarding the commijnity
structure, the herbivores most frequently seen, especially in the shallower areas, were Scanjs coelestinus,
Sparisoma viride and Kyphosus sectatryx. In the deeper areas (below 20m) the most common fishes were Chromis
scotti. Gramma aft. loreto, and Halichoeres bivittatus.




   454                          09:00 Tuesday                                                            .          THN
Seasonally variable frxid availability constrains the timing of reproduction by herbivtx'ous coral reef fishes
K.B. Clifton, Biology, University of California, 1156 High St., Santa Cmz, CA 95064; R.D. Robertson, Smithsonian
Tropical, Research Institute, Unit 0948, APO. AA 34002-0948.

To date, few studies have examined how food availability may constrain the reproduction, growth and mortality of
coral reef fishes in their natural habitat. To address this issue, we compared the life history tactics of supplementally
fed. wild, adult beaugregory damselfish tStegastes leucosbctus} with those of control fish during a series of 90-day
experimental trials. These herbivorous fish showed both seasonal and lunar patterns of repr^uction in the study
area off the coast of Panama. During the study, patterns of reproductive output and growth of control fish varied
temporally and spatially, apparently in response to natural patterns of food availability. Growth rates, though
variable, did not correspond well with levels or reproductive output. Mortality was generally high, though soma what
reduced during periods of low reproduction.Protein rich food supplements greatly increased reproduction and growth
of experimental fish and substantially lowered rates of mortality, itresperrtive of season. These results strongly
suggest that food limitation plays a critical role In determining both the seasonal timing and intensity of reproduction,
growth, and mortality in this speciesTale of two puffers: Do motor patterns change with a shift In muscle insertion?             J.E. Austin and P.O.
Wainwright, Dept of Biological Sciences, Rorida State, University, Tallahassee, FL 32306 USA.
□urophagous fishes of the order Tetraodontiformes use stalwart teeth and jaws to process prey. Idiosyncratic in their
reliance on oral manipulation and cnjshing during feeding, they possess a relatively complex adductor mandibulae
musculature as compared to those fishes of the ancestral, pharyngeal jaw-processing persuasion. Al and A2
adductor mandibulae muscles orchestrate the closing and biting forces. Dog-faced pufferfishes in the genus Arothron
possess a plesiomorphic insertion of the A2 muscle on the lower jaw. Southern puffers of the genus Sphoeroides, in
contrast, have a novel shift in A2 insertion from the dentary to the maxilla. Lack of linkage between anatomical
change and subsequent functional consequence serves to reinforce motor pattern consenration during muscle
evolution. Electromyographic recordings of jaw muscles from both genera were taken as puffers fed on prey of
varying texture (fiddler crabs and shrimp). Quantified with EMG variables including burst duration, relative onset and
intensity, motor pattern differences were manifest only in an across-the-board earlier onset of adductor firing in
Southern puffers.




  451                      -16:15 Monday                     . .   GS1                       MCN
Variation In offspring characteristics of SIstrurus mtHartus, SIstrurua catenatus, Thamnophls airtalla,
Thamnophia proximua, and Nerodla rhomblfer. Implications for studies of optimal offspring size. MA.
Pilgrim. University of Arkansas, Department of Biological Sciences, Fayetteville, AR, 72701 USA; T.M. Fanell and
P.G. May, Stetson Universi^, Department of Biology, DeLand, FL, 82720 USA; R.A. Seigel, Southeastern Louisiana
University, Department of Biological Sciences, Hammond, LA, 70402 USA.
When studying snake reproductive ecology, offspring characteristics are one of the most difficult reproductive traits
to quantify in a natural setting. Reid enclosures allow an investigator to house gravid females in a semi-natural
setting; this provides critical data on offspring characteristics as well as the relationship between a mother's
characteristics and those of her offspring. During the summers of 1992-1996, we used field enclosures to house 94
gravid Sistrurus miliarius until parturition. During the summers of 1996-1997, we used field enclosures to house
gravid Sistrurus catenatus (N=24), Thamnophis sirtalis (N=36), Thamnophis proximus (N=19) and Nerodia rhombifer
(N=14) until parturition. Data collected from these females and their offspring were used to examine within and
among litter variation in offspring characteristics. In addition, we used these data to evaluate a number of
hypotheses generated by optimal offspring size theory.




   452                         08:00 Tuesday                                 SE                               THN
Physiology and migratory behavior under different environmental conditions during the parr-smolt
transformation of Atlantic salmon. G.P. Baibin. S.D. McCormick and A.J. Haro, Ccxite Anadromous Fish
Research Center, BRDAJSGS, 1 Migratory Way, Turners Falls, MA 01376 USA.
Timing of physiological changes asscxriated with the parr-smolt transformation has been intimately linked with
changes In photoperiod and temperature. However, there is little direct evidence concerning environmental control
of downstream migratory behavior. Seasonal timing of physiological and behavioral changes associated with
increased temperatures was examined. Atlantic salmon parr and pre-smolts were tagged with passive integrated
transponders (PIT) in March, placed in simulated stream conditions and monitored continuously from April through
July. Water temperature was increased 1°C every 3 d (ambient), 1°C every other day (advanced), or 1°C every 9 d
(delayed). The number of downstream passages of smolts peaked in May. Downstream movements of pan- were
two-orders of magnitude lower than of smolts. Rsh maintained under ambient and advanced conditions ceased
activity by mid-June. Rsh exposed to the delayed temperature regime sustained downstream movements through
July. In late June gill Na+, K+ -ATPase activity (an index of osmoregulatory physiology) had decreased in smolts
maintained under ambient and advanced regimes, whereas it remained elevated in the delayed group. Temperature
regimes dramatically affect smolt physiology, behavior, and migratory timing. Ructuating water temperature and its
influence on migration must be considered when contemplating survival of hatchery and wild smolts to the marine
stags.




   453                        08:30 Tuesday                           .   .. SE                               THN
Declining temperature Influences the osmoregulatory physiology of American shad, Alosa sapldissima,
restricting the timing of seaward migration. J. Zydlewski‘° and S.D. McCormick’-*', "Conte Anadromous Rsh
Research Center, BRDAJSGS, 1 Migratory Way, Turners Falls, MA 01376 USA; ‘University of Massachusetts,
Department of Biology, Amherst, MA , USA.
Osmoregulatory abilities of American shad must be coordinated with migrations between fresh water (FW) and
seawater (SW). Shad develop the ability to tolerate SW at larval-juvenile transition (26-45 d post-hatch) coincident
with 3.5 and 10-fold increases in chloride cell (CC) number and gill Na’,K*-ATPase activity respectively. Although
only early development is limited to low salinities, shad remain in FW for 5-6 months (until autumn). During autumnal
migration juveniles lose the ability to osmoregulate in FW, evidenced by a decline in plasma chloride (20%). Shad
kept in the laboratory through Dec. experience large declines in plasma chloride (68%) and high mortality. Gill
Na+,K*-ATPase activity increases 3-fold and gill CC's on the primary and secondary lamellae Increase 2-fold and 1.5-
fold; these are likely to be compensatory mechanisms for increasing ion uptake. Changes in plasma chloride, gill
Na'',K-’-ATPase, and CC's are reduced and delayed if shad are maintained at 24°C versus a natural decline in
temperature. Impaired osmoregulatory ability, as influenced by temperature, may serve as a proximate cue for
migration. Changes In temperature (e.g. global warming) will likely alter the timing of migration.

Reef fishes from Parcel Manuel Luis Marine State Park, Maranhao, NE Brazil.        L.A. Rocha and I.L. Rosa,
Universidade Federal da Paraiba, CCEN - Departamento de Sistematica e Ecologia, Joao Pessoa, PB - 58059-900,
Brazil.
The Parcel Manuel Luis Marine State Park (PEM), off MaranhSo State, NE Brazil, is a large reef (18 km by 6 km)
virtually unstudied biologically. Due to difficulty of access, a still unknown fish fauna is found in ths area. This work is
being developed in collaboration with the Maranhao State Environmental and Hydric Resources Bureau. It's main
goals are to determine the composition and structure of the fish community, and to contribute to the management
plan of the PEM. Data are being obtained through underwater observations, photographs and spear fishing. The
method used to determine the community structure is the stationary visual census. In three expeditions (between
August 1997 and January 1998) 103 species belonging to 47 families were recorded. The purple chromis, Chrmis
scotti, previously known only from the Caribbean and United States coast, was collected at PEM, where juveniles
and adults were frequently seen close to the bottom in depths between 18 and 30m. Regarding the community
structure, the herbivores most frequently seen, especially in the shallower areas, were Scarus coelestinus,
Sparisoma viride and Kyphosus sectatryx. In the deeper areas (below 20m) the most common fishes were Chromis
scotti. Gramma aff. loreto, and Halichoeres bivittatus.




  454 .             . • . - . 09:00 Tuesday                            SE                  .          THN
Seasonally variable food availability constrains the timing of reproduction by herbivorous coral reef fishes.
K.B. Clifton. Biology, University of California, 1156 High St., Santa Cruz, CA 95064; R.D. Robertson, Smithsonian
Tropical, Research Institute, Unit 0948, APO, AA 34002-0948.
To date, tew studies have examined how food availability may constrain the reproduction, growth and mortality of
coral reef fishes in their natural habitat. To address this issue, we compared the life history tactics of supplementally
fed, wild, adult beaugregory damselfish (Stegastes leucostictus) with those of control fish during a series of 90-day
experimental trials. These herbivorous fish showed both seasonal and lunar patterns of reproduction in the study
area off the coast of Panama. During the study, patterns of reproductive output and growth of control fish varied
temporally and spatially, apparently in response to natural patterns of fcxxf availability. Growth rates, though
variable, did not correspond well with levels or reproductive output. Mortality was generally high, though some what
reduced during periods of low reproduction.Protein rich food supplements greatly increased reproduction and growth
of experimental fish and substantially lowered rates of mortality, irrespective of season. These results strongly
suggest that fcxxf limitation plays a critical role in determining both the seasonal timing and intensity of reproduction,
grovrth, and mortality in this species




   455.                         09:30 Tuesday                                    SE                                 THN
Size-based delaying tactics In breeding schedule by brook trout: a removal experiment. P.J. Blanchfield.
Dept. Biology, York University, North York Ontario M3J 1P3; M.S. Ridgway, Aquatic Ecosystems Science Section,
3rd Fl. N. 300 Water St.,, Peterborough, Ontario K9J 8M5.
Among salmonines (trout, salmon, char), there is a consistent trend for large females to spawn before small ones
within a breeding season. This pattern may be related to competition for limited spawning sites or, alternatively,
small females may delay reproduction as an adaptive tactic to minimise brood loss. Females routinely lose broods
through the subsequent use of nest sites by other females. Broods of small females are more likely to be lost by this
distuitiance because nest depth is related to body size. We tested these alternative hypotheses by detaining the
largest females in a marked population of lake-spawning brook trout (Saivelinus fontinalis). The competition
hypothesis predicts small females would breed earlier in the absence of large females, whereas the adaptive tactic
hypothesis predicts delayed breeding. Consistent with our second hypothesis, small females spawned significantly
later during the experimental year (1996) compared to the previous two years. Furthermore, brood loss was
significantly reduced. Within seasons, brood loss was significantly higher for small than large females. Site choice
may also play an important role in reproductive success. We show that small females increase reproductive
success by delayed reproduction and suggest that this adaptive tactic may be socially mediated.




   456                           10:30 Tuesday                         .        SE                                 THN
The effects of population structure on the timing of reproductive    activity In male fathead minnows
(Pimephales promelas): Individual    and population-level implications A.J. Danylchuk and W.M Tonn,
Department of Biological Sdenoes, University of Alberta,, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2E9.
Size-dependent asynchrony in the seasonal timing of reproduction has been well documented tor fish in temperate
regions. A common explanation of this phenomenon is that small fish are physiologically forced to postpone the
allocation of enerpy to reproduction, resulting in a delay in the seasonal timing of reproductive activity. However, for
male fathead minnows we suggest that the timing of seasonal reproductive activity is regulated by social
interactions. In an endosute and a pond experiment, small males advanced their reproductive condition, held
nesting territories, and spawned only when isolated from large males or once large males were removed from the
pi^ulation. Small males were of similar size in all experimental treatments, suggesting that size-dependent
differences in eriergy allocation do not account for differences in their phenology. Preliminary analyses also indicate
that the production and size of young produced by small 'uninhibited' males was not significantly different from the
production and size of young produced by large dominant males. Thus, the release of small males from social
control may expedite population recovery following a size-dependent disturbarxie such as winterkill.   457                          11:00 Tuesday                                 SE ,                             .. THN
Seasonal aspects of resource allocation In Ambystoma opacum: Implications for population dynamics. D.£_
Scott, Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, Drawer E, Aiken, SC 29802 USA.
Marbled salamanders (Ambystoma opacum') inhabit woodlands throughout much of the easterri United States.
Adults typically migrate to temporary pond breeding sites en masse in early autumn, where courtship, breeding, arid
terrestrial oviposition occur over a 3-4 week period. Energetically "spent" adults leave the site with virtually all lipid
stores depleted. Experimental manipulations of food level suggest that adult reproductive frequency is dependent on
prior food acquisition; thus food availability in the terrestrial habitat may partly explain the wide
among-individual variation in year-to-year breeding patterns.
Larval success is highly dependent on the timing of pond filling and drying: hydroperiod directly affects mortally
and strongly influences competitive and predatory interactions. Per-capita food resources in the larval stage
determine larval growth rates, larval period, body size at metamorphosis, and a suite of post-metamorphio adult
traits Although variation in larval period can be substantial, there is surprisingly little vanation in the absolute date
of metamorphosis. Larvae from eggs hatched 3-mo apart generally metamorphose within a few weeks of each other,
regardless of whether the aquatic habitat remains suitable for growth. Later-hatching larvae therefore metarnorphose
at a smaller size in spite of the strong relationship between body size at metamorphosis and traits related to adult
fitness.
Food resources available to individuals in both the aquatic and terrestrial stages of the life cycle affect the resource
allocation “decisions' a salamander makes. Understanding allocation decisions is critical to modeling the population
dynamics of Ambystoma opacum.

   458    .                     11:30 Tuesday                                  SE                              .. THN
Differential timing of maturation and reproduction the salamander, Ambystoma talpoldeum.                     T.J. Byan*'.
■Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, Drawer E, Aiken SC 29802 USA; R.D. Semlitsoh, ‘■Divsion of Biological
Sciences, Univeristy of Missouri, Columbia MO 65211 USA.
Variation in abiotic parameters determines the timing of reproduction in many semi-aquatic amphibians; hence, ^e
timinq of first reproduction is constrained by extrinsic (e.g., temperature and rainfall) rather than intrinsic (e.g., the
rate of qametogenesis) factors. Adaptations that release organisms from extrinsic factors may have important
Individual- and population-level implications. We describe the pattern of metamorphosis and maturation in natural
and experimental populations of the salamander Ambystoma talpoideum. Prior to first reproduction (usually at 1-yr
post-hatching), individuals that metamorphose are sexually immature when leaving the aquatic envirorimerjt, and
must mature in the terrestrial environment. Maturation, however, may precede metamoyhosis. Individuals, that
mature prior to metamorphosis remain in the aquatic environment (i.e., become "paedomorphic ), are physiologically
capable of breeding at the start of the breeding season, In the early fall. Terrestrial adults, however, must wait for the
proper suite of environmental conditions to initiate migration to the aquatic breeding habitats, which may be delayed
until mid to late winter. The result is a potentially large difference in the timing of reproduction be^een the two
morphs. The consequences of differential maturation and reproduction among individuals may collectively have
larger population-level effects.




   459                          08:30'Tuesday                                  CR7                                 AXL
Overwintering strategies of the timber rattlesnake (Crotalus horridus), corn snake (Elaphe guttata), northern
pine snake tPituophis melanoleucus), eastern king snake (Lampropeltls getula), and northern black rarer
(Coluber constrictor) in the Pine Barrens of southern New Jersey. R.T. Zappalorti, M.E. Torocco arid F.L.
Peterson, Herpetological Associates, Inc, Plant and Wildlife Consultants., 536 Seaman Avenue. Beachwood, New
^e rem sreke, northern pine snake, and eastern king snake reach the northern limit of their range in the Pine
Barrens of southern New Jersey. The timber rattlesnake and northern black racer are within the eastern core of their
range in the Pine Barrens. These species have developed different strategies to cope with harsh winter
temperatures. Radio-telemetry was used to locate hibernacula. Drift fences were used to determine dates of
emergence and ingress for 113 pine snakes (6 dens). 66 black racers (5 dens), 61 rem snakes (6 dens), and 4 king
snakes (1 den). Physical characteristics of the underground den structure and the depth at which the snakes
hibernated was observed by excavating 3 timber rattlesnakes (2 dens), 1 king snake (1 den), 12 com snakes (3
dens), 196 pine snakes (8 dens), and 41 black racers (6 dens). Rattlesnakes (N=45) and king snakes (N-6) were
observed to hibernate in shallow, water-filled cavities and tunnels along-the edge of stream comdors. The snakes
were found beneath the roots of Atlantic white cedar, black gum, or red maple trees and Sphagnum mats, at an
average depth of 30 cm, and were partially submerged in water. Com snakes, pine snakes, and black racers otteri
share the same upland hibernacula, which are generally located In stump holes or abandoned mammal burrows at
an average depth of 1.0 meter. The earliest dates for emergence and latest dates for ingress to dens are: pine make
 emeraence = March 25, return = November 27; com snake emergence = March 14, return = November 16, black
 racer omeraence - March 20. return = November 11; timber rattlesnake emergenco^= April 20,




                                 09:30 Tuesday                                  CR7                                AXL
 Biomass relationships In a snake community. H.S. Fitch. University of Kansas Natural History Reservation, 2060
 E., 1600 Road, Lawrence, Kansas 66044-9460 USA.
 A snake community was studied in mixed prairie-woodland habitat in NE Kansas, near the junction of Douglas,
 Jefferson, and Leavenworth Counties, 1948-1997. The ophifauna of 18 species attained a mean of 1350 snakes/ha
 and was dominated by the prairie ringneck, with an estimated 94.3% of the snakes and 53% of total biomass. The
 ringneck and western worm snake feed almost entiFely on earthworms-about 54% of snake prey biomass. Other
 species of ecological significance and their biomass are: racer 18.9%, garter snake 11.2%, copperhead 8.9%, black
 rat snake 3.3%, bmber rattlesnake 1.6%, worm snake 1.4%. Other than earthworm(s), prey consisted of vole, 40.3%
 (eaten by 7 species), cottontail 8.6% (4 species), deer mouse 7.7% (6 species), frog 7.4% (4 species), squirrel 4.7%
 (1 species), toad 3.1% (2 species), and glass lizard 2.8% (3 species).

   460                         08:45 Tuesday                 ..                CR7    .                             AXL
Soil composition and moisture influence the cold hardiness of hatchling painted turtles (Chrysemys picta).
J.P. Costanzo and J.D. Litzgus. Department of Zoology, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio 45056, USA; J.B. Iverson,
Department of Biology, Earlham College, Richmond, Indiana, 47374, USA; R.E. Lee(Jr.), Department of Zoology,
Miami University, Oxford, Ohio 45056, USA.
Painted turtles [Chrysemys picta) hatch in late summer but usually remain in the nest during winter. Hatchlings earn
survive subzero temperatures in the nest either by tolerating the freezing of their body tissues, at temperatures ,,-4
°C, or by avoiding ice nucleation and remaining supercooled (unfrozen) to temperatures at least as low as '12 °C.
We investigated the effects of soil composition and soil moisture on susceptibility to ice inoculation in hatchling
turtles endemic to the sandhills of Nebraska, where soil moisture in winter is variable (range 4-14%). Turtles cooled
in frozen, native soil (predominantly sand) froze at -1.6 °C, whereas turtles cooled iri frozen soil to which clay or peat
was added supercooled to -13 °C before freezing. Avoidance of inoculation by environmental ice in turtles exposed
to frozen native soil was possible only when the soil contained liffle moisture (<4%). Thus, survival of relatively low
nest temperatures, by supercooling, may be greater for turtles hibernating in sandy soils containing little moisture, or
in soils containing clay or organic matter. However, the winter microenvironment contains numerous ice nuclei (e.g.,
inorganic particulates, microorganisms) that may nevertheless promote inoculative freezing.




   461                         09:00 Tuesday                              ..   CR7                                   AXL
Field and laboratory studies on active and resting body temperatures of a nocturnal, tropical snake (Boiga
irregularis). N.L. Anderson. B. Coupe. G. Perry, T. Hetherington and J. Williams, The Ohio State Universrty,
Department of Zoology. 1735 Neil Ave., Room 104 Botany and Zoology Building. Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.
Although studies of body temperature (Tb) are extensive for snakes living in temperate regions, few studies have
focused on tropical, nocturnal snakes. Temperature sensitive radiotransmitters were used to record coelomic
temperatures of 11 brovm tree snakes (BTS) on Guam and 5 captive animals held in a thermal mosaic. Copper
models of snakes were used to characterize the climate space of BTS. Preliminary analysis suggested that captive
BTS at rest chose cooler temperatures (21 - 23 °C) than those experienced by inactive wild snakes (27 - 32 °C).
Free living snakes did not raise Tb by basking. Diurnal temperature profiles of resting wild snakes were similar to
those of copper models placed in refugia. This suggests that, in contrast to temperate snakes, resting BTS do not
actively thermoregulate. The situations for active snakes is unclear. Captive snakes with access to temepratures
between 22 - 43 °C attained greater Tb while active al night (30 - 33 °C) than free ranging snakes (25 - 26 °C) limited
to ambient temperatures between 24 - 26 °C. The difference in Tb might represent selection of a 30 - 33 °C Tb by
captive snakes or be an artifact of movement patterns through the thermal mosaic.




   462                          09:15 Tuesday                      ..          CR7                                   AXL
Constraints on life histories of temperate-zone snakes: is the price of viviparity very high?                  P,T. Gregory,
Dept, of Biology, University of Victoria, P.O. Box 3020 STN CSC, Victoria B.C. V8W 3N5.
In the highly seasonal environments of the north temperate zone, ectothermic animals such as snakes suffer
significant temporal constraints on their annual cycles, with consequences for their life histories and demographies.
For example, cold winters prohibit any activity at all, but summers also may be cool, further restricting activity. In
presumed evolutionary response to this, most temperate-zone snakes are viviparous; gravid feipales exhibit precise
behavioural thermoregulation, apparently providing optimal developmental conditions for their young. Howevec
thermoregulation often conflicts with other activities such as feeding. In fact, in many species, gravid females feed
liffle or not at all, even in captivity. The main demographic consequences of this are reduced future reproductive
output, especially through decreased reproductive frequency of individual females. Nonetheless, this tradeoff may be
relatively unimportant in the long run because many snakes are long-lived “bet-hedging" species and compensate for
low reproductive output in one year by surviving to reproduce at a later date. I illustrate these ideas with data for
garter snakes (Thamnophis) and rattlesnakes (Crotalus).




    466        .                 09:00 Tuesday                                 CF13                       ..        CHM
 Gene duplication differences suggest polytypy in the Chinese sucker, Myxocyprinus asiaticus
 (Cypriniformes: Catostomidae). D.G.K Buth. UCLA Dept, of Biology, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1606 USA.

 The Chinese sucker, Myxocyprinus asiaticus, is the only allotetraploid cafostomid fish that is endemic to Asia. Little
 is known about this species and specimens have been unavailable for genetic comparisons with North American
 species. Since about 1989, it has been imported in the pet trade as the “Chinese high-fin shark." Tsoi et al. (1989)
 first reported gene duplication characters of Myxoc^rinus, documented their findings with zymograms, and
 compared their results with the gene duplication literature on North American catostomids. Specimens I obtained
 commercially were compared elecfrophoretically (products of about 70 loci) to close catostomid relatives in the
 genera Cycleplus and Ictiobus, very few allozymes were shared. Gene duplication differences at Ak-A and Pgm-B
 suggest that Tsoi et al. and I have been examining different species because these characters have not been
 reported to vary within any catostomid species.range in the Pine Barrens. These species have deveioped different strategies to cope with harsh winter
temperatures. Radio-telemetry was used to locate hibernacula. Drift fences were used to determine dates of
emergence and ingress for 113 pine snakes (6 dens), 66 black racers (5 dens), 61 corn snakes (6 dens), and 4 king
snakes (1 den). Physical characteristics of the underground den structure and the depth at which the snakes
hibernated was observed by excavating 3 timber rattlesnakes (2 dens), 1 king snake (1 den), 12 com snakes (3
dens), 196 pine snakes (8 dens), and 41 black racers (6 dens). Rattlesnakes (N=45) and king snakes (N=6) were
observed to hibernate in shallow, water-filled cavities and tunnels along-the edge of stream corridors. The snakes
were found beneath the roofs of Atlantic white cedar, black gum, or red maple trees and Sphagnum mats, at an
average depth of 30 cm, and were partially submerged in water. Com snakes, pine snakes, and black racers often
share the same upland hibernacula, which are generally located in stump holes or abandoned mammal burrows at
an average depth of 1.0 meter. The earliest dates for emergence and latest dates for ingress to dens are: pine snake
emergence = March 25, return = November 27; com snake emergence = March 14, return = November 16; black
racer emergence » March 20, reton = Noyernbw 11;,                         wnergOTOg = April= November




 Blomasa relationships In a snake community. H.S. Fitch. University of Kansas Natural Historv Reservation 2060
 E. , 1600 Road, Lawrence, Kansas 66044-9460 USA.                                                        ’

 A snake community was studied in mixed prairie-woodland habitat in NE Kansas, near the junction of Douglas
 Jefferson, and Leavenworth Counties, 1948-1997. The ophifauna of 18 species attained a mean of 1350 snakes/ha
 Euid was dominated by the prairie ringneck, with an estimated 94.3% of the snakes and 53% of total biomass. The
 ringneck and western worm snake feed almost entirely on earthworms-about 54% of snake prey biomass. Other
 species of ecological significance and their biomass are: racer 18.9%, garter snake 11.2%, copperhead 8.9%, black
 rat snake 3.3%, timber rattlesnake 1.6%, worm snake 1.4%. Other than eatthworm(s), prey consisted of vole, 40.3%
 (eaten by 7 species), cottontail 8.6% (4 species), deer mouse 7.7% (6 species), frog 7.4% (4 species), squirrel 4.7%
 (1 species), toad 3.1% (2 species), and glass lizard 2.8% (3 species).




   464     ...                 08:30 Tuesday                                CF13                             .,CHM
Examination of inter- and Intra-specific variation within the central Asian sturgeon genus
Pseudoscaphirhynchus (Actinopterygii, Acipenserldae). B.R. Kuhaida and R.L. Mayden, University of Alabama,
Box 870345, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0345, USA; V.J. Birstein, The Sturgeon Society, 331 West 57th Street, Suite
159, New York, NY 10019, USA.
Among the most critically endangered sturgeon species worldwide are those in the genus Pseudoscaphirhynchus
(Scaphirhynchinae), which are endemic to the Syr Darya (P. fedtschenkoij and Amu Darya (P. kaufmanni and P.
hermanni) rivers of the Aral Sea in central Asia. All three species exhibit considerable intra-specific morphological
variation. Significant differences (P < 0.05) among the three species (n = 187) were found in 15 of 17 meristic and
48 of 50 mensural characters. Principal component analysis (PCA) of meristic data and sheared PCA of mensural
data provided complete or almost complete separation of these species. Eleven meristic and at least 19 mensural
characters were significantly different between the narrow- and wide-snout forms of P. kaufmanni. The short- and
long-snout forms of P. hermanni and P. fedfschenkor differed significantly for 1 and 4 meristic and 37 and at least 23
mensural characters, respectively. Differences included number of fin rays, dermal plates, snout spines, and gill
rakers, as well as snout, plate, fin, caudal peduncle, and barbel measurements. Sheared PCA gave complete
separation between the two forms of P. fedtschenkoi, with snout, caudal peduncle, and fin measurements loading
heavily. Results indicate that there are potentially six rather than three species in the genus Pseudoscaphirhynchus.




   465                        08:45 Tuesday                                CFIS .                            CHM
Lake Nipigon ciscoes species flock (Coregonus spp.): an ecomorphological and microsatellite assessment.
J, Turgeon and L. Bematchez, Departement de biologie. Universite Laval, Sainte-Foy, Quebec, G1K 794; A. Estoup,
Laboratoira de genetique des poissons, INRA-Jouy-en-Josas, Jouy-en-Josas 78352 France.
Studies on north temperate fish species indicate that new habitat availability following the last glacial retreat has
promoted ecological speciation in post-glacial lakes. The extensive ecophenotypio polymorphism observed among
Great Lakes ciscoes suggests that they have radiated through trophic adaptation and reproductive isolation. This
study aims al relating the ecomorphological and genetic polymorphisms expressed by the Lake Nipigon ciscoes
assemblage in order to evaluate the likelihood of an intralacustrine divergence driven by ttie exploitation of
alferriative resources. Morphological variation, trophic and spatial niche are characterized and contrasted among four
putative species (N>200). Genetic variation at 10 microsatellite loci is analysed to appraise the extent of genetic
structuring and reproductive isolation among species. Our results reveal various levels of niche overlap and indicate
that Coregonus artedi is more generalist than C. nigripinnis, C. hoyi and C. zenethicus. Surprisingly, trophic and
morphological specialization were not as congruent as expected. Significant but low proportion of genetic variance
can be attributed to differences among species allelic arrays. Globally, the results suggest that C. zenethicus and C.
artedi are probably the initial colonisators of Lake Nipigon and that C. nigripinnis and C. hoyi are diverging from C.
artedithrough intralacustrine trophic specialization and spatial segregation.

behavioural thermoregulation, apparently providing optimal developmental conditions for their young. However,
thermoregulation often conflicts with other activities such as feeding. In fact, in many species, gravid females feed
little or not at all, even in captivity. The main demographic consequences of this are reduced future reproductive
output, especially through decreased reproductive frequency of individual females. Nonetheless, this tradeoff may be
relatively unimportant in the long njn because many snakes are long-lived "bet-hedging" species and compensate for
low reproductive output in one year by sunriving to reproduce at a later date. I illustrate these ideas with data for
garter snakes (Thamnophis) and rattlesnakes (Crofa/us).




 S?"®. duplication difterances auggeat polytypy in the Chinese sucker, lUyxocyprinus aslaticua
 (Cyprlnlformes: Catostomidae). D.G.B. Both. UCLA Dept, of Biology, Los Angeles. CA 90095-1606 USA.
The Chinese sucker, Myxocyprinus asiaticus, is the only allotetraploid catostomid fish that is endemic to Asia. Little
IS known about this species and specimens have been unavailable for genetic comparisons with North American
species. Since about 1989, it has been imported in the pet trade as the "Chinese high-fin shark." Tsoi et al. (1989)
first reported gene duplication characters of Myxocyprinus, documented their findings with zymograms, and
compared their results with the gene duplication literature on North American catostomids. Specimens I obtained
commercially were compared electrophoretically (products of about 70 loci) to close catostomid relatives in the
genera Cycleptus and Ictiobus; very few allozymes were shared. Gene duplication differences at Ak-A and Pgm-B
suggest fliat Tsoi et al. and I have been examining different species because these characters have not been
reported to vary within any catostomid species.




   467                         09:15 Tuesday                               CF13                              CHM
Phylogeny and biogeography of ricefishes (Beloniformes,Adrianichthyidae) L.R. Parent!. National Museum of
Natural History,, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., 20560.
Ricefishes, known best by the medaka, Oryzias iatipes, are classified in the family Adrianichthyidae in the
atherinomorph order Beloniformes. The approximately twenty-five ricefish species range throughout fresh and
brackish waters of eastern Eurasia, Southeast Asia, the Indian subcontinent, across the Indo-Australian archipelago,
crossing Wallace's Line, to Timor. Throughout most of their range, ricefishes are small, reaching about 40 mm SL; in
the tectonic lakes of Sulawesi, however, ricefishes are relative giants, reaching about 200 mm SL. Ricefishes are
monophyletic and comprise two monophyletic subgroups or lineages, one large bodied and one small, diagnosed
here by morphological characters. Outgroup comparison using traditional morphology supports a transformation
from large to small, whereas preliminary molecular data supports a transformation from small to large. Sulawesi
ricefishes are not monophyletic but, instead, include members of each of the two lineages. As expected, the sister
taxa have an area of overlap, or sympafry, in Sulawesi. This distribution pattern is found in other fish taxa,
supporting the idea that neither lineage is primitive to the other, but that there was a widespread ancestral taxon,
and, once sister lineages diverged, some members of one or both lineages dispersed into the range of the other.




   468.                        09:30 Tuesday                               CF13                             CHM
Phylogeographic and genetic relationships of spotted sand bass (Paratabrax maculatofasciatus) from the
Gulf of California versus the outer Pacific Coast and its congeners: -A comparison of mtDNA control region
sequences and allozymes. A.I. Brokaw and C.A. Stepien, Dept, of Biology, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH 44106-7080 USA; R.H. Rosenblatt, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California, San
Diego, San Diego, CA 92093 USA.

Systematic relationships among three sympatric serranid sea basses from the warm temperate eastern Pacific coast;
Paralabrax ctathratus, P. nebuiifer, and P. macutatofasciatus, are analyzed from mitochondrial DNA control region
sequences and 40 allozyme loci. Phylogeographic and genetic divergences of P. macutatofasciatus from two outer
Pacific coast and three Gulf of California populations are tested to evaluate whether the warm tropical waters of the
southern tip of the Baja Peninsula constitute a barrier to gene flow. The three species are distinguished by many
fixed allozymic and sequence differences, corresponding to an estimated 8 million years of divergence. Allozyme
and sequence divergences estimate the separations of P. nebuiifer and P. maculatofasciatus as 4 to 5 million years,
and the Pacific coast and Gulf of California populations of P. maculatofasciatus as 750,000 years. The Pacific and
Gulf populations are distinguished by two fixed mtDNA sequence differences and three significant allozymic
frequency differences. Three mtDNA haplotypes and three unique allozyme alleles are identified along the Pacific
coast, and the Gulf houses four haplotypes and six unique allozyme alleles. The tropical barrier of the southern Baja
Peninsula limits gene flow, resulting in divergence of the Pacific coast and Gulf of California populations.                              09:45 Tuesday                                CF13                               CHM
  469
The Apogon erythrinus complex: not all little red fishes are the same. D,W. Greenfield, Department of Zoology,
University of Hawaii, 2538 The Mall, Honolulu, Hl 96822 USA.
In Hawaii, a small, red, semitranslucent species of cardinalfish was described as Apogon                   Similar
cardinalflshes from other areas of the Indo-Pacific have been identified as this species, or E cr^hnnus h:as been
synonomyzed with A. crassiceps or A. coccineus. In addition, other similar species such as A. ^°Vssa and A.
kominatoensis have been involved. These fishes form two phenetic groups defined by scale pattem and snoirt
structure: one group contains A. coccineus described from the Red Sea as well as other specres, and the second
group contains A. erythrinus from Hawaii.       The A. erythnnus complex appears to be composed of several
unde^ribed species in lhe Pacific and Indian oceans, with A. erythnnus being endemic to Hawaii.




                               10:30 Tuesday                                CF13                              CHM .
   470
Phylogenetic significance of the ontogeny of structures related tp sexual rnaturation M maleTree inae
(Cyprirredontiformes: Poeciliidae). C.M. Rodngugz, Museo Naoional de Histona Natural, Plaza de la Cuflura
Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic; E. Sdnchez-Bencosme, Museo de Zoologia de Grupo Jaragua, Inc El Vergel
#33, El Vergel, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic.
A search for characters was aimed at inferring phylogenetic relationships of Poepfliinae■ on fte basis iof^ppenio
changes in several structures during male maturation. Informatiori relevarit to the
discovered in the modification and migration oephalad of the pelvic fins, ana fin, and         P’®"9'°Ph9res |acb^^^
as well as the histolysis of the first hemal spine. That migrates antenorly in almost all genera dI Poecihinae (w'‘h
exception of at least two genera) to form a small bone of the suspensonum of the gonopodium Jelled the
Transformation of the second through the third, fourth or fifth hemal spines into stniotures called the gorrapophjrees,
    along with the gonaotinosts, the ligastyle, and muscles supports the gonopodium. New hypothe®es of ^^0'097
and phylogenetic relationships in the cladistics sense are proposed. Sfabstiod ®9?*X®®®j
Principal Component Analysis, applied to ontogenetic transformabons. show significant differences among group that
were hypothesized previously to be close relatives.




                                10:45 Tuesday                                CF13                             ■CHM
    471
 Systematics and gonadal morphology: discovering a relationship.            H J. Gngr, Stock Enhancemont Research
 Facility.Florida Manne Research Institute, 14495, Harilee Road Port M^atee, FL, 34221-9620, L.R. Pae                 .
 National Museum of Natural ,Hisfoty. Smithsonian Institution,, Washington. D.C. 20560.
 A comparative histological survey of gonad structure in higher bony fishes revealed that the Jobul^ ^e^al
 compartments in testes of all Atherinomorpha surveyed are thei restricted testis type; spemmtogoroa are l^tecI only
 at the distal termini of lobules. In addition, oocyte yolk in the atheimomotphs isaqianulY- These deiwed chara<^ers,
 along with numerous others, support atherinomorph monophyly. Spermatogonia in the lobular testes of o^er ^gto
 teleosts are distributed along the length of the lobules (unrestricted testis type) as in. for example, the percomorph
 SpXsundedma/is, snook, and the mugilomorph Mug,7 cephalus; black mu let. Mu^,l
 cosmopolitan species of importance as a food fish and for aguaculture. Stock declines of this species have o^rred
 in Rorida but a recent net ban curtailing the commercial catch is expected to result in a rebound in the b ack mullet
 population. Mullets are of worid-wide commercial importance, yet their systerrvitic 9?®'’'°"
 been proposed as close relatives of atherinomorphs. Ongoing surveys of testicular and °°cyte morphotogy in
 atheririomorphs and their postulated close relatives will help danfy the taxonomic position of mullets as well as
 demonstrate the value of gonadal morphology in teleost systematics.




  ReaponM* of buKfrog larvae to hypoxic and load-contaminated water. T.M. Rk:e. B.J. Blackstone, W.L. NIxdorf
  and D.H. Taylor, Miami University, Department of Zoology, Oxford. Ohio 45056 USA.
 Amphibians are exposed to lead (Pb) around mining sites, areas with extensive automobile traffic, and skeet ranges.
 Because Pb decreases hemoglobin synthesis, Pb-e^osed amphibians might display responses such as air-gulping
 and increased buccal ventilation similar to subjects in hypoxic water. We exposed bullfrog larvae to either 0 or 775
 ppb Pb and either 3.50 or 7.85 ppm oxygen for 7 days. General activity (movements greater than one body length)
 was decreased in larvae exposed to low oxygen compared to those in high oxygen, but was not influenced by
 exposure to Pb. Pb-exposed larvae made more trips to the surface (air-gulping) compared to unexposed larvae
 even under high oxygen conditions. Lanrae exposed to both Pb and low oxygen displayed increased buccal
 ventilation compared to larvae exposed to either treatment separately. Pb-exposed larvae decreased in mass during
 the exposure period whereas unexposed larvae decreased in mass. The combined effects of Pb exoosure anil

                               11:00 Tuesday                                CF13                              CHM
  472
Are Coregonus of the central alpine lakes species-flocks? M.R, Douglas and P.C. Brunner, Zool^ical Museum,
University of Zurich-Irchel, Switzerland; L. Bernatchez, Department of Biology, University of Laval, Sainte Foy, QU,
Canada.
Divergent forms of Coregonus, with uncertain taxonomic status, co-exist in sympatiy within Central Alpine lakes.
Molecular, morphological and ecological data, generated for 533 specimens from 19 populations in 8 lakes, were
compared amongst themselves, against three evolutionary and two geographic models, and again^ four^ putative
taxonomic arrangements. Data matrices were based on six microsatellite loci, five menstic, and four gualitalnre
characters pertaining fin and body coloration. Two- and three-way Mantel tests were used to compare and contrast
data and models. Allele freguencies and non-parametric discriminant analysis of genetic data supported distinctness
of each population. Mantel tests revealed that genetic pattern was best explained wi^ a species-flock mMel, while
the phenotype supported a model which invoked multiple invasions. However, similar phenotypes have bem
produced again and again among different lakes through convergent evolution. Thus, inorphological data are
homoplasious and their application in various taxonomies has confused an interesting and unigue situation.




                               08:00 Tuesday                                CA10 .                           . MCN
   473
Distribution of androgen receptors In the brain of two anuran amphibians.               SX, Boyd and T.J. Ebersole,
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame. IN 46556 UbA.
The distribution of neuronal nuclei that concentrate 3H-labeled androgens has been described for a few amphibians
Location of androgen receptors in anuran amphibian brain has not been reported howev®r using any ^her
technique. We used immunocytochemistry to locate androgen receptor-like staining m the brain of rn^e wd fem^
bullfrogs (Rana catesbeiana) and South African clawed frogs (Xenopus laevis} The antibody (PG-21 f^ G
Prins) was raised against the rat androgen receptor. Brains of both species contamed specific, nudear androgen
receptor-like immunoreactivity (AR-ir). Staining was broadly distnbuted across the brain and was found, for example,
in the olfactory bulb, amygdala, preoptio area, hypothalamus, thalamus, optic tectum, torus semicirculans arid
medulla. The percent of AR-positive nuclei in individual brain areas vaned greater (range from 5/o to 94/o) both
within and across species. Significant sexual differences in the percent of AR-positive nudei were seen iri both
species in several brain areas. Brain areas containing androgen receptor-like immunoreaotivity may represent sites
of control of reproduction or behavior in these amphibians.
Supported by NSF #IBN95-14305.




                                08:15 Tuesday                                CA10                              MCN
    474 . .
 Calling in the chilly tropics: Does temperature affect call characteristics in hig^levation eurythermic
 frogs? C.A. Navas. Department of Physiology, University of Sao Paulo Sao Paulo SP,. Brasi; C.R. Bevier, School
 of Science and Health, Philadelphia College of. Textiles and Science, Philadelphia, PA 19144 USA.
 A few species of frogs representing four families (Bufonidae, Dendrobatidae, Hylidae, and Ireptodactylidlae) inhabit
 elevations above 3000 m in the tropical Andes, an environment that is charactenzed by dramatic thermal
 fluctuations. Although nocturnal temperatures are consistently low, diurnal temperatures are rnore variable,
 sometimes changing as much as 20°C in one hour at soil level. This degree of thermal vanabon forces u'umal
 Andean frogs to^ be eurythermic. One species in particular. Coiostethus subpunctatus, ® "’•"Buing b^^ «
 remains active year-round, calls from dawn to dusk, and expenences temperatures dunng calling activity that range
 from 6 to 25°C. This frog, therefore, represents an excellent research model for ^udying the effects ofternperature
 on patterns of natural tehavior of ectothermic vertebrates. In this study we recorded vocalizations of
 mafes from which we estimated body temperature by taking the temperature with a thermcKOuple themometer
 where the calling male was found. We selected at least 5 calls at random from each individual and ana^zed caH
 characteristics such as calling rate, duration, and freguency. At least one parameter, calling rate, is indeed affected
 by temperature. Other characteristics are more variable and the effects of temperature on these will be discussed.




                                             id:                             CA10                               MCN ■
 Assessment of the nutritional status of Japanese anchovy larvae from four hydrographic regions in southern
 margin of the East China Sea - as examined by RNA/DNA ratio and otolith fluctuating asymmetry. T.-S. Chiu
 and J.-B. Huang, Dept, of Zoology, Natl. Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 106, ROC.
 During the spring bloom of Japanese anchovy (EngrauHs japonica}, we assessed the nutritional status of the larvae
 in four hydrographic regions identified in the southern margin of the East China Sea - the southern East China Sea
 (SECS), mixing zone (MIX), upwelling water (UWW) and Kuroshio (KUR), and the fitness of the species was thus
 inferred. The nutritional status was assessed by means of nucleic acid and otolith fluctuating asymmetry analysis.
 The amounts of RNA and DNA, and the radius, perimeter and surface area of right and left otoliths were measured in
 individual lanra basis. RNA/DNA ratio and fluctuating asymmetry (FA) from IR-LI of otolith measurement were
 evaluated to indicate their nutritional status. Samples were obtained in cruises from 1994 to 1997. Larvae from thesystemanc^an^gonaoannorphoioov^iseo^lna a relationship. HJ. Grier. Stock Enhancement Research
Facility,Florida Manne Research Institute, 14495, Hartlee Road, Port Manatee, FL, 34221-9620; L.R. Parent!,
National Museum of Natural ,History, Smithsonian Institution,, Washington, D.C. 20560.
A comparative histoiogical survey of gonad structure in higher bony fishes revealed that the lobular germinal
compartments in testes of all Atherinomorpha surveyed are the restricted testis type; spermatogonia are located only
at the distal temnini of lobules, in addition, oocyte yolk in ths atherinomorphs is agranular. These derived characters,
along with numerous others, support atherinomorph monophyly. Spermatogonia in the lobular testes of other higher
teleosts are distributed along the length of the lobules (unrestricted testis type) as in, for example, the percomorph
Centropomus undecimalis, snook, and the mugilomorph Mugil cephalus, black mullet. Mugil cejihalus is a
cosmopolitan species of importance as a food fish and for aquaculture. Stock declines of this species have occurred
in Rorida, but a recent net ban curtailing the commercial catch is expected to result in a rebound in the black mullet
population. Mullets are of world-wide commercial importance, yet their systematic position is unclear. Mullets have
been proposed as dose relatives of atherinomorphs. Ongoing sunreys of testicular and oocyte morphology in
atherinomorphs and their postulated close relatives will help darify the taxonomic position of mullets as well as
demonstrate the value of gonadal morphology in teleost systematics.




  475                         Q8 3Q Tuesday . .                         .CAIO                        MCN
ResTCnass of bullfrog larvae to hypoxic and lead-contaminated water. T.M. Rice. B.J. Blackstone, W.L. Nixdorf
and D.H. Taylor, Miami University, Department of Zoology, Oxford, Ohio 45056 USA.

Amphibians are exposed to lead (Pb) around mining sites, areas with extensive automobile traffic, and skeet ranges.
Because Pb decreases hemoglobin synthesis, Pb-e^osed amphibians might display responses such as air-gulping
and increased buccal ventilation similar to subjects in hypoxic water. We exposed bullfrog larvae to either 0 or 775
ppb Pb and either 3.50 or 7.85 ppm oxygen for 7 days. General activity (movements greater than one body length)
was decreased in larvae exposed to low oxygen compared to those in high oxygen, but was not influenced by
exposure to Pb. Pb-exposed larvae made more trips to the surface (air-gulping) compared to unexposed lanrae
even under high oxygen conditions. Larvae exposed to both Pb and low oxraen displayed increased buccal
ventilation compared to larvae exposed to either treatment separately. Pb-exposed larvae decreased in mass during
the eiiposure period whereas unexposed larvae decreased in mass. The combined effects of Pb exposure and
hypoxia could decrease survival of lanrae in the field. Not only might lanrae experience physiological problems from
decreased oxygen intake, but they might also experience greater predation pressure due to increased presence at
the surface and reduced size.




   4.76                        08:45 Tuesday                                 CA10                               MCN
Daily body temperature variation of western toads (Sirfo boreas} in forested habitats in southeastern Idaho.
P.E. Bartelt. Waldorf College, Forest City, lA 50436 USA; C.R. Peterson, Idaho State UniversiN, Pocatello, ID
83209 USA.
Understanding the thennal biology of ectotherms is fundamental for understanding factors that affect their
movements and habitat use. For wet-skinned amphibians, one of these factors is different rates of evaporative water
loss among habitats. Comparing botty temperature variation of amphibians to variations in the thermal and hydric
conditions among habitats will help biologists to better understand how habitat modifoation may affect amphibian
movements and habitat use. For a one month period during 1995, we monitored the body temperatures (Tb) of adult
western toads and used physical models to monitor the environmental conditions of fore^ed habitats they used. We
surgically implanted temperature-sensitive transmitters into four toads and used an automated data recording system
to record Tb every five minutes. We used an array of physical models and single-channel dataloggers to measure
operative temperatures every 15 minutes and calculated rates of evaporative water loss over four hour blocks of
time, in shaded and exposed microsites among four habitats. Nighttime toad Tb's were higher than model
temperatures, suggesting that toads remained under cover or in burrows at night. Daytime toad Tb's were warmest
in the shrub habitat, rather than in the regenerating clearcut, and coolest in the forest canopy.




   477 .                       09:00 Tuesday                              . .CA10 . .                          MCN
Economy of predator avoidance by salamanders responding to chemical cues. D.M. Madison. Department of
Biological Sciences, State University of New York at Binghamton. Binghamton, New York 13902-6000; J.H.
McDarby, Siena College, Loudonville, NY 12211-1462; J.C. Marez, Department of Biological Sciences, State
University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York 13902-6000.
Determining how much time and energy to commit to predator defense is a fundamental problem for animals. Prey­
specific chemical cues in the scent ofpredators may allow other prey to economize defense. We show that during
the day salamanders (Plathodon cinereus) avoid the chemical traces of all individuals of a snake predator
(Thamnophis sirtalis}, but at night avoid only those traces from snakes that had fed on conspecific salamanders. Our
daU show predator recognition, diet discrimination, and the use of predator activity schedules in risk assessment.
This sophisticated, chemosensory mechanism of diet assessment and avoidance economy in a common amphibian
may have broad relevarrce to interpreting and manipulating the way higher terrestrial vertebrates respond to their
environment.

Calling In the chilly tropics: Does temperature affect call characteristics In high-elevation eurythermic
frogs? C.A. Navas. Department of Physiology, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, Brasil; C.R. Bevier, School
of Science and Health, Philadelphia College of, Textiles and Science, Philadelphia, PA 19144 USA.
A few species of frogs representing four families (Bufonidae, Dendrobatidae, Hylidae, and Leptodactylidae) inhabit
elevations above 3000 m in the tropical Andes, an environment that is characterized by dramatic thermal
fluctuations. Although nocturnal temperatures are consistently low, diurnal temperatures are more variable,
sometimes changing as much as 20°C in one hour at soil level. This degree of thermal variation forces diurnal
Andean frogs to be eurythermic. One species in particular, Colostethus subpunctatus, is intriguing because it
remains active year-round, calls from dawn to dusk, and experiences temperatures during calling activity that range
from 6 to 25°C. This frog, therefore, represents an excellent research model for studying the effects of temperature
on patterns of natural behavior of ectothermic vertebrates. In this study we recorded vocalizations of more than 50
males from which we estimated body temperature by taking the temperature with a thermocouple thermometer
where the calling male was found. We selected at least 5 calls at random from each individual and analyzed call
characteristics, such as calling rate, duration, and frequency. At least one parameter, calling rate, is indeed affected
by temperature. Other characteristics are more variable and the effects of temperature on these will be discussed.




  478 .               .       09 15 Tuesday                               CA1Q      ..             MCN
Assessment of the nutritional status of Japanese anchovy larvae from four hydrographic regions in southern
margin of the East China Sea - as examined by RNA/DNA ratio and otolith fluctuating asymmetry. T.-S. Chiu
and J.-B. Huang, Dept, of Zoology, NaB. Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 106, ROC.

During the spring bloom of Japanese anchovy (Engraulis Japonica'), we assessed the nutrifional status of the larvae
in four hydrographic regions identified in the southern margin of the East China Sea - the southern East China Sea
(SECS), mixing zone (MIX), upwelling wafer (UWW) and Kuroshlo (KUR), and the fitness of the species was thus
inferred. The nutrition^ status was assessed by means of nucleic acid and otolith fluctuating asymmetry analysis.
The amounts of RNA and DNA, and the radius, perimeter and surface area of right and left otoliths were measured in
individual lanra basis. RNA/DNA ratio and fluctuating asymmetry (FA) from IR-LI of otolith measurement were
evaluated to indicate their nutrifional status. Samples were obtained in cniises from 1994 to 1997. Lanrae from the
KUR showed a significantly lower RNA/DNA ratio than those from the SECS, MIX and UWW. FA measured by IR-LI
of otolith surface area also exhibited a significant higher variation by larvae from the KUR. Therefore, the larvae
occurred in the KUR was judged to be in poor condition. As a result we may hypothesize that the western edge of
the Kuroshio current acts as a border line preventing the oceanic dispersal of Japanese anchovy in the waters of the
southern East China Sea area.




   '479                         09:30 Tuesday .,                               CA10                                MCN
Energetics of northern pike: from laboratory to field and back again.                M.C. Lucas. University of Durham,
Department of Biological Sciences, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK; J.D. Armstrong, Freshwater Rsheries
Laboratory, Pitlochry, Perthsire PHI 6 5LB, UK; L.D. Simms, University of Durham, Department of Biological
Sciences, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK.
A good deal of Ed Crossman's research has been devoted to the study of the Esocidae or pikes. In Europe only
northern pike. Esox ludus, are present; but the wide importance of this species as a top predator in slow-moving
rivers and lakes throughout the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere means that Ed's work on this and other
species of esocid has stimulated research by many scientists worldwide. We chart our group's progress in the study
of pike energetics over the last 15 years, demonstrating how the northern pike's respiratory capacity is adapted
towards sprint activity and digestion of large meals; how tracking and heart rate telemetry have been used to
ex^ine behaviour, estimate meal size and partition energy expenditure in the natural environment; and how
variations in basal metabolic rate may be closely related to individual strategies of growth and survival, we conclude
with an assessment of the direction of future work on the behaviour and energetics of esocids.




   480                          09:45 Tuesday                                 CA10                                MCN
Flow visualisation and kinematics of the body and pectoral fin during swimming In sturgeon. C.D. Wilga and
G.V. Lauder, Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697 USA.
Negatively buoyant fishes have been observed to adopt a tilted body attack angle relative to swimming direction at
low speeds. Sturgeon are negatively buoyant and, unlike the actinopferygians studied previously, possess pectoral
fins that are rela^ely fixed and oriented parallel with the longitudinal axis of the body. Swimming behavior was
studied in the white sturgeon, Adpenser transmontanus, using 3-D kinematics, electromyography, and quantitative
flw visualization. Sturgeon swam using continuous undulations of the body with a positive body tilt that increases
with decreasing swimming speed (3.0-0.5 B.L.s-1). Thus, sturgeon appear to supplement total lift by altering body
attack angle over a range or swimming speeds. This increased lift may ba necessary to overcome their negative
buoyancy. Sturgeon also vary body attack angle from positive to negative while changing position in the water
column from rising to station holding to sinking. In addition to altering body tilt, sturgeon also actively alter the angle
of the pectoral fins. As the sturgeon changes position from rising to station holding to sinking, the angle of the
posterior portion of the pectoral fin increases. Thus, pectoral fins appear to actively assist changes in body position.   481                         10:15 Tuesday                                CA10                               MCN
A field study of metabolism during terrestrial spawning in the grunion fish. K.L. Martin and R.C. Van Winkle,
Department of Biology, Pepperdine University, Malibu, CA 90263-4321.
Gnjnion fish (Leuresthes tenuis} exit the ocean to spawn on sandy beaches. Both males and females move about
actively during terrestrial spawning. In a previous study, grunion that were removed from water in the laboratory and
forced to be active showed increased lactate concentrations in white muscles and blood. In this study, grunion of
both sexes were caught in the field before spawning, and following completion of normal spawning activity. These
were compared with grunion that had not emerged from water, and with a group of fish that had emerged but not
spawned, then were exercised to exhaustion in air. Lactate concentrations from white muscle and the heart were
measured for males and females in all four treatments. There were no significant differences between males arid
females in the field, before or after spawning, in lactate in white muscle and heart muscle. Values were within
nomial field or resting ranges for ectothermic vertebrates. Fish exercised to exhaustion in air showed significantly
higher lactate in both white muscle and heart than other fish. We suggest that grunion do not employ anaerobiosis
during normal emergence and spawning out of water.




   482                         10:30 Tuesday           . . .                CA10      .                        MCN
Crushing performance of stripped burrfish (Chllomycterus schoepfi): Modulation of muscle patterns in
production of crushing force. W.L. Korff and P.C. Wainwright, Department of Biological Science, Florida State,
University, Tallahassee, FL 32306-4340 USA,.
The relationship between force production and patterns of muscular activation were investigated for striped burrfish
IChilomycterus schoepli). We were particularly interested in how these fish modulated adductor mandibulae muscle
activity in response to prey of varying hardness. Periwinkle snails (Littorina irrorata) of a known size were fed to
starved burrfish and electromyograms (EMG) were recorded from four muscles that are recruited during feeding
(Al B, A2 alpha and A2B of the adductor mandibulae complex (AM), and the levator operculi). Snail size was used to
quantity force exerted by burrfish based on a linear relationship found between the length of the snail shell and force
necessary to crush the shell in previous experiments. We quantified muscle activity patterns by measuring bur^
duration integrated rectified area of burst, and burst intensity (area/duration) from EMGs. Correlation, multiple
regression, and analyses of covariance (ANCOVA) were used to decipher the relationship between prey size (force)
and muscle activity. In general, individuals modulated force production by increasing duration and area of EMG
bursts tor all muscles in the AM complex. Intensity measures varied both by individual and by muscle suggesting
that a variety of motor patterns can produce similar crushing forces.




   483                          10:45 Tuesday                               CA10                                MCN
Lipid storage and composition in tropical surgeonfishes (Teleostei:Acanthuridae).                    W.L. Montgomery,
Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5640 USA; H. Nakagawa and
T Umino, Faculty of Applied Biological Science, Hiroshima University, Higashi-hiroshima 739-8528, Japan; T.
Shibuno, IshigaW Tropical Station, Seikai National Fisheries Research Institute, Ishigaki 907-04, Japan.
Lipid composition of tropical marine reef fishes is poorly known, despite their use as human food and interest in
health-related benefits of fish lipids. We examined composiUon of lipids from epaxial muscle, liver, and two storage
sites (intraperitoneal fat, IFF; retroperitoneal fat bodies [FB] posterior to the peritoneal cavity) in three species of
surgeonfishes from Ishigaki Island, Japan: Acanthurus bariene, A. lineatus, Naso liluratus. Triglycerides dominated
all samples of neutral lipid and constituted > 99% of IPF and FB. Cl 6 fatty acids prevailed in both neutral and polar
lipids although C18 and C20 acids were also common. Saturated fatty acids, dominated by palmitic acid (16:0),
comprised 38.7-50.7% of acids from neutral lipids and 30.8-41.1% from polar lipids. Polyunsaturated acids (PUFA)
were prevalent in polar lipids (especially 20:4n6, 20:5n3, 22:2n3, 22:5n3, 22:5n6 and 22:6n3). Common PUFA of
neutral lipids were 18:2n6,18:4n3, several n-3 and n-6 C20 acids, and 22:2n3 and 22:5n3. IPF and FB were almost
identical across species. The FB appears to be an accessory storage site which overcomes constraints on lipid
storage imposed by a small, inflexible abdominal cavity which contains both viscera and consistently voluminous gut
contents. Fatty acid signatures indicate that largely overlooked epiphytic or epilithic diatoms contribute significantly
to lipid acquisition.




    487                        .1.1:45 Tuesday                               CA10                               MCN
.Aromatase activity in ths neural tissues of the Canadian red-sided garter snake (Thamnophls sirtalis
 parietalis) under hibernaculum temperatures. R.W Krohmer. Department of Science, Saint Xavier University,
 3700 W. 103rd Street, Chicago, IL 60655 USA.

 Numerous studies have indicated that the initiation of spring courtship behavior and mating in the male Canadian ibd-
 sided garter snake, unlike most vertebrate species, is independent or circulating androgens. Recently, however, field
 data has shown that circulating levels of testosterone (T), elevated in the fall, remain elevated throughout hibernation
 and upon emergence. Even though T levels are elevated in the spring, to date, the only known stimulus initiating
 courtship behavior is a period of low temperature dormancy followed by the onset of warm temperatures. In the field,
 winters (and subsequently hibernation) can begin as early as October and extend into May. In the laboratory,
 courtship behavior can be initiated after as few as seven weeks under hibernaculum conditions (total darkness at 4-
 5C). However, as the duration of the dormancy period was increased (up to 17 weeks) courtship behavior
 intensified. Similar to other vertebrates, the neural pathways critical for the Initiafion and maintenance of courtship
 behavior in the Canadian red-sided garter snake have been shown to contain sex steroid concentrating neurons.
 However, while these neurons respond to seasonal variations in T, the role of testosterone in the initiation and
 maintenance of courtship behavior In the male red-sided garter snake has continued to elude investigators. Recent
 studies have identified aromatase activity {AA} within specific ares of the pathway closely associated with the steroid
 concentrating neurons. The presence of AA within the areas controlling courtship, suggests T may play an indirect
 role In 'setting up" this neural pathway during the protracted hibernation in the field, mis study was designed to
 investigate AA in neural tissues maintained under conditions of hibernation

   484                        11:00 Tuesday                                CA10                               MCN
Vitamin D photobiosynthetic opportunity and ability of free-living Texas spiny lizards and house geckos: a
preliminary study E. Carman and G.W. Ferguson, Dept. Biol., Box 298930, Texas Christian University, Fort Worth,
Texas , 76129, ; W.E. Gehrmann, Sci. Dept. Tarrant Co. Junior Coll., Fort Worth TX; M.F. Holick and T. Chen,
Vitamin D, Skin, Bone Laboratory, Boston Univercity Medical, Center, Boston, MA.
The ability and opportunity to photobiosynthesize vitamin D utilizing ultraviolet light were compared in free-living
Texas spiny lizards Sceloponis olivaceous and house geckos Hemidactylus turcicus. Focal observations of each of
ftree individuals of each species throughout an entire diel activity cycle allowed measurement of relative
photobiosynthetio opportunity by providing a map for retracing the time and location pattern of each lirard with in-
vitro provitamin D models. The models, when exposed to ultraviolet light, convert their contained provitamin D to
previtamin D in proportion to the UV dose. As expected, photobiosynthetic opportunity was greater for Ihe diurnal
Sceloporus than for the crepuscular/nocturnal Hemidactylus. In contrast, when excised dorsal skins of field-caught
lizards were exposed to moderately high (90 microwatt^cm squared) UV-B irradiance in the laboratory, the more-
sensitive Hemidactylus skins converted provitamin D to previtamin D to a significantly greater degree than those of
Sceloporus. The approach shows great promise for studying patterns of photobiosynthesis within a species and
surveying opportunity and ability in various herp taxa.




   485                         11:15 Tuesday                               CA10                              MCN
Sexual dimorphic nuclei In the brain of the Canadian red-sided garter snake (Thamnophls sirtalis sirtalis):
Role of hormones and/or environment. D. Baleckaitis and R.W. Krohmer, Science Department, Saint Xavier
University, 3700 W 103rd Street, Chicago, IL 60655 USA.
The Canadian red-sided garter snake has been reported to exhibit a dissociated reproductive pattern, mating at a
time when the gonads are quiescent. To date, the only known stimulus initiating courtship behavior in the male red­
sided garter snake is a period of low temperature dormancy followed by exposure to warm temperatures. Numerous
studies have delineated the neural pathway critical for the initiation and maintenance of courtship behavior in the
male red-sided garter snake. Similar to other vertebrates, neural regions that comprise this pathway have been
shown to contain sex steroid concentrating neurons. Many vertebrate species exhibit sexual dimorphic areas in their
neural tissue. In addition, these changes have been shown to be in response to variations in the concentration of
sex steroids hormones. To determine if neural tissues in the red-sided garter snake are sexually dimorphic due to a
possible response to seasonal and/or hormonal fluctuations, brain areas were measured in animals of both sexes
following hormonal and environmental manipulation.




   486                        11:30 Tuesday                                CA10        .     .                MCN
Aromatase activity In the brain of the Canadian red-sided garter snake (Thamnophls sirtalis parietalis):
Specific area punch analysis. M.H. Boyle and R.W. Krohmer, Science Department, Saint Xavier University, 3700
W. 103rd Street, Chicago, IL 60655 USA.
During the past 15 years, research has delineated the neural pathway critical for the initiation and maintenance of
courtship behavior in the Canadian red-sided garter snake. Similar to other vertebrates, the nerual regions that
comprise this pathway have been shown to contain sex steroid concentrating neurons. Seasonal actiyation of
courtship behavior in the male red-sided garter snake, however, has been described as independent of circulating
testosterone (T) levels. While these neural areas have been shown to be critical for the initiation and control of
courtship behavior in the male red-sided garter snake, the role of T, if any, continues to elude investigators.
Recently, we have Identified aromatase activity {AA} in various regions of the garter snake brain by quantifying the in
vitro formation of pH]esttone from androst-4-ene-3, 17-dione,[1,2,6,7-=H(N)]- precursor. To determine if AA was
intensified in areas containing sex steroid concentrating neurons, areas associated with courtship behavior were
isolated using a specific-area micro dissection punch technique. Specific areas investigated included the anterior-
hypothalamus preoptio area (AHPOA), nucleus sphericus (NS), and the septum (S). Punches were taken from the
cortex (C) as a possible control. There was no significant difference in AA in animals collected in the spring or fall.
There was a significant overall gender difference in AA, with females exhibiting higher levels of AA in the AHPOA
and NS. In mates, the AHPOA and septum exhibited significanly greater AA than the nucleus sphericus and cortex,
while the AHPOA exhibited significantly elevated AA when compared to the other neural areas.




   490.,                       16:00 Tuesday                   .             P4                               PCH
 Food habits of the european wall lizard, Podarcis sicula, introduced to Long Island, New York. N. Patel and
 R.L. Burke, Department of Biology, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY, USA, 11549.

We studied the stomach contents of 150 European wall lizards, Podarcis sicula, collected from several populations in
western Long Island, New York, throughout their active season in 1997. Their diets were made up of a wide variety
of ants, insect lanra, beetles, spiders, and millipedes. The list of prey included many introduced species. We
compared our results to those reported for this species and conspecifics in their native habitaL
We found a correlation between prey size and head width, which suggests that head width or a morphological factor
associated with head width, may constrain the size of prey that individual lizards can consume. We further noted
that some individuals had eaten several prey hems of the same species, which is surprising in cases of prey species
that do not normally congregate. This suggests that individual lizards may specialize on particular prey species, and
actively forage for that species. We also tested for differences in food habits of males and females, independent of
body size.surgeonfishes from Ishigaki Island. Japan: Acanthurus bariene, A. lineatus, Naso lituratus. Triglycerides dominated
all samples of neutral lipid and constituted > 99% of IPF and FB. C16 fatty acids prevailed in both neutral and polar
lipids, although C18 and C20 acids were also common. Saturated fatty acids, dominated by palmitic acid (16:0),
comprised 38.7-50.7% of acids from neutral lipids and 30.8-41.1% from polar lipids. Polyunsaturated acids (PUFA)
were prevalent in polar lipids (especially 20:4n6. 20:5n3, 22:2n3, 22:5n3, 22:5n6 and 22:6n3). Common PUFA of
neutral lipids were 18:2n6,18:4n3, several n-3 and n-6 C20 acids, and 22:2n3 and 22:5n3. IPF and FB were almost
identical across spedes. The FB appears to be an accessory storage site which overcomes constraints on lipid
storage imposed by a small, inflexible abdominal cavity which contains both viscera and consistently voluminous gut
contents. Fatty acid signatures indicate that largely overlooked epiphytic or epilithic diatoms contribute significanfly
to lipid acquisition.




Aromatase activity in the neural tissues of the Canadian red-sided garter snake (Thamnophla slrtalh
parivtalls) under hibernaculum temperatures. R.W Krohmer. Department of Science, Saint Xavier University,
3700 W. 103rd Street. Chicago, IL 60655 USA.

Numerous studies have indicated that the initiation of spring courtship behavior and mating in the male Canadian red­
sided garter snake, unlike most vertebrate species, is independent of circulating androgens. Recently, however, field
data has shown that circulating levels of testosterone (T), elevated in the fall, remain elevated throughout hibernation
and upon emergence. Even though T levels are elevated in the spring, to date, the only known stimulus initiating
courtship behavior is a period of low temperature dormancy followed by the onset of warm temperatures. In the field,
winters (and subsequently hibernation) can begin as early as October and extend into May. In the laboratory,
courtship behavior can be initiated after as few as seven weeks under hibernaculum conditions (total darkness at 4-
5C). However, as the duration of the dormancy period was increased (up to 17 weeks) courtship behavior
intensified. Similar to other vertebrates, the neural pathways critical, for the initiation and maintenance of courtship
behavior in the Canadian red-sided garter snake have been shown to contain sex steroid concentrating neurons.
However, while these neurons respond to seasonal variations in T, the role of testosterone In the initiation and
maintenance of courtship behavior in the male red-sided garter snake has continued to elude Investigators. Recent
studies have identified aromatase activity (AA) within specific ares of the pathway closely associated with the steroid
concentrating neurons. The presence of AA within the areas controlling courtship, sug^sts T may play an indirect
role In "setting up" this neural pathway during the protracted hibernation in the field. This study was designed to
Investigate AA in neural tissues maintained under conditions of hibernation




   488                          16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                                PCH
Applied Herpetology: a new Journal proposed. M.R.K. Lambert. Environmental Sciences Department, Natural
Resources Institute , (University of Greenwich), Central Avenue, Chatham Maritime, Kent ME4 4TB, England.

Applied amphibian and reptile research covers natural products development [toxinology (snake and lizard venoms),
pharmacology (amphibian skin secretions), reptile leather and tortoiseshell industries); environmental monitoring
[amphibian teratology from incidence of abnormalities, and herpetofaunal ecotoxicology and contamination
bioindicatoia); farming [captive breeding and husbandry techniques for restocking populations, exhibition, teaching
and experimentation], and conservation and wildlife management [species consenration, biodiversity assessment
and sustainable utilization]. Papers in applied herpetology are often published in non-herpetological journals, or in
the world's heqietological journals, which are in effect subsidising governmental, international agency and
commercial sponsors of such work. There is a case for publication of peer-reviewed papers in applied research to
be funded by these sponsors, especially since relatively little research in herpetology is now financed that is not
applied. Such sponsors should include an allocation in projects proposed for the funding of publications.




   489                  ..     16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                                PCH
Herpetofauna of the Albany Pine Bush. K.C. Hunsinger, The University at Albany, Albany, New York.

The Albany Pine Bush is a unique ecosystem characterized by sandy soils, vernal pools and pitch pine / scrub oak
forests located in the towns of Colonie, Guilderland and the city of Albany, New York. Using historic and current data,
Stewart and Rossi (1981) reported the presence of 30 species of herpetofauna in the Albany Pine Bush. Since that
time, there has been a significant commercial and residential development in and around the Pine Bush. This study
represents a re-survey of the area to determine what species of amphibians and reptiles are present today, estimate
their relative abundance and draw on Stewart and Rossi's work to estimate the impact that 20 years of development
has had upon the ecosystem and its inhabitants.

testosterone (T) levels. While these neural areas have been shown to be critical for the initiation and control of
courtship behavior in the male red-sided garter snake, the role of T, if any, continues to elude investigators.
Recently, wo have identified aromatase activity (AA) in various regions of the garter snake brain by quantifying the in
vitro fonnation of (®H]estrone from androst-4-ene-3, 17-dione,[1,2,6.7-^H(N)]- precursor. To defemiine if AA was
intensified in areas containing sex steroid concentrating neurons, areas associated with courtship behavior were
isolated using a spedfic-area micro dissection punch technique. Specific areas investigated included the anterior-
hypothalamus preoptic area (AHPOA), nucleus sphericus (NS), and the septum (S). Punches were taken from the
cortex (C) as a possible control. There was no significant difference in AA in animals collected in the spring or fall.
There was a significant overall gender difference in AA, with females exhibiting higher levels of AA in the AHPOA
and NS. In males, the AHPOA and septum exhibited significanly greater AA than the nucleus sphericus and cortex,
while 9ie AHPOA exhibited significantly elevated AA when compared to the other neural areas.




Food tiabfts of the european wall lizard, Podardt slcuta. Introduced to L.ong Island, New York. N. Patel and
R.L. Burke, Department of Biology, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY, USA, 11549.

We studied the stomach contents of 150 European wall lizards, Podarcis sicula, collected from several populations in
western Long Island, New York, throughout their active season in 1997. Their diets were made up of a wide variety
of ants, insect larva, beetles, spiders, and millipedes. The list of prey included many introduced species. We
compared our results to those reported for this species and conspecifics in their native habitat

Wo found a correlation between prey size and head width, which suggests that head width or a morphological factor
associated with head width, may constrain the size of prey that Individual lizards can consume. We further noted
that some individuals had eaten several prey items of the same species, which is surprising in cases of prey species
that do not normally congregate. This suggests that individual lizards may specialize on particular prey species, and
actively forage for that species. We also tested for differences In food habits of males and females, independent of
body size.




   491                           16:00 Tuesday                                  P4.                               PCH
A comparison of the movements of indigenous and displaced long-term captive ornate box turtles
(Terrapene omata) in the Sand Hills of Nebraska. D.L. Claussen. T. Luncan and K. Zemko, Dept, of Zoology,
Miami Univ., Oxford, OH, USA 45056.

Herpetologists often release animals after laboratory study in a laudable attempt at conservation. However, the
subsequent fates of such animals are generally unknown. We hypothesized that the behavior of these animals
would be markedly altered, possibly compromising their survival. We compared movements of turtles, captured in
the field and fitted with thread-trailers, with a matched group released simultaneously after one year of captivity. We
trailed each animal for 200 m (two or three days) and we subsequently mapped these trails, computing for each the
minimum convex polygon area, the maximum recorded speed, and three measures of trail sinuosity (the square root
of area divided by trail length (L), the greatest distance between two points divided by L, and the fractal dimension
(D)). The variance of the captive turtle data was significantly greater than that for the native turtles for trail area and
for two of the three sinuosity measures. However, contrary to expectations, none of the mean values differed
significantly between these groups, nor were there any obvious trends. Although we have no survivorship data, long­
term captivity and release in an unfamiliar location does not appear to markedly affect the short-term movement
patterns of ornate box turtles.




   492     ..        .   ..    16:00 Tuesday                                   P4                                 PCH
A mark-recapture analysis of the eastern garter snake population at the Mosquito Hill Nature Center, New
London, Wl. ATsoukatos and R.W. Krohmer, Science Department, Saint Xavier University, 3700 W. 103rd Street,
Chicago, IL 60655.

Since the spring of 1996, we have been gathering specific life history parameters on the eastern garter snake
(Thamnophis sirtalis sirtaiis) population at the Mosquito Hill Nature Center, located along the Wolf River just outside
of New London, Wl. Animals were collected at the denning site in the spring and fall. The sex, weight and snout-vent
length were recorded and each animal was given a unique clipping pattern on their ventral scutes for ftjture
Identification. All animals recaptured were again weighed, measured and reclipped with their original clipping.
Between spring ‘96 and fall '97, 391 males and 131 females were collected, marked and data recorded. As of &1
■97, 23% of the males and 11% of the females marked had been recaptured al least once with 9% of the males and
0% of the females recaptured In two or more of the collecting periods. Recapture data demonstrates a remarkable
growth rate during the active season (spring to fall). As a population, males (n=22) gained 49.4+7.1 mm in length
and 18.3±1.3 grams in weight. While the single female, measured under the same conditions. Increased its' length
by 73 mm and gained 51.1 grams. During hibernation, animals exhibited a reduced growth rate with males (n=21)
gaining 1.4+0.5 mm in length and losing an average of 5.0+1.0 grams, while females (n=2) increased an average of
4.0+3.0 mm and lost 7.0+1.0 grams.   493                         16:00 Tuesday                                   P4                                PCH
Scales of diversity: the role of parks in conserving genetic population structure of threatened snakes. KA,.
Prior. Endangered Species Division, Canadian Wildlife Service, Hull, Quebec KOH 1A3; H.L. Gibbs, Department of
Biology, McMaster, University, Hamilton, Ontario L8S 4K1; P.J. Weathertiead, Department of Biology, Carleton
University, Ottawa, Ontario K1S5B6.
We used DNA sampled from black rat snakes {Elaphe o. obsoleta} and eastern massasauga rattlesnakes (Sistnjrus
c. catenalus) in Ontario to investigate genetic population structure at several spatial scales. Our findings based on
RAPD markers indicate that geographically-isolated populations of rat snakes may not be genetically distinct, and
that sub-structuring within regional populations might be attributable to reduced snake movement and gene flow due
to ecological barriers. As such, park agencies should develop cooperafivo management strategies for regional
populations that span multiple jurisdictions. Data from rrucrosatellite markers indicate that isolated massasauga
populations are highly divergent and that regional populations may be comprised of inbred local populations. Thus,
fine-sc^e genetic structuring may be the norm for massasauga populations, rather than a corisequence of recent (<
300 years) anthropogenic effects. These data support the view that individual populations of massasaugas
associated with parks have high consenration genetic value since many populations probably contain a unique
portion of sub-specifio variation. This research has helped direct conservation efforts by providing parks with a
means of assessing the relative distinctiveness of remnant populations, sm empirical basis for identifying appropriate
scales of management, and a method for testing the efficacy of conservation actions.




   494                          .16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                               P.CH
Preliminary life history analysis of the European wall lizards, Podarcis sicula, introduced to Long Island,
New York. M. Sabatino. B. Spar and R.L. Burke, Department of Biology, Hofsfra University, Hempstead, NY, USA,
11549.
We collected European wall lizards, Podarcis sicula, from separate but similar populations in western Long Island,
New York, throughout the spring and summer of 1997, and assessed their reproductive condition. Diagnosable adult
females ranged in size from 44 to 77 mm SVL; the smallest female with eggs was 57 mm SVL. Of the 57 adult
females caught, 13 had eggs, clutch size ranged from 1 to 9 eggs, mean clutch size was 5.5 eggs, and median
clutch size was 6 eggs. Females were first found with eggs on 30 April; females were last found with eggs on 11
July.
The presence of fully shelled eggs in four females that also had a similar number of post-ovulatory but unshelled
eggs suggests that some females of this species may double clutch, at least in some years. This ability to produce
large numbers of eggs may help explain the fact that this species is rapidly expanding from its introduction site in just
30 years.




   495                        .16:00 Tuesday                                  P4                                PCH
Reproductive biology of the male eastern garter snake (Thamnophls sirtalis sirtalis) at the Mosquito Hill
Nature Center. D. Clesson and R.W. Krohmer, Science Department, Saint Xavier University. 3700 W. 103rd Street,
Chicago, IL 60655 USA.
Spring male courtship behavior was assessed In the field following emergence from hibernation. Thrity adult male
eastern garter snakes were collected in either the fall (n=19) or spring (n=11), anesthetized and killed within 24
hours of capture. The testes and kidneys from each animal were excised for histological examination. In addition,
six animals were maintained under conditions of hibernation (total darkness, 4-7C) for 15 weeks, Followitig the end
of all courtship behavior, animals were processed as described above. Tubule diameters and epithelial heights were
measured from 10 seminiferous tubules and 10 sexual segment tubules. The mean fall seminiferous tubule diameter
was 176.4+7.2um and the epithelial height was 32.1+2.3pm. Histological examination revealed regressing epithelia,
consisting of 3-4 cell layers with sperm and spermatogonia the dominant cell type. The mean sexual segment
diameter was 127.0+3.1 pm with an epithelial height of 46.0+2.1pm and containing numerous, large sexual granules.
The mean spring seminiferous tubule diameter was 163.8+3.6pm and the mean epithelial height was 29.6±5.6pm.
Histological examination revealed regressed epithelia, consisting of 1-3 cell layers with spemafogonia the dominant
cell type. The mean sexual segment diameter was 115.5+4.2pm withan epithelial height of 41.5±2.5pm and
contained fewer granules that observed in the fall. Animals placed into artificial hibernation had a mean seminiferous
tubule diameter of 158.8±g.6pm and an epithelial height of 22.6±2.8pm consisting of 1-2 cell layers with
spermatogonia the dominant coll typo. The mean sexual segment diameter was 111.8±3.2pm and the epithelial
height was                The epithelia contained diffuse sexual granules.




     •'55                    .. 16:Q0 Tuesday                                  P4                                 PCH
Cross-species amplification of microsatellites developed for timber rattlesnakes (Crotalus horrldus). L.M.
Bushar. Biology Department, Beaver College, Glenside, PA USA; M. Mallga and H.K. Reinert, Biology Department,
The College of New Jersey, Ewing, NJ, USA.

Microsafellite analysis is a useful tool in studies of population genetics and kinship; however, few microsafellite loci
have been isolated for use with snake species. Cross-species amplification of microsafellite loci has been
demonstrated for a wide range of species, including plants, fish, birds, and mammals. We were Interested in
assessing the utility of microsatellites isolated from a timber rattlesnake (Crotalus hom'dus) genomic library in other-
species of rattlesnakes.

PCR primers designed for 5 different C. honidus microsatellite loci were used to screen individuals representing 8
Crotalus species (C. adamanteus, C. airox, C. cerastes, C. durissus, C. molossus, C. viridis, and C. willardi), 2
Sistrurus species (S. catenatus and S. miliarus) and Agkistrodon contortrix. Three of the primer sets (7-144, 7-87,
and 5A) were consen/ed in all of the species studied; although there was a high frequency of “drop outs' for some of
the individuals in some species. One of the primers (3-155) was only consenred in members of the durissus
subgroup (C. molossus and C. durissus), thus supporting this evolutionary grouping.

                                                                                                                             3




  496                          16:00 Tuesday                                   P4                                 PCH
 Origins of the American snake fauna. H.G. Dowling and J.V. Jenner, Rendalia Biologists, Talladega, AL 35160;
T. Pinou, Dept. Biol. Yale Univ., New Haven.,.

  Recent geological, paleontological, morphological, and molecular studies provide identification and better
definitions of the diverse clades that comprise the present American snake fauna. No single field provides a clear
zoogeographic narrative of these faunal elements but the consilience of information from multiple sources offers
such a base. Not unexpectedly, the oldest surviving clades are also the most ancient ones in the Americas. The
typhlopids and leptotyphlopids of the Neotropics and Africa probably date from the mid-Cretaceous splitting of
Gondwana by the Atlantic Ocean. The anomalepedids and Anilius in contrast are ancient South American
endemics without known relatives, although the latter may be a Recent relative of the Cretaceous +Dinilysia. The
Neotropical (true) boids appear to represent an ancient henophidian fauna that ranged from Madagascar across
Antarctica to South Arnerica. Conversely, the American erycids, tropidophiids (and              ?ungaliophiids and
?Loxocemus) derive from the Cretaceous-to-Eocene connection of eastern North America with Europe. This also
may be true of the caenophidian “North American Relicts.' The main American caenophidian fauna (crotalids,
elapids, xenodontids, dipsadids, colubrids s.s., and nafridds) did not arrive until later. Both paleontological and
molecular data support two or more Miocene entries of these snakes from the Old World via Bering Strait




   497                         16:00 Tuesday                                  P4                                 PCH
African Raninae: A molecular phylogenetic perspective. M.G.duPreez. Department of Biochemistry, University
of the Western Cape, Private Bag XI7, Bellville, 7535, Africa; A. Channing, Department of Zoology, University of the
Western Cape, Private Bag X17, Bellville, 7535, Africa.

Nucleotide sequence comparisons were used to investigate the generic relationships within the subfamily Raninae in
Africa. Approximately 300 base pairs of the mitochondrial 12S ribosomal RNA gene from one representative of each
genus were sequenced. The phylogenetic tree was rooted with Bufo valliceps.

Support for the tree was estimated in various ways. Bootstrap values were calculated for the sequence tree. Decay
index values which measure tree stability in terms of supported resolution and the number of unambiguous base
changes along each branch are reported.

The tree for African ranines based on osteology (Clarke. 1981) was tested. Much of it is well supported.




   498        ....             16:00 Tuesday                                   P4                                 PCH
Morphological, osteological, serological and karyological Investigations of Turkish Hyla arborea
(Anura:Hylidae) populations. U. Kaya. Dept, of Psychology. Brown University, Box. 1853 Providence, Rl 02912
USA :Dept. of Biology, Faculty of Science, Ege University,, Bomova-lzmir Turkey.

The present studies deal with Hyla specimens (N:471) . which were examined by various methods
(morpnometrically, osteologically, serologically and karyologically). Different populations from Turkey are compared
to bring an under^anding of their taxonomic states. Our morphological findings show that the anterodorsally oriented
spur of the lateral stripe in the inguinal regions exists with a continuous lateral stripe in Hyla arborea. If there is no
spur then the stripe will often be discontinuous as seen in Hyla savignyi. Osteological research found the imbrication
and amkylosis of vomers over the sphenethmoid for Hyla arborea. For Hyla savignyi, imbrication and amkylosis do
not occur. A study of chromosomal sets of two species established the presence of largely identical karyotypes. Our
serological results indicated the presence of an extra albumin fraction (a total of 3) in the Black Sea Region
specimens of Hyla arborea than those of other regions. Our findings support the assertion that two different species
inhabit Turkey named Hyla arborea and Hyla savignyi, which were taken as different subspecies by various authors.
The present study established the southern distribution limits of Hyla arborea and Hyla savignyi in the east and the
west




   502                          16:00 Tuesday                                  P4                     .          PCH
Origin and evolution of the parthenogenetic lizards Cnemidophorus cozumela and C. maslini (Sauria:
Teiidae). N.L. Manriquez. O. Hernandez, M. Villagran and F.R. Mendez, Instituto de Biologia, Universidad Nacional
Autonoma de Mexico,, A.P. 70-153, C.P. 04510, Mexico, D.F. Mexico.

Recently Cnemidophorus maslini was considered as a different species of C. cozumela due to morphological
differences. C. maslini was suggested as an hybrid of C. angusbceps and C. deppii, nevetheless the origin of C.
cozumela is unclear. To propose the Origen and evolution of the unisexual lizards we detennine the histocompatibility
(through skin grafts) between C. cozumela and C. maslini, their karyotype, and the karyotype of the parental species
(C. angusticeps and C. deppii). The histocompatibility analysis shows a genetic homogeneity between the two
parthenogenetic species (100% graft acceptance), C. maslini has a diploid number of 47 chromosomes, as ttie
perfect hybrid of C. angusticeps (2n = 44) and C. deppii (2n = 50). C. cozumela has 50 chromosomes, apparently as
a result of three centromeric breaks in the C. maslini karyotype. This study suggest that C. cozumela and C. maslini
are the same species as the morphological and karyotypical differences recorded does not appear to be due to
genetic differences.                                                    "■" BBBwiiwsa wwsisa a WVVMV w>«w • (WkWi «* ««■ na w^w •«*«•«•• ■ IWI^I ns V*«f«
measured from 10 seminiferous tubules and 10 sexual segment tubules. The mean fall seminiferous tubule diameter
was 176.4+7.2um and the epithelial height was 32.1+2.3pm. Histological examination revealed regressing epithelia,
consisting of 3-4 cell layers with sperm and spermatogonia the dominant cell type. The mean sexual segment
diameter was 127.0+3.1pm with an epithelial height of 46.0±2.1|im and containing numerous, large sexual granules.
The mean spring seminiferous tubule diameter was 163.8+3.6pm and the mean epithelial height was 29.6±5.6um.
Histological examination revealed regressed epithelia, consisting of 1-3 cell layers with spermatogonia the dominant
cell type. The mean sexual segment diameter was 115.5±4.2um withan epithelial height of 41.5+2.5um and
contained fewer granules that observed in the fall. Animals placed into artificial hibernation had a mean seminiferous
tubule diameter of 158.8+9.6pm and an epithelial height of 22.6+2.8pm consisting of 1-2 cell layers with
spermatogonia the dominant cell type. The mean sexual segment diameter was 111.8+3.2pm and the epithelial
height was 4O2’+2.4pm. The epith^ia contained diffuse sexual granules.




Croea-spMies amplification of mlcrosatellftes developed for timber rattlesnakes iCrotatua horrleTuay. L.M.
Bushar. Biology Department, Beaver College, Glenside, PA USA; M. Maliga and H.K. Reinert, Biology Department,
The College or New Jersey, Ewing, NJ, USA.

Microsatellite analysis is a useful tool in studies of population genetics and kinship; however, few microsatellite loci
have been isolated for use with snake species. Cross-species amplification of microsatellite loci has been
demonstrated for a wide range of species, including plants, fish, birds, and mammals. We were interested in
assessing the utility of microsatellites isolated from a timber rattlesnake (Crotalus horridus) genomic library in other
species of rattlesnakes.

PCR primers designed for 5 different C. horridus microsatellite loci were used to screen individuals representing 8
CrotaJus species (C. adamanteus, C. airox, C. cerastes, C. durissus, C. molossus, C. viiidis, and C. willardi), 2
Sistrvrus species (S. catenatus and S. milianis} and Agkistrodon conlortnx. Three of the primer sets p-144, 7-87,
and 5A) were conserved in ail of the species studied; although there was a high frequency of 'drop outs' for some of
the individuals in some species. Ono of the primers (3-155) was only conserved in members of the durissus
subgroup (C. molossus and C. durissus), thus supporting this evolutionary grouping.




   500                             16:00 Tuesday                                       P4                        .         PCH
Cladlstic analysis of the angle-headed dragons (Gonocephalus sensu lato, Agamidae), a polyphyletic genus.
S.M. Moody. Department of Biological Sciences, Ohio University, Athens OH 45701; G.J. Watkins-Colwell,
Department of Biological Sciences, Sacred Heart University, 5151 Park Avenue, Fairfield, CT 06432, USA.

The angle-headed dragons, Gonocephalus sensu lato have often been given as an example of a vertebrate that
straddles Wallace's Line. However, examination of the members of this genus of agamid lizard, distributed
throughout Southeast Asia, Oceania and Indo-Australia, has resulted in the discovery of numerous characters
strongly supporting the taxonomy of the pre-Boulenger 1800's in which several genera were recognized, and none
straddled Wallace's Line. Gonocephalus and Acanthosaura are found only in SE Asia and Indonesia whereas
species of New Guinea, eastern Australia and Oceania belong to the resunected genera Hypsilurus and Arua. The
cladistic relationships of the latter genera are with Physignathus, Hydrosaurus and the Australian radiation of
agamids. Gonocephalus and Acanthosaura dadistically belong with the Calotes and Agama radiation in Asia and
Africa. The Eocene agamid Tinosaurus from North America has been compared with these two dades and falls
with the former.




  .501                             16:00 Tuesday                                      ;P4                                   PCH
Relationships of Gastrophryne (Anura: Microhylidae) based on 12S mt rDNA sequences.                                      J. Feden.
Department of Biology, University of Richmond, Richmond, VA 23173 USA.

The genus Gastrophryne comprises 5 species: G. usta, G. carolinensis, G. olivacea, G. elegans, and G. picHventris.
The combined distribution of these species ranges from Honduras and El Salvador to Iowa, USA. Gastrophrjme
carolinensis and G. olivacea represent the northernmost range of the genus and are widely distributed in the USA.
Relationships among these spedes have been previously studied by Nelson (1972) who suggested a sister taxa
relationship between the two most northern species. Herein, we present a preliminary analysis of relationships based
on 12S mitochondrial ribosomal DNA sequences. Both strands of a segment of the 12S ml RNA gene were
sequenced. We obtained information on 429 bass pair positions for each taxon, among which 89 positions (about
21%) were variable. Discophus was used as the outgroup and characters were run unordered. Two equally
parsimonious trees (36 steps long, C.l. = 0.667) were obtained that alternatively placed G. elegans as sister taxa of
G. carolinensis and G. olivacea. Weighting transversions over transitions (10/1 ], we obtained a single tree (30 steps
long, C.l = 0.7) that supports a sister taxa relationship between G. elegans and G. olivacea. This preliminary
analysis does not support the doser relationship between the two North American species.

0^1       uro oiiiuc mii wiioii uc uiavvRluiluwuo cu> occii Hl nyiet oetviyfiyi, voit^iuyiuoi loj^arcii rouna me irTiDncauon
and amkylosis of vomers over the sphenethmoid for Hyla arborea. For Hyla savignyi, imbrication and amkylosis do
not occur. study of chromosomal sets of two species established the presence of largely identical karyotypes. Our
serological results indicated the presence of an extra albumin fraction (a total of -3) in the Black Sea Region
specimens of Hyla arborea than those of other regions. Our findings support the assertion that two different species
inhabit Turkey named Hyla arborea and Hyla savignyi, which were taken as different subspecies by various authors.
The present study established the southern distribution limits of Hyla arborea and Hyla savignyi in the east and the
west




Origin and evolution of the parthenogenetic lizards Cnemtdaphorua cozumeta and C. masrlnt (Saurla:
Telldae). N.L. Manriquez. O. Hernandez, M. Villagran and F.R. Mendez, Instituto de Biologia, Universidad Nacional
Autonoma de Mexico,, A.P. 70-153, C.P. 04510, Mexico, D.F. Mexico.

Recently Cnemidophorus maslini was considered as a different species of C. cozumela due to morphological
differences. C. maslini was suggested as an hybrid of C. angusticeps and C. deppii, nevetheless the origin of C.
cozumela is unclear. To propose the origen and evolution of the unisexual lizards we determine the histocompatibility
(through skin grafts) between C. cozumela and C. maslini, their karyotype, and the karyotype of the parental species
(C. angusticeps and C. deppii). The histocompatibility analysis shows a genetic homogeneity between the two
parthenogenetic species (100% graft acceptance). C. maslini has a diploid number of 47 chromosomes, as the
perfect hybrid of C. angusticeps (2n = 44) and C. deppii (2n = 50). C. cozumela has 50 chromosomes, apparently as
a result of three centromeric breaks in the C. maslini karyotype. This study suggest that C. cozumela and C. maslini
are the same spedes as the morphological and karyotypical differences recorded does not appear to be due to
genetic differences.




   503                           16:00 Tuesday                                   P4                                 PCH
Investigating monophyly in the sub-family Petropedetinae Noble 1931 (Anura: Ranidae). E. Scott. A. Dawood
and A. Channing, Zoology Department, University of the Western Cape, Private Bag XI7, Bellville, 7535, South
Africa.

In an attempt to establish the outgroup of the genus Cacostemum Boulenger 1887, a preliminary' molecular
investigation into the relationships among the genera of the sub-family Petropedetinae was conducted. Additional
exemplar sequences from the sub-family Raninae Gray 1825 were induded in the analysis, which used
mitochondrial 12s sequence data. Parsimony analysis of the results shows the genera of the Petropedetinae to be
interspersed with genera of the Raninae, refuting monophyly of both sub-families as currently recognized. Although
this result is by no means surprising, and has been found by other workers (e.g. Ford 1989,1993), it does highlight
problems associated with ranid ph^ogenetics in general. There is a need to find monophyletic dades within the
small African ranids in order to understand their phylogeny, so that evolutionary and biogeographic hypotheses
concerning them can be tested.




   504                           16:00 Tuesday                              . . P4                                 PCH
Freeze tolerance and cryoprotectant mobilization in the gray treefrog (Hyla versicolor).                       J.R. Layne.
Department of Biology, Slippery Rock, PA 16057 USA.

 This study characterized freeze tolerance and cryoprotectant levels in H. versicolor tram Illinois. Frogs were frozen
in the laboratory at -1.5, -3.5, and -5.5 C. All frogs tolerated freezing at -1.5 and -3.5 C but the survival rate declined
at -5.5 C (<50%). Calorimetry revealed that 46.2% of the body water froze at -1.5 C. Plasma glucose and glycerol
were substantially elevated, 14X and 5X respectively, in recently thawed frogs vs. unfrozen frogs. Three unfrozen
frogs had levels of plasma glycerol tanging between 17.1-36.8 mmol/L, suggesting an anticipatory response to
freezing, but another three unfrozen frogs had glycerol at 1.1 mmol/L. No correlation existed between levels of
plasma glucose and glycerol in unfrozen frogs and recently thawed frogs. Inverse relationships existed between
glycerol content and ice content and between plasma osmolality and ice content. The levels of freeze tolerance and
related protective measures appear sufficient for H. versicolor to successfully overwinter beneath forest floor debris
in Illinois.  505                         16:00 Tuesday
Revision of the genus Holocentms (Pisces: BeryciformesiHoiocentridae).                     p.R. McMillan, College of
Charleston, Grice Marine Laboratory, 205 Fort Johnson, Charleston, SC 29412 USA.

The two species of Holocentnts. H. adscensionis and H. rufus, are very siinilar iti appearance and overiap in many
characters that have been used to distinguish them, on occasion making iden ification difficult. Furthermore,
specimens of H. adscensionis from the central and eastern Atlantc, particularly St• Hel^a and Asoen^on islands
differ in a number of characters from putative conspecifios from the western Atlantic. The genus Hdoc^^sai^
the two species are redescribed, with new ranges tor frequently used characters provided as well as infomabon oil
other characters useful for distinguishing species. Principal components ^alyses of counts and sheared pnncipal
components of measurements are used to compare the species of Holocentrvs.              Differences among western,
central, and eastern Atlantic populations of H. adscensionis are addressed.




   506                         16:00 Tuesday                                .   P4
Field use of propofol: Finally a safe, effective, rapid recovery anesthetic f« reptiles. NX. Anderson, B- (^upe,
T. Hetherington and J. Williams, The Ohio State University, Department of Zoology, 1735 Neil Ave., Room 104
Botany and Zoology Building, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.
In a field study on 11 Boiga irregularis, propofol provided 15-20 minutes of surgical anesthesia. Snakes recovered
rapIdlyX surgery, achTeving normal motor control and behavior after 2 to 3 1/2 hours, aI whichi time they
released at the point of capture. One snake experienced an atypical anesthesia and was mobile, M not aggress^
at release (153 minutes). Post-operatively, all snakes exhibited expected behavior and artivity for the duration of tlw
Study. Propofol has the advantage of minimal equipment requirements (synnges and needles), rapid onset of
anesthesia (< 60 seconds), short duration of action (15-20 minutes), effective muscle relaxation, and lack of
significant side effects. Propofol requires venous access. /Mthough propofol is usually easily administer^ to snakes
via the tail vein, the small size and fragility of these vessels in Borga irregulans required carJopuncture to admmister
the anesthetic. No pain reactions, heart arrhythmias, or deaths were asswiated with this technique. Propofol
induced a variable transient depression in respiratory and heart rates which did not appear to be clinically significant.




                                16:00 Tuesday                                   ■P4 .                            PCH
    507 .
 Supercooling and freeze tolerance In the lizard Podarcis s/cub.^^A.A. HuaSM and R.L.        Department of
 Biotogy, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY, USA, 11549; K.B. Storey, Department of Biology and Chemistry,
 Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 5B6.
 We assessed European wall lizards, Podarcis sicula, collected from populations introduced to the U.S., for the abili^
 to tolerate freezing temperatures. This has implications for the future of this species currently undergoing rapid
 range expansion, and allows us to make informed guesses about its over-wintenng behavior.
 We first determined that they could regularly survive supercoolirig to down to -5’ C (temperature rronitored by
 thermocouple) for at least 60 minutes. Next, individuals were cooled to-2.S°C and freezing was induced. Lizards
 induced to freeze had body temperatures of -0.5 to +0.5° C; we ftawed thern after 15 minutes and hdd ^m at 5 C
 for 24 hours, when they were checked again for life signs. All three lizards frozen in this
 internal ice formation was inititated as would be expected in a natural environment, they rapidly froze and died.

 This species does not appear to be freeze tolerant, which differs froin results reported by Claussen et       ®
 conspecific (P. muralis}  VJe demonstrated that our different results are vey likely due to a different in
 experimental technique. Standardization of techniques and definitions are needed if freeze tolerance compansons
 are to be made between species and populations.




    511                          16.00 Tuesday                                  P4                               'PCH
 Evidence for a resident subpopulation of northern cod In Gilbert's Bay, Labrador. J.M. Green. Department of
 Biology, Memorial University, St. John's,, Newfoundland, Canada, , A1B 3X9; j.S. Wroblewski and W.L. Bailey,
 Ocean Sciences Centre, Memorial University, St. John's, Newfoundland.

 A historical spring fishery for northern cod (Gadus morhua) in Gilbert's Bay, Labrador prompted us to tag, with
 transmitters, nine Gilbert's Bay cod (48-70 cm) in October, 1996. Eight tagged fish were repeatedly relocated
 between January and July 1997. Several had returned to their site of capture in a shallow (< 30 m) arm of the bay
 where they remained for the duration of tracking. All were active throughout the winter months, at times swimming
 distances of several km per day. Samples from the subpopulation indicated that adult (38-73 cm) cod reached
 spawning condition in late May-eariy June, several months later then the ripening period reported for cod
 ovenrrintering offshore on Hamilton Bank, but a time similar to resident cod spawning in Trinity Bay, Newfoundland.
 Many Gilbert's Bay cod have a lower length-at-age and fecundity-af-age than cod from Hamilton Bank or Trinity Bay,
 likely reflecting a growth rate slowed by the cold sea water temperatures of coastal Labrador. Body condition factors
 suggest that food is not limiting growth.

  508                        ■ 16:00 Tuesday
Aerobic metabolism of Eleutherodactylus antillensis under stressful hydric conditions. K Nieves-PuiqdoHer,
University of Puerto Rico, Deparment of Biology, PO. Box 23360, San Juan, PR, 00931-3360.

Eleutherodactylus antillensis is a neotropical frog found in grasslands, shrubs and fems around Puerto Rico. We
measured the combine effects of changes in hydration and temperature on oxygen consumption dunng rest and
exercise at 20“C, 25®C and 30®C. Aerobic metabolism was not affected by temperature and hydraton lev^s.
Nevertheless, a tendency to increase in oxygen consumption was observed during rest and exercise at 30 C. The
resistance of this species to stressful conditions suggests that it might be able to survive a wide range of habitats.




   509                        .16:00 Tuesday                              .
A new protocol to test the effects of chronic pesticide exposure on eggs and larval amphibians. S.E, Julian
and J.H? Howard, Department of Biology, Frostburg State University, Frostburg, MD 21532 USA.

The potential role of pesticides in amphibian declines has generated many studies of short-term, acute exposures.
Investiqations of chronic exposures may more accurately reflect conditions experienced by natural populations. We
present a biologically realistic protocol to study the effects of pulsed exposures of pe^iades on amphibian egg
masses and larvae. We will examine effects of three insecticides on survival, growth, behavior, and development ot
several amphibian species. Eggs and larval stages of three amphibian species will be exposed to three
concentrations of each pesticide based on previously detennined LC50 s. Egg masses will be placed in 5 gallori
aquaria containing pesticide and maintained until hatching success and deformities can be recorded. The larval
experiment consists of a static test with pesticide renewal every two weeks in conjuntriion with water replacement.
Larvae will be maintained in 20 gallon aquaria from two weeks post-hatching through metamorphosis. Sun/iv^,
arowth lime to metamorphosis, activity levels, and behavioral and developmental abnormalities will be monitored.
Uncontaminated sediment will be placed in the bottom of each aquarium to absorb pesticides and provide an
additional pathway for its uptake in tadpoles. Preliminary results suggest that species differ in pesticide sensitivity
and pesticides are rapidly absorbed by sediment.




                                16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                                PCH
   ■510
Mitochondrial gene expression In response to freezing, dehydration and aiioxia strewes in the frrez^
tolerant wood frog (Rana ayhratica}. S.Wu and K.B. Storey, Department of Biology, Carteton University, 1125
Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 5B6.
 Wood frogs display natural freeze tolerance during winter hibernation. To extend our knowledge of the rnetabolic
 adaptations that     support freezing survival, we are exploring freeze-induced gene    expression. Via differentia
 screening of cDNA libraries prepared from         liver or brain of frozen wood frogs, we have identified several
 mitochondrial genes that are upregulated during freezing exposure. Included are^e mitochondrial gene for f^DH-
 ubiquinone oxWoreductase in liver and the mitochondrial genes for 12S and 1^ rRNA subunits, transfer RN/\s
 (fRNAVal tRNALeu, tRNAPhe) and ATPase (subunit 6 and 8) in brain.               The accumulatiori of mitixhondna
 ribosomal gene transcripts (12S and 16S         rRNA) may compensate for low temperature inhibition of nbosomal
 assembly whereas elevated tRNA transcripts may help sustain mitochondrial protein biosynthesis during freezing.
 Upregulation of NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase and ATPase may be a resporise to freeze-iriduced anowa to
 hdp optimize use of declining oxygen supplies as freezing progresses.          Northern hybndizafion analysis also
 assessed the expression of these genes in other organs during freezing and tested their responses to one of two
 individual stresses that are components of freezing: dehydration and anoxia.




    514      .                 16:DQ Tuesday                                  P4                               PCH
 Ichthyological collection of medium tocantins (Brazil). P.H.F. Lucinda, C.S. Agostinho and E.E. Marques,
 Insfituto de Biologia e Saude Publioa, Universidade do Tocantins, CP25 Porto Nadonal TO Brasil 77500-000.

 The ichthyofauna in the medium and upper Rio Tocantins (Brazil) has been poorly investigated. Among the fish
 collecting expeditions that have taken place in that area, the Indiana University Expedition, headed by Carl Temetz
 in 1923, whose material is presently housed in the California Academy of Sciences, represents one of the scarce
 sources of study about this iohth^fauna. Papers concerning the ichthyological composition of the Araguaia -
 Tocantins System are also rare. The level of taxonomic knowlerige related to fish from its medium portion is still very
 precarious. The majority of studies comprise technical reports, which analyse the ichthyological composition
 superficially, however, they do not present discussions on taxonomic or systematic problems. Several species show
 serious taxonomic difficulties, or have no description. Moreover, this fauna is threatened because of the constraction
 of several hyitroelectric power plants. According to our standpoint, one of the most important measures to mitigate
 this situation is to carry out species inventory in poorly sampled and unsampled areas. The objective of this study
 was to inventory part or this ichthyofauna, what resulted in the creation of an Ichthyological Collection of the Medium
 Rio Tocantins. 'The collection is housed at the Institute de Biologia e Saude Publica da Universidade do Tocantins, in
 Porto Nadonal town, Trxiantins State of Brazil. It has been gathered since 1995 and results from several projects
 carried out in that institution, as well as some others still in execution. Nowadays, the collection shelters about 215
 species, representing the majority of Neotropical fish groups. Nonetheless, the precise identification of several
 species Is still wanting.   507                         16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                               PCH
Supercooling and freeze tolerance In the lizard Podarcis sicub. A.A. Hussain and R.L. Burke, Department of
Biology, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY, USA, 11549; K.B. Storey, Department of Biology and Chemistry,
Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 5B6.

We assessed European wall lizards, Podards sicula, collected from populations introduced to the U.S., for the ability
to tolerate freezing temperatures. This has implications for the future of this species currently undergoing rapid
range expansion, and allows us to make informed guesses about its over-wintering behavior.

We first determined that they could regularly survive supercooling to down to -5° C (temperature monitored by
thermocouple) for at least 60 minutes. Next, individuals were cooled to -2.5°C and freezing was induced. Lizards
induced to freeze had body temperatures of -0.5 to +0.5° C; we thawed them after 15 minutes and held them at 5°C
for 24 hours, when they were checked again for life signs. All three lizards frozen in this fashion died. Thus, when
internal ice formation was inititated as would be expected in a natural environment, they rapidly froze and died.

This species does not appear to be freeze tolerant, which differs from results repotted by Claussen et al. for a
conspecific (P. muralis). We demonstrated that our different results are very likely due to a difference in
experimental technique. Standardization of techniques and definitions are needed if freeze tolerance comparisons
are io be made between species and populations.




   511        .              ..16:00.Tuesday                            P4    . .   .                PCH
Evidence for a resident subpopulation of northern cod In Gilbert's Bay, Labrador. J.M. Green. Department of
Biology, Memorial University, St. John's,, Newfoundland, Canada, , A1B 3X9; J.S. Wroblewski and W.L. Bailey,
Ocean Sciences Centre, Memorial University, St. John's, Newfoundland.

A historical spring fishery for northern cod (Gadus morhua) in Gilbert's Bay, Labrador prompted us to tag, with
transmitters, nine Gilbert's Bay cod (48-70 cm) in October, 1996. Eight tagged fish were repeatedly relocated
between January and July 1997. Several had returned to their sits of capture in a shallow (< 30 m) atm of ths bay
whsrs they remained for ths duration of tracking. All were active throughout the winter months, at times swimming
distances of several km per day. Samples from the subpopulation indicated that adult (38-73 cm) cod reached
spawning condition in late May-early June, several months later then the ripening period reported for cod
ovenrrintering offshore on Hamilton Bank, but a time similar to resident cod spawning in Trinity Bay, Newfoundland.
Many Gilbert's Bay cod have a lower length-at-age and fecundity-at-age than cod from Hamilton Bank or Trinity Bay,
likely reflecting a growth rate slowed by the cold sea water temperatures of coastal Labrador. Body condition fectors
suggest that food is not limiting growth.




   512                         16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                               PCH
Taxonomic status and geographic distribution of Bryconamerlcus elgenmanni Evermann and Kendall, 1906
(Characiformes, Charaadae). A.M. Miquelarena, Institute de Limnologia "Dr. Raul A. Ringuelet*, C.C. 712, (1900)
La, Plata, Argentina.; A.E. Aquino. American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street,, New
York, NY, 10024, USA.

Evermann and Kendall (1906) described Bryconamericus eigenmanni based on two specimens of Rio Primero
(Cordoba, Central Argentina), after which there were no more records of the species. The similarity between S.
eigenmanni and B. iheringi was noted by several authors, though finally keeping both as separate species. The need
of comparison of good population samples from ths areas of distribution of bo^ nominal species was suggested by
Malabarba and Kindell (1995), however misplacing ths type locality of B. eigenmanni within the Rio Parana system,
when actually the former belongs to an endorheic basin. The objective of our study is to provide evidence supporting
the validity or B. eigenmanni on base of material from ths type-locality drainage. A redescription using morphometric,
meristic and osteological characters, an analysis of the geographical distribution as well as a comparison with B.
iheringi, are provided. It is concluded that B. eigenmanni can be distinguished from other species of the genus by a
combination of characters including number of maxilla teeth, premaxilla shape, body depth, eye horizontal diameter,
and secondary sexual dimorphism of male pelvic fins. The distribution range suggests that the species is endemic to
endorheic drainages of Central Argentina.




   513                         16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                               PCH
Development of an index of biotic integrity for the mid-atlantic highlands region. F.H. McConnick. US
Environmental Protection Agency, 26 W. Martin Luther King Dr., Cincinnati, OH 45268 USA; R.M. Hughes,
Dynamac International, c/o US Environmental Protection Agency, 200 SW 35fh St., Corvallis, OR 97333, USA; P.R.
Kaufmann and A.T. Herlihy, Oregon State University, c/o US Environmental Protection Agency, 200 SW 35fh St,
Con/allis, OR 97333 USA; D.V. Peck, US Environmental Protection Agency, National Health and Environmental
Effects Laboratory, 200 SW 35th St, Corvallis, OR 97333 USA.

From 1993-1995, fish assemblage data were collected from 298 streams in the Mid-Atlantic Highlands region as part
of the USEPA's Environmental Monitoring and Assessment Program (EMAP). We examined responses of fish
community metrics to physical, chemical, habitat and landscape indicators of catchment disturbance. Univariate and
multivariate analyses of relationships among fish community metrics, habitat integrity and anthropogenic disturbance
were used to develop an index of biotic integrity (IBI) for the assessment of stream condition in the region. Metrics
are scored continuously from 0-10 and the resulting 16 metric IBI ranges from 0-100. We assessed the condition of
the fish community based on hypothesized reference criteria reflecting historical conditions. We established scoring
criteria of 85% for excellent biological integrity, 70% for acceptable, and 50% for impaired. Only 19.6% of the stream
length had excellent or acceptable fish communities. Forty-two percent of the total stream length was marginal and
37% was impaired.

    510                         16:00 Tuesday ..____________________ P4 ______                 ___________ pCH
Mitochondrial gene expression In response to freezing, dehydration and anoxia stresses in the freeze-
tolerant wood frog (Rana sylvatica). S. Wu and K.B. Storey, Department of Biology, Carteton University, 1125
Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 5B6.

Wood frogs display natural freeze tolerance during winter hibernation. To extend our knowledge of the metabolic
adaptations that     support freezing survival, we are exploring freeze-induced gene    expression. Via differential
screening of cDNA libraries prepared from         liver or brain of frozen wood frogs, we have identified several
mitochondrial genes that are upregulated during freezing exposure. Included ate the mitochondrial gene for NADH-
ubiquinone oxidoreductase in liver and the mitochondrial genes for 12S and 16S rRNA subunits, transfer RNAs
(tRNAVal, tRNALeu, tRNAPhe) and ATPase (subunit 6 and 8) in brain.              The accumulation of mitochondria
ribosomal gene transcripts (12S and 16S         rRNA) may compensate for low temperature inhibition of ribosomal
assembly whereas elevated tRNA transcripts may help sustain mitochondrial protein biosynthesis during freezing.
Upregulation of NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase and ATPase may be a response to freeze-induced anoxia to
help optimize use of declining oxygen supplies as freezing progresses.         Northern hybridization analysis also
assessed the expression of these genes in other organs during freezing and tested their responses to one of two
individual stresses that ate components of freezing: dehydration and anoxia.




   514                         16:00 Tuesday                               P4                          .. PCH
Ichthyological collection of medium tocantins (Brazil). P.H.F. Lucinda, C.S. Aaostinho and E.E. Marques,
Institute de Biologia e Sauds Publics , Universidade do Tocantins, CP25 Porto Nacional TO Brasil 77500-000.

The ichthyofauna in the medium and upper Rio Tocantins (Brazil) has been poorly investigated. Among the fish
collecting expeditions that have taken place in that area, the Indiana University Expedition, headed by Cart Temetz
in 1923, whose material is presently housed in the California Academy of Sciences, represents one of the scarce
sources of study about this ichthyofauna. Papers concerning the ichthyological composition of the Araguaia -
Tocantins System are also rare. Ths level of taxonomic knowledge related to fish from its medium portion is still very
precarious. The majority of studies comprise technical reports, which analyse the ichthyological composition
superficially, however, they do not present discussions on taxonomic or systematic problems. Several species show
serious taxonomic difficulties, or have no description. Moreover, this fauna is threatened because of the constnjction
of several hydroelectric power plants. According to our standpoint, one of the most important measures to mitigate
this situation is to carry out species inventory in poorly sampled and unsampled areas. Ths objective of this study
was to inventoiy part of this ichthyofauna, what resulted in the creation of an Ichthyological Collection of the Medium
Rio Tocantins. The collection is housed at the Institute de Biologia e Saiide Publica da Universidade do Tocantins, in
Porto Nacional town, Tocantins State of Brazil. It has been gathered since 1995 and results from several projects
carried out in that institution, as well as some others still in execution. Nowadays, lhe collection shelters about 215
species, representing the majority of Neotropical fish groups. Nonetheless, the precise identification of several
species is still wanting.




   515                          16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                               PCH
Shore fishes of the Trindade Island, Espirito Santo, ES BrazihPreliminary checklist. J.L. Gasparini,
UFESASEUNES - Sao Mateus, ES 29930-000; S.R. Fleeter, UFES/CEG - Depto. de Ecologia, Vitoria, ES 29060-
900.

The Trindade Island is located at 20°30'S and 29’20'W, approximately 620 nautical miles (1260 km) off the coast of
Espirito Santo, forming with Martin Vaz Archipelago the most isolated insular group off the Brazilian coast. Due to its
geographical isolation, Trindade's fauna arouses great biogeographic interest. Two expeditions were undertaken
(1995 and 1997), summing up 71 days of field work, and about 215 hours of undenwater observation (snorkeling)
surveying the ichthyofauna from tidal pools to reefs of 20m deep. To collect specimens a combination of various
fishing techniques, such as hand netting, spearfishing and hook and line, were used. Voucher specimens are
deposited in the fish collections of the following institutions: Depto. de Zoologia, Unicamp (ZUEC), Museu de
Zoologia, USP (MZUSP) and Colegao Zoologica, UFES. A total of 71 fish species belonging to 35 families were
recorded. The most representative families were: Carangidae (8 species), Balistidae (6), Serranidae (5), Labridae
(4), Pomacentridae (4) and Muraenidae (4); Haiichoeres and Sparisoma were the most speciose genera, each with
three species. Two unidentified species were found: Stegastes sp. (Pomacentridae) and Haiichoeres sp. (Labridae),
which probably are endemic to the Trindade/Maitin Vaz insular group.




   516                         16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                               PCH
Spacial and temporal patterns of diversity, fishery productivity and distribution of fish communities in the
upper Jurud Extractive reserve (Brazilian Amazon). R.A.M. Silvano. Nucleo de Estudos e Pesquisas Ambientais,
Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil; B.D. Amaral, Centro de Recursos Hidricos e Ecologia
Aplicada Escola de, Engenharia, Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil; O.T. Oyakawa, Museu de Zoologia da Universidade de Sao
Paulo, Box 7172,, 01064-970, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.

We sampled the ichthyofauna of the Upper Jurua Extractive Reserve (Brazilian Amazon) through gillnet fishing, in
the main upper Jurud river, its tributaries and the floodplain lakes in the wet and dry seasons. The dry season yielded
a greater number, biomass, species richness and diversity of fishes than the wet period, what can be due the
cortcentration of fishes due to low water level. The diversity and species richness do not varied between habitats, but
the lakes yielded a greater biomass of fish than the main river and tributaries. This could be associated to a greater
stability of the lakes, less subjected to subtle variations in water level. The fish assemblages varied mainly between
the two seasons and between lakes and the lothic environments. This spatial variation was more pronounced during
the dry season (when lakes and rivers showed a more distinct ichthyofauna). In the wet season there was a certain
mixing in fish composition among the habitats, probably due to dispersal movements effectuated by the fishes in the
innundated forest. We observed a high total fish diversity in the Upper JuruS River, what can be related partially to a
high beta diversity, or variation in species composition between habitats.   517                         16:00 Tuesday                                  P4                                PCH
Shore fishes of the Trindade Island, Espirito Santo, ES BrazIkPreliminary checklist J.L. Gasparinb
UFES/CEUNES - Sao Mateus, ES 29930-000; S.R. Fleeter, UFES/CEG - Depto. de Ecologia, Vitona, ES 29060-
900.
The Trindade Island is located al 20°30'S and 29°20'W, approximately 620 nautical miles (1260 km) off the coast of
EspMto Santo, forming with Martin Vaz Archipelago the most isolated insular group off the Brazilian coast. Due to its
oeoaraphical isolation, Trindade's fauna arouses great biogeographic interest. Two expeditions were undertaken
(1995 and 1997), summing up 71 days of field work, and about 215 hours of underwater observation (snorkeling)
surveying the ichthyofauna from tidal pools to reefs of 20m deep. To collect specimens a combination of vanous
fishing techniques, such as hand netting, spearfishing and hook and line, were used. Voucher spearnens are
deposited In the fish collections of the following institutions: Depto. de Zoologia, Unicamp (ZUtC), Museu de
Zo&oqia, USP (MZUSP) and Cole^ao Zoologica. UFES. A total of 71 fish species belonging to 35 farnilies were
recorded. The most representative families were: Carangidae (8 species), Balistidae (6), Serranidae (5), Labndae
(4). Pomacentridae (4) and Muraenidae (4); Halichoeres and Sparisoma were the most speciose genera, ea^ with
three species. Two unidentified species were found: Stegastes sp. (Pomacentridae)                                   j
which probably are endemic to the Trindade/Martin Vaz Insular group. Financial support: MARINHA DO BRASIL and
AVIDEPA.




   518                         16:00 Tuesday                .                 P4
Migration and population structure of the porbeagle Shark, Lamna nasus, in Canadian Atbntio watery WJi-
Jovce. Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3H 4H6: P.C.F. Hurley. Fishenes Biologist, Manne R^sh Division
(Maritimes Region), Bedford Institute of Oceanography, P.O. Box 1006, Dartmouth, Nova Scotia B2Y 4A2.

Seasonal movements of the porbeagle shark, Lamna nasus. in Canadian Atlantic waters were deteimined using size
and sex composition of catches sampled by Fisheries Observers in the porbeagle longline fishery. Males and
immature females predominate porbeagle catches on the Scotian Shelf edge in March and April. The data suggest
ttiat mature females segregate from the main body of the population during this penod. The The proportion of mature
females in catches increases in May and June. Porbeagle move onto the Shelf in May and northeastward along the
Shelf in May and June, moving into the Gulf of St. Lawrence and onto the Grand Banks m late June and early July.
Larger porbeagle move off the Shelf into the Gulf of St. Lawrence and onto the Grand Banks first, followed by
vounger porbeagle. Large porbeagle begin to leave the Gulf in September and large females prodominatG catches
on trie Grand Banks in September to November. Porbeagle move out of the Gulf and off the Grand Banks in
November and out to the Shelf edge in December. Migration of the porbeagle shark in Canadian Atlantic waters is
complex and catch rate analyses should incorporate size and sex composition of catches on a seasonal basis.




   ■519                         16:00 Tuesday                                 P4                                 PCH
Preliminary results of stock discrimination of Dolly Varden char, Salvelinus malma, and Arctic char, S.
alpinus, from Iwavik National Park, Yukon Territory, using mIcro-PIXE analysis of otolith sfrOTtiurn.
Babaluk and J.D. Reist, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 501 University Crescent, Winning, MB, R3T 2N6, V.A.
Sahanatien, Dept, of Canadian Heritage, Parks Canada, P.O. Box 1840, Ini^k, NT, XOE OTO; N.M. Halden, Dept, of
Geological Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, R3T 2N2; J.L. Campbell, Dept, of Physios, University of
 Guelph, Guelph, ON, NIG 2W1.
 Micro-PIXE (proton induced X-ray emission) analysis was used to determine the content of strontium in the core area
 of otoliths from Dolly Varden and Arctic char from the north slope of the Yukon Territory. Otoliths are composed
 primarily of calcium carbonate (as aragonite). Trace elements such as strontiurn which are'.present in the water the
 fish inhabits and which are chemically similar to calcium are often incorporated into the otoliths. Because otoliths do
 not undergo resorption of constituents, they contain a permanent record of the environments occupied by the fish
 throughout life. The otolith core is formed at the site where the individual was spawned; thus, environmental yanation
 in the levels of strontium and other trace elements has the potential to differentiate biological groups of fish. M^^h
 strontium levels in otolith cores from populations of Iwavik char ranged from 280 to 520 ppm and were assoaated
 with the habitat occupied. Strontium differences in otoliths have the potential to discnminate biqlogica st^ks of
 chars in Iwavik National Park and may also be useful in identifying fish from mixed groups to their stock of ongin.
 This work confirms biological stock stmeturing observed in these char through other methods.




       523                      14:00 Tuesday                                  SE                               THN .
 Phenology of growth and mortality among smallmouth bass broods. T. Friesen**’. ‘Department of Zoology,
 University of Guelph, Guelph ON; M. Ridgeway, ‘Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources.

 We detennined the variability in year class and brood-specific growth and mortality rates of first-year smallmouth
 bass (Microptenis dolomieu) and assessed the importance of temperature and spawning date to growth and
 sunrival. Date of spawning, hatch, first-feeding and metamorphosis were recorded and growth and survival were
 estimated for broods from a single population over 5 spawning seasons. Growth and developmental rates were
 positively associated with water temperature within and among years, but much of the variability in growth rate
 remained unexplained by temperature. Nest sunrival was high during the embryonic period in all years, despite low
 water temperatures, but decreased sharply during the larval and early juvenile periods. Brood-specific mortality rates
 were highly variable and mortality rate distributions were consistently skewed to the right in all years. Brood-specific
 mortality rates were weakly to moderately related to spawning date and temperature within years. Brood-specific
 rnortality rates differed significantly among years, but were not related to temperature. Cumulative morality also
 differed among year classes, but was negatively related to temperature. Our results suggest that temperature may
 influence Srst-year recruitment in smallmouth bass through its combined effects on development, growth and
 mortality, while spawning date ultimately determines the length of the first growing season.




    524 .                       14:30 Tuesday                                  SE                                TTHN

  520                        , 16:00 Tuesday                          ..       P4          ..                     PCH
Resurrecting fist) and Invertebrate footage from archived videotapes. T.A. Potts, National Undersea Research
Center at the University of North Carolina at Wilmington, 7205 Wrightsville Ave., Wilmington, NC 28403 USA.

Since 1984, the National Undersea Research Center at the University of North Carolina at VVilmington has supported
over 50 research projects Involving the use of shallow and deep submersibles. On every mission numerous hours of
videotape were recorded and stored In the Center’s archive - often lying dormant after the principal investigators
proprietary use period had elapsed. In early 1998, we initiated a project to revl^ each tape and capture
representative cups of all fishes, invertebrates and habitat types encountered. Through collaboration with
taxonomists, we hope identify all species and make a CD that can be used by the science community.




   521                           13:00 Tuesday                                SE                                  THN
Phenology of reproductive investment with seasonal fluctuation in resource availability: Does facultative
matrotrophy maximize fitness? J.C. Trexler. Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University,
Miami, FL 33199 USA; D.L. DeAngelis, Biological Resources Division, U. S. Geological Survey, USA.

Seasonality in resource availability and physiological maintenance costs may change the relationships of tradeoffs
that balance to maximize fitness. We explore the ways in which recently acquired (income) and stored (capital)
energy may be used in reproductive strategies in a seasonally fluctuating environment. We have developed an
indi\ndual-based model to contrast the fitness of females (measured as lifetime production of offspnng) using income
and capital modes of reproduction in a seasonal environment. Our model is motivated by the reproductive biology
of sailfin mollies, a livebearing fish with facultativa investment in egg size. Depending on their body size and lipid
stores, females produce large eggs that develop without additional nutritional supplementation (lecithotrophy), or
smaller eggs yielding embryos whose nutrition is supplemented during development (lecithotrophy and
matrotrophy). Lipid stores vary seasonally from an average of 15% of dry weight in females reproducing in the early
spring, to a low of 5% of dry weight in summer-reproducing females. We explore the hypothesis that facultative
matrotrophy permits a mixed capital and income-fueled reproductive strategy, and yields maximizatiori of fitness in
the face of a tradeoff of egg size and offspring number when compared to pure capital or income strategies.




   522                           13:30 Tuesday        .                         SE                                 THN
On the virtue of being the first born: the influence of date of birth on fitness In mosquitofish, Gambu^a
affinis. D. Reznick. University of California, Riverside, CA 92521; E. Schultz, University of Connecticut, Stoirs CT
06269-3042; S. Morey, US Fish and Wildlife Service, 2800 Cottage Way, Sacramento, CA 95825; H. Rodd,
University of Toronto, Toronto ON M5S 1 Al
Gambusia affinis and G. holbrooki from localities like Illinois. North Carolina, and New Jersey stop reproducing in late
July to mid-August, when there may be up to two months of mild weather remaining in the season. This is more than
enough time to produce an additional litter of young. At the same time, females store up to 20% of they dry mass in
fat These fat reserves are partially utilized during the winter, but some remain the following spring and are used for
reproduction. Why would a short-lived species forego producing a litter of young in the late summer in favor of storing
fat for reproduction the following spring? We hypothesized that the fitness of young produced in the spnng is higher
than the hypothetical young that could have been produced the previous fall and that this difference is sufficient to
compensate for the risk that the female will not survive to produce a litter the following spnng. We tested this
hypothesis with enclosure experiments in which we evaluated three components of fitness of newborn young as a
function of their date of birth. At four times during the summer, we set out 20 offspring from ten different litters in ten
different enclosures, then estimated the probability of survival to maturity, age at maturity and fecundity in the first
litter The last outplant date was after the usual end of the reproductive season and represents the hypothetical last
litter of the season. We obtained these litters by keeping females in the laboratory with long photopenods and high
water temperatures. Our results, duplicated in two seasons, demonstrate that the earliest bom young have a much
hiaher Drobability of survival to maturity and much more rapid development than those toitj late the season.
These      factora wtH enhance fitness sufficiently under most conditions to favor the early cessation of reproduction.




    526                      .    16:00 Tuesday                                 SE                                THN
 Seasonality, tlmo constraints, and life history transition: an experimental approach. L. Rowe. Dept Zoology
 University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario.

Seasonality leads to time constraints on the major life history transitions. I review recent theory that develops
predictions on the patterns of age and size at maturity expected in seasonal environments. Unfortunately common
patterns in life history transitions may result from a variety of constraints imposed by or even unrelated to
seasonality. Therefore, studies that center primarily upon obsenration and pattern offer little to disentangling the
various forces that can lead to common patterns. Experimental methods are required for this task. I review a series
of experiipents on a variety of taxa that have informed these issues. I focus on two predictions. Arst, individuals
approaching a time horizon are expected to take greater foraging risks and thereby decrease their time to maturity
Second, independent of any behavioural responses, organisms approaching a time horizon are expected to
accelerate development and similarly decrease time to maturity. The experimental results lend support to these
hypotheses.




   527                           16:30 Tuesday                                 SE                                 THN     519                         16:00 Tuesday                                                                      PCH
 Preliminary results of stock discrimination of Dolly Varden char, SahfeBnus malma, and Arctic char S
         anTi      h"®'             Territory, using mlcro-PKE analysis of otolith strOTitium iL
                                    Oceans Canada, 501 University Crescent, Winnipeg, MB, R3T 2N6: V f<
                 9?'?®“'®" ^'®^i®g®’ parks Canada, P.O. Box 1840, Inuvik, NT, XOE OTO? N.M. Maiden, D^pt. of
Guelphl GL^ph?ON; N?G 2WT               Winnipeg, MB, ROT 2N2: J.L. Campbell, Dept, of Physics, University of


of                               x-ray emisaon) analysis was used to determine the content of strontium in the core area
             of                                 ^®f'f'"" ‘h® "olh s'oP®        ‘he Yukon Territory. Otoliths are composed
             “I®'®®? .®®'^O®^ (as aragonite). Trace elements such as strontium which are present in the wafer the
nnt                             ®*’®S'®®"y s'^'lar to calcium are often incorporated into the otoliths. Because otoliths do
                              ®°®®?'*“®®’®'J^ey Contain a permanent record of the environments occupied by the fish
in                                  IS         ^*1*^® ^1*® u^®^ **^® individual was spawned; thus, environmental variation
Llr^Mi      ®          ViIS ®'’'^ °^®'^ '®®® ®l®®’s®*s has the potential to differentiate biological groups of fish Mean
wHh                             o?® I?'" P0P‘'l®i'0®s of Ivvayik char ranged from 280 to 520 ppm and were associated
                        ®,‘^,t, Sjfoof'oh' differences in otoliths have the potential to discriminate biological stocks of
       '® iwawk Nahorial Park and may also be useful in identifying fish from mixed groups to their stock of origin
This work confirms biological stock structunng observed in these char through other methods.                           “




     523                        14:00 Tuesday                                   SE                                 THN
Phenology of growth and mortality among smallmouth bass broods. T. Friesen*-*’. ‘Department of Zoology,
University of Guelph, Guelph ON; M. Ridgeway, *0013110 Ministry of Natural Resources.

We determined the variability in year class and brood-specific growth and mortality rates of first-year smallmouth
bass (ABcropterus dolomieti) and assessed the importance of temperature and spawning date to growth and
surviv^. Date of spawning, hatch, first-feeding and metamorphosis were recorded and growth and survival were
estimated for broods from a single population over 5 spawning seasons. Growth and developmental rates were
posifively associated with water temperature within and among years, but much of the variability in growth rats
remained unexplained by temperature. Nest survival was high during the embryonic period in all years, despite low
water temperatures, but decreased sharply during the larval and early juvenile periods. Brood-specific mortality rates
were highly variable and mortality rate distributions were consistently skewed to ths right in all years. Brood-specific
mortality rates were weakly to moderately related to spawning date and temperature within years. Brood-specific
mortality rates differed significantly among years, but were not related to temperature. Cumulative morality also
differed aimong year classes, but was negatively related to temperature. Our results suggest that temperature may
influence iirst-year recruitment in smallmouth bass through its combined effects on development, growth and
mortality, while spawning date ultimately determines the length of the first growing season.




     524                        14:30 Tuesday                                   SE                                 THN
Is spawning phenology sufficient to explain adult recruitment in smallmouth bass populations? M.S.
Ridgeway and B.J. Shuter, 1 Harkness Laboratory of Fisheries Research, Aquatic Ecosystems Science Section,
Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, Third Floor North, 300 Water St., Peterborough, Ontario K9J 8M5; M.J.
Gross, Department of Fisheries and Wildlife, University of Minnesota, USA.

The timing and duration of spawning in smallmouth bass populations are closely tied to body size and spring
warming rates. A repeatable pattern of large males preceding small males In the timing of reproduction has been
obsenred at a number of sites. The alternating life history hypothesis proposes that the potential gains made by
young-of-year as a consequence of this seasonal pattern of spawning are sufficient to predict size of maturity and
spawning time of individu^s. We present three lines of evidence that together indicate the acquisition of home
ranges in the late juvenile stage is a key process in adult recruitment in our study population in Lake Opeongo. DNA
fingerprinting demonstrates a restricted spatial distribution of juveniles in their first summer and little or no size
advantage associated with the timing of parental spawning. Home range analysis of adults demonstrates significant
fidelity to home ranges, areas of concentrated use and a daily movement pattern suggesting spatial memory.
Finally, a 60 year record of age-specific abundance and growth demonstrates that density-dependent growth occurs
at ages 2-3; a period of time after their initial restricted distribution in their first summer and prior to the adult home
range phase. We believe this transition phase is the key to understanding adult recruitment and that spawning
phenology may interact with this element of bass ecology rather than a direct connection to adult maturity as a
proposed in the alternating life history hypothesis.




     525 .                      15:30 Tuesday                                   SE                                 THN
Adaptation-by-time within pacific salmon populations.               A.P. Hendry. School of Rsheries, University of
Washington, Box 357980 Seattle, WA, USA.

Correlations between breeding date and the life histo^ or energy stores of individuals might arise owing to two
different mechanisms; condition dependence or adaptation-by-time. Condition dependence is the conventional view,
and predicts that individual size, condition, or status influence breeding date. This concept has been profitably
applied to iteroparous. Income breeding species with flexible breeding times. It seems poorly-suited, however, to
some semelparous, capital breeding species that have less flexible breeding times. For these species, a more
plausible explanation is that heritable maturation schedules allow temporally-isolated population components to
adapt to selective regimes specific to their breeding times (adaptation-by-time). The fundamental difference between
the two hypotheses is that condition dependence considers breeding date within a season to be a proximate effect of
variation in life history traits or energy allocation, whereas adaptation-by-time considers breeding date to be an
ultimate cause of such variation. I present evidence for limited gene flow among temporal components of Pacific
salmon populations and evidence that they exhibit adaptive variation tailored to selective regimes that vary through
the breeding season. Adaptation-by-time appears relevant to temporal trends in body size, reproductive life span,
patterns of energy allocation, and the development rate of embryos.

    522                          13:30 Tuesday                                                                     THN




 GambusiaaKnis and G. holbrooki from localities like Illinois, North Carolina, and New Jersey stoo reoroducino in lata
                            there may be up to two months of mild weather remaining in the season. This is more than
                          ®® ®‘f^.'f'°®®l. i*f®5°f young. At the same time, females store up to 20% of their dry mass in
                                       iriilizBd during the winter, but some remain the following spring and are used for
              a          ? H ®*!P'*-lived species forego producing a fitter of young in the late summer in favor of storino
                     ^®              spnng? VJe hypothesized that the fitness of young produced in the spring is highe^r
than the hypothetical young that could have been produced the previous fall and that this difference is sufficient to
hSIIIShBQk                       *’? ’®T®’®         2°* ®‘J®''''® *° produce a litter the following spring. We tSd Ws
hypothesis with enclosure expenments in which we evaluated three components of fitness of newborn vouno as a
bnotion of their date of birth. At four times during the summer, we set out 20 offspring from ten different litters% ten
           enclosures, then estimated the probability of survival to maturity, age al maturity and fecundity in the fi^
 liter. The last outpl^t date was after the usual end of the reproductive season and represents the hyiwthetical last
wBtor Ib^® ®®,?®°"- 'J(® obtairied these litters by keeping females in the laboratory with long photopenods and high
w?h®Br nmh!wiih ®®r'                'JpRI'®®*®^     *"o seasohs, demonstrate that the earliest born young have a much
                                 rriatunty and .mu^ more rapid development than those bom late in the season.
These two factors will enhance fitness sufficiently under most conditions to favor the early cessation of reproduction




  526                   .   ■ 16:00 Tuesday                            SE                            THN
Seasonality, time constraints, and life history transition: an experimental approach. L. Rowe. Dept. Zoology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario.

Seasonality leads to time constraints on the major life history transitions. I review recent theory that develops
predictions on the patterns of age and size at maturity expected in seasonal environments. Unfortunately common
patterns in life history transitions may result from a variety of constraints imposed by or even unrelated to
seasonality. Therefore, studies that center primarily upon observation and pattern offer little to disentangling the
various forces that can lead to common patterns. Experimental methods are required for this task. I review a series
of experiments on a variety of taxa that have infomied these issues. I focus on two predictions. Rrst, individuals
approaching a time horizon are expected to take greater foraging risks and thereby decrease their time to maturity.
Second, independent of any behavioural responses, organisms approaching a time horizon are expected to
accelerate development and similarly decrease time to maturity. The experimental results lend support to these
hypotheses.




   527                         16:30 Tuesday                                   SE                                 THN
State-dependent timing of breeding In fishes: proximate explanations and ultimate implications. E.T. Schultz.
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs CT 06269-3042 USA.

The seasonal timing of reproduction may vary with individual characteristics (or 'state variables'), such as size and
energetic state. I review this phenomenon in fishes. I show that the pattern is widespread, in taxonomic terms and
across reproductive modes and behaviors. I show that there is evidence that individual state can affect the timing of
first reproduction in the season (onset) as well as the last breeding effort of the season (termination), in serially-
spawning fishes. The most common observation is that large individuals commence breeding activity earlier in the
season than small individuals. State dependence in phenology is considered at several levels of organization. The
physiological effect of state variables, in tenns of how they affect the endocrine system to influence timing, is poorly
understood. Clarification of the relationship between state variables and timing is needed, and perhaps best
addressed with eiqierimental manipulation of individuals. State-dependence in timing is meaningful from an ultimate
perspective. Optimization of breeding time is often viewed in terms of single fitness components, especially survival
of offspring. State-dependence suggests that the situation is more complex. I show that fish systems are promising
subjects for tests of various models of optimal breeding times.




   528                          13:00 Tuesday       ...                       CR5                                MCN
Support for a mesodermal origin of the nuchal glands of Rhabdophls Barlnus (Serpentes: Colubridae). A.H.
Savitzkv. Department of Biological Sciences, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529-0266, USA; W.A.
Velhagen Jr., Department of Biology, James Madison University, Harrisonburg, VA 22807, USA; A. Mori,
Department of Zoology, Kyoto University, Sakyo, Kyoto, 606-01, Japan; KA. Roberts, Department of Biological
Sciences, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529-0266 USA; A. Das, Department of Biology, James Madison
University, Harrisonburg, VA 22807 USA.

The natricine colubrid snake Rhabdophis tigrinus possesses a parasagittal series of paired glands in the neck that
serve a defeiisive function. Early reports of the embryonic origin of ttie glands suggested that they arise from
mesodermal tissue, rather than from ectoderm as do most other cutaneous glands in vertebrates. We examined
both adult and embryonic glands using several gross anatomical, histological, and electron microscopic techniques,
and our results support a mesodermal origin of the nuchal glands. Our embryonic material confinns earlier reports
that the glands anse as mesenchytnal condensations deep to the developing epidermis, with no evidence of the
epithelial invagination that characterizes the development of most cutaneous glands. Adult specimens injected with
Microfil reveal that the major network of cutaneous vessels lies superficial to the glands, further supporting a
mesodermal origin. The adult glands possess a thick connective tissue capsule, and there is no evidence of
epithelial organization of the interior cells.   529                          13:15 Tuesday                                  CR5                ..       .       MCN
Two skinks of Florida's xerlc habitat: phylogeography of Neoseps reynoldsl and Eumeces egreglus. AJVL
Clark. BEECS Genetic Analysis Cote, University of Florida, PO Box 110700, Gainesville, Florida 32611-0700 USA;
B.W. Bowen, Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville,, Florida 32611 USA; L.C. Branch,
Wildlife Ecology and Conservation, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611 USA; P.E. Moler, Florida Game
and Fresh Water Rsh Commission, 4005 South Main Street, Gainesville, Florida 32601-9099 USA.

Both Neoseps reynoldsi and Eumeces egregius are lizards associated with xeric habitats of Florida. To assess
phyiogeographic patterns in these two species, mtDNA sequences were compared from various sites across the
state. Neoseps reynoldsi occurs only on three ridges in the central highland of the Florida peninsula. Populations are
highly structured, witti four major lineages observed and deep genetic division among the ridges. The central
haplotypes in a parsimony network are associated with the northern portion of the Lake Wales Ridge, one of the
oldest habitats in peninsular Florida, suggesting an ancient radiation from this central ridge. Eumeces egregius
comprises five subspecies that occur through most of Florida and into Georgia and Alabama. The major partitions in
an mtDNA phylogeny for E. egregius are not concordant with subspecies designations. However, the mtDNA are
consistent with the hypothesis that this species also radiated outward from an ancestral population on the Lake
Wales Ridge. These findings raise conservation concerns for the loss of genetic diversity in the rapidly disappearing
scrub habitats of Florida's ancient ridges.




   530                          13:30 Tuesday                                  CR5      ..         .               MCN
Is it all just walking pterygoids? An exploration of feeding mechanics in snakes. B.A. Young. Dept, of Biology,
Laibyette College, Easton, PA. 18042 USA.

Classic descriptive and functional studies of ophidian feeding have resulted in a detailed, and supported, hypothesis
for the mechanics of prey ingestion in snakes. This hypothesis, commonly known as the pterygoid walk, centers on
the sequential protraction and retraction of the contralateral palato-maxillary arches. Given the phylogenetic history
and cephalic staictural diversity of snakes, as well as their variation in prey preference, it would seem unlikely that all
snakes use the same prey ingestion mechanics. The diversity of feeding mechanics was explored through a
morphological examination of the mandibular syphysis, a region generally taken to have no special function in prey
ingestion. Serial sections through the syrnph^is of over 180 species revealed substantial variation in tissue
composition and structural arrangement. Suites of characters suggest this anatomical region may perform different
functional roles in different species. Observations of ophiophagous snakes reveal prey ingestion accomplished with a
highly modified pterygoid walk. In these cases only unilateral displacement of the palato-maxillary arch functions in
prey ingestion, with the caudal portion of the pterygoid displacing the prey posteriorly.




   531                          13:45 Tuesday                  ..   .          CR5                             .   MCN
The ontogeny of morphological variation: sex, family, and testosterone effects on head, body, and tail
growth in the garter snake, Thamnophls sirtalis. R.B. Kino. Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Illinois
Univeristy, DeKalb, IL, USA 60115.

The evolution of population- and species-level differences requires heritable variation in phenotype. However,
phenotypic variation may have physiological and environmental as well as genetic causes. In an effort to elucidate
the proximate causes of morphological variation in the garter snake, Thamnophls sirtalis, offspring born to 26 wild-
caught females were reared in captivity. Within each litter, males and females were assigned at random to two
treatment groups and received sham or testosterone-containing subcutaneous implants for a three month period
starting at three months of age. Growth in head dimensions, body size, and tail length was monitored until snakes
were six to 14 months old and was analyzed using repeated-measures multivariate analysis of variance. Family
membership had pervasive effects on growth in all traits. These effects may be attributable to penetic variation or
maternal effects arising from the common in utero environment shared by litter-mates. Sex had significant effects on
growth in all traits but the magnitude of these effects was small, suggesting that differences in body size seen in
adult garter snakes do not arise until later in life. Elevated testosterone levels had significant but small negative
effects on growth in body size and head dimensions.




   535..                         14:45 Tuesday                                  CR5                    .           MCN
A new look at what the eye implies about the early ancestors of snakes. C.L. Caorette. Evolution, Ecology, and
Organismal Biolog, Ohio State University, 1735 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210 USA.

Gordon Walls (1940, 1942) constructed an elegant logical story for the early origin of snakes as burrowers, based
upon the anatomy of the eye. Independently, Mahendra (1938) suggested that burrowing snakes, such as Typhlops,
represented the most basal snake lineages, also underscoring the hypothesis of a fossorial ancestry for snakes.
This hypothesis, with Some modification, has been widely accepted (Underwood, 1970; Rieppel, 1988). Recent
phylogenetic research by Caldwell and Lee (1997) suggested an alternative to the fossorial ancestor hypothesis,
reviving an early hypothesis for an aquatic origin of modem snakes. Can the ophthalmic characteristics so forcefully
argued by Walls for a fossorial origin of snakes equally support an argument for an aquatic origin for snakes? In fact,
many of ^ese same ophthalmic characteristics are observed in aquatic taxa. The shape and relative size of the lens
and the method of accommodation in modem snakes are typical of aquatic animals and suggest an aquatic ancestry
for snakes. Other characteristics of the eye are less obviously attributable to an aquatic ancestor but are still
consistent with this alternative hypothesis. In light of the revised nistorioal framework, this alternative hypothesis for
ths ecological origin for snakes merits closer inspection.




   536                           13:00 Tuesday            ..   .               CR1                                 CHM
Evaluation of a by-catch reduction device to reduce diamondback terrapin {Malaclemys terrapin) mortality In

   532                         14:00 Tuesday                               .   CR5                              MCN
Estimates of male and female reproductive success In the northern water snake, Nerodia sipedon sipedon,
using microsatellite DMA markers. M.R. Prosser and H.L. Gibbs, Department of Biology, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, L8S 4K1; P.J. Weatherhead, Department of Biology, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, K1S
5B6.

Estimates of individual reproductive success are essential for determining patterns of sexual selection in snakes, yet
studies which assess reproductive success using genetic markers are rare. We used microsatellile DNA markers to
conduct parentage studies in two wild populations of the northern water snake, Nerodia sipedon , in Eastern
Ontario. Specifically, eight microsatellite loci were isolated and used to assign paternity to 48 broods with a high
probability of exclusion [P(E)=0.999], and subsequently to estimate individual male and female reproductive
success. Our results indicate that 1) multiple paternity occurs in approximately 40% of the broods bom in the wild,
confirming findings from other studies that females accept copulations from multiple rtiales, and 2) less than 10% of
^e marked males sired any offspring over the three years of this study, suggesting that there may be strong
selection acting on certain male phenotypic characters that maximize male reproductive success.




   533                        14:15 Tuesday                                    CR5 . .                         MCN
Hierarchical patterns of genetic population structure in black rat snakes (Elaphe obsoleta obsoleta) as
revealed by microsatellite DNA analyses. S.C. Lougheed, Dept. Biol., Queen's Univ., Kingston, ON K7L 3N6;
H.L. Gibbs. Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, L8S 4K1; K.A. Prior and P.J.
Weatherhead, Dept. Biol., Carleton Univ., Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6.

Northern temperate snakes have a number of life history characteristics that could lead to genetic stnjcturing at fine
geographic scales including: 1) use of communal hibernacula for over-wintering and 2) high adult inter-annual fidelity
to specific hibernaculum sites. In this study we investigated this possibility by examining the distribution of variation
at six microsatellite loci in one such temperate snake taxon, the black rat snake (Elaphe o. obsoleta). Sampling
occurred at three hierarchical scales ranging from individual hibernacula to regional populations, mostly within the
Frontenac Axis region of eastern Ontario. We detected no statistically significant pair-wise differentafion (FST and
RST} between hibernacula within the same sub-populations (inter-hibernaculum distance =BE 6 Km). However,
isolation by distance was evident among locales within the Frontenac Axis (maximum distance of 50 Km) and among
regional populations (maximum distance of 1500 Km). Conservative estimates of Ne derived from heterozygosity
values ranged from approximately 600 to 2000. These values are far in excess of the number of snakes typically
found in a single hibernaculum and suggest relatively large genetic neighborhoods encompassing many communal
hibernacula. Our results suggest viscosity of gene flow over relatively short distances (at the scale of tens of
kilometers) but substantial genetic exchange among local hibernacula.




   534                          14:30 Tuesday                                  CR5                               MCN
Studies of lung-based hearing in amphibians and reptiles. T.E. Hetherington. Department of Zoology, Ohio
State University, 1735 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210-1293 USA.

Lungs have been shown to function in reception of airborne sound in snakes and species of frogs that lack tympanic
middle ears, and this lung pathway may represent the most primitive mechanism of hearing in tetrapod vertebrates.
Laser vibromefric studies were extended to investigate the acoustic responsiveness of the lateral body walls and
lungs of salamanders and lizards, and additional studies analyzing potential routes of sound energy transfer from the
lungs to the inner ear were conducted on frogs. The body walls of several species of salamanders and lizards were
found to be responsive to sound, typically showing a low frequency peak in motion (< 300 Hz) and a higher
frequency peak from 800-2000 Hz depending on body size. In contrast, the body wall of lungless plefhodontid
salamanders showed a reduced low frequency peak in motion and completely lacked the higher frequency peak.
Neurophysiological studies on fire-bellied toads (Bomblna orientalis) suggest that sound energy is not transferred
from the lung to the inner ear via respiratory pathways. Vibrometric experiments suggest instead that the operoularis
system may be involved. Sound-induced motion of the suprascapula decreased dramatically when sound was
blocked from reaching the body wall/lung. Lung-induced motion of the suprascapula may be relayed via the
operoularis muscle to the operculum in the oval window of the inner ear.




   538                          13:30Tuesday. .                                CR1                  .           CHM
On conservation of the Sahelian giant tortoise, Geochelone sulcata. M.R.K. Lambert. Environmental Sciences
Dmartment, Natural Resources Insbtute , (University of Greenwich), Central Avenue, Chatham Maritime, Kent ME4
4TB, England,

 Geochelone sulcata (Cryptodira: Tesfudinidae) achieves a length of 830 mm and weight of 105.5 kg, and is the
largest of the world's continental tortoises. It has a range forming a 600-700 km wide belt across Africa's Sahelian
region from Mauritania and Senegal in the west to Eritrea and Ethiopia in the east, and was reported still to be
common in the western Sahel during the late 19th century. The information database is poor, but populations today
are known to be very depleted in most of the range, due to utilization as food by local people and collection for the
international live animal trade. The giant tortoise inhabits light savannah woodland, grassy during June-October
rains, but sparsely vegetated and livestock-trampled during the Sahelian dry season. Refuge is sought in bunows.
The species occurs in zones with mean annual rainfall 140-1098 mm. The bioclimatio range is "desertic", "sub-
desertio" and barely "warm tropical - dry season of long duration", and vegetation mainly "Semi-desert grassland
and shrubland: northern Sahel and Somalia-Masai", "Sahel Acacia woodland, grassland and deciduous bushland"
and "undifferentiated woodland: Sudanian and Ethiopian". Using locality records, a project is being developed to
map the giant tortoise's optimum habitat by means of satellite imagery. This will form the basis for recommending
the creation of a natural reserve in Mali, and areas for re-stocking with captive-bred animals.




   539    ..                    13:45 Tuesday                                  CR1                              CHM
Ecology of the Jamaican slider turtlerJhAnnfSiiiJ »3ri2«                  sp^ies-Ievel differences requires heritable variation in phenotype. However
phenotypic vanation may have physiological and environmental as well as genetic causes in an effort to elucidate
                          "’“JPhologioal variation in the garter snake, T/iamnophfe XwafeTofeprinrbonJ to^ S^lX
                  were reared in captivity. Within each litter, males and females were assigned at random to two
Steltinaatmfee                     rSJLfc                           s^^=^aneous implants for a three month period
were^v                        gJ                   '*™®®S'O®S. body siz®, and tail length was monitored until snakes
                                  V'®® ®o®'yz®‘l “5'09 repeated-measures multivariate analysis of variance Famflv
                             effects on growth in all traits. These effects may be attributable to genetic variation or
                    hXh                      <^®«’environment shared by litter-mates. Sex had s^nificant effects rxi
                        the magnitude of these effects was small, suggesting that differences in body size seen in
adult garter snates do not anse until later in life. Elevated testosterone levels had significant but small neoative
effects on growth in body size and head dimensions.                                     5»'yn»ncani oui smaii negative




   535                        14:45 Tuesday                       .... CR5 .                           MCN
A new look at what the eye Impllee about the early ancestors of snakes. C.L. Capretle. Evolution, Ecology, and
Organismal Biolog, Ohio State University, 1735 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210 USA.

Gordon Walls (1940, 1942) constnicted an elegant, logical story for the early origin of snakes as burrowers, based
upon the anatomy of the eye. Independently, Mahendra (1938) suggested that burrowing snakes, such as Typhlops,
represented the most basal snake lineages, also underscoring the hypothesis of a fossorial ancestry for snakes.
This hypothesis, with some modification, has been widely accepted (Underarood, 1970; Rieppel, 1988). Recent
phylogenetic research by Caldwell and Lee (1997) suggested an alternative to the fossorial ancestor hypothesis,
reviving an eariy hypothesis for an aquatic origin of modem snakes. Can the ophthalmic characteristics so forcefully
argued by Walls for a fossorial origin of snakes equally support an argument for an aquatic origin for snakes? In fact,
many of these same ophthalmic characteristics are observed in aquatic taxa. The shape and relative size of the lens
and the method of accommodation in modem snakes are typical of aquatic animals and suggest an aquatic ancestry
for snakes. Other characteristics of the eye are less obviously attributable to an aquatic ancestor but are still
consistent with this altemative hypothesis. In light of the revised historical framework, this alternative hypothesis for
the ecological origin for snakes merits closer inspection.




   536                          13:00 Tuesday                                .CR1                               CHM
Evaluation of a by-catch reduction device to reduce diamondback terrapin [HXalaclemys terrapin} mortally bi
crab pots. J.P. Green. Ohio University, Athens, OH, USA; W.M. Roosenburg, Dept, of Biological Sciences,, Ohio
University, Athens, OH 45701 USA.
Diamondback terrapins, Malaclemys terrapin, frequently drown due to incidental capture in crab pots. Crab pots
selectively capture male and young female terrapins, thereby skewing sex ratios and removing individuals with high
reproductive value. We tested a by-catch reduction device (BRD) to determine its ability to reduce tenapin
enbapment and the effect the BRD had on the size and number of crabs that were caught in crab pots. We tested
three size BRDs, 4 cm x 10 cm, 4.5 cm x 12 cm and 5 cm x 10 cm, on both standard crab pots and modified crab
pots designed to prevent terrapin mortality. We found that the 4 cm x 10 cm BRD effectively prevented turtle entry,
however, eliminated crabs based on height. Neither the 5 cm x 10 cm nor the 4.5 cm x 12 cm BRDs affected crab
size or the number of crabs caught, but the 4.5 cm x 12 cm BRD reduced terrapin by-catch by 82 percent, whereas
the 5 cm X 10 cm BRD only reduced terrapin by-catch by 50%. We stress the importance of using BRDs to reduce
terrapin captures throughout their range, thus preserving the biodiversity of wetland ecosystems and restoring or
maintaining natural sex ratios of terrapin populations.




   537                          13:15 Tuesday                                ..CRI                              CHM
Estimating gopher tortoise population sizes: Management implications of a study in Soutti Carolina. T-Pi
Tuberville and M.E. Dorcas, Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, University of Georgia, P. O. Drawer E, Aiken, SC
29802, USA.
The gopher tortoise {Gopherus polyphemus] is legally protected by state regulations throughout its r^ge and
federally listed as threatened in the western portion of its range. Popuialiori sizes of gopher tortoises have
traditionally been calculated using standard correction factors that estimate the number of tortoises based on foe
nunfoer of burrows in a given area. However, correction factors may vary among seasons, habitats, and regions and
there are no quantitative studies on gopher tortoises in foe northeastern portion their range. We used a volunteer­
based burrow c^nt survey to mark 1174 potential tortoise burrows on the Tillman Sand Ridge Heritage Preserve in
Jasper County, SC. To evaluate the effectiveness of the burrow count survey for estimating tortoise population size,
we Investigated 368 marked burrows using Infrared burrow cameras. We obserwd 49 tortoises using foe burrow
cameras and estimated the population size to be 153 adult tortoises. Our site-specific correction of 0.183 is
considerably loviror than previously published correction factors and resulted in a substantially lower population
estimate than those calculated from widely used correction factors. Our results emphasize foe critical need to
consider regional variation in foe relationship between burrow number and tortoise population size when developing
and using correction factors.

               r? niDernacuium ana suggest relatively large genetic neighborhoods encompassinq many communal
                                     viscosity of gene flow over relatively short distances %f the scale of Tens of
Kilometers) but substantial genetic exchange among local hibernacula.




mHHil                                               airborne sound in snakes and species of frogs that lack tvmoanio
                         pathway may represent the most primitive mechanism of hearing in tetrapod vertebrates
      ri?                     J extended to investigate the acoustic responsiveness of the lateral body walls and
                    encl lizards, and additional studies analyzing potential routes of sound enerov transter from the
teuSrt   he                           On fregs The body walls <?f 'Several species of sXlTdSs s^d feards werl
found to be responsive to sound, typically showing a low frequency peak in motion (< 300 Hz^ and a htnhor
sal^^dereSJwe^ rreri^?rB°ri         depending on body size. In contrast, the body wall of lungleL ptethodonM
                      a reduced low frequency peak in motion and completely lacked the higher freouencv oeak
                           on fire-bellied toads (Bombina orientalis} suggest that sound eneray is not transferred
curfom ms?® i?     inn®r ear via respiratoiy pathways. Vibromefric expenments suggest inslead^hat the opercularis
S^dTrom^eaoh?nTi®the bodv'^waMi^n                         suprascapula decreased dramatioally when soTind was
             reaching the body wall/lung. Lung-induced motion of the suprascapula mav be relaved via tha
opeiculans muscle to the operculum in the oval window of the inner ear.




  538                       13:30 Tuesday                                 CR1                            CHM
On conservation of the Sahelian giant tortoise, Geochelone sult^ala. M.R.K. Lambert. Environmental Sciences
Department, Natural Resources Institute , (University of Greenwich), Central Avenue, Chatham Maritime, Kent ME4
4TB, England.

Geochelone sulcata (Cryptodira: Testudinidae) achieves a length of 830 mm and weight of 105.5 kg, and is the
largest of the world's continental tortoises. It has a range forming a 600-700 km wide belt across Africa's Sahelian
region from Mauritania and Senegal in the west to Eritrea and Ethiopia in the east, and was reported still to be
common in the western Sahel dunng the late 19th century. The infoimation database is poor, but populations today
are known to be very depleted in most of the range, due to utilization as food by local people and collection for the
international live animal trade. The giant tortoise inhabits light savannah woodland, grassy during June-October
rains, but sparsely vegetated and livestock-trampled during the Sahelian dry season. Refuge is sought in bumows.
The species occurs in zones with mean annual rainfall 140-1098 mm. the bioclimatio range is "desertic", "sub-
desertic" and barely "warm tropical - dry season of long duration", and vegetation mainly "Semi-desert grassland
and shrobland: northern Sahel and Somalia-Masai", "Sahel Acacia woodland, grassland and deciduous bushland"
and "undifferentiated woodland; Sudanian and Ethiopian". Using locality records, a project is being developed to
map the giant tortoise's optimum habitat by means of satellite imagery. This will form the basis for recommending
the creation of a natural resenre in Mali, and areas for re-stocking with captive-bred animals.




    539                         13:45 Tuesday                                  CR1                               CHM
Ecology of the Jamaican slider turtle (Trachemys terraperi}, with implications for conservation and
management. KJt. Buhlmann and T.D. Tuberville, Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, University of Georgia, SC,
29802, USA; R.H. Kerr and D. Booher, Institute of Ecology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

We investigated populations of the Jamaican slider turtle (Trachemys terrapen}, a species endemic to Jamaica. We
sampled turtles at four sites-- three along the southern Jamaican coast and one in northwest Jamaica. We captured
turtles in a variety of habitats, including a permanently ponded wetland, farm ponds, and a stream in a karst
landscape. Turtles were also found in a series of seasonal ponds where they retreat into nearby cave refugia. The
refugia remain flooded, thus allowing the slider population to exist in this seasonally arid landscape. We did not
observe or capture turtles during limited sampling in a large river and a brackish mangrove swamp. Individuals from
the northwest population appeared morphologically distinct from turtles captured along the south coast and
descriptions of T. terrapen provided in the literature. The native people hanrest turtles whenever they are found
incidentally. Concentrated populations, such as those in the cave refugia, are heavily exploited. We found red­
eared sliders (Trachemys scripts elegans} in Jamaican pet stores and suspect they could become established in
Jamaica, possibly hybridizing with the native slider. Our preliminary research suggests that T. terrapen is a highly
threatened species needing conservation action in order to insure its persistence.




   540                          1.4:00 Tuesday.                               CRI                                CHM
A comparison of morphological and reproductive characteristics of nesting loggerhead sea turtle
populations. M. Tiwari and K.A. Bjomdal, Archie Carr Center for Sea Turtle Research, 223 Bartram Hall,, Dept, of
Zoology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611.

Few studies have addressed intraspecific trends within a marine turtle species over a large area. The main objective
of this study was to quantify whether loggerhead sea turtles nesting in Florida , Brazil, and Greece differ signifioaiitly
in their morphology and reproductive output. Data on body size, clutch size and egg size were collected from nesting
females. To place ideas in a more general perspective, morphological and repr^uctive data on other loggerhead
populations were compiled from the literature and examined for latitudinal trends within the Atlantic and
Mediterranean. Differences in moqjhology and reproductive output were observed among the three populations.
Indicating that each population experiences and responds to a unique combination of factors both at and away from
the nest™ beach. Both body size and egg size were significantly correlated with latitude. However, correlations
were not significant when Mediterranean data were excluded, suggesting that turtles in the Mediterranean encounter
environmental conditions significantly different from oceanic populations. This study highlights important differences
among populations, broadens the concept of lite history variation to a turtle species not confiried to a single
geographic location, and emphasizes the need for conserving genetic and phenotypic variation in marine turtle
populations.  .541                         14:15 Tuesday                      .. . .        CR1                            CHM
Effects of human disturbance on five-line'd skink (Eumeces fasciatus) abundance and distribution at Point
Peiee National Park, Canada. S.J. Hecnar and R J. Brooks, Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
ON, N1G 2W1; R.T. M'Closkey, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Windsor, Windsor, ON, N9B 3P4.

The five-lined skink is widely distributed in eastern North America but its populations are disjunct and of conservation
concern in the northern portion of its range. Canadian populations are presently considered "vulnerable". We
studied effects of human disturbance on five-lined skinks at Point Peiee National Park, from 1990 to 1997.
Surveys Indicated low skink abundance and a lack of woody debris in areas heavily used by humans. A population
dedine, concurrent with high disturbance levels, occurred from 1990 to 1996. Skinks used woody debris as refuge
sites and showed preferential use of large moderately decayed logs and boards having greater surface area. Human
disturbance resulted in degradation and removal of debris. To test the hypothesis that skink absence in human high-
use areas was caused by a lack of suitable debris, we placed artificial microhabitats in areas which previously
lacked debris and skinks . Experimental boards were quickly colonized and heavily used despite high disturbance
rates. Results suggested that skinks are resilient to minor disturbances such as board displacements, but not to
removal or degradation of debris. Habitat restoration by moving large woody debris from open beach to the
stabilized dune began in 1996 and resulted in increased skink abundance in 1997.




   542                     ... . 14:30 Tuesday                                  CR1                     ..   . .CHM
The effects of road mortality on two threatened snake species on Peiee Island, Ontario. R.J. Willson. B.D.
Porchuk and R.J. Brooks, Department of Zoology. University of Guelph. Guelph. Ontario, NIG 2W1.

Road mortality is becoming an increasing threat to endangered and isolated reptile populations. Reptiles killed by
motorized vehicles and found on Peiee Island's roads (68 km in total) were collected and locations recorded from
1993 -1996. During the three years of intense surveys, the roads were scanned approximately every two days. In
1998, sections of road that had high numbers of roadkilled blue racers {Coluber constrictor mx'i) and eastern fox
snakes {Elaphe gloyd!) during the roadkill surveys, will be scanned intensively to determine suitable methods to
mitigate the effects of vehicular mortality. The blue racer is endangered in Canada, and threatened status for the
eastern fox snake is pending review. In three years 78 blue racers (11 adults/year) and greater than 100 eastern fox
snakes were found dead on Peiee Island's roads. Many adult females that are killed on the roads are moving to or
from shoreline oviposition sites. In the fall of each year, many hatchlings are also found dead on the roads. For
example, from 1993 - 1996, 75 hatchling eastern fox snakes were recorded as roadkills. As a result of continuing
development in the form of summer cottages, and growing tourism, vehicular traffic continues to increase on Peiee
Island's roads. Ths future impact of increased traffic flow and continued road mortality on the blue racer and eastern
fox snake remains to be seen. Our data suggest that road mortality will be a significant factor leading to the decline
of both snake species on Peiee Island.




   543                         14:45 Tuesday                                    CR1     .   .    . .           CHM
The Impact of roads on snake populations in eastern Texas. D.C. Rudolph. S.J. Burgdorf, R.R. Schaefer and
R.N. Conner, Soulhem Research Station, Box 7600, SFA Station, Nacogdoches, TX 75962 USA.

Radio-telemetry studies of timber rattlesnakes {Crotalus horridus) and Louisiana pine snakes {Pituophis mthvem}
suggested that mortality associated with roads was a significant factor in the biology of these species. An arialysis of
timber rattlesnake records in relation to road densities supported the hypothesis ffiat mortality associated with roads
has resulted in the extirpation of this species from significant portions of the landscape. The hypothesis that existing
road networks depress populations or large snake species was tested using a trapping protocol to sample snake
populations up to 850 m from road corridors. Preliminary results suggest that snake populations are reduced by 50%
or more up to a distance of 450 m from roads with moderate use. There was no indication that the population indices
had reached an asymptote at a distance of 850 m. For some species the data suggest that larger individuals are
located further from road corridors. Quantification of the road network on a landscape scale indicates that the large
snake fauna of eastern Texas Is subject to significant road related mortality that has the potential to reduce
populations by 50% ro more across a large proportion of the landscape.




                                16:30 Tbesaay                              ..   CR1                            CHM
Ami^lbians, r^ltes, and phosphate mining In Florida. H.R. Mushinsky and E.D. McCoy, Department of Biology
and Center for Urban Ecology, University of South Rorida, Tampa, Honda 33620, USA.

 Much of central Florida has been subjected to strip mining for phosphate. The mining process drastically alters the
upland habitats available for wildlife occupancy. We collected amphibians and reptiles at 30 unmined xeric upland
sites and 30 previously mined sites to determine which amphibians and reptiles may be under-represented at the
rwlaimed mined sites. Thirteen species of amphibians (4) and reptiles (9) were determined to be "focal species,"
that IS, they were under-represented at the reclaimed mine sites, relative to the unmined sites. Reasons for their
under-representation^ include the lack of suitable substrate for burrowing species, lack of temporary ponds for
amphibian reproductiOT, and lack of sufficient litter, ground cover, and plant structure for other species. Plans to
further study selected focal species, including translocating common species to reclaimed habitats will be reviewed.

   544                         15:30 Tuesday                                 CR1                               CHM
Habitat use, home ranges and hibernacula of the copperbelly water snake (Nerodia erythrogaster neglecta}
in southern Indiana and northwest Kentucky. C.J. Coppola and R.A. Kingsbury, Department of Biology, Indiana-
Purdue University, R. Wayne, IN 46805 USA.

The copperbelly is federally listed under the Endangered Species Act as Threatened in the northern part of its range,
and protected to the south by the Copperbelly Water Snake Conservation Agreement. Snakes from two populations
were radio-tracked at the Sloughs Wildlife Management Area, Kentucky, and in the Patoka National Wildlife Refuge,
Indiana. The movements of the snakes were monitored to elucidate patterns of home range size and habitat use.
including hibernacula sites. Habitat use was seasonally compared between sexes. Home ranges and activity
centers were calculated using minimum convex polygons. Individual snakes occupied widely different habitats,
demonstrated pronounced fidelity to selected habitats for much of the season. Buttonbush sloughs and areas of
shallow water with emergent vegetation were most frequently used, while closed canopy forested habitats away from
the sloughs and targe bodies or open water were not. Habitat use shifted towards palustrine forest edges as the
season progressed. The hibernacula of most snakes were crayfish burrows or stumps near or within the floodplain.




   545                         15:45 Tuesday                                 CR1                                CHM
Conservation of the endangered copperbelly water snake, Nerodia erythrogaster neglecta. B.A. Kingsbury.
Department of Biology, Indiana-Purdue University, Fort Wayne, IN 46805 USA.

The copperbelly is an inhabitant of shallow wetlands in parts of the midwestem United States. It is stats listed as
Endangered by Illinois, Indiana, and Ohio, federally listed as Threatened to ths north by ths US Rsh and Wildlife
Service, and protected in southern Indiana, southern Illinois, and Kentucky by a conservation agreement. Over the
last few years, efforts have dramatically increased to learn more about the species' ecological requirements to
prevent further losses of snakes or suitable habitat. I will review efforts to conserve the remaining populations of the
copperbelly. Discussion will include a review of fire current status of the snake, both in the legal and biological
senses, and a description of the conservation agreement. I will also examine the implications of research findings
from several studies out of my lab regarding management decisions about restoring and reclaiming habitat for the
species.




   546                         16:00 Tuesday .             .   .             CR1                                CHM
Long-term changes in movement patterns of massasauga rattlesnakes following a severe flood. R.A. Seiael
and MA. Pilgrim, Dept, of Biological Sciences, Southeastern Louisiana Univ., Hammond, LA 70402-0736 USA.

From 1979-1983 we conducted radiotelemetry and mark-recapture studies on massasauga rattlesnakes {Sistrurus
catenatus) at the Squaw Creek National Wildlife Refuge in northwestern Missouri. These data showed that snakes
hibernated in a moist prairie, moved away from the prairie to drier areas in the late spring and summer, and returned
to the prairie in the fall. In 1993, the refuge was impacted severely by the "Great fiffidwestem Rood"; massasauga
populations showed significant changes in population size strocture, sex ratio, mass-length relationships, and
reproduction as a result of this event. From 1996-1997 we re-examined the movement patterns of this population to
determine any addition^ effects of the flood. We found that although snakes still hibernate in the main prairie, very
few massasaugas leave the prairie for outlying areas, but remain in the prairie during the summer. In addition, the
number of massasaugas found crossing roads on the refuge has decreased dramatically, and the snakes that do
cross refuge roads are mainly neonates rather than adults as was seen in the earlier study. The implications for
these apparent changes in movement patterns for management and conservation will be discussed.




   550             ,   . .      13:30 Tuesday                               CF14                                AXL
Mi*SinTfn7S^ roS'                                              Museum of Zoology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,


Hubbs and Miller's research on the Great Basin emphasized changes at the level of races and subspecies- these
^^ges apparently occurred rapidly, in hundreds to thousands of years. Miocene to Pleistocene fossils of these
fishes, in coritrast, suggest unexpectedly stow changes at the species level, i.e., over hundreds of thousands to
neari^y 10 million years, with infrequent evolution of new species. Resolution of this incongruence requires
danfication of the relative frequency of short-term differentiation, species origins, and extinction. The Great Basin
evidence demonstrates that fluctuating pluvial-interpluvial cycles result in rapid proliferation of new subspecies but
everitual extinction of all but generalist survivors, often as relict endemics. The frequent extinctions and infrequent
persistence of new speaes in the Great Basin seem to bo the consequence of repeated loss of habitat during
interpluvial stages of Pleistocene cycles. The result seems to be rapid but superficial changes in morphology without
lOTg-term charge. Great Basin fish faunas exhibit low diversity and high endemism characteristic of tectrxiically
active areas The low diyereity suggests that high extinction rales were caused by high elevations, high gradients
(low habitat diversity), and dimatic variability.                                                       • a a   543                         14:45 Tuesday                          .      CR1                               CHM
Th© impact of roads on snake populations in eastern Texas. P.C. Rudolph. S.J. Burgdorf, R.R. Schaefer and
R.N. Conner, Southern Research Station, Box 7600, SFA Station, Nacogdoches, TX 75962 USA.
Radio-telemetry studies of timber rattlesnakes (Cmtalus horridus) anti Louisiana pine snakes {Pituophis ruthvenl)
suggested that mortality associated with roads was a significant factor in the biology of these species. Ari ari^ysis of
tirnber rattlesnake records in relation to road densities supported the hypothesis mat mortality associated with mads
has resulted in the extirpation of this species from significant portions of the landscape. The hypothesis that existing
road networks depress populations or large snake species was tested using a trapping protocol to sample snake
populations up to 850 m from road corridors. Preliminary results suggest that snake populations are reduced by 50%
or more up to a distance of 450 m from roads with moderate use. There was no indication that the population indices
had reached an asymptote at a distance of 850 m. For some species the data suggest that larger individuals are
located further from road corridors. Quantification of the road network on a landscape scale indicates that the large
snake fauna of eastern Texas is subject to significant road related mortality that has the potential to reduce
populations by 50% ro more across a large proportion of the landscape.




  547                         16:30 Tuesday                               CR1                      CHM
Amphbians, reptiles, and phosphate mining in Florida. H.R. Mushinskv and E.D. McCoy, Department of Biology
and Center for Lfrban Ecolo^, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33620, USA.

 Much of central Florida has been subjected to strip mining for phosphate. The mining process drastically alters the
upland habitats available for wildlife occupancy. We collected amphibians and reptiles at 30 unmined xeric upland
sites and 30 previously mined sites to determine which amphibians and reptiles may be under-represented at the
reclaimed mined sites. Thirteen species of amphibians (4) and reptiles (9) were determined to be ‘focal species,'
that is, they were under-represented at the reclaimed mine sites, relative to the unmined sites. Reasons for their
under-representation include the lack of suitable substrate for burrowing species, lack of temporary ponds for
amphibian reproduction, and lack of suflident litter, ground cover, and plant structure for other species. Plans to
further study selected focal spedes, induding translocating common species to reclaimed habitats will be reviewed.




   548                          13:00 Tuesday                                CF14                               AXL
Phylogeography of the anchovies (Genus Engraulis). W.S. Grant, Northwest Fisheries Science Center, National
Marine Fisheries Service, 2725 Montiake Blvd East, Seattle WA 98112 USA; B.W. Bowen. Department of Fisheries
and Aquatic Sdences, University of Rorida, 7922 NW 71st Street, Gainesville FL 32653 USA.

Anchovies (genus Engraulis) inhabit temperate upwelling zones and boundary currents across the globe, including
locations in Europe (E. encrasicolus), southern Africa (E. capensis), Australia (E. australis}, Japan (E. japonicus},
Mexico-California (E. mordax}, Chile-Peru (E. ringens}, and Argentina-Brazil (E. anchoita}. Comparisons of mtDNA
cytochrome b sequences reveal four major lineages corresponding to three New Worid spedes and a single lineage
including all four Old Worid species. The relationships among haplotypes in the Old World anchovies demonstrate
recent colonization events between Japan and Australia, and between Europe and southern Africa. A previous
population in southern Africa (possibly the progenitor of the European population) may have gone extinct and been
recently recolonized from Europe. A comparison of anchovies to sardines (genus Sardinopd), which have a similar
geographic distribution, reveals a dramatically different distribution of mtDNA lineages. These data prompt two
conclusions about the biogeography of temperate marine fishes. First, a vicariance model alone is inadequate to
explain the distribution of evolutional lineages in these taxa. Both vicariance and dispersal events are strongly
implicated. Second, the principle of gener^ized tracks, in which species with similar distributions have similar
evolutionary histories, is contradicted by a comparison of phylogeographic patterns in sardines and anchovies.




   549                          13:15 Tuesday                                CF14                                AXL
Phylogeography of the plains klllifish. Fundulus zebrinus: Implications for Its zoogeography and taxonomy.
B.R. Kreiser and J.B. Mitton, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0334, USA; J.D. Woodling, Colorado
Division of Wildlife, CO, USA.

The plains killifish. Fundulus zebrinus, is a smallish cyprinodontid fish found throughout ths western plains states,
and additionally it has been introduced to the Colorado River drainage. The widespread distribution of F. zebrinus
has suggested the possible influence of historical connections among these drainages. In an attempt to describe the
geographic patterns of genetic variation in F. zebrinus, vte examined variation in ^lozymes and mitochondrial DNA
(RFLP's ant) COI sequence). The genetic relationships among populations demonstrated a considerable degree of
concordance across data sets. Ths geographic assemblages revealed have implications for our interpretations of
the geologic history of ths Great Plains. Some controversy exists as to whether there is in reality two species of
Fundulus (i.e. F. kansae in the northern portion of the range). The phylogeogr^hy revealed a distinct break
between northern and southern populations, suggesting that the taxonomic status of F. zebrinus might warrant closer
study.

   546                         16:00 Tuesday                                 CR1                               CHM
Long-term changes In movement patterns of massasauga rattlesnakes following a severe flood. R.A. Seiqel
and MA Pilgrim, Dept, of Biological Sciences, Southeastern Louisiana Univ., Hammond, LA 70402-0736 USA.

From 1979-1983 we conducted radiotelemetry and mark-recapture studies on massasauga rattlesnakes {Sistrurus
catenatus) at the Squaw Creek National Wildlife Refuge in northwestern Missouri. These data showed that snakes
hibernated in a moist prairie, moved away from the prairie to drier areas in the late spring and summer, and returned
to the prairie in the fall. In 1993, the refuge was impacted severely by the ‘Great Midwestern Flood'; massasauga
populations showed significant changes in population size structure, sex ratio, mass-length relationships, and
reproduction as a result of this event. From 1996-1997 we re-examined the movement patterns of this population to
detennine any additional effects of the flood. We found that although snakes still hibernate in the main prairie, very
few massasaugas leave the prairie for outlying areas, but remain in the prairie during the summer. In addition, the
number of massasaugas found crossing roads on the refuge has decreased dramatically, and the snakes that do
cross refuge roads are mainly neonates rather than adults as was seen in the earlier study. The implications for
these apparent changes in movement patterns for management and conservation will be discussed.




   550                          13:30 Tuesday                                CF14                             ... AXL.. ]
History and diversity of Great Basin fishes. G.R. SMITH. Museum of Zoology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Ml 48109-1079, USA.

Hubbs' and Miller's research on the Great Basin emphasized changes at ths level of races and subspecies; these
changes apparently occurred rapidly, in hundreds to thousands of years. Miocene to Pleistocene fossils of these
fishes, in contrast, suggest unexpectedly slow changes at the species level, i.e., over hundreds of thousands to
nearly 10 million years, with infrequent evolution of new spedes. Resolution of this incongruence requires
clarification of the relative frequency of short-term differentiation, species origins, and extinction. The Great Basin
evidence demonstrates that fluctuating pluvial-interpluvial cydes result in rapid proliferation of new subspedes, but
eventual extinction of all but generalist survivors, often as relict endemics. The frequent extinctions and infrequent
persistence of new spedes in the Great Basin seem to be the consequence of repeated loss of habitat during
interpluvial stages of Pleistocene cycles. The result seems to be rapid but superficial changes in morphology without
long-tenn charge. Great Basin fish faunas exhibit low diversity and high endemism characteristic of tectonically
actave areas. The low diversity suggests that high extinction rates were caused by high elevations, high gradients
(low habitat diversity), and dimatic variability.




   551     . ..       .        13:45 Tuesday                                 CF14                                AXL
Biogeography and life history variation In flatfishes (PleuronectidaeiPIeuronectiformes). J.A. Cooper.
National Marine Fisheries Service, Systematics Laboratory, MRC 153, Museum of Natural History, Washington, D.C.
20560, U.S.A.

Flatfishes of the family Pleuronectidae are distributed in marine waters across the entire northern hemisphere. The
majority of spedes (49 out of 59) are found in the Pacific Ocean with only fen pleuronectid species in the Atlantic
Ocean. Some species inhabit wide ranges inhabiting Pacific, Atlantic and Arctic waters, while many others have
more limited distributions. An area cladogram using a recent cladistic hypothesis of relationships within
Pleuronectidae allows for the interpretation of this geographic distribution. A trans-arctic dispersal appears to be a
repeated pattern within taxonomic subgroups of Pleuronectidae. Associated with this extensive distribution is a wide
range of life history traits. Feeding behavior, spawning season, age and size at maturity all exhibit variation at
different taxonomic levels, induding within spedes variation for some of the widely distributed spedes. The extent to
which inheritance versus geographic distribution, and corresponding environmental factors influence these life
history variables will also be presented.




  ■552                        14:00 Tuesday                                 CF14                                AXL
Sangre de Cristo and other local color from Mexico; geographic variation in sexually selected characters?
R.L.Borowskv and K.-c. Chen, Department of Biology, New York University, Washington Square, NY 10003, USA.

The variable platyfish, Xiphophorus variatus, has the broadest range of any species of Xiphophorus. Most work on
this species has concentrated on populations in the Rio Tamesi drainage, towards the northern end of its
distribution. Here, we report on the populations toward the southern end of the range, in the Rios Nautla, Solteros,
Tecolutla and Cazones. These populations differ from the ones in the north by exhibiting pronounced local variation
in adult male coloration patterns. One variety, termed Sangre de Cristo in the aquarium literature, is characterized
by deep red coloration on the belly and throat of adult males. Another color variety is vivid yellow coloration of the
gonopr^ium. These color variants, and others, ate extremely restricted in geographic distribution. Sangre de Cristo
occurs in an area no larger than ten by fifteen kilometers, with the frequency of the variant highest towards the center
of the range. Yellow gonopodium is know from only a single locality. In contrast, adult male color variants in the
north seem more broadly distributed. Population genetic data suggests that populations in the south may be more
isolated from one another than in the north. AP-PCR (RAPD) analyses reveal less band variation in the southern
populations than in the northern populations. There is also less variation at the autosomal tailspot locus in southern
than in northern populations and greater tailspot variability among populations in the south. If is hypothesized that
the evolution of local color variants is promoted by reduced gene flow among populations. This is of great interest
because vivid adult male colors in poeciliids are generally believed to be sexual selected characters and these
results suggest a potential role of small population effects in their origin.                              .14:15 Tuesday                                CF14                                AXL
   553
A couple of case studies in African Ichthyobiogeography; Anabantidae and Malapteruridae.                  S-M. Norris,
Ichthyology Laboratory, Royal Museum of Central Afnca, B-3080 Tervuren, Belgium.

Africa has a large and diverse fish fauna which is spread across a variety of ecosystems and habitats A prelminary
synthesis of fartors structuring the distributions of these fishes (exclusive of the Great Lake faunas) is att^pted.
Rigorous phylogenetic hypotheses are available for very few Afnr^n taxa. In fact, ®^®® basic t^orirmic^d
distribution infomalion is lacking for many groups and regions complicating progress in *bis field This leaves most
biogeographic discussions more in the realm of Humphry Greenwood s bioaccountaricy than tme
Mam fishes seem distributed to the limits of their preferred habitats while others seemingly pay litt e beed to habitat
bouridaries, indicating more complex factors are in play. Example fish distnbutions bom^o farnilies, AnabanMae
(climbing perches) and Malapteruridae (electric catfishes), are used to explore types of distnbution patterns, with
possible explanations (or 'accountings') offered.




                                14:30.Tuesday                                CF14                               AXL
   554
Fifty years of faunal change in Lake Pontchartraln. R.C^CashPer, J.M. Humphries. C.S. Schieble and J.S.
Stewart, Department of Biological Sciences. University of New Orleans, New Orleans. LA, 70148 USA.

Lake Pontchartraln, a complex, warm-temperate, shallow basin, is one of the largest estuaries iri the Gulf of Merdco
region The lake is bounded by Mississippi River deltaic plain on the west and south, incised Pleistocenet terraces to
the north and barrier islands and older river deltas to the east. Salinity vanes from pure freshwater Jbe w^em
fringe of the basin to nearly marine conditions in the eastern components of the basin. Freshwater riput^ pnm^N
from rivers draining the Pleistocene terraces with occasional natural (and more recently, man-made) incursions from
the Mississippi River. During the last century significant degradation of the lake has occurred due to pollution,
shoreline erosion, commercial shell dredging and saltwater intrusion from navigational waterways.
The fauna of the lake reflects these varied hydrological connections, with well over 120 sp^es of ^b Imown from
the basin. However, the human impact on the lake's fauna has been considerable. In order to Ptwid®
inventory of the basin and design a monitoring program to assist with Lake management, •be Uiwe^_of New
Orleans has been engaged in a four year assessment of the he^th of the basin. Quarterly collec^ons are ipadei by
trawl and/or seine at 15 stations approximating sites surveyed by Suttkus in the early 1950 s and Thonyson and
Verret in the late 197O's. The first two years of the present study (1996-98) have yielded nearly80 species o'fishes
with the bay anchovy most common in trawls and inland silversides most common in seme coupons. In addition,
we have collected nine specimens of Rio Grande perch, Cichlasoma cyanoguttatum from a vanety of locals.




                                14:45 Tuesday                                CF14                                AXL
    555
 Distribution of fishes in the West Twin River drainage in relation to lat^glacial events.               P.A. Cochran,
 (PAC.NRH) Division of Natural Science. St. Norbert College, DePere, Wl 54115 USA.
 We assessed the occurrence of fishes upstream and downstream frorn a waterfall iiear the mouth of the, De^ls
 River a tributary to the West Twin River in the Lake Michigan drainage of Mst-cenfral Wisconsin. We hypothesized
 that VeX atove the waterfall colonized the upper Devils River when the West Twin River vaUey^se^ed as a
 spillway from Glacial Lake Oshkosh to Lake Michigan, because terras elevations                             J^here^
 submerged under higher flow regimes. We found eighteen native fish species above fte.
 seventeen native species occurred in the West Twin River only below the waterfall. To test theJ?’!)!
 relatively early colonists gained access to the upper Devils River, we assigned^
 each species'^according to its suspected timing of colonization elsewhere in the Upper              JJ"®™ ™®^^ n°
 significant differences between the rankings of fishes found only below and those found above the walerf^L
 Constraints on fish distribution imposed by geological history may be relevant to the assessment of strearn
 ecosystem health: a stream reach above the waterfall had a lower Index of Biotic Integrity score than a similar reach
 below, reflecting the absence of some species above the waterfall.




                                16:15 "Tuesday                           CF14                              AXL
  Distribution patterns and physical parameters affecting Blacksmith larvae, Chromls punctipinnis, off the
  north west coast of Catalina Island. A.A. Foote. California State University, Northridge, Department of Bloloav
  18111 Nordhoff St. Northridge. Ca. 91330-8303, USA.                                     •

  Populations of damselfishes (Pomacentridae) are frequently found near kelp beds and rocky areas along open
 coasts. They have demers^ eggs and planktonic larvae. From the time of hatching through the three stages of
 larval development (preflexion, flexion and post flexion) many environmental factors influence development,
 distribution and abundance. This investigation focuses on pomacenfrid early life history stages in relation to
 environmental factors that influence their distribution and abundance. Four locations were selected (two inshore and
 two offshore) off the north west coast of Catalina Island. A one meter plankton net was towed, for five minutes, in
 sets of five replicates per site over a duration of three lunar cycles (200 samples). Wafer temperature, salinity, pH,
 current direction, wind velocity and lunar cycles were recorded for all tows. Data were analyzed using 3-way
 ANOVA. Preliminaiy results show increased densities inshore, with predictable cycling over the sampling period.
 Fluctuations in physical parameters appear to affect inshore and offshore lanral distributions and abundances. This
 information will aid in predicting settlement for future recruitment into local populations.




    560                          16:30-Tuesday                             . .CF14                               AXL

  556                          15:30 Tuesday                                 CF14                                AXL
Temporal dynamics of fish assemblages on small patch reefs: comparison of high diversity (Great Barrier
Reen and low diversity (Virgin Islands) systems. P.F/Sale. (PFS&PC) Biology & Great Lakes Institute for
Environmental, Research, Univ, of Windsor, Windsor. ON N9B 3P4.
We use data from 10 visual censuses over five years of fish assemblages on small patch reefs located on the back-
reef at Tague Bay. St. Croix. U.S. Virgin Islands. These are compared with comparable data frorn a 10-year study
of southern Great Banier Reef patch reefs. Tague Bay assemblages were substantially less diverse (total of 88
soeoies recorded versus 141 species at the Australian site), but displayed a.lmost the same lewis of ternporm
variation (change in composition from census to census) as did the Australian assemblages, pus result arid
related observations argue for the composition and dynamics of fish assemblages in the taro• locations to be
determined by substantially similar processes. An analysis of the data, with fish classified into 12 feeding guilds
rather than into species, showed variation in guild structure from census to census in both kxiatioris. However, the
guild composition of Taque Bay assemblages fluctuated around a structure that was markedly dmerent trom the
average structure of the Australian assemblages. While assemblages in the two locations are structured by similar
processes, they play markedly different trophic roles.




                                15:45 Tuesday                                 CF14                                AXL
   557
me fish assemblages of San Diego Bay, California. L.G. Allen, California State University, Northridge. CA USA.

Twelve guarteify samples of the fish assemblages of San Diego Bay were taken from July 1994 to April 1997 ai four
stations using a variety of sampling methods (large seine, small seines, square enclosure, puree seme, beam trai^
and otter trawl) designed to assess all components of the ichthyofauna. These sarnples yielded a total of 405,034
fishes belonging to 75 species that weighed 1,725 kg. The northern anchovy was the most abundant fi^ species,
comprising 51 % of the total catch, followed by topsmelf at 22%, the slough ani^ovy at ISIfe Pacific sardine at 3 A
and shiner surfperch al about 2% of the total catch. Round stingrays constituted ^% of the total biomass taken
followed by northern anchovy at 14%, spotted sand bass at about 13%, topsmelt, 10/o, and slough anchovy. 6 A.
Marked changes in the number individuals and total biomass occurred over the course of the study. Both numenttal
abundance and biomass were highest in the spring and summer months due largely to heavy recruitment of juvenile
surfperches and topsmelt. Very large catches of juvenile northern anchovy. Pacific sardine, round stingrays, and
Spotted sand bass caused the pronounced peaks in July. A similar number of fish were taken in the vegetated and
non-veqetated areas, however different gears yielded varying results with respect to densities in vegetated and non-
veaetated areas According to canonical correlation analysis, distance from the mouth of the bay, temperature, and
ssuinity accounted for nearly 95% (R2 = 0.949) of the variance in species abundances.




                                16:00 Tuesday                                 CF14.                               AXL
    558
 Community structure of demersal reef fishes of the Mississippi-Alabama outer crOTtinental shelf. K.J. Sulak.
 W.F. Smith-Vaniz and D.C. Weaver. Florida Caribbean Science Center. US Geological Survey-Biological Resources
 Division. 7920 NW 71st Street. Gainesville. FL 32653 USA.
 Hard-bottom features of the Mississippi-Alabama outer continental shelf in the northeastern Gulf of Mexico (the
 Pinnacles} were surveyed to determine faunal composition and relative abundance of resident reef fishes. Study
 reefs of low. medium and high profile features spanning a depth range of 58 to 110m were investigated by remote
 operating vehicle (ROV). trapping, trawling, and hook and line sampling. Cabined sampling technique^
 documented -150 species of demersal fishes, including 74 species of reef fishes, pie purpose of this study is to
 provide a comparison of reef fish diversity to other regions of the Gulf of Mexico, and identify the trophic structure of
 the reef fish community.




    562                       .08:45 Wednesday.                                 BB                                THN
 Atlantic swordfish management in the 199O's: Wifi domestic rebuilding be possible in the face of
 Intematlonal overfishing? J.T. Stevenson and R. Lent, National Marine Fisheries Service, Highly Migratory
 Species. Management Division, F/SF1,1315 East-West Highway. Silver Spring. MD 20910 USA.

 Atlantte swordfish are a highly migratory species targeted by domestic and international fishing fleets in the North
 ^r«A??b*b Atlantic Oceans. The 22-member International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas
  (ICCAT) conducts stock assessments and issues management recommendations for swordfish fisheries In 1996
 the North Atlantic swordfish stock was estimated to be at 58% of the biomass needed to produce maximum
 sustainable yield. In 1997, the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) identified North Atlantio swordfish as
 overfished and began developing a domestic swordfish rebuilding program under the authority of the Magnuson
 Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act. This plan may include time/area closures fto limit catch of
 undersized fish) and import restrictions. In 1997, U.S. swordfish imports totaled more than 15,000 mt and were
 worth more than US$95 million. As a major importer of swordfish, the U.S. can play a role in international
 conservation by ensuring that imports are from countries participating in the ICCAT conservation program. NMFS
 will continue to pursue domestic strategies to rebuild this stock and will work within ICCAT to support international
 rebuilding strategies. It is not clear what effect restrictions on U.S. fishermen may have in light of increasing
 international fishing efforts on this highly migratory species.




    563                       09:00 Wednesday                                   BB                                THN                                          VI niu uiarrue porcn, i^icniasoma cyanogunatum tram a variety of locals.




         555                          14:45 Tuesday                                 CF14                               . AXL
      roS^SS'n-’^                                 f’**®'’ drainage in relation to late-glacial events.           PA Cochran
      (PAC.NRH) Division of Natural Science, St. Norbert College, DePero, Wl 54115 USA.                            '

                                                  .uP^ream and downstream from a waterfall near the mouth of the Devils
     tha®soede^s aS^e fte watlrf^"r5nnf                                drainage of east-central Wisconsin. We hypothesized
     uiai species above me waterfall colonized the upper Devils River when the West Twin River vallev served a*? a
     submeraed'^ndpr°Wn^^®fl°®^''°®’’                            because terrace elevations indicate that the'^waterfall was
                °                       regimes. We found eighteen native fish species above the waterfall whereas
                                 occurred in the West Twin River only below the waterfall. To test the hypothesis that only
                     'colonists gained access to the upper Devils River, we assigned an independently^erived lankina to
                                'r '*® ®u®P®c*®d timing of colonization elsewhere in the Upper Midwest There were^o
                                         ’■^® ^antangs of fishes found only below and those found above the waSrfall
     Constraints on fish distribution imposed By geological history may be relevant to the assessment of stream
                           ®?®®®' '^®T’’ ®*’°''® ”^® *'atetf3l had a lower Index of Biotio Integrity score than a simnar reach
     below, reflecting the absence of some species above the waterfall.                                           winner reacn




         559                         16:15 Tuesday                                 CF14                                AXL
     Distribution patterns and physical parameters affecting Blacksmith larvae, Chromls punctipinnis, aft the
     north west coast of Catalina Island. A.A. Foote. California State University, NorUiridge, Department of Biology,
     18111 Nordhoff St., Northridge, Ca. 91330-8303, USA.

     Populations of damselfishes (Pomacentridae) are frequently found near kelp beds and rocky areas along open
     coasts. They have demersal eggs and planktonic larvae. From the time of hatching through the three stages of
     larval development (preflexion, flexion and post flexion) many environmental factors influence development,
     distribution and abundance. This investigation focuses on pomacentrid early life history stages in relation to
     environmental factors that Influence their distribution and abundance. Four locations were selected (two inshore and
     two offshore) off the north west coast of Catalina Island. A one meter plankton net was towed, for five minutes, in
     sets of five replicates per site over a duration of three lunar cycles (200 samples). Wafer temperature, salinity, pH,
     current direction, wind velocity and lunar cycles were recorded for all tows. Data were analyzed using 3-way
     ANOVA. Preliminary results show increased densities inshore, with predictable cycling over the sampling period.
     Fluctuations in physical parameters appear to affect inshore and offshore larval distributions and abundances. This
     information will aid in predicting settlement for future recruitment into local populations.




        560                          16:30 Tuesday                                CF.14                               AXL
     Use of GIS in taxonomic collections and its relevance to assessing biodiversity, spatio-temporal
     distributions, and field work validation. J.R. Ruiz-Carus. F.D.E.P., Florida Marine Research Institute, 100 Eighth
     Ave. SE, St. Petersburg, FL 33701-5095, USA.

     A system that analyzes and displays spatially referenced data is known as a geographical information system (GIS).
     The use of GIS technology has facilitated understanding of complex relationships between organisms and their
     environment. In ichthyology, GIS could facilitate access to information associated with taxonomic collections. It
     could provide spatial analysis within and among species using distribution patterns of morphological and genetic
     characters: accurately analyze geographical distributions of morphological characters and correlate them with
     ecological parameters; and provide an objective measurement of the status of an ecosystem, which has generally
     been done based on human perception but lacked data. Taxonomic collections of voucher and type specimens and
     their associated environmental data are abundant sources of unexplored information. This information is highly
     relevant for management of natural resources because taxonomy has been built upon it. This information, when
     analyzed with GIS, could be used to address these areas and to provide the foundation for measuring fish
     biodiversity and evaluating the dynamics of spatio-temporal patterns of fish. The FDEP's FMRI is applying GIS
     technology to analyse the robust databases associated with its voucher collections. Further study of voucher
     specimens will allow us to produce maps of morphological characteristics of fish linked to ecological parameters. We
     also intend to produce synthesized information for ecosystem management in a format amenable to spatial- and time­
     analysis study.




        561                        08:15 Wednesday                                  BB                                 THN
     Borders and biodiversity: a plight for Pacific salmon.           B.E. Riddell. Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Padfio
     Biological Station,, Nanaimo, B.C.

     If Pacific salmon are a cultural icon, then their treatment in the past century is certainly inconsistent with this value.
     Recent reviews of their status in Canada and the Pacific northwest report about 1,000 populations extinct or at risk,
     and several stocks are listed or proposed for listing under the U.S. Endangered Species Act. Causes of the declines
     are numerous, usually attributed to someone or something else, and always debatable. The history of impacts can
     be broadly characterized as: an initial uninformed and rapid expansion of fisheries; then decades of rapid economic
     expansion in many sectors plus heightened competitive over-fishinQ of hatchery and wild salmonids; and finally, 20-
     30 years of extensive regulation, confrontation, and change. Dunng the latter period, the issue of "borders" in
     management and conservation has become very evident. The Pacific Salmon Treaty between the United States and
     Canada (1985) provided the first comprehensive agreement on Pacific salmon and offered a means to cooperate in
     consenration and development. Unfortunately, it now exemplifies the problem of Bordets and’their risk to biodiversity
     in Pacific salmon. This talk will address the history of salmon conflicts, the complexity of salmon issues, and describe
     the risks associated with the present Treaty impasse.




<■
i—                                                                                                              1.

    558                        .16:00 Tuesday                                CF14                               AXL




documented *150 species of demersal fishes, including 74 species of reef Ashes        The ouroose Si fW«5
ttS Ash’rorSt?                                           "’®         “®’‘'®°’         "'®"«*y^‘be trophic stmXre of




    562                    . 08:45 Wednesday                                 BB                               THN
Atlantic swordfish management In the 199O's: Will domestic rebuilding be possible In the face of
international overfishing? J.T. Stevenson and R. Lent, National Marine Fisheries Service, Highly Migratory
Species, Management Division, F/SF1,1315 East-West Highway, Silver Spring, MD 20910 USA,

Atlantic swordfish are a highly migratory species targeted by domestic and international fishing fleets in the North
and South Atlantic Oceans. The 22-member International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas
(ICCAT) conducts stock assessments and issues management recommendations for swordfish fisheries. In 1996,
the North Atlantic swordfish stock was estimated to be at 58% of the biomass needed to produce maximum
sustainable yield. In 1997, the National Marine Rsheries Service (NMFS) identified North Atlantic swordfish as
overfished and began developing a domestic swordfish rebuilding program under the authority of the Magnuson
Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act. This plan may include time/area closures (to limit catch of
undersized fish) and import restrictions. In 1997, U.S, swordfish imports totaled more than 15,000 mt and were
worth more than US$95 million. As a major importer of swordfish, the U3. can play a role in international
conservation by ensuring that imports are from countries participating in the ICCAT conservation program. NMFS
will continue to pursue domestic strategies to rebuild this stock and will work within ICCAT to support international
rebuilding strategies. It is not clear what effect restrictions on U.S. fishermen may have in light of increasing
international fishing efforts on this highly migratory species.




   563                       09:00 Wednesday                                 BB                               THN
Interstate striped bass managaement, 1977-1998. H.M. Austin. Virginia Institute of Marine Science, College of
William and Mary, Gloucester Point, VA 23062, USA; J.G. Travel stead, Virginia Marine Resources Commission,
P.O. 756, Newport News, VA 23607, USA.

Initially, under the auspices of the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) Interstate Fisheries Management
Program, and subsequently the operation of the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission (ASMFC), striped bass
(Morone saxatilis) management of the mid-Atlantic (Virginia-Maine) stocks have showed both an initial abysmal
beginning, and a final and unique result that can claim responsibility for the dramatic recovery of the heavily fished
mid-Atlantic stocks. Recommendations were made to the ASMFC as early as 1942 for the need for more stringent
unified regulations that transcended state boundaries: but it was not until 1981 that a Scientific and Statistics
Committee recommenced to the ASMFC Striped Bass Board that the spawning grounds be closed during the
spawning season, and that the minimum size limit be 14* coast-wide, while most of the states adopted such
measures in 1982 their enforcement was voluntary. It was not until the passage of the Federal Atlantic Striped Bass
Cohservation Act in 1984, requiring full compliance with the Act that each state fulfilled their obligations.
Subsequently, a combination of protective regulations and stringent enforcement, coincident with several highly
successful dominant year classes (1987,1989, 1993, and 1996) have led to an unprecedented abundance of large
(>24*, 600 mm) fish. So successful is the program that Congress has passed subsequent coast-wide legislation
(Atlantic Coast Cooperative Fisheries Consenration and Management Act of 1994) to protect other coastal migratory
species.




   564.                   . 09:30 Wednesday                                 BB                               THN
Marine turtle movements In the Caribbean: realigning boundaries in the marine environment. A.L. Bass.
Department of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences; University of Rorida; 7922 NW 71 st Street Gainesville, Florida
32652 USA.

Mitochondrial DNA has proven useful for the elucidation of population structure and questions regarding the behavior
of adult female marine turtles. What can the analysis of multiple distinct foraging sites tell us about marine turtle
developmental habitats and movements in the Caribbean? Analyses of Juvenile foraging populations have provided
information regarding recruitment scales in the Caribbean and Atlantic. Previous studies indicate that multiple
nesting locations contribute individuals to a particular foraging site. Oftentimes these foraging sites are located
outside the geopolitical boundaries of countries supporting the nesting populations.            Determination of the
composition of Juvenile and adult foraging grounds provide information on movement and behavior of marine turtles
in the Caribbean and Atlantic. Consequently, this information is necessary for the development of management
policies directed tcmards marine turtles. Migratory behavior of marine organisms forces scientists anti management
organizations to think differently about how conservation efforts should be directed. Finally, unawareness of human
delineated boundaries emphasizes the importance of international cooperation In the maintenance of biodiversity.  565                     ... .10:15 Wednesday                                BB                                    THN
A bl-national effort to protect endangered Kemps ridley sea turtles. S.S. Heppell. Duke University Marine
Laboratory, 135 Duke Marine Lab, Road, Beaufort, North Carolina 28516 USA; R. Marquez-Milan, Institute Nacional
de la Pesoa-CRIP Manzanillo, Playa Ventanas S/N, A.P. 591, Manzanillo, Colima, Mexico 28200.

Kemp's ridley sea turtles {Lepidochelys kempi) nested in ths tens of thousands in the 194O's and were the most
abundant species in the Gulf of Mexico. Intensive egg harvest and mortality at sea caused the population to
plummet; by the mid-197O's, less than 1000 nests per year were counted at Rancho Nuevo, Mexico, the only known
nesting beach. Efforts to prevent extinction were initiated in Mexico in 1960s, and from 1966-1978 approximately
30,000 hatchlings were releaserJ per year. A United States-Mexico cooperative research and conservation program
was formed in 1978 which now protects 95% of the nests laid at Rancho Nuevo. The cooperative includes the
Mexican Ministry of Fisheries, U.S. National Parks Service, Fish and Wildlife Service, and National Marine
Fisheries Senrice. Additional research support and funding comes from the Glatts Porter Zoo in Brownsville, the
Texas Shrimpers Association and other groups. The National Marine Fisheries Service sponsored a captive
rearing program and efforts to re-establish a nesting colony at South Padre Island, Texas. Both nations passed
legislation that requires Turtle Excluder Devices on shrimp trawling gear to reduce incidental mortality. Today the
Kemps ridley population is still more than an order of magnitude below historical levels, but nests are increasing,
largely due to the dedicated efforts of two nations.




   566                  . . .10:30 Wednesday                                  BB          ,   .                      THN
Blind catfish {Prietella: Ictalurldae) phylogenies and troglobitic Invertebrates as Indicators of international
(Mexico - USA) subten-anean aquifer interconnections, and as tools for environmental risk assessment. D.A.
Hendrickson. Texas Memorial Museum, Texas Natural History Collections, R4000 / PRC176, University of Texas,
Austin, TX 78712-1100 USA; J. Krejca, Department of Zoology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712 USA; J.M.
Rodriguez Martinez, SIMEP, Inc., Eagle Pass, Texas, USA.

Hydrogeology of the highly karstic and arid Texas-Mexico border region is complex, and subterranean hydrographic
relationships poorly understood, yet these aquifers are heavily exploited for municipal, industrial and agricultural
uses. Diverse contaminants problems in the Rio Grande (= Rio Bravo) are well known, and increasing development,
especially in the border corridor, and regional large-scale pumping of aquifers, are rapidly increasing threats to
environmental health in the region. Preliminary hydrogeologic data indicating that karst flows may pass under the Rio
Granda were presented during international impact assessment hearings for a proposed hazardous waste dump in
south Texas. We apply phylogenetic and biogeographic relationships of the regional troglobitic fauna, together with
genetic distance data, as potentially convenient, quick, and relatively inexpensive, indirect measures of degree of
hydrologic interconnections among aquifers, and thus as indicators of probabilities and geographic extent of impacts
from leakage from the waste dump in Texas, or any other aquifer impact, such as excessive withdrawals. Sequence
data from miDNA of populations of Prietella phieatophlla throughout a large region of Coahuila indicate considerable
historic anil/or current connections among populations, as do distributions of less-thoroughly studied troglobitic
invertebrates broadly sympatric with this obligate cave catfish. Invertebrate distributions also support the hypothesis
of trans-border subterranean aquifer connections under the Rio Grande. Future studies will seek increased resolution
of relationships among Prietella populations, and phylogenetic hypotheses of relationships of the troglobitic
invertebrates, to further corroborate these preliminary conclusions.

   567                     .. 10:45 Wednesday                                BB     . .                              THN
Fish assemblages of the Rio Conchos and Rio Grande basins, Mexico and Texas. R.J. Edwards, Department
of Biology, The University of Texas-Pan American, Edinburg, TX 78539 USA; G.P, Garrett, Heart of the Hills
Research Station, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Ingram, TX 78025 USA; E.C. Marsh-Matthews, Museum of
Natural History and Biological Survey, University of Oklahoma, Nonnan, OK 73019 USA.

Rshes of the Rio Conchos and Rio Grande and their tributaries were surveyed from 1992 to 1995 and these
collections were compared to historical surveys. Cluster analysis of fish assemblages revealed several
distinguishable but overlapping assemblage stnictures. Two spring localities, both impacted, were dominated by
Gambusla, as were headwater localities of Rio Conchos tributaries. Lower Rio Conchos tributary localities were
more diverse and had large numbers of Notropis jemezanus, Campostoma omatum, and Gambusla senilis.
Mainstem assemblages near the Rio Conchos/Rio Grande confluence were characterized by a diverse oyprinid
component in addition to ictalurids and the Mexican tetra, and few introduced species. Other mairistem sites that
were heavily impacted by channelization and agricultural runoff were dominated by Cyprinella lutrensls and had large
numbers of introduced Tilapia. Lower canyons of the Rio Grande were chararoterized by a diverse fauna that
included both swift water species such as Rhinichthys cataractae and Maerhybosis aestivalis as well as other
species characteristic of the Chihuahuan Desert rivers. Comparison of recent to historical TOllections revealed
substantial changes in assemblage compostion in many reaches, often due to population reduction or extirpation of
species.




   571                       08:30 Wednesday                                   15                      .   . .      OVC
Northern Rmlts of reptiles: temperature-related constraints and adaptations.                      R.J. Brooks. Department of
Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, NIG 2W1.

Forty years ago, Bleakney pointed out that the factors limiting the ranges of herpetofauna had not been well studied.
This is still true. Presumably, limits are set by extreme climatic conditions in some if not all cases. The northern
limits are set by the severity of cold temperatures in winter or by the impact of summer temperatures on the
(ievelopment of the embryos. The northern limits of most Canadian reptiles are remarkably similar, especially
compared to the variation observed in amphibians. Few reptiles tolerate freezing, and in those that do the ecological
importance of this ability is not obvious. There is some evidence of latitudinal trends in physiological traits and
patterns of growth that suggest adaptation to cooler, shorter summers in northern reptiles, but not much evidence of
adaptation of pivotal temperatures of environmental sex determination, or to low incubation temperatures, nor to
colrier winters. I will discuss evidence suggesting that the nrthem distribution of reptiles is determined largely by the
length and warmth of the summer.

   568                        11:00 Wednesday                                    BB                                THN
Biodiversity crossing borders: the invasive vector In fishes. E.J. Crossman and B.C. Cudmore, Centre for
Biodiversity and Conservation, Royal Ontario, Museum, 100 Queen's Park, Toronto, Ontario M5S 2C6.

Most often measures of biodiversity have been documented and expressed in regard to political boundaries, as
opposed to ecological areas. There have been extensive programs of intentional introduciions of nonindigenous
species by agencies in one political area without prior consultation with adjacent political areas. When this situation
involves international boundaries it can lead to greater concern. The present freshwater fish fauna of Canada could
be said to result totally from fishes that have "invaded or reinvaded" Canadian waters as those wafers appeared.
The process continues today. Records starting in 1949 indicate that at least eight species have entered Canadian
wafers by moving across or around the Great Lakes and interconnecting rivers. The list includes eight species
native to the United States and seven introduced there. If we include the potential of global warming there are an
aditional 41 species to the immediate south of Canada that might invade. If we extend the list to the whole of
Canada and the United States there is a total of 63 species that have achieved part of their distribution by this vector.




   569                        11:15 Wednesday                                   Ba            ...   .              THN
Northern borders and threatened species: endangered amphibians In Canada. D.M. Green. Redpath Museum,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2K6.

The northern range limit of a species is the dynamic result of local extinction versus establishment of new
populations. This, in turn, is dependent upon dispersal, habitat availability, habitat predictability, population
dynamics, and metapopulation dynamics. In Canada, all native species of amphibians reach their northen limits. For
some, this limit lies just inside the southern Canadian border and therefore these species are candidates for
Canada's endangered species list whatever their distribution or abundance in the United States. Canada has no
endemic amphibian species. To what extent are these Canadian endangered species an artifact of the position of the
Canada/US border? Or, in consideration of the genetic distinction and isolation that may occur among northern
limital populations, how much of a biolological imperative does designation of "endangered" in Canada carry? These
questions are best addressed on a case by case basis.




   570                        08:00 Wednesday                                    15                                 OVC
Ecological physiology of cold adaptation and overwintering In Eastern Painted turtles. (Chrysemys picta
picta}. G. Ultsch. Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL. 35487; C.E. Crocker,
Division of Biology and Medicine, Brown University, Providence Rl 02912; M.E. Canwile, Department of Biological
Sciences, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL. 35487.

Abstract not received




   574                        10:30. Wednesday         .               .         15                                -OVC
Evolution of freeze tolerance in turtles: what is known? R.L. Burke. Department of Biology, Hofstra University,
Hempstead, NY, USA, 11549.

Hatchling freeze tolerance has been reported in western painted turtles (NE and various Canadian), midland painted
turtles (Ontario and OH), eastern X midland painted turtles (NJ ), and ornate box turtles (NE). Lack of hatchling
freeze tolerance has been reported in red eared sliders (IL anrJ LA), spiny soft-shelled turtles (NE), yellow mud turtles
(NE), and snapping turtles (NE). To this list I add wood turtles and common map turtles (IN) as not freeze tolerant,
and very preliminary data suggests that southern painted turtles (LA) are also freeze intolerant, while Blanding's
turtles appear to be freeze tolerant.

Understanding the evolution of this trait is complicated for several reasons. These include 1 .disagreement over the
importance of freeze tolerance vs supercooling in natural situations, 2. lack of a consistent standard for defining
freeze tolerance, 3. lack of comparable interpopulational freeze tolerance data for a species with large latitudinal
range and possible variation in this trait, and, 4. lack of a phylogenetic analysis of a clade with variation in this trait.
More work is needed.   567                         10:45 Wednesday                                  Bl                                 THN
                    ■'’* **!? f*'”                 Grande basins, Mexico and Texas. R.J. Edwards, Department
of Biology, The University of Texas-Pan Amencan, Edinburg, TX 78539 USA; G.P. Garrett, Heart of the Hills
Research Station, T^s Parks and Wildlife Department, Ingram, TX 78025 USA; E.C. Marsh-Matthew.s Museum of
Natural History and Biological Survey, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019 USA,

                 C°™:^°®.3rid Rio Grande and their tributaries were surveyed from 1992 to 1995 and these
       Uehow k               *° h'storical surveys. Cluster analysis of fish assemblages revealed several
elmbuSa^s                                              ''■"u      'oca'i*'®®, Poth impacted, were dominated^
mom                       ‘ localities of Rio Conchos tnbutanes. Lower Rio Conchos tributary localities were
more diverse and had large numbers of Notropis jemezanus, Campostoma omatum, and Gambusia senilis
Mainstem assernblages near the Rio Conchos/Rio Grande confluence were characterized by a diverse cvorinici
                       ictalunds and the Mexican tetra, and few introduced species. Other'mainster^sit^ that
                                'fagricul^rd runoff were dominated by Cyprinella lutrensls and had large
                                       canyons of the Rio Grande were chararcterized by a diverse fauna that
                                  ®k'^                cataractaa and Macrhybosis aesbValis as well as othir
suhSXi^ ohonoo? ® ’         S^'hoPhuan Desert nvers. Comparison of recent to historical collections revealed
substantial changes in assemblage composfion in many reaches, often due to population reduction or extirpation of
specioS.                                                                                                ’




  57-1                      08:30 Wednesday                         B                                          OVC
Northern llmits of reptiles: temperature<elated constraints and adaptations.                R.J. Brooks. Department of
Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, NIG 2W1.

Forty years ago, Bleakney pointed out that the factors limiting the ranges of herpetofauna had not been well studied.
This Is still true. Presumably, limits are set by extreme climatic conditions in some if not all cases. The northern
limits are set by the severity of cold temperatures in winter or by the impact of summer temperatures on the
development of the embryos. The northern limits of most Canadian reptiles are remarkably similar, especially
compared to the variation observed in amphibians. Few reptiles tolerate freezing, and in those that do the ecological
importance of this ability is not obvious. There is some evidence of latitudinal trends in physiological traits and
patterns of growth that suggest adaptation to cooler, shorter summers in northern reptiles, but not much evidence of
adaptation of pivotal temperatures of environmental sex determination, or to low incubation temperatures, nor to
colder winters. I will discuss evidence suggesting that the nrthem distribution of reptiles is determined largely by the
length and warmtii of the summer.




   572                        09:00 Wednesday                                  15                                OVC
The ecophysiology of freeze tolerant frogs: surviving the big freeze. J.R. Lavne Jr, Department of Biology,
Slippery Rock University, Slippery Rock PA 16057 USA.

At least five species of frogs from North America survive extensive freezing of their body fluids. Their limits of
tolerance emanate from the combined interactions of freeze temperature and the duration of exposure. Frogs protect
their tissues from injury by accumulating massive quantities of glucose or glycerol and by relocating body water from
major organs. The roles of physiologic^ systems in the cryobiology of these frogs are varied. Some morphological
characteristics and systemic functions are key elements supporting freeze tolerance. For example, the integument
transmits ice crystals info body fluids preventing extensive supercooling of body fluids and the cardiovascular system
actively distributes cryoprotectant from central stores in the liver to other body tissues before arresting. In contrast,
the CNS and skeletal muscle function at temporarily reduced rates upon thawing that are in proportion to the
intensity of the freeze episode. This then may affect important organismal activities such as the ability of frogs to find
and interact with mates.




   573                        09:30 Wednesday                                   15                               OVC
Molecular adaptations for freeze tolerance In amphibians and reptiles. K.B. Storey. Dept. Biology, Carleton
University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario K1S 5B6.

Various species of terrestrially-hibernating amphibians and reptiles are freeze tolerant, enduring long-term freezing
exposures with as much as 50-65 % of total body water frozen as extracellular ice. Studies in my lab explore the
biochemical adaptations underlying natural freeze tolerance. Recent studies have included analysis of the hormone,
B-adrenergic receptor, and second messenger responses underlying cryoprotectant (glucose) production by liver and
identitied a novel fbnn of Insulin in wood frogs. Other studies have madie the first analysis of freeze-induced gene
expression in vertebrate organs. Using a cDNA library constructed from livor of wood frogs (Rana sy/vatica) frozen
for 24 h at -2.5 degrees C °, we identified the freeze-induced upregulation of genes coding for the a and S subunits of
fibrinogen (a plasma dotting protein), the mitochondrial membrane ADP/ATP translocase, and a novel protein (about
90 amino acids, 10 kD) with a nuclear exporting sequence. Northern hybridization analysis showed that mRNA levels
for all three proteins (fibrinogen subunits paralleled each other) had distinct organ-specific patterns and responded
differently to freezeAhaw, dehydration, and anoxia stresses. Other studies have revealed that genes that are anoxia-
induced in freshwater turtles are also upregulated by freezing in hatchling painted turtles

   570                         .08:00 Wednesday                                                                     OVC




Abstract not received




   574                     .    10:30 Wednesday                                  15                                OVC
Evolution of freeze tolerance fn turtles: what is known? R.L. Burke. Department of Biology, Hofstra University,
Hempstead, NY, USA, 11549.

Hatchling freeze tolerance has been reported In western painted turtles (NE and various Canadian), midland painted
turtles (Ontario and OH), eastern X midland painted turtles (NJ 1, and ornate box turtles (N^. Lack of hatchling
freeze tolerance has been reported in red eared sliders (IL and LA), spiny soft-shelled turtles (NE), yellow mud turtles
(NE), and snapping turtles (NE). To this list I add wood turtles and common map turtles (IN) as not freeze tolerant,
and very preliminary data suggests that southern painted turtles (LA) are also freeze intolerant, while Blanding's
turtles appear to be freeze tolerant.

Understanding the evolution of this trait is complicated for several reasons. These include 1 .disagreement over the
importance of freeze tolerance vs supercooling In natural situations, 2. lack of a consistent standard for defining
freeze tolerance, 3. lack of comparable interpopulational freeze tolerance data for a species with large latitudinal
range and possible variation in this trait, and, 4. lack of a phylogenetic analysis of a clade with variation in this trait.
More work is needed.




   575                          11:00 Wednesday                                   15                               OVC
Skirting the edge of hypoxia: overwintering In bullfrogs. A.W. Pinder. Dalhousie University, Halifax NS B3H
4J1.

It has long been a mystery how aquatically overwintering frogs, such as bullfrogs, sunzive winter hypoxia. There
have been anecdotal reports that frogs bury in mud, but anoxic frogs survived less than two weeks at 4°C in the
laboratory, and frogs did not bury in mud when it was available. In the field, while most of the pond bottom was
severely hypoxic, the frogs were found in very cold (0-1°) and relatively well oxygenated water at the extreme edge
of the pond, centimetres below ice cover. In the laboratory, frogs in a thermal gradient chose colder temperatures
when the wafer was hypoxic (Tatfersall and Boutilier; J. Exp. Biol. 200:1031-1038). Frogs have a high Q10 (around
5) below 4°C, thus metabolism is reduced In cold water at the pond edge. Anally, the metabolic rate of ovenwintering
frogs In hypoxic water gradually decreased by 60% over several weeks, reducing fuel consumption and the amount
of oxygen required in the water (Donohoe and Boutilier, J. Exp. Biol, in press). Aquatic frogs thus remain aerobic all
winter by choosing a low environmental temperature to reduce metabolic rate, choosing water with the highest
available oxygen, and reducing metabolic rate at a constant temperature.




   576                         .. 11:30 Wednesday                                 15                               OVC
Freeze-activated signal transduction cascades In amphibians and reptiles. J.A. MacDonald and K.B. Storey,
Department of Biology, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada KI S 5B6.

Several terrestrial anurans and reptiles that live at high latitudes have developed elaborate physiological and
biochemical mechanisms for surviving cold winter temperatures. These animals can endure the conversion of up to
65% of their total body water into extracellular ice and then revive after freezing solid for days or weeks. Several
studies have indicated an important role for reversible protein phosphorylation in the regulation of freeze-induced
metabolic adaptations and documented changing patterns of activity of protein kinases A and C. New studies are
examining the roles of mftogen-acUvated protein (MAP) kinases in signal transduction in freeze-tolerant and anoxia-
tolerant frogs and turtles. Stress- and organ-specific changes have been found in ths responses of the extracellular
signal-regulated kinases (ERKs), the stress-activated protein kinases (SAPKs), and p38 that indicate differential
functions in cell response to stress. Other studies have monitored stress-induced changes in transcription factors by
Western blotting and electrophoretic mobility shift assays; these bind to DNA at the promoter regions of their target
genes and induce gene expression in response to cellular stress. The patterns of MAP kinase activation in stress-
tolerant animals suggest the importance of these modules in adapting to oxygen deprivation and severe osmotic
stress and identity freezing as a novel activator of MAP kinases.                             08:00 Wednesday                                CR3                                CHM
  577
Estimates of oopulation size and density for the rainbow water snake, Enhydris enhydns mornaiopsinae) in
Ske Songkia^haiiand. H.K. Voris and J.C. Murphy, Department of Zoology, Field Museum, Chicago, IL 60605,
D.R. Kams, Department of Biology, Hanover College, Hanover, IN 47243 USA.
The 98 000-hectare Lake SongMa wetland complex is one of Thailand's most uriique and irnportant natural
resources. It is home to one of the most taxonomically diverse assemblages of aquatic snakes in the worid. One
species of true sea snake (Hydrophis brooki!), one species of file snake (Acrochordus              .3*X
species of Asian water snakes (Homalopsinae) live here. We happed ma^ed, arid related 2M ranb^ water
snakes (Enhydns enhydris') on 13 consecutive days in a marsh near the village of Ban Tha^^Hin. A tot^ of 380
snakes were traoDed in a 1.5 ha area and of these 144 were previously marked. Schumachers estimate of the
population size 15^473 snakes (95% confidence limits = 406 to 567 snakes) and the Schnabel binomial estimate
usmg the poisson approximation is 446 snakes (95% confidence lirnite = 371 to 561 snakes), ^nhy^
sperids the majority of its time in the mud-root-tangle at the edge of dittoes, pools and
indicate that most snakes are found in a one meter wide band along the aquatic edges. We estimate the linear
density of Enhydris enhydris lo be approximately 0.5 snakes per square meter of shoreline.




                             08:15:Wednesday                                 CR3                               CHM
   578
Habitat utilization, movements, and activity patterns of an aMemblage of aqu^c snakes in ^ke Songkia,
Thailand. D.R. Kams. Biology Department, Hanover College, Hanover, IN 47243, USA, H.K. Vons and J.C.
Murphy, Department of Zoology, Field Museum, Chicago,, IL 60605 USA.
We conducted a radiotelemetrio study of aquatic snakes in a wetland meadow in Lake SongWa Thalar^d We
monitored three species of homalopsine (11 Enhydris enhydris. two Enhydns plumbea, one Homatops/s bL^cata),
one pipe snake {Cylindrophis ruffus), and one common keelback (Xenochrophis riavipunclalum) tor
snakes utilized the subsurface mud-root-fangle along aquatic edges and made particular use of man-m^e fe^res.
Enhydris plumbea, H. buccata, and C. rufhjs were relatively sedentary (mean dai y                                  ® f")
compared lo the more variable and active E. enhydris (mean daily movement: 5 males = 32.6 m 6 fema es - 21.3
m) We found no significant difference between the movements of male and fernale E. enh^ns (all females in
reproductive condition). Xenocbroph/s flavipunctatum (rnean daily movement = 23.8 m) was                              JS
actively forage away from aquatic edges. We found no significant difference behveen day and "ight rnoyements
three E. enhydris (mean day movement = 6.6 m; night = 11 m) nor between too E.
2.3; night = 2.8). Important factors affecting the spatial ecology of snakes in tropical wetlands will be discussed.




                              08:30 Wednesday                                 CR3                              ■ CHM
   579
Time-energy allocation in timber rattlesnakes (Crotalua horrldus}-. affects o*’""V®'Y®''’®’’®"
success. S J. Beaupre. University of Arkansas, Department of Biological Sciences, Fayetteville, AR 72701 USA.

 Studies of the affects of natural variation in food availability may provide valuable insighUegarding mechanisrns ttiat
 govern population dynamics and the responses of individuals to environmental change.^ The use of ‘®l®^®*ry'rtJ®!Q®
 bodied snakes such as the timber rattlesnake allows simultaneous monitonng of multiple ^®P°rt®®®
 the environment I monitored feeding rates, growth, reproductive activities, time allocation and field metabolic rates
 in a sample of radiotagged timber rattlesnakes during a high and low resource V®®'-
 timber rattesnakes exhibited lower feeding rates than ten radiotagged snakes dunng 1997 ^^es e^ibrted
 significantly greater size-adjusted growth rates during 1997. Dunng the low resource year, no reproductive^Mfies
 were observed, however, under conditions of high feeding rates, fourteen independent reproductive assiraatioiTS
 were observed among 10 radiotagged snakes. Snakes in low resource oondibons spent a higher proportion of
 available daylight time engaged in foraging, whereas, under high resource conditions, ^rt®*^®®JP®?*
 resting and reproductive activities. The simultaneous measurement of multiple responses to rt®*';^!®'
 variafion suggests environmental dependencies in the rules of time-energy all^ation. An understanding of those
 dependencies will allow greater accuracy in the prediction of responses of individuals and populations to changes in
 the environment.




    583                        09:30 Wednesday                                CR3                                CHM
 Experimental analyses of interactions between native and exotic lizardspecies using dredge spoil islands in
 Florida. T.S. Campbell. Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology 569 Dabney Hall, University of
 Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996 USA.

 The Cuban brown anole (Anolis sagrei) was introduced into south Rorida about 50 years ago, and is now arguably
 the most numerous tenestrial vertebrate on the peninsula. This, along with habitat alteration, coincides with the
 decline of the native green anole (Anolis carolinensis) in Florida. To experimentally assess the brown anole's role in
 the decline, I introduced brown anoles onto three dredge spoil islands occupied by greens, and used three islands
 with native greens as controls. Islands contained forested and non-forested habitats. Populations were monitored
 for four years with capture-mark-recapture techniques, and detailed microhabitat and spatial data was collected.
 Brown anole populations became very dense within too years. Green anole control population sizes and habitat use
 parameters remained stable, whereas treatment populations crashed, and the few remaining greens utilized different
 habitat types than their ancestors. Gut content analyses gave Planka's dietary overlap values above 0.9, indicating
 food resource competition, and also showed that both species eat each other's hatchlings. Ths interaction was
 highly asymmetric, favoring brown anoles In all habitat types. However, green anoles survived in forested areas also
 containing patches of dense-shrubby vegetation, which may have helped their hatchlings successfully run the brown
 anole gauntlet.

   580                      08:45 Wednesday                                 CR3                               CH^
Is the long-nosed snake, Rhinocheilus lecontel (Colubridae), a specialist predator? J.A. Ri^riquez-Robl-^ and
H W Greene, Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 3101 Valley Life Sciences Building. University of California, Berkeley,
California 94720-3160 USA.
We explored the issue of predator specialization by examining dietary variation in the widespread North Amencan
long-nosed snake, Rhinocheilus lecontei. >Ne examined the stomach contents of rnore than 800 museum
specimens, and supplemented our findings with published dietary records. Sixty-six percent of 134 prey eaten by R.
lecontei were lizards, 26% were mammals, and 6% were squamate eggs; teiid lizards of the genus Cnemidophorus
comprised 72'7o of all lizard prey. Mexican R. Lecontei that contained food were significantly larger than specimens
from the United States and consumed a higher percentage of mammals. To assess the relative degree of trophic
niche breadth of R. lecontei, we compared the frequency of lizards and of Cnemidophorus in me diet of long-nosed
snakes with the frequency with which other terrestrial alethinophidian snakes consumed lizards as modal prey and
with which these same serpents ate the lizard genus they most commonly fed on. Although there are no statistical
reasons for labeling R. lecontei a specialist, its diet might often be restricted to lizards and even to Cnemidophorus.




                             09:00 Wednesday                                 CR3                               CHM ■
   581
Sprint performance of the endangered giant lizard of El Hierro Galtotia simonyi, (Sauria. Lacerhdae). A
compar^n with Gallotla caesaris and Gallotia stehlinl. R. Marquez, Centro de Biologia Ambient^, Faculdade
de Ciencias, Universidade de, Usboa, P 1700 Lisboa, Portugal. (RM) Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales. Jose
Gutierrez Abasoal 2. 28006 Madrid, Spain; D. Cejudo, Asociacion, Herpetoldgica Espanola, Senador Castillo
Olivares 10, 35003 Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain.
Predation bv introduced vertebrates caused the near extinction of the giant lizard of the Canarian island of El Hierro
Gallotia simonyi (Sauria,Lacertidae). Thus, antipredator behavior such as escape (spent perforrnance) may have
played a major role. We studied temperature dependent sprint performance in the captive popiriation of the giant
lizard and we compared performance with G. caesaris, a small-sized lizard abundant throughout El Hierro, and with
G steNini an abundant large sized lizard from the island of Gran Canaria. Among adults, maximum speed was
significantly higher in the G stehlini, both in absolute (nVs) and relative speed (SVL/s). G. simony and the smaller
sympatric G. caesaris did not differ significantly in maximum speeds (m/s). Juvenile G. amontn were slower than
juvenile G. stehlini but the differences were significant only in absolute speed           Juvenile G. sirnonyi were
significantly slower than similar sized adult G. caesaris. Adults from the captive population of G. simonyi should not
be used for reintroduction because their sprint performance may have been hampered by prolongued captivity.
Juveniles could be released although introduced predators should be cicely monitored due to the lower sprint
performance of juvenile G. simonyi compared to the similar sized adult G. caesans which are abundant in the
reintroduction area.




                              09:15 Wednesday                                 CR3                               CHM
    582
Trapping webs may be useful for estimating densities of selected terrestrial Uzards. (IH. Rodda, USGS
Patuxent Wildlife Research Center, 4512 McMurry Ave., Fort Collins, CO 80525 USA; S.R. Vogt. CNMI Div. Rsh and
Wildlife Lower Base, P.O. Box 10007, Saipan, MP 96950 USA; K.E. Allen. Guam National Wildlife Refuge, P.O. Box
 8134, MOU-3, Dededo, GU 96912 USA.
 In 1983 Anderson and colleagues proposed that radial arrays of traps (trapping webs) could be used to estirnate
 absolute population density of trappable species, in a manner analogous to the visual/auditory arcular plots widely
 used for estimating densifies of passerine birds. We tested the validity of this approach by settiiTg radial aiW® Oj
 glueboards for lizards in forested areas of Guam and Saipan islands prior to or shortly after conducting total removal
 sampling for the same species in the same areas. One of too skink species sampled, Carita fuses, is readily trapped
 and may be attracted to traps by previously-caught conspecifics. The abundance estimate for this species, as
 estimated by five trapping webs, exceeded the estimate provided by total removal in three cases and was less than
 file total rernoval estimate in too others. The 95% confidence limits overlapped the total removal estimate in one of
 five cases The density of the other lizard species sampled, Emoia caeruleocauda, was grossly underestimated by
 three trapping webs. On days of suitable weather (e.g., sunshine for heliophils) trapping webs may provide useful it
 imprecise^ estimates of absolute abundance for species that are abundant, readily trapped, terrestrial, and relatively
 uniform in distribution.




     586                       10:45 Wednesday                                 CR3                              CHM
 Seasonal variation in shelter use by Gila monsters in the Chihuahuan Desert of New Mexico. R.D. Jennings.
 Department of Natural Sciences, Western New Mexico University, P.O. Box 680, Silver City, NM 88062, USA; D.D.
 Beck, Department of Biological lienees. Central Washington University, Ellensburg, WA 98926, USA.

 In southwestern New Mexico's Chihuahuan Desert, Gila monsters (Heloderma suspectum) may avoid extreme
 environmental conditions In underground shelters. Because shelters that are suitable during cold winter months may
 not be so during the hot and dry summer, we investigated differences in shelter use across seasons. No differences
 were detected in entrance dimensions, but shelters used in the fall and winter were deeper than those of the spring
 and summer. Spring and winter shelters were frequently in rocky substrata, while summer shelters were more
 typically In better developed soils. Winter shelter entrances were strongly oriented toward the south, while those of
 other seasons were more variable In orientation. Slopes containing winter shelters also were strongly oriented
 toward the south, while those of spring and summer shelters were oriented toward the east and souAeast. We
 explored relationships between the physical attributes of shelters and their microclimates (temperature and humidity)
 using miniature data loggers. Winter shelters provided warmer microclimates during the winter, while summer
 shelters provided more humidity during the summer, when compared to shelters from other seasons. A large
 proportion of winter shelters are reused, suggesting that suitable winter shelters are relatively less common than
 shelters suitable for use in other seasons.       579                          08:30 Wednesday                                   CR3                                 CHM
                                                                  horrldusy. affects of annual variation in foraging
    success, g       Beaupre, University of Arkansas, Department of Biological Sciences, Fayetteville, AR 72701 USA. ’

     nnvom                                           ‘o ’ood availabiliV may provide valuable insight regarding mechanisms that
     hS^®?!                   dynamics and the responses of individuals to environmental change. The use of telemetry in large
    tho^nnvimnmo                as the timber rattlesnake allows simultaneous monitoring of rnultiple responses to ctoges in
     in                  *■ i            feeding rates, growth, reproductive activities, time allocation, and field metabolic rates
    ti7nhn?TaHilfnJv«°n^i?h^ Ti^®*^ raWesiiakes dunng a high and low resource year. In 1996, thirteen radiotagged
    ck^nifin^nih?®"^®®                    Itwor feeding rates than ten radiofagged snakes during 1997. Snakes exhibried
    woTO^nh?onm^®h®'^ size-adjusfed growrth rates during 1997. During the low resource year, no reproductive activities
    wire IblllSd amnnn®ih reH?nffnn‘^H°"®v°' ^'^5 *®v®‘^'"3                     fourteen independent reproductive associations
                                      radiofagged snakes. Snakes in low resource conditions spent a higher proportion of
                                               foraging, whereas, under high resource conditions, snakes spent more ti™ in
                    reproductive activities. The simultaneous measurement of multiple responses to natural environmental
    rimnriBnHofl^ii?!.?i"'"^"'’’T"*® dependencies in the rules of time-energy allocation. An understanding of these
    dependencies will allow greater accuracy in the prediction of responses of individuals and populations to changes in
    ifiw wi iviroiirnvrii.




      ■583                         09:30 Wednesday                                   CR3                                 CHM
    Experimental analyses of Interactions between native and exotic llzardspecles using dredge spoil islands in
    Florida. T.S. Catnpbell. Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology 569 Dabney Hall, University of
    Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996 USA.

    The Cuban brown anole (Anolis sagrei) was introduced into south Florida about 50 years ago, and is now arguably
    the most numerous terrestrial vertebrate on the peninsula. This, along with habitat alteration, coincides with the
    decline of the native green anole (Ano/is carolinensis] in Rorida. To experimentally assess the brown anole's role in
    the decline, I introduced brown anoles onto three dredge spoil islands occupied by greens, and used three islands
    with native greens as controls. Islands contained forested and non-forested habitats. Populations were monitored
    for four years with capture-mark-recapture techniques, and detailed microhabitat and spatial data was collected.
    Brown anole populations became very dense within two years. Green anole control population sizes and habitat use
    parameters remained stable, whereas treatment populations crashed, and ths few remaining greens utilized different
    habitat types than their ancestors. Gut content analyses gave Pianka's dietary overlap values above 0.9, indicating
    food resource competition, and also showed that both species eat each other's hatchlings. The interaction was
    highly asymmetric, favoring brown anoles in all habitat types. However, green anoles sunrived in forested areas also
    containing patches of dense-shnjbby vegetation, which may have helped their hatchlings successfully run the brown
    anols gauntlet




       584                        09:45 .Wednesday                                  CR3                                  CHM
    Gray rat snakes, do th^ specifically target red-cockaded woodpecker nestlings for depredation? J.H. Cole
    and L.W. Burger, Mississippi State Universi^, Dept, of Wildlife and Rsheries, USA.

    The highly arboreal gray rat snake (Elaphe obsoleta spiloides} is a significant predator upon endangered red-
    cockaded woodpeckers (RCWs) (Picoides borealis). Snake excluder traps were used to detennine sel^tivity for
    RCW nest trees, active roost trees, inactive roost trees and within cluster and outside cluster random trees by
    capturing snakes attempting to climb trees. Tree cavities were assessed to determine current use status and
    captures on nest trees simulated depredations upon RCWs. Snakes climbed RCW nest trees on 14 occations (10
    climbs during nestling periods and 4 cimbs during post-fledgling periods). Inactive roosts were climbed 16 times,
    each having documented use of cavities by non-RCW species. Only three climbs were made upon active roost trees
    and none on random trees. In addition, 22 gray rat snakes were monitored via radio telemetry to assess home range
    size, habitat composition, spatial distribution and individual habitat preferences throughout Noxubee National Wildlife
    Refuge, Noxubee and Winston counties, Mississippi, during 1997. Data indicate random selection for any cavity
    using species by gray rat snakes, but, any chance selection for RCWs is important given the limited fecundity of this
    bird. Also, depredations upon RCW nest trees appears not to be random temporally. Snakes tend to visit RCW
    cluster areas only dumg the nesting season and seem to specifically target RCW nest trees during the nestling
    period. If non-iethal detenents to gray rat snake depredation can be found for RCW nest trees, the snake could serve
    as a management tool to eliminate competitors and predators of RCWs through depredation of these species, while
    presenting RCW nestiings.



1

       585                         -10:30 Wednesday                                  CR3                         , ,    CHM
    Daily refugia of brown tree snakes on Guam: location choice and thermal implications. G. Perry, B. Coupe.
    N. Anderson and T. Hetherington, Ohio Cooperative Rsh and Wildlife Research Unit, Department of ZoologyAOSU,
    1735 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210 USA; J. Williams, Department of Zoology/OSU, 1735 Neil Avenue,
    Columbus, OH 43210 USA.

    The brown tree snake (BTS, Sofga irregularis) was accidentally introduced on Guam approximately 50 years ago,
    and has caused major ecological and economic impacts. As a result, much research has been devoted to the biology
    of this nocturnal, arboreal snake. However, few data exist on the diurnal refugia of this species, or that of other
    nocturnal, arboreal snakes. We radio-tracked 11 BTSs to their daily refugia in a limestone forest on Guam. Each
    snake was followed for 9-13 consecutive days. Each morning we tracked each snake to its refuge, visually sighting
    most of them. We characterized each refuge, and obtained data on the temperature inside many using Hobo loggers,
    insetted into the refugium after the snake left. We also conducted a survey of the vegetation at our study site, to
    compare utilization with availability. About 90% of 127 refugia were above ground, typically in trees. Snake refugium
    use was not random. BTSs strongly preferred some species (e.g. Pandanus provided 72.4% of refuges, but only
    comprised about 6.5% of canopy cover). This choice may be related to the thermal and hydric environment provided
    by this unusual tree. We discuss these preferences and some of their implications.

                                       Compared to the similar sized adult G.'caesans which are abundarininhe
 iwiniroQucuon ar6a«




    582                     . 09:15 Wednesday                                CR3                               CHM

                                                    ISIS; c5»’!SS''8S5ai STw
 fo 19M Anderaon and colleagues proposed that radial arrays of traps (trapping webs) could be used to estimate
ulld                                                1?,® rtianner analogous to the visual/auditory circular plots Sly
used for estimating densities of passerine birds. We tested the validity of this approach bv settina radial armvs of
glueboards for lizards in forested areas of Guam and Saipan islands prior to or shortly after conductinq total rernoval
                     hl’S®?®/,”®?’®® '"?® ®®'P®                       species sampfed,Carffe S,fereaXwd
llrimateri                           previously-caught conspecifics. The abundance estimate for this specieSs
estimated by five trapping webs, exceeded the estimate provided by total removal in three cases and was less than
me total rem^al estirnate in two others. The 95% confirFence limits^ overiappedfee tSreS ISl fe Ine o^
five cas®s. The density rfthe other lizard species sampled, Emoia caeruleocauda, was grossly underestimated bv
knDrerisoPeliiml?es 5ah            suitable weather (e.g., ^nshine for heliophils) trapping webs may provide useful, if
uniformin'dlstribltton^ absolute abundance for species that are abundant, readily trapped, terrestrial, and relatively




   586                       -10:45 Wednesday                               CR3                               CHM
Seasonal variation In shelter use by Gila monsters In the Chlhuahuan Desert of New Mexico. R.D. Jenninos.
Department of Natural Sciences, Western New Mexico University, P.O. Box 680, Silver City, NM 88062, USA; D.D.
Beck, Department of Biological Sciences, Central Washington University, Ellensburg, WA 98926, USA.

In southwestern New Mexico's Chihuahuan Desert, Gila monsters (Heloderma suspectum) may avoid extreme
environmental conditions in underground shelters. Because shelters that are suitable during cold winter months may
not be so during the hot and dry summer, we investigated differences in shelter use across seasons. No differences
were detected in entrance dimensions, but shelters used in the fall and winter were deeper than those of the spring
and summer. Spring and winter shelters were frequently in rocky substrata, while summer shelters were more
typically in better developed soils. Winter shelter entrances were strongly oriented toward the south, while those of
other seasons were more variable in orientation. Slopes containing winter shelters also were strongly oriented
toward the south, while those of spring and summer shelters were oriented toward the east and southeast. We
explored relationships between the physical attributes of shelters and their microclimates (temperature and humidity)
using miniature data loggers. Winter shelters provided warmer microclimates during the winter, while summer
shelters provided more humidity during the summer, when compared to shelters from other seasons. A large
proportion of winter shelters are reused, suggesting that suitable winter shelters are relatively less common than
shelters suitable for use in other seasons.




   587                       11:00 Wednesday                                CR3                               CHM
Reproductive aspects of the turtle Podocnemls expansa from the Colombian Amazonia. N.C. Valenzuela.
Department of Ecology and Evolution SUNY at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-5245 USA.

A field study of the relationship between female size and clutch depth in Podocnemls expansa was carried out at the
Middle Caqueta River, Colombian Amazonia. Measurements of width and diagonal of the trails left by the females on
the sand were used as surrogates of female size. Clutch and egg sizes were also studied as well as the relationship
to female size. Larger females laid more and larger eggs which were buried deeper. Hatchling size was positively
assodated with egg size. Temperature profiles of the sand varied with depth. Effects of nest depth on sex ratios are
discussed together with implications for lifetime sex ratios produced by females and population sex ratios in nature.
Data showed no evidence supporting the Optimal Propagule Size models in this fresh water turtle. No evidence was
found of small females producing suboptimd size eggs.




   588                       11:15 Wednesday                                CR3                               CHM
Timing, temperatures, and behavior of hibernating Gopherus agassizil in the northeastern Mojave Desert.
D.F. Haines and T.C. Esque, United States Geological Survey, Biological Resources Division, 345 E, Riverside
Drive, St. George, UT 84790 USA; C.R. Tracy, Biological Resources Research Center, Univ, of Nevada, Reno,
Reno, NV 89557-0015 USA.

Desert tortoises (Gopherus agassizii) retreat to hibernacula during winter monfhs in the northern part of their range.
We studied hibernation behavior and quantified hibernaculum characteristics of radio-telemetered tortoises at two
sites in the northeastern Mojave Desert. These sites differ in elevation, physiognomy and vegetation. Miniature
temperature-recording data loggers were attached to these tortoises previous to the onset of hibernation and
removed after, emergence in 1995-1996 (n=13) and in 1996-1997 (n=16). The average hibernation onset dates
were: 4 Nov 95 (SD=12.24 days) and 24 Oct 96 (SD=7.99 days). The average hibernation termination dales were
24 Mar 96 (SD=14S9 days) and 13 Mar 97 (SD=4.37 days). These dates were significantly different between the
two hibernation seasons (onset: P=0.0058; termination: P=0.009). The duration of hibernation was not significantly
different between sites, genders and seasons. Two tortoises experienced ambient temperatures below 0 degrees C
(#464 < 2 hours; #5131 < 4 hours) while outside their hibernacula In April 1997 and survived. All air temperatures
inside hibernacula remained above 2 degrees C. The hibernacula at one site were investigated with a fiberoptic light
scope to determine depths that tortoises occupied. Correlations are made between hibernacula temperatures and
the depth of the tortoises.  589                        11:30 Wednesday                               CB3.                          ... CHM
Inter-generic hybrids In emydid turtles, description and possible significance. J.H. Harding, MSU Museurn.
Michigan'State University, East Lansing, Ml 48824-1045 USA; S.K. Davis, Department of Animal Science, Texas A
& M University, College Station, TX 77843 USA.
Hybridization events between species and genera of emydid turtles are rarely reported. Putative hybrids reported
here include cresses between Clenmys insculpta and Emydoidea blandingii, Graptemys sp. and Trachemys scnpta,
and Pseudemys sp. and Trachemys scripta. intergeneric matings took place under captive conditions, although in
large outdoor semi-natural enclosures. Supporting data on parentage from mitochondrial and nuclear DNA analyses
will be also be presented. The Clemmys X Emydoidea hybrids display a blending of parental charactenstics;
expression of certain morphological and behavioral traits may, speculatively, represent traits that were present in a
common ancestor of the parental species. Living hybrid specimens will be studied to determine rates of fertility and
ontogeny of morphological and behavioral characters. .Should these hybrids prove to be fertile, crosses will be
initiated in order to follow the segregation of traits defining these different Emydid genera.




   590                       11:45 Wednesday                   .   .       CR3                .,             CHM^
Habitat use and home range of the Blanding's turtle {Emydoidea biandingu) and the spotted turtle {Clemmys
guttata) In northeast Indiana. C.E. Bariow and B A Kingsbury. Department of Biology. Indiana-Purdue University,
Ft. Wayne, IN 46805 USA.
Blanding's turtles and spotted turtles are listed as Endangered by the state of Indiana. We are using telernetiy to
study their habitat use and patterns of movement in a wetland complex in the Pigeon River Fish and Wildlife Area, in
northeastern Indiana. Home range analysis revealed that individuals used extensive areas, but also exhibited fidelity
to particular sites. Spotted turtles were most often obsen/ed in shallow vegetation patches dominated by sedges,
cattail, and small shrubs. Blanding's turtles, however, used a relatively broader range of miorohabitats. including
open water, scrub-shrub and areas dominated by lilypads and sedges. They also tended to use deeper areas than
spotted turtles. Movement between wetlands and terrestrial activity was observed in both species of varying
degrees. In addition to summarizing our findings on habitat use and home ranges, we will discuss the implications of
these findings for conserving the species.




   591                     . 08:00 Wednesday ...                           CF12                               MCN
Spawning and fecundity In the vermilion snapper (Lut|anidae: Rhomboplites aurorubens) frorn the
northeastern Gulf of Mexico. L.A. Collins. A.G. Johnson, J.H. Brosher and M.G. Remy, National Manne Fishenes
Senrice, 3500 Delwood Beach Road, Panama City, FL 32408, USA.
The vermilion snapper (Lutjanidae: Rhomboplites aurorubens) is an important species to commercial and
recreational fishers in the southeastern United States, especially in the northern Gulf of Mexico and off the coast of
the Carolinas in the South Atlantio Bight (SAB). A recent publication by Cuellar et al. was the first to use the most
effective techniques on reproduction of multiple-spawning fishes (from Hunter et al. 1985, and Hunter and Macewicz
1985) on vermilion snapper, from samples taken during 1992 and 1993 from the SAB. We used similar techniques
as those used by Cuellar et al. (1996) on 1,962 vermilion snapper ranging from 195 to 570 mm total lerigtti dunng
1991-1994 from the northeastern Gulf of Mexico (NEGOM). Most (70 %) of our fish were sampled from the
recreational catch and fishing-depth was 31 to 98 m. We estimated that 1993-1994 sex ratio was 1:1 batch fecundity
was 26,761-415,161 hydrated oocytes, average-annual spawning frequency was 44 in 1993 and 23 in 1994, and
annual fecundity was 0.62-21.9 million. Our estimates of batch fecundity, spawning frequency and annual fecundity
were all greater (at fish length) than for SAB vermilion snapper (Cuellar et al. 1996). Possible causes of these
differences are water temperature, preservation, diet, length of spawning season, and sampling techniques.




    595                      09 15 Wednesday .                             CF12                              MCN
Reproductive ecology of guH toadfish {Opsartus beta). S.J. Allee and W.A. Bennett. University of West Florida,
Florida USA.

Gulf toadfish, Opsanus beta, are pooriy represented in ecological studies and their reproductive strategies relatively
undefined. Our preliminary investigations into breeding seasons and mating behaviors of a Florida gulf toadlish
population have revealed several unique and previously undocumented strategies. Ten replicates, each with 5 nest
types, were placed in the field and observed from February until November for toadlish activities. Gulf toadfish
appear to participate in a bi-peaked breeding season. Males established nests and females oviposit during the month
of May, then all fish disappear until late July and breeding resumed in September. Male and female toadfish
apparently discriminate between nest types differently. Females preferred nests with one opening over those that
are accessible to the surrounding environment through multiple openings. Males, however, showed distinct
preferences between the five different nest types based on charactenstics of each nest. Males that occupy nests
adjacent to other male-occupied nests appear to have greater reproductive success than lone males, contradicting
the traditional view that toadfish are highly aggressive and territorial. Male gulf toadfish do not appear to
aggressively defend any territory beyond their immediate nest site, an observation which may explain why males in
groups experience greater reproductive success.

  592                        08:15 Wednesday                 .              CF12                              MCN
Lack of synchrony In the reproductive cycles of male and female blackbelly rosefish, Hellcolenus
dactylopterus, off the Atlantic coast of the southeastern United States. D.M. Wyanski, D.B White and G.R,
Sedbeny, Marine Resources Research, Institute, P.O. Box 12559, Charleston, SC 29422 USA,

Histological examination of gonad tissue from 1300 specimens showed that blackbelly rosefish have intraovarian
gestation. Fertilization is internal, as free spermatozoa were found primarily in resting ovaries from July through
December with peak occurrence in September through November. There was a delay of one to three months before
fertilization, as oocyte development did not begin until December. Occurrence during January through April of early-
celled embryos, the most advanced stage observed, and postovulatory follicles indicated that oocyte development
was rapid. Embryos composed of a blastodermal cap and a large yolk mass were surrounded by a clear gelatinous
matrix within the ovary. The reproductive mode in blackbelly rosefish appeared to be intermediate between oviparify
and viviparity.




   593                      .08:30 Wednesday                     .,          CF12                               MCN
Sperm modifications associated with Insemination in glandulocaudine fishes. J.R, Bums, Department of
Biologic^ Sciences. George Washington University, Washington, D.C, 20052, USA; S.H. Weitzman, Dept.
Vertebrate Zoology. MRC159. NMNH, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. 20560, USA.

Previous results have demonstrated that females within the subfamily Glandulocaudinae (family Characidae) are
inseminated. With the exception of one genus that transfers sperm with spherical nuclei (’aquasperm') to the
female, the species of all other genera transfer sperm with elongated nuclei. We have been carrying out
transmission electron microscopy on the testes of available species in order to describe the morphology of the
mature sperm and to ascertain the mechanisms of nuclear elongation. Additionally, our results have uncovered
potential characters that may prove useful in hypothesizing phylogenetic relationships among these taxa. Within the
Glandulocaudinae, the mature spermatozoa of the genera Diapoma , Hysteronotus , Corynopoma and
Pseudocorynopoma all have the anterior portion of the flagellum contained within an elongated cytoplasmic collar.
The mature spermatozoa of Mimagoniates barbed , M. microlepis and M. rheochatis , on the other hand, have
very short cytoplasmic collars with the flagellum free along most of its length. However, an analysis of
spermiogenesis in these three species showed that during spermatid development, the cytoplasmic collar (containing
the flagdlum) initially elongates substantially, but subsequently most of the collar degenerates before maturation is
complete. Therefore, for the species thus far analyzed, an elongated cytoplasmic collar at least at some point during
development may be a synapomorphy.




   594                       09:00 Wednesday'                         .     CF12                             . MCN
Poecilia formosa, an all-female fish? M. Doebler, I. Schlupp and J. Parzefall, Zool. Inst.u. Mus., -Martin-Luther-
King-Platz 3, 20146 Hamburg, Germany.
Poectlia formosa is known as an all-female species which reproduces gynogenetically. Normally sperm from closly
related species trigger the embryogenesis. After breeding Poecilia foimosa for 10 years in our laboratory now, we
found phenotypic males for the first time last year. The most important question now is whether the masculinized fish
are functional Poecilia formosa males which can even reproduce or if they occur because of an error in the
development and are therefore only deformed females. To find out the possible effects of these phenotypic males for
the whole reproduction complexes, we examined the morphology and the behavior. We could prove that the Poecilia
formosa males have a gonopodium, the muscle that moves the gonopodium, a suspensorium and male gonads. With
standardized choice experiments we could show that the Poecilia formosa males prefer Poecilia formosa females to
Poecilia latipinna females and Poecilia mexicana females. And Poecilia formosa females prefer Poecilia formosa
males to Poecilia mexicana males and other Poecilia formosa females. So from the behavior we could expect a
normal intraspecific reproduction, as well. On top of these results we got a couple of broods of Poecilia formosa
males and Poecilia formosa females since September last year.




   598                    „ .10:30 Wednesday                                 CF12                              MCN
Morphology and life history of the marine threespine stickleback {Gasterosteus aculeatus). R.W. Kino Deol
of Biology, Clark University, 950 Main St., Worcester, MA 01610, USA.                                     '

At the dose of the last gladal period, only some 15,000 years ago, numerous and varied freshwater aquatic habitats
were formed. The threespine stickleback was one of the first fish to colonize these habitats, and these populations
have undergone a spectacular adaptive radiation. The threespine stickleback inhabiting nearby coastal marine
habitats is the stock from which these freshwater populations were founded. Thus, both the diredion and degree of
change following freshwater isolation can be inferred by comparing freshwater and marine stickleback. However, the
manne form actually may comprise two types: one living and breeding only in marine waters; and a second,
anadromous type. At present we know relatively little about whether these types differ in any substantive way.
Further, we know little about variation within these types. I present preliminary morphological and life-historical data
showing that these types may not bo as similar as previously thought, and I compare the level of apparent
phenotypic variability with that eirhibifed by freshwater populations. SB^MSlg
 1991-1994 fmm*«£^northeaJieMli^of^^'STnEGoKos?
 wa?" 415                             '° ®® "’•
                                                                                                   "’"’ '°‘^ W ‘’“^9
                                                                    that W9X°1994 sex rafio wlTlTba^ fecTndSy
 annScundty’wU                                                                                and 2BT/^4“"an‘X
 we^ all greate^ (a. fish lengft)“fo?                                                             SSS’S®
 differences are water femperafure, preservation, diet, length ofTpaw'ning season a-^d s^UlShnTues




   595                       09:15 Wednesday                            .   CF.12      .    .. .              MCN
Reproductive ecology of gulf toadfish (Opsanus beta). S.J. Allee and W.A. Bennett. University of West Florida,
Florida USA.

Gulf toadfish. Opsanus beta, are poorly represented in ecological studies and their reproductive strategies relatively
undefined. Our preliminary investigations into breeding seasons and mating behaviors of a Florida gulf toadfish
population have revealed several unique and previously undocumented strategies. Ten replicates, each with 5 nest
types, were placed in the field and observed from February until November for toadfish activities. Gulf toadfish
appear to participate in a bi-peaked breeding season. Males established nests and females oviposit during the month
of May, then all fish disappear until late July and breeding resumed in September. Male and female toadfish
apparently discriminate between nest types differently. Females preferred nests with one opening over those that
are accessible to the surrounding environment through multiple openings. Males, however, showed distinct
preferences between the five different nest types based on charactenstics of each nest. Males that occupy nests
adjacent to other male-occupied nests appear to have greater reproductive success than lone males, contradicting
the traditional view that toadfish are highly aggressive and territorial. Male gulf toadfish do not appear to
aggressively defend any territory beyond their immediate nest site, an obsenration which may explain why males in
groups experience greater reproductive success.




   596                       09:30 Wednesday                                CF12                             -.MCN
Reproduction of Pseudoplatlstoma corruscans (Silurfformes: Pimelodidae) in the Paranri River, State of Sao
Paulo, Brazil. N. Buck. Institution: Departamento de Educacao UNESP Campus de Assis, SP.

Pseudoplatlstoma corruscans is a migratory species of economic interest. It is widely distributed in South America (in
the basins of ths Parana, San Francisco and Paraguay Rivers) and reproduces in floodplain lagoons where it spends
the first phases of its life. Monthly collections, from January 1985 to January 1988, were done performed in 150km of
Parang River, State of Sao Paulo, Brazil. A total of 255 fish were examined (56% young and 44% adults) measuring
between 20.0 and 170.0 cm in total length. Data on body length at first sexual maturation was estimated to be 73.0
cm. This is larger than minimum capture size for this specie determined by the Brazilian Environmental Agency
regulating fishing. The reproductive period coincided with the flood period from October to January and schools of
mature fish were followed as far as Rio Pardo, a tributary of the Paranri River. In the next months P. corruscans
larvae were always collected in marginal ponds. These periodic floods promote the contact of the Parana River with
the marginal ponds and are a requirement to the maintenance of the reproductive processes of P. corruscans.




   597                      09:45 Wednesday                                 CF12                           .. MCN
Spatial and temporal patterns of reproductive and trophic divergence in bluegill sunfish. T.J. Ehlinoer.
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee, 3209 N. Maryland Ave, Milwaukee, Wl
53111 USA.

A study of bluegill populations from 12 Wisconsin lakes revealed significant differences among lakes in the degree of
trophic specialization and sexual dimo^hism. Morphological and behavioral variation within and among populations
suggested that males compete most intensely for nesting sites in lakes with limited breeding area. Subsequent
studies discovered additional bluegill colonies located in deeper areas of lakes for 4 of the most sexually-selected
populations. Comparisons between deep-spawning and shallow-spawning colonies showed that deep-spawning
bluegill possessed a trophic morphology typical of limnetic specialists and were less sexually dimorphic than bluegill
from shallow colonies. Deep- and shallow-spawning bluegill did not differ in mean size or age, however there was
greater variation in both age and size among males from the shallow colonies. The relative abundance of cuckolder
males was significantly higher in shallow colonies. The mean number of eggs per nest did not differ between colony
types, but variation in the number of eggs spawned per nest was greater in the shallow colonies. These data are
consistent with the hypothesis that the intensity of sexual selection is greater in the shallow colonies, and that the
deep colonies reflect an evolutionary aitemative.

 ^lS^^s»rigger°^:C                            X? bre^Jino"                                            ®P®™         <='“'V
 found phenotypic males for thVfwSlTit^ar                                                        our laboratory now. we
 are fuScBon^IPoecilia foXa mX S ca?evS?%Sce                                                      the masculinized fish




 glSt«:>SSW«
 males and Poedlia formosa females since September last year              ®                              Poealia formosa




   598                        10:30 Wednesday                 .               CF12                               mcN
Morphology and life history of the marine threesplne stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus). R.W. Kino. Dept,
of Biology, Clark University, 950 Main St.. Worcester, MA 01610, USA.

At the dose of the last gladal period, only some 15,000 years ago, numerous and varied freshwater aquatic habitats
were formed. The threesplne stickleback was one of the first fish to colonize these habitats, and these populations
have undergone a spectacular adaptive radiation. The threesplne stickleback inhabiting nearby coastal marine
habitats is the stock from which these freshwater populations were founded. Thus, both the direction and degree of
change following freshwater Isolation can be inferred by comparing freshwater and marine stickleback. However, the
marine form actually may comprise two types: one living and breeding only in marine waters; and a second,
anadromous typo. At present we know relatively little about whether these types differ in any substantive way.
Further, we know little about variation within these types. I present preliminary morphological and life-historical data
showing that these types may not be as similar as previously thought, and I compare the level of apparent
phenot^ic variability with that exhibited by freshwater populations.




   599                        10:45 Wednesday.                                CF12                               MCN
Evaluating the relationship between organismal trait values and body size, with an example from life-history
data for the threesplne stickleback, Gasterosteua aculeatus. J .A. Baker. Department of Biology, Clark
University, Worcester, Massachusetts 01610, USA.

The form of the relationship between values for organismal traits (e.g. clutch size) and organism body size has been
of interest to biologists for >150 years. This interest has two, somewhat independent foci: to estimate the slope of
the relationship itself, and to estimate size-free trait values for comparison across groups. Despite this long interest,
there remains considerable controversy over the appropriate statistical model to use in each instance. Most studies
use ordinary least squares regression for both, but this is only appropriate when the correlation between the trait of
interest and size is quite high (i.e., > 0.9). Such high correlations are infrequent in life-history data sets. Presently,
two alternatives for slope estimation appear to be gaining support: major axis regression, and reduced major axis
regression. I apply all three methods to a data set for 50 threesplne stickleback populations in order to illustrate the
considerably different conclusions that cran be generated for slopes. Size-adjustment is only appropriately performed
using ordinary least squares procedures. Nevertheless, I use a subset of populations to illustrate how faulty
conclusions can be generated hero, also. No present statistical resolution to this latter problem is apparently in view.




   600                      '11:00 Wednesday                                  CF12                              MCN
Inter-and Intra- latitudinal variation in life history traits in migrating silver-phase American eels, Anguilla
rostrata. K. Oliveira and J.D. McCleave, University of Maine, School of Marine Sciences, 5741 Libby Hall, Orono,
ME 04469-5741 USA.

Migrating silver phase American eels were collected from two geographically separated pairs of rivers in Maine. Size
at migration, age at migration, mean annular growth, and sex ratios were compared to existing data from other
locations to test for the presence of latitudinal changes in life history traits. Comparisons of traits within and among
river pairs were also made to examine intra-regional variations. 'The correlation between latitude and female life
history traits resulting from the addition of data from Maine female eels does not support established relationships,
reducing the correlation coefficients from 0,64 to 0.28 for length and 0.88 to 0.26 for age. The analysis of mate data
from Maine eels, however, yields significant correlations between latitude and these traits (size: r=0.94: and age:
0.65). Comparisons of traits among Maine rivers revealed several possible sources of variation that could account
for the low relationship between latitude and female traits. Variations observed in these four Maine rivers can be
associated with drainage characteristics, methodological differences, and fishing pressure.   601                        11:15 Wednesday                         .   . . CF12                              MCN
Phenotypic plasticity In life history traits of Gambusia puncticulata puncticulata (Poecllildae) from the
Cayman Islands, BWI. M.A. Abnev and C.F. Rakocinski, Gulf Coast Research Laboratory, Fisheries Ecology
Program, 703 East Beach Drive, Ocean Springs, MS 39564 USA.

 Gambusia p. puncticulata is a common resident of saline ponds which show high spatio-temporal variability in
physico-chemical conditions. We examined variability in reproductive traits of Gambusia p. puncticulata from eight
ponds among the ttiree Cayman islands during both rainy and dry periods, In August 1996 and January 1997,
respectively. Life-history traits examined included: (1) size at maturiW; (2) number of propagules per brood; (3) mean
individual weight of propagules; and (4) reproductive allotment, ihe average standard length of mature males
increased significantly between August and January due to the influence of either post-maturation growth or late-
maturing males. The mean standard length of mature females was often significantly greater during the dry period
than during the wet period. Also, females were nonsuperfetating and provided continual nourishment during
propagule development. There was an inverse relationship (r=-.63; n=171) between body-weight adjusted number of
propagules and mean individual propagule weight, although both traits increased with somatic weight. This
relationship signifies a phenotypic life-history tradeoff. Mean individual propagule weight varied significantly between
months and among ponds, whereas reproductive allotment only varied among ponds in Two-Way ANOVAs.
Plasticity in life-history traits of these populations may be tied to the dynamic nature of their environment.




   602                       -11:30 Wednesday                                CF12                               .MCN
Phenotypic plasticity In Gambusia hispanlolae from Lake Enriquillo, Dominican Republic, Hispaniola Island.
C. Mir and C.M. Rodriguez, Museo Nacional de Historia Natural, Plaza de la Culture, Santo Domingo, Dominican
Republic; F. Nunez, Institute Dominicano de Investigaciones Biologicas.

Extreme phenotypic plasticity of the lip was discovered in a population of Gambusia hispaniolae during a survey of
fishes to Lake Enriquillo, southwestern Dominican Republic, Hispaniola Island. Las Azufradas, a pool of sulfurous
water, is tributary to the main lake (Enriquillo). It is the only known habitat for a population of G. hispaniolaa
characterized by cxinspicuously enlarged and papillose lower lip that has not been observed in any other member of
the genus (although it is superficially similar similar to the lip of Cyprinodon labiosus, a member of Cyprinodontidae
and also to Poecilia sulphuraria, a member of Poedliinae). In a sample of more than 200 spedmens from Las
Azufradas, the enlarged lip was present in 100% of individuals, but no specimen of G. hispaniolae from elsewhere
exhibits the character. The hypothesis that the population comprises a new species was tested by morphometric
analysis of individuals from Las Azufradas versus individuals from other populations in the island. Other than the
modified lip, no morphological differences were found. Common garden experiments conducted to test for plasticity
showed that the enlarged lip dissappeared after short periods of time under laboratory conditions. At the end of the
experiment, no differences in lip size or shape were detectable among samples from Las Azufradas and other
localities. Feeding habits and effects of food type were also studied. We discuss the possible driving forces that
produce the phenotype.




   603                        11:45 Wednesday                                CF12        .                      MCN
Ethnolcthyology of Piracicaba River fishermen (Southeastern Brazil). R.A.M. Silvano and A. Begossi, Nucleo
de Estudos e Pesquisas Ambientais, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.

Ethnolcthyology is the part of science that studies the relationships between people and fish, including folk
knowledge. Fishermen usually have knowledge on fish biology and behavior, which is often useful to ichthyologists.
We conducted an ethnolcthyological study with fishermen from the impounded portion of the Piracicaba River
(Southeastern Brazil), interviewing 22 fishermen (17 men and 5 women) using questionnaires based on pictures of
ten fish species. We showed the pictures at random, in the same order for all people interviewed. Fishermen showed
a detailed knowledge about diet, predators, spacial and temporal distributions, reproduction and migratory patterns.
Many Information provided by fishermen fitted well with the biological observations from the scientific literature.
Fishermen exhibit a great knowledge on diet, predators, migratory movements and habitat requirements of fishes.
This could be due to the constant observation of these phenomenons by fishermen and due to Hie Importance of this
Infonnatlon to the fishery. Fishermen known more about common and commercially valuable fish species, and
known less about rare species. The value and abundance of the fishes, the usefulness in the fishery, as well the
frequent observation of the biological attributes of abundant species are Important factors influencing the Piracicaba
River fishermen Imowledge about fish.




  ,607 .. .                  09:45 Wednesday                                 CAS                                 AXL
Molecular phylogeny: Resolving the taxonomy of the Hyperolius virlditlavus complex. A.M. Wieczorek.
Department of Biochemistry, University of the Western Cape, Private Bag XI7, Bellville 7535, South Africa , ; A.
Channing, Department of Zoology, University of the Western Cape, , Private Bag X17, Bellville CAPITAL B 7535,
South Africa; R.C. Drews, Department of Herpetology, California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, California .
94118, USA.

The H. viridiHavus complex is considered to comprise a number of sub-species, based on dorsal colouration
patterns. The reliance on morphological characters for taxonomic purposes has resulted in some taxonomic
confusion regarding this complex, with some researchers recognizing few, and others many subspecies.

The aim of the present study is to use molecular techniques to resolve this problem. Frogs were collected from
various localities throughout Africa and their DNA extracted and subsequently sequenced ( 12S and 16S rRNA
mitochondrial gene).

Results indicate that H. viridiflavus consists of two clades, each of which is a sister group to a different grouping of
other species of Hyperolius. The more basal clade are from inland central Africa (Zambia, Zimbabwe), and the

   604                       08:45 Wednesday                                CA6                             .. AXL
The sand frog saga. Calls and chromosomes on a molecular tree. A. Dawood and A. Channing. University of
the Western Cape, Private Bag XI7, Belleville 7535, South Africa; J.P. Bogart, Department of Zoology, University of
Guelph, Guelph, Ont. N1G 2W1.

African sandfrogs of the genus Tomoptema have previously been thought to consist of six species, one of which is a
tetrapioid. A fieldtrip to Namibia, Zimbabwe and Zambia provided material which shows that the widespread T.
cryptotis consists of three species. The previously restricted tetrapioid, T. tandyi, is now known to be present
throughout much of Africa. We present a phylogeny of the diploid species, and show that tetrapioid populations are
accumulating genetic differences.




   605 .                     09:00 Wednesday                               CA6                                AXL
Genetic composition of supernumerary chromosomes In the Pacific giant salamander, Dicamptodon
tenebrosua. J.N. Brinkman and S.K. Sessions, Redpath Museum, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2K6.

Supernumerary, or B, chromosomes are morphologically distinct chromosomal elements that are found in addition to
the normal chromosome complement. They may show numerical variation within and between individuals and are
highly variable in their effect, morphology, and inheritance pattern. These chromosomes, thought to arise either from
the autosomal chromosome set or through interspecific hybridization, appear to evolve independently of the normal
chromosome set. Supernumerary chromosomes are present in the Pacific giant salamander, Dicamptodon
tenebmsus. Individuals of this species that we examined possessed up to 8 supernumeraries, with population means
ranging from 0.5 to 2.67 per individual. Supernumerary chromosomes from two D. tenebrosus individuals were
microdissected, cloned and partially sequenced to analyze their genetic make-up. We used these DNA segments as
probes tor use In Southern blots to determine whether or not homologies exist between supernumerary
chromosomes and the normal chromosome set. The DNA composHon of these supernumerary chromosomes and
their origin and evolution in D. tenebrosus will be discussed.




   606                      09:15 Wednesday                                CA6                                AXL
Allozyme analysis of salamanders (genus: Desmognathus} In northeastern Pennsylvania. R.M. Bonett. Dept,
of Biology, East Stroudsburg University, 200 Prospect St., East Stroudsburg, PA. 18301, USA; S.G. Tilley, Dept of
Bology, Smith College, hiorthampton, MA 01063, USA; T.C. LaDuke and T. Whitford, Dept, of Biolcgy, East
Stroudsburg University, 200 Prospect St., East Stroudsburg, PA. 18301, USA.

The mobilities of six protein loci were Investigated in ten populations of salamanders (Genus: Desmognathus} in
Northeastern Pennsylvania near the edge of the Pleistocene glacial boundary. Salamanders were collected from two
watersheds that transverse the range of Desmognathus ochrophaeus and are within the range of D. fuscus.
Heterozygotes were found for three of the six loci Investigated in six of the ten localities sampled. Based on
comparisons with similar studies heterozygosity Is attributed to influence from genetically diverse southern
populations, rather than interspecific gene exdiange.




   610                      11:00 Wednesday                                CA6                               AXL
Phylogenetic relationships among Neotropical tree fro^ of the 30 chromosome clade.       AA. Chek
Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, NIG 2W1; S.C. Lougheed and PT Boag'
Department of Biology, Queen's University. Kingston, Ontario, K7L 3N6.

The phylogenetic relationships among tropical taxa are poorly known when compared to temperate counterparts. In
frogs, this situation is compounded by a notoriously conserved morphology which yields tew readily-apparent
characters. Thus hypotheses of speciation and character evolution have often been constrained to limited rfoa or
relied upon gross similarity and contemporary biogeography. We have used DNA sequence data to investigate the
phylogenetic affinities among the '30 chromosome group" of tree frogs of the genus Hyla. This group has
representatives from Central America through the Andes, across the Amazon basin and Into the Atlantic forests of
Brasil. We compare the existing view of this group with the picture revealed by DNA sequence data.    603                       11:45 Wednesday                                 CF12                               MCN
 Ethnolrthyol^ of PiraciMba River fishermen (Southeastern Brazil). R.A.M. Sitvano and A. Beoossi Nucleo
 de Estudos e Pesquisas Ambientais, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.

                 '®            °L ®®'®,"‘re *h®* studies the relationships between people and fish, including folk
                               ®®iS!                  *'®h biologv and behavior, which is often useful to ichthyologists.
 rcniJh f »®*®^D®^ ethnoicthyologicd study with fishermen from the impounded portion of the Piracicaba River
»fn                                      fisheimen (17 men and 5 women) using questionnaires based on pictures of
1 riefened knn^i^n/=h*             pictures at landoni, in the same order for all people interviewed. FishermSi showed
                            d ?®’-PJ®'^®’°^®i®P?®rel and temporal distributions, reproduction and migratory patterns.
                   Pf°''''l®d hy fishermen fitted well with the biological observations from the scientific literature.
This ^ifi? he d^o tn                        ?®’’              relgratoty movements and habitat requirements of fishes.
infnm^nn^tn^thp rsh!rS                             ‘^ese phenomenons by fishermen and due to the importance of this
kndl^^                   J*' ^®^®rreen known more about common and commercially valuable fish species, and
5'"°™" ®®?         rare Meaes. TTie value and abundance of the fishes, the usefulness in the fishery, as well the
                                                           ffifish.^”                  ’®®‘°^® ’"n®®n®ing ‘h® Piracicaba




   607                       09:45 Wednesday                                  CA6                                AXL .
Molecular phylogeny: Resolving the taxonomy of the Hyperolius vlridiflavus complex. A.M. Wieczorek.
Department of Biochemistry, University of the Western Cape, Private Bag XI7, Bellville 7535, South Africa , ; A.
Channing, Department of Zoology, University of the Western Cape, , Private Bag X17, Bellville CAPITAL B 7535,
South Africa; R.C. Drews, Department of Herpetology, California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, California,
94118, USA.

The H. vlridiflavus complex is considered to comprise a number of sub-species, based on dorsal colouration
patterns. Ths reliance on morphological characters for taxonomic purposes has resulted in some taxonomic
confusion regarding this complex, with some researchers recognizing few, and others many subspecies.

The aim of the present study is to use molecular techniques to resolve this problem. Frogs were collected from
various localities throughout Africa and their DNA extracted and subsequently sequenced ( 12S and 16S rRNA
mitochondrial gene).

Results indicate that H. vlridiflavus consists of two clades, each of which is a sister group to a different grouping of
other species of Hyperolius. The more basal clade are from Inland central Africa (Zambia, Zimbabwe), and the
advanced dade from coastal South Africa, and east Africa (e.g. Tanzania, Kenya).




   608                       10:30 Wednesday                      .   .    . CA6      .                         AXL
Phylogeny of neotropical horned frogs, genus Hemiphractus (Anura: Hylldae: Hemiphracfinae) based on
evidence from morpholom. J.R. Mendelson. Dept, of Biology, Utah State University, Logan, UT. 84322-5305
USA; CA. Shell and H.R. da Silva, Natural History Museum and Department of Systematics & Ecology, University
of Kansas, Lawrence, KS USA.

The Neotropical genus Hemiphractus comprises 5 species. Frogs in this genus have long been assumed to
represent a natural group of species. Their bizarre appearance, with hom-like, fleshy protrusions from ftieir upper
eyelids, massive skulls, and serrated lower jaw bones, dearly distinguishes this group from any other Neotropical
frogs. Previous work by us corroborated the monophyly of Hemiphractus and placed if within the genus Gastrotheca-
-i.e., Gastmtheca is paraphyletic with respect to Hemiphractus. Herein we present some recent work on ths
phylogeny of Hemiphractus based on data from osteology, external morphology, and behavior. Parsimony analysis
of 48 characters generated a single tree that fully resolves relationships among these species. This tree is highly
congruent with Trueb’s (1974) hypothesis of relationships among these species and allows us to discuss aspects of
their biogeography and behavior.




   609     .                 10:45 Wednesday                                 CA6                                 AXL
Testing of amphibian dispersal scenarios with hypervariable DNA. J.W. Amtzen. ICETA, Campus Agrario de
Vairao, Rua de Monte, Crasto, Vairao, 4480 Vila do Conde, Portugal.

In pond-breeding amphibian species, dispersal between demes reduces the chance for local extinction. I aim to
show that the level of dispersal is determined not only by the distance of ponds, but also by the quality of the
terrestrial habitat between them. Toads (Bufo bufo) and newts (Triturus cristatus} in the United Kingdom and France
were surveyed for their presence or absence in large numbers of ponds. Environmental data were obtained in the
field and from topographical maps and satellite imagery. A stepwise logistic regression procedure was used to
identify ths ecological parameters associated with the presence/absence of both species. Dispersal scenarios were
generated on ths assumption that good habitat to livs in is good habitat to disperse through. The several dispersal
hypotheses are currently being tested against gene-flow estimates obtained from a variaty of genetic markers
(allozymes, mini- and micro-satellites).

    606                       09:15 Wednesday                                 CA6                                AXL
   mJSSS                                                                      PA.Pennsylvania.
                                                                   northeastern
                 ^roudsburg University, 200 Prospect St., East Stroudsburg,       18301. USA- SR.M.         Deot
                                                                                                     BonettDeot^f
                                                                                                  G Tillev
 e^^’u           C°"09S> Northampton, MA 01063, USA; T.C. LaDuke and T Whitford Deot of BiSmv EaS
 Stroudsburg University, 200 Prospect St., East Stroudsburg, PA. 18301, USA.                   P’’ ’

           ®“,Pf°*.®‘n 'ooi were investigated in fen populations of salamanders (Genus- Desmoanathus} in
SrehedTtM"u^sveree"the‘^?nnt®nf^^^^                   glacial boundaiy. Salamanders were collect^ from L>
                                             °®?'’^°5na<hus ochrophaeus and are within the range of D. fuscus
Hefero^otes were found for three of the six loci investigated in six of the ten localities sarn^pled Based on
                 ’’heterozygosity is attributed to influence from genetically dwerse southern
populations, rather than interspecific gene exchange.




   610 .    ..               11:00 Wednesday                                CAS                                AXL
Phylogenetic relationships among Neotropical tree frogs of the 30 chromosome clade.      AJK. Chek.
Department of Zoology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, NIG 2W1; S.C. Lougheed and P.T. Boag,
Department of Biology, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, K7L 3N6.

The phylogenetic relationships among tropical taxa are poorly known when compared to temperate counterparts. In
frogs, this situation is compounded by a notoriously conserved morphology which yields few readily-apparent
characters. Thus hypotheses of speciation and character evolution have often been constrained to limited data or
relied upon gross similarity and contemporary biogeography. We have used DNA sequence data to investigate the
phylogenetic affinities among the "30 chromosome group" of tree frogs of the genus Hyla. This group has
representatives from Central America through ths Andes, across the Amazon basin and into the Atlantic forests of
Brasil. We compare the existing view of this group with the picture revealed by DNA sequence data.




   611                       11:15 Wednesday                                 CA6                               AXL
 Evolutionary systematics of european newts. J.W. Amtzen. ICETA, Campus Agrario de Vairao, Rua de Monte,
Crasto, Vairao, 4480 Vila do Conde, Portugal.

 Six taxa of crested and marbled newts (subgenus Triturus] have largely parapatric distributions across Europe, with
or without hybridization taking place between them. A combination of morphological, protein and mtDNA sequence
data is applied to resolve the taxonomy of the group. In France, western Europe, hybridization between crested and
marbled newts is unidirectional. This hybrid zone is spatially-temporally unstable and affected by environmental
criiange, giving rise to a typical geographical pattern. Comparison of this zone with a cluster of hybrid zones in four
taxa of crested newts in 'ex-Yugoslavia', eastern Europe, reveals remarkable similarities between them, suggesting
that the same forces are operational across Europe in hybrid zone dynamics.




   612                       13:00 Wednesday                                 AVI                              QVC
The reproductive biology of the mouthbrooding cardinalfish Pterapogon kaudemi (Perciformes,
Apogonidae). A. Vagelli. New Jersey State Aquarium , 1 Riverside Drive. Camden, NJ 08103 USA,; M. Kind, New
Jersey State Aquarium, 1 Riverside Drive, Camden, NJ 08103 USA.

The Banggai cardinalfish, Pterapogon kaudemi Koumans 1933 has been the focus of the pet trade since its
"rediscovery" a few years ago. Very little is known about the population status of this is species which seems
restricted to the sandy shallows of the Banggai Islands in the Indo-Pacific ocean. In an attempt to alleviafe the
collecting pressure on this species, a captive breeding program was successfully developed. The reproductive
biology of P. kaudemi differs from most Apogonids in several aspects. The spawn consists of a few large eggs,
about 40 of 3 mm in diameter. Eggs are incubated by the mate for approximately 19 days (25°C) until hatching
occurs. The larvae hatch in a post-flexion stage measuring about 6 mm SL and remain in the male's oral cavity for
another ten days. At the time of release, Ban^ais measures 8 mm SL, their large yolk sac is mainly consumed and
they do not pass through a planktonic stage. Once released, alevines do not come back to seek refuge in the male's
mouth and no association between male and newly released alevines persists. Juveniles take four months to reach
30mm TL and they mature in another five to seven months. A summary of the ontogeny and larval development is
presented.                            13:20'Wednesday                                 AVI                               ovc
  .613
Functional and phylogenetic significance of trio spawning In redhorse suckers, Maxostoma. P.E.JenIgns
and A.A. Coons, Department of Biology, Roanoke College, Salem, VA 24153 UbA.
Moxostoma spawning acts involve one female and two or more males, and occur by intense quivering into gravel
and/or cobble. In primitive, mass-spawning M. collapsum and M. anrsun/m, usually 3-5 uontemtqnal males atterid
each act Advanced species typically trio-spawn, a male on each side of the fetnale. The most denved rep'u
M carinatum involves^two-mala defense of spawning sites and, upon approach by a female, synchronized leng^y
alignment (10-20 sec), undulation, and quivering (5-10 sec each). Nest-building and courtship a™ faise^ a^nbed to
in’carrnafum Svnapomorphies of anatomy, coloration, and behavior support recogriizing the clade. (Carolm
redhorse ((m'erj^nmm) (M. mbustwn, M. carinatum}}).
involved oreater numbers of eggs may be fertilized and buned, but earSeP-buned eggs may be unburied
 nXtinqIv In trio the female is s^metncally held and pressed laterally to doreolaterally dunng wipositiOT. In he
more Sed species, the two adjacent nest-holding (Dear Enemy) males repel intruders that perturb or dispel the
female from spawning. It takes two males to tango, perhaps best so in suckers.




                             13:40 Wednesday                                 AVI                               OVC
   614 .
Spatial learning and shelter selection by luyenile spotted®i^07“uSA% Afford’
Deoartment of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of, Rochester, Rochester, NY 14607 UbA, n, r-ora,
BlplrtSlnt of Biology, Universifo of Texas at Tyler, Tyler JX 75799 USA; OAdJoUanan. Department of Brain and
Cognitive Sciences, University of, Rochester, Rochester, NY 14607 USA.
Rnaiial abilities are important in mediating natural behaviors in snakes, such as localization of refuges. Eight snakes
Sratoed to find the Son of an escape hole in a circular arena, given a choice of eight ho es. Lejn^g was
riafarminaH hv qinnificant decreases in toe latency to find the goal and in the distance traveled to the goal. To date,
A^s&ha™ animus Sd noKthe task after 32 trainino sestons. Onfo two animals sh^ed a
sionificant change in behavior indicative of learning. These results differ from those obtained previously with com
snakes Elaphe g. guttata, which can leam toe same task within 16 trainirig sessions.                           SoH
sensorv cues after traininq indicates that subjects use different cues to find their goal. All animus were also test^
for shSter preferences. Snakes were given a choice of three different shelter sites (submerged, on
elevated) over a four day period to determine the relevance of the arena escape task. To date, six
oreferred elevated sheltere, and most animals show fidelity to shelters choseri on the first day. ^1®®® results
suggest that juvenile spotted pythons may be more motivated to seek elevated instead of submerged refuges.




                              14:00 Wednesday                                AVI                               OVC
    615
 Monitoring Idaho amphibian and reptile populations^through chafes> in
 Cooper Doering and J. Cossel Jr., Idaho State University, Box 8007, Pocatello, Idaho 83209 USA.

 Declines in populations of some formerly common, widespread amphibiaris and reptiles in Idaho indicate toe need
 for a statXide morlitoring program. Such declines show that v^e can no longer assume that amphibian and reptite
 oooulatfons are doing weU. The mark-recapture studies needed to document changes in numbers of animals are Ito
 eXsNe to^ndurt on a statewide basis. The best evidence that we have for amphibian                            d“^,'^®®
 comes frorn documenting changes in toe species occurrence over wide area. This suggests that ari ^^matiw
 anninach is to oeriodicallv survey selected study areas for changes In toe number of sites occupied by ea^
 secies. Such a^program could Involve selecting 20 study areas around the stale so that all           andeco^ons
 u^tild he reoresented at least twice. Every year, 2-3 study areas (with 20-30 separate sites each) could be surveyed
 JlSng standard"techniques so that all would be sampled once per decade. If a c^nsid^ble                     nX^g of
 of oMuoied sites for a species is detected, further studies could be conducted to determine me extent and n^re or
 toe^edfoes We are                    approach by repeating surveys conducted during toe 197O's at two areas in
 southern Idaho.




    619                       '13:00 Wednesday                               CR13                               THN
 The herpetofaunal assemblage of a unique south-central Rorida ecosystem. R.D. Owen and R. Franz, Florida
 Museum of Natural History, University of Rorida,, PO Box 117800 Gainesville, Rorida, 32611 -7800 USA.

 The Avon Park Air Force Range (APAFR) is a diverse 106,000 acre federal property in south-central Rorida. Many
 diverse wetland and upland habitats are embedded In a matrix of pine dominated communities. A major topographic
 feature of the property is a narrow central relict sand ridge (ie.. Bombing Range Ridge). During a two year vertebrate
 study, we documented the distribution and abundance of a large percentage of the amphibians and reptiles observed
 on the property. Many records were observations made during road cruising activities. Additional monitoring
 techniques included dip netting, field searching and examining gopher tortoise burrows using a mobile camera. Of
 the 77 species potentially occurring on the property we documented the presence of 62 species. Based on known
 distributions and the habitats present on APAFR toe absence of at least two species from this property is perplexing.
 Two xeric-upland endemics (Neoseps reynoldsi and Eumeces egregius ) were not documented during this study
 despite intensive surveys whereas other fauna of this community (eg., Hhineura Horidana , Sceloporus woodi,
 Tantilla relicta } were commonly encountered. Biogeography, not naoitat degradation or loss, is the most likely
 explanation for the absence of these species.

                               14:20 Wednesday                                 AVI                                OVC
  616
Piranha interrelationships. W.L. Fink, Museum of Zoology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079
USA.
The South America characiforms called piranhas comprise nearly 60 described species, all^ated to four genera,
Pvaopristis, Pristobrycon, Serrasalmus and ^gocentnjs. Pygopnstis is apparently monotype and
beJn^hown to include three species. Questions about the monophyly of Pnstobrycon and Serras^us have b^n
raised by several workers, and the general expectation is that Prrsfr^rgrori is paraphylebc. fo this
examine^ the identities of nominal species of Serrasalmus and Pnstobn^on, and discuss toe' P*?>^9e^bc
relationships among those shown to be valid. Features analyzed include skeletal, morphological, soft anatomy, color
pattern, squamation, and body shape.




                               14:40 Wednesday                                 AVI                                 OVC
   617
Rmmetric morohometrics of body shape in juvenile and adult Serrasalmus manueli and S. gmldingl.
Hill Department of Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079, U.S.A; M.L. Zelditch, Museum of
Paleontology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079, U.S.A: W.L. Fink, Museum of Zoology, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079, U.S.A.
 Juveniles of the black-water piranhas Serrasalmus manueli and Senasalmus gouldingi are virtually identi^ in body
shaoe oiamentation and meristic features. In contrast, adults of these species are markedly dflerent in body
sha^' pigmentation’ and to a lesser extent in meristic features, and are easily identifiable. Our objectives in this
study are% explore the use of some novel morphometric techniques in the analysis of body shape and ont^eriy^
One objective to particular is to determine whether small juveniles can be distinguished by body ®hapB using relafive
warns analysis. The second objective is to compare the ontogenetic transformations in shape that produce the
markedly different aduH body forms from the indistinguishable juvenile body forms.




                                15:00 Wednesday                                 AVI                                ovc
    618
 Scalation in caecilians: variation at the intra and interspecific level. A.P, Summers, Organismic ^d
 Evolutionary Biology, UMASS Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003 USA; R.A. Nussbaum, Museum of Zoology.University of
 Michigan, 1109 Geddes Avenue, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079 USA.
 Caecilians are circumtropically distributed amphibians eitoibiting rrany adaptations to a fo^orid'
 limblessness reduced eves and a strongly ossified skull. Perhaps none of their mqrphologi^ oddities is as
 enigmatic as’toe presence of dermal scales, a character found in neither of the other lissamphibian ord^.^d
 soecles of caecili^ have circumferential rows of tiny scales in some or all of top annular grooves that ring toe txfoY
 Ttoe size and shape of individual scales were once thought to be of systematic importance, ^o®9h'              "      a
 oarameters within a single individual may encompasses the range of variation seen in toe whole group. We used a
 clearino and stalninq technique to look at toe pattern of scalation rather than toe scales toems^ves. Data from
 fourteen Qrandison^ larvata showed less than 10% variation in a suite of rrtonstic characters.            J™'® ®,'®,9',®
 indivfouals of sixteen other species in all six families showed a wide range of variation from fully  _*®' ^^PLP
 naked Basal taxa such as Epicrionops and Ichthyophis are nearly completely covered, while some of toe most
 dlriwd^a h^f                    {Typhlo^ectes} or feiiv scales (Geoftypefes) The pattern of “al®/'®®J® ®®“
 distinouish between oenera and in some cases species. Data from several smaller individual G. lan^ata indicate that
 iaiX beg??^inX^P^tXr annXr grovespnd proceeds anteriorly, -^ere are two dorso-lateral centers of
 scalation in each annular groove from which scalation eventually grows around the body.




    622           .        .    13:45 Wednesday                                 CR13                                tHN
 Distribution and status of the alligator snapping turtle {Macroclemya temmincid!} in Georgia. J.B. Jensen.
 Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Nongame-Endangered Wildlife Program, 116 Rum Creek Drive, Forsyth,
 Georgia 31029, USA; S.C, Johnson, Natural Resource Senrices, Inc., 229 East Shore Drive, Americus, GA 31709,
 USA.

 Other than anecdotal information obtained from commercial turtle trappers, relatively little data relating to the alligator
 snapping turtle ^acroclemys temmincldi) in Georgia are available. Further, toe impact of toe commercial trade of
 this species on Georgia populations is largely unknown. Two separate studies, one completed in 1990 and toe other
 currently ongoing, were developed to enhance our knowledge of toe present day distribution and relative abundance
 of the species in Georgia, as well as to develop appropriate plans for its conservation, interviews with a commercial
 trapper extremely familiar with M. temminckii populations in Georgia, revealed that these turtles were trapped during
 toe 1970s and early 1980s in all major coastal plain stream systems in Georgia. M. femm/nck//populations were
 found in all watersheds which emptied into the Gulf of Mexico. Commercial trapping efforts during that period
 resulted in the capture and sale or 6000 to 7000 adult turtles averaging 32 kg each from toe Rlnt River system
 alone. Results from toe 1989-1990 study and the present study will be presented to compare current trapping
 success throughout the Georgia range of M. temminckii with that of toe Flint River drainage during the 197O’s.                                  Hfw< N* «imy uv niuiv niuiivuiuu lu KiuuK cicvaiQu II ijluuu




    615                       .14:00 Wednesday                                    AVI                           OVC
 Monitoring Idaho amphibian and reptile populations through changes in occurrence. C.R. Peterson S.
 Cooper Doenng and J. Cossel Jr., Idaho State University, Box 8007, Pocatello, Idaho 83209 USA.

 Declines in populations of some formerly comrnon, widespread amphibians and reptiles in Idaho indicate the need
 tor a statewide rnonitonng program. Such declines show that we can no longer assume that amphibian and reptile
 populations are doing well. The mark-recapture studies needed to document changes in numbers of animals are too
expensive to conduct on a statewide basis. The best evidence that we have for amphibian population declines
comes from documenting changes in the species occurrence over wide area. This suggests that an alternative
approach IS to penodically survey selected study areas tor changes in the number of sites occupied by each
species. Such a prograrn could involve selecting 20 study areas around the state so that all species and eooreqions
would be represented at least taco. Every year. 2-3 study areas (with 20-30 separate sites each) could be sunreved
using st^dardtechniques so that all would be sampled once per decade. If a considerable decrease in the number
01 OOTupied sites for a species is detected, further studies could be conducted to determine the extent and nature of
the declmes. We are testing this approach by repeating surveys conducted during the 197O's at two areas in
southern Idaho.




   619                        13:00 Wednesday                                   CR13                            THN
The herpetofaunal assemblage of a unique south-central Florida ecosystem. R.D. Owen and R. Franz, Florida
Museum of Natural History, University of Florida,, PO Box 117800 Gainesville, Florida, 32611-7800 USA.

The Avon Park Air Force Range (APAFR) is a diverse 106,000 acre federal property in south-central Florida. Many
diverse wetland and upland habitats are embedded in a matrix of pine dominated communities. A major topographic
feature of the property is a narrow central relict sand ridge (ie., Bombing Range Ridge). During a two year vertebrate
study, we documented the distribution and abundance of a large percentage of the amphibians and reptiles observed
on the property. Many records were observations made during road cruising activities. Additional monitoring
techniques included dip netting, field searching and examining gopher tortoise burrows using a mobile camera. Of
the 77 species potentially occurring on the property we documented the presence of 62 species. Based on known
distributions and the habitats present on APAFR the absence of at least two species from this property is peiplexing.
Two xeric-upland endemics (Neoseps reynoldsi and Eumeces egregius ) were not documented during this study
despite intensive surveys whereas other fauna of this community (eg., Rhineura Hondana , Sceloporus woodi,
Tantilla relicta ) were commonly encountered. Biogeography, not habitat degradation or loss, is the most likely
explanation for the absence of these species.




   620                        13:15 Wednesday                                   CR13                 .    .     THN
Post-nesting movements and dive behavior of the leatherback sea turtle (Dermochelys corlacea} in the
Atlantic Ocean. S.A. Eckert. Hubbs-Sea World Research Institute, 2595 Ingraham St. , San Diego, CA 92109,
U.S.A.

The island of Trinidad in the southern Caribbean Sea, supports one of the largest nesting aggregations of the
leatherback turtle. While the presence of this colony is well known, the post nesting distribution of these females is
not well understood. Studies into the dive behavior of female leatherbacks at this colony as well as in other colonies
is well defined, however little is understood about diving and foraging behavior of the species outside of ths nesting
season. In this study, I use satellite telemetry to follow the post-nesting movements and diving behavior of
leatherback sea turtles for one year. During that period the turtles swam in excess of 13,000 km and virtually
circumnavigated the northern Atlantic Ocean. Dive behavior was variable depending on region and was likely
related to food distribution. Maximum dive depths were in excess of 700 m. Detailed results of this study will be
presented including a description of where the turtles went after leaving, their diving behavior as well as possible
reasons for ths routing chosen.




   621                        13:30 Wednesday                                   CR13                            THN
The amphibians and reptiles of the upper Tocantins river, Brazil. NJ. DaSilvafJr.). Departamento de Biologia,
Universidade Catolioa de Goias - Ave., Universitaria, 1440 - Setor Universitario - 74605-010 - Goiania, GO, BRAZIL.

A four year collecting effort in the Minacu-Uruacu region of Goias, Brazil, produced 36 species of amphibians (2
orders and 6 families), 6 species of amphisbaenians (1 family), 25 species of lizards (9 families), 56 species of
snakes (8 families), 3 species of chelonians (3 families), and 2 species of crocodilians (1 family). Among ths
squamate reptiles there are 2 new species of amphisbaenians and 4 new species of snakes. This list is the first
compreensive herpetological survey of Central Brazil and the findings are being used for faunal comparisons
between the Cerrado region. Caatinga and Amazon regions. Despite low endemism the Brazilian dry-lands (Cerrado
and Caatinga) are closer in herpetoraunal similarities than any of them to the Amazon region. The Tocantins river is
the last tributary of the Amazon river on its right margin. Only at Tucurui, in the state of Para, over 800 miles north,
the herpetofaunal characteristics are typically Amazonian.

    618                        15:00. Wednesday                                 AVI                                 OVC
 Scalartlon In caecilians: variation at the Intra and interspecific level.              A.P. Summers      Oraanismic and
                       a''®®        USA: R.A. Nussbaum,
 Michigan.l 109 Geddes Avenue, Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1079 USA.                                                           ’

                                  distributed amphibians exhibiting many adaptations to a fossorial existence including
iSKSSXI                  eyes         a strorigly ossified skull. Perhaps none of their morphological oddities is as
                                 ‘1®'™^'scales, a character found in neither of the other lissamphibian orders. Most
            caecilian have cir^rnferential rows of tiny scales in some or all of the annular grooves that ring the body.
                        individual sc^es were once thought to be of systematic importance, though variation in these
parameters within a single individua may encompasses the range of variation seen in the whole group. We used a
cleanng ^d stoning technique to look at the pattern of scalation rather than the scales themselv^. Data from
                                showed less than 10% variation in a suite of meristic characters. Data from single
individu^s of sixteen other s|:^ies in all six families showed a wide range of variation from fully scaled to compietelv
naked, ^sal taxa such as Eptcnonops and Ichthyophis are nearly completely covered, while some of the most
denved t^a have no scales (TypWonecfes) or few scales {Geotrypetes). The pattern of scalation is sufficient to
distinguish between genera, and, in some cases species. Data from several smaller individual G. larvata indicate that
scalation begins in the postenor annular groves and proceeds anteriorly. There are two dorso-lateral centers of
scalation In each annular groove from which scalation eventually grows around the body




   622                        13:45 Wednesday                                 CR13                                 THN
 Distribution and status of the alligator snapping turtle {Macroclemya temminckli) In Georgia. J.B. Jensen.
•Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Nongame-Endangered Wildlife Program, 116 Rum Creek Drive. Forsyth,
 Georgia 31029, USA; S.C. Johnson, Natural Resource Services, Inc., 229 East Shore Drive, Americus, GA 31709,
 USA.

Other than anecdotal information obtained from commercial turtle trappers, relatively little data relating to the alligator
snapping turtle (Macrodemys temminckii) in Georgia are available. Further, the impact of the commercial trade of
this species on Georgia populations is largely unknown. Two separate studies, one completed in 1990 and the other
currently ongoing, were developed to enhance our knowledge of the present day distribution and relative abundance
of the species in Georgia, as well as to develop appropriate plans for its conservation. Interviews with a commercial
trapper extremely familiar with M. temminckii populations in Georgia, revealed that these turtles were trapped during
the 1970s and early 1980s in all major coastal plain stream systems in Georgia. M. femm/ncku populations were
found in all watersheds which emptied into ths Gulf of Mexico. Commerci^ trapping efforts during that period
resulted in the capture and sale or 6000 to 7000 adult turtles averaging 32 kg each from the Flint River system
alone. Results from the 1989-1990 study and the present study will be presented to compare current trapping
success throughout the Georgia range of M. temminckii with that of the Flint River drainage during the 1970's.




 ..623                        14:00 Wednesday                                 CR13                                 THN
Differences among the spatial distribution of sympatric amphibians. R.D. Brodman. Biology Department, Saint
Joseph's College, Rensselaer, IN 47978 USA.

Habitat segregation among related species has many ecological implications. However, the degree of spatial
distribution differences in regions of sympatry is not well known for amphibians. Three-hundred sixteen ponds were
monitored in three counties in northwest Indiana to determine if the spatial distributions of amphibian species
differed. Data on relative abundance of the eleven most abundant amphibian species were tested by the Cramer-
von Mises test, for differences between the way the populations of each species pair are distributed across the
study area. Thirty-eight (69%) out of the 55 possible species pairs had significantly different spatial distributions.
Distributions of all the species within families or genera were significantly different from each other, except among
toads and leopard frogs which tended not to differ from most other species. Ths biological significance of the
procedure in general and the results spedfically will be discussed.




   624 .                      14:15 Wednesday                                 CR13                                 THN
Are calling surveys the best method to use to monitor all frogs? B.E. Smith. Department of Biology, Black Hills
State University, USB #9044, Spearfish, SD 57799-9044, USA.

Concerns over population declines and reports of malformations have led many agencies to become interested in
inventory and monitoring of amphibians, especially frogs. Most of these programs rely primarily on calling surveys.
Volunteers are often used in these efforts, and they are not necessarily trained herpetologists. For two years, my
survey teams have conducted surveys of several species in a variety of habitats in western South Dakota. We have
found that calling surveys are not necessarily the best census method for all anurans, and they may result in
misleading conclusions. For federal lands in western South Dakota, we recommend calling surveys to monitor only
one species, the chorus frog (Pseudacris triseriata}. For most other species, calling surveys give misleading results
or their success may depend on detailed knowledge of anuran life histories. Species which breed at temporary
wetlands are easily overlooked when calling sunrey routes are designed. Calling behavior also appears to depend
on certain climatic factors which have yet to be fully understood. Limited funds may be better spent on life history
studies and on studies of chorusing behavior before calling surveys become favored as the primary method of
inventory and monitoring of anurans across North America.r

      625                       13:00 Wednesday                                CR3                                CHM
    Testing for treatment effects using home range; a herp^oiogist's perspective. g.R. de SoHa and R.J. Brooks.
    University of Gueiph, Department of Zoology. Guelph. Ontario. NIG 2W1.

    Home range analyses are commonly used by herpetologists to test aspects of behaviour, demographics,
    reproductive strategies, and other aspects of ecology. Unfortunately, herpetologists (and other ecologists) often do
    not use the same rigorous standards when analyzing home rarrges that they use for other statistical procedures.
    Home ranges are frequently estimated using different sample sizes, time intervals among observations, and total
    sampling periods, either among animals or among treatments. Using simulations and radiotelemetry data from
    snapping turtles (Chelydra serpentina), I demonstrate that home range estimates are dependent upon these three
    aspects of the sampling regime. In order to adequately test for treatment effects, home ranges must be analyzed
    using similar sample sizes and time intervals. Ironically, one aspect of home range analysis which ecologists have
    attempted to improve is autocorrelation. Traditionally, autocorrelation is believed to violate the assumptions of home
    range estimates, and so ecologists often subsample observations to reduce autocorrelation. However. I demoristrafe
    that the accuracy and precision of home range estimates may improve with increasing autocorrelation, and reducing
    autocorrelation may cause more problems than it solves.




       626                      13:15 Wednesday               . .              CR3                 .              CHM
    Home range analysis of the common musk turtle {Stemotherus odoratus) in fragmented habitat.                      J±L
    Edmonds and R.J Brooks. Dept, of Zoology. University of Guelph. Guelph. Ontario. NIG 2W1.

    We studied a population of common musk turtles {Stemotherus odoratus) in Georgian Bay. Ontario. These turtles
    occupy the shallow shoreline waters of the many small islands in this region. Their habitat is fragmented because
    most of the area is land or deep wafer, which is unusable. Animals occupying fragmented habitat appear to have
    larger home ranges relative to those that do not because unused space between and around fragments are included
    in the analysis. Two home range estimators, minimum convex polygon and hamionic mean, tend to overestimate
    home range in fragmented habitat. Cluster analysis is an estimator which reduces the amount of unused area within
    the estimate. Using radio-location data from the musk turtles we compared the accuracy of these three home range
    estimators. Cluster analysis was only more accurate than the harmonic mean estimator. However, the variability in
    accuracy was considerably less for cluster analysis relative to minimum convex polygon. We concluded that cluster
    analysis is a more appropriate home range estimator for animals in fragmented habitat than the minimum convex
    polygon or harmonic mean estimators.




       627                      13:30 Wednesday                                CR3         .   .                  CHM
    The influence of body size and kinship on aggression and contest outcomes In hatchling snapping turtles
    (Chelydra serpentina). J.K. Lochead and R.J. Brooks. University of Guelph. Department of Zoology. Guelph.
    Ontario. N1G2W1.
    Game theory has greatly improved our understanding of animal behaviour, and can be used to predict the outcomes
    of fights or contests between individuals. This theory predicts that an animal's role might be used as a cue for
    contest settlement, thus reducing the cost of contests. The objective of this study was to evaluate how role
    asymmetries in size and kinship affect the frequency of aggressive behaviours and the outcomes of male-male
    contests for food in hatchling snapping turtles (Chelydra serpentina). Snapping turtle hatchlings were randomly
    paired either with a dutch-mate (144 pairs) or with a non-relative (158 pairs) and were placed in an arena where they
    competed for 10 consecutive equal-sized food items. The number of Umes that each turtle acquired a food item as
    well as the frequency of two aggressive behaviours, biting and mounting, were recorded. The results indicate that
    ^solute body size, body size ratio between competitors and relatedness of individuals are not important
    detemiinants in the outcomes of contests or the frequency of aggression. Clutch identity was a significant predictor
    of frequency of aggressive behaviours, but not contest outcomes.




       631      ..              ..14.30 Wednesday                               CR3                              CHM
    Community composition of turtles in three habitats of the upper Mississippi River. R.V. Anderson. MA
    Ro^no and M.L. Gutierrez. Department of Biological Sciences, Western Illinois University, Macomb, IL 61455


    Populations of turtles were determined in three habitats of Pool 20, upper Mississippi River including an open river
    site, a slough, and a backwater. Baited turtle traps were used to collect turtles at each site between early June
    through September, 1997. Two hundred and eighty-three turtles in 7 species were collected during the study.
    Population estimates where highest for the slough habitat where over 430 turtles occurred compared to 155 in the
    open river site and 113 in the backwater area. Simpson's diversity of 0.80, were significantly higher in the slough
    habitat than other habitats sampled. Mark-recapture data from turtles collected in the slough showed red-eared
    sliders, painted turtles, and common snappers to have the highest population sizes in that order. Ths open river sits
    had ths lowest diversity but had the highest density of sort-shelled turtles. Only 3 species of turtles; common
    snapping turtle, painted turtle, and red-eared slider, were collected in the backwater area. While turtles were found
    in all habitat types in this reach of the river, the slough habitat provided adequate water levels, lower current
    velocities, and food sources thus high densities of turtles and a diverse community occur in this habitat type.

   628                    .   13:45 Wednesday                               CR3 .                             CHM
Is natal dispersal sex-biased in collared lizards? T.A. Baird and D.K. Timanus. Dept, of Biology. Univ, of Central
Oklahoma. Edmond. OK 73034 USA.
Theory predicts that in polygynous species males should disperse from natal sites more than females because
dispersal will promote the ability of males to compete for mates. We tested this prediction in a polygynous
population of collared lizards. Crotaphytus collaris, by determining the distance between the points of first and last
capture for male and female hatchlings, and the distance between hatchling location and where males and females
settled as yearlings. Distance between first and last sightings within the hatchling activity season was not different
in males and females. A similar percentage of both sexes dispersed > 20m from the hatchling to the yearling
season.* and the average hatchling to yearling dispersal distance was not different in males and females. These
data do not support the hypothesis of male-biased natal dispersal, even though our central Oklahoma poplation of
collared lizards displays a strongly polygynous social system.




   629                         14:00 Wednesday                              CR3                               CHM
Natural history of the terrestrial vipers Bitts gabonica and Bitts nasicomis in Cameroon: Preliminary results
from radiotelemetry. D.P. Lawson. Department of Biology. The University of Texas at Arlington. Arlington. Tx
76019 USA.
Reid observations and preliminary results of ranging patterns of the large, terrestrial Gaboon viper. Bids gabonica,
and rhinoceros viper. Bids nasicomis, will be presented based on information gathered during a two year
radiotelemetry study of these species in southwestern Cameroon.




   630                         14:15 Wednesday                              CR3                           .   CHM
Spotted turtle (Ctemmys guttata) hibernation near the northern range limit. J.D. Litzgus and J.P. Costanzo.
Department of Zoology. Miami University. Oxford. Ohio 45056. USA; R J. Brooks. Department of Zoology. University
of. Guelph. Guelph. Ontario N1G 2W1; R.E. Lee (Jr.). Department of Zoology. Miami University. Oxford. Ohio 45056.
USA.
Spotted turtles (Ctemmys guttata) are listed as ’Vulnerable" in Canada, and are similarly listed throughout the
eastern U.S. Not much is known about hibernation in this species, therefore information on site fidelity and
communal hibernaculum use may be important to the creation of conservation programs. We examined various
aspects of hibernation in a population of northern temperate spotted turtles residing on an island in Georgian Bay.
Ontario. Using temperature-sensitive radiotransmitters and miniature dataloggers, we monitored the phenology and
temperatures at entrance into and exit from hibernation over 4 winters (1993-97). Nineteen hibernacula occupied by
a total of 34 turtles were discovered; 12 hibernacula were apparently occupied by individual turtles and 7 were used
communally (minimum of 2-6 individuals). Many individuals returned to the same hibernaculum in subsequent
winters. Turtles entered hibernation in late September and October when body temperatures, were approximately
12°C. and exited hibernacula in late April when turtles experienced temperatures of about 4°C. Turtles were
protected from subzero temperatures in their thermally stable hibernacula (range 0.3 to 3.9°C), despite highly
variable and low winter air temperatures (average minimum of -33°C). Turtles lost little weight over winter (loss of 2-
4% of pre-hibemation mass).




   634                        . 15:45 Wednesday                           . CR3                               CHM
Corattus grenadensis revisited: population trends in a West Indian snake. R.W. Henderson, Milwaukee Public
Museum. 800 W. Wells St., Milw, Wl 53233, USA; R.A. Saidak. 4 Callingham Road, Pittsford, NY 14534, USA.

During the course of field work over a 10-year period with the arboreal boa Coratius grenadensis on the West Indian
island of Grenada, locals (e.g., farmers, forestry officials) invariably informed us that tree boas were not as common
as they had been in the past. During the same decade-long span we had recorded the numbers of snakes observed
during nocturnal timed searches at each of 5 sites situated from sea level to 460 m. At 3 of the 5 sites, we
encountered more snakes/man-hour (mh) of searching during our 1998 counts than we did in counts made in the late
1980s, although snakes/mh may have reached higher numbers during intervening years. Only one site exhibited a
steady decline in the number of snakes obsenzed, and one exhibited a steady increase; fluctuations occurred at the
other sites.

Coratius grenadensis is most common at elevations below 100 m in agriculturally disturbed sites (which provide
more edge habitat) with a high incidence of mango trees or trees with similar shape and foliage. In such favorable
habitats we have encountered it at rates of up to 8 snakes/mh (est. density of 61 snakes/hectare).

Marly factors can contribute to the differences in numbers we have obsenzed between and within localities: type of
habitat, habitat modification, elevation, moon phase, preciptation, etc. However, we have not in general observed
declines in boa numbers on Grenada.                                                         <«in wmiKuif Hl            Iiauiiai UlOII UlO IIIIIIIIIlUlll vonvex
 polygon or harmonic mean estimators.




    627                .     13:30 Wednesday                                CR3                       .          CHM
 Ti?                               Wnship on aggression and contest outcomes In hatchling snapping turtles
 ^netyara ^rpMtina).       J.K, Lpchead and RJ. Brooks, University of Guelph, Department of Zoology. Guelph,
 nnfanft    9\Ar^                                                                                          ’

Game theory has greatly improved our understanding of animal behaviour, and can be used to predict the outcomes
of fights or contests between individuals. This theory predicts that an animal's role might be used as a cue for
contest s^lemerit, thus reducing the cost of contests. The objective of this study was to evaluate how role
asymrnetnes in size and kinship affect the frequency of aggressive behaviours and the outcomes of male-male
contests for food in haWjling snapping turtles (Chelydra serpentina). Snapping turtle hatchlings were randomly
paired        wm a clutch-mate (144 pairs) or with a non-relative (158 pairs) and were placed in an arena where they
competed for 10 consecutive equal-sized food items. The number of times that each turtle acquired a food item as
well as the frequency of two aggressive behaviours, biting and mounting, were recorded. The results indicate that
absolute body size, body size ratio between competitors and relatedness of individuals are not important
determinants in the outcomes of contests or the frequency of aggression. Clutch identity was a signifioant predictor
of frequency of aggressive behaviours, but not contest outcomes.




   631                       14:30 Wednesday                                CR3                                   CHM
Community composition of turtles In three habitats of the upper Mississippi River. R.V. Anderson. M.A.
Romano and M.L. Gutierrez, Department of Biological Sciences, Western Illinois University, Macomb, IL 61455
USA.

Populations of turtles were determined In three habitats of Pool 20, upper Mississippi River including an open river
site, a slough, and a backwater. Baited turtle traps were used to collect turtles at each site between early June
through September, 1997. Two hundred and eighty-three turtles in 7 species were collected during the study.
Population estimates where highest for the slough habitat where over 430 turtles occurred compared to 155 In ^e
open river site and 113 in the backwater area. Simpson's diversity of 0.80, were significantly higher in the slough
habitat than other habitats sampled. Mark-recapture data from turtles collected In the slough showed red-eared
sliders, painted turtles, and common snappers to nave the highest population sizes in tfiat order. The open river site
had the lowest diversity but had the highest density of soft-shelled turtles. Only 3 species of turtles; common
snapping turtle, painted turtle, and red-eared slider, were collected in the backwater area. While turtles were found
in all habitat types in this reach of the river, the slough habitat provided adequate water levels, lower current
velocities, and food sources thus high densities of turtles and a diverse community occur in this habitat type.




   632                       14:45 Wednesday                                CR3                                  CHM
Predation on Clemmya guttata and Chelydra serpentina nests In a dolomite prairie.                 T.P. Wilson. Biology
Department, George Mason University, Fairfax, Va, 22030-4444, USA.

Fifteen turtle nests of two species were located during the summer of 1997 and monitored until evidence of
emergence or predation was observed. The two species involved in this pilot study were Clemmys guttata and
Chelydra serpentina. Ten C. serpentina nests were located in juxtaposition to ecological or man-made edges. All of
these were predated within seven days. The five C. guttata nests were located in areas distant from ecological or
man-made edges. None of these have been predated at the time of this writing. Preliminary data suggest that nest
predation is more frequent near ecological or man-made edges. Conversely, nests located in more heterogenous
habitats have increased survivorship. This increase may result from these nests being less frequently encountered
by predators.




   633                       15:30 Wednesday                                CR3                                  CHM.
A population study of painted turtles, Chrysemya picta: the effects of timing of nesting on nest temperatures
and sex ratios. C.E. Backe. Illinois Natural History Survey-607 E. Peabody Dr. Champaign,, IL 61820.

I am currently studying a population of painted turtles, Chrysemys picta, in Dewitt Co., IL to gain insight into
population structure, timing of nesting, nest cavity temperatures and overwintering temperatures. As of 24
September, 1997, 99 turtles were marked, 102 were recaptured, and the population was estimated to be 115 (95%
C.l. 106< n <137) using the Schumacher-Eschemeyer regression modification to the Schnabel estimator. Five
completed nests were found and protected from predation with a wire mesh cage. Temperature data loggers
recorded nest cavity temperatures, which will be used to infer sex ratios of each nest. Because painted turtles
exhibit temperature-dependent sex determination, the timing of nesting may affect nest temperatures and thus skew
sex ratios. Underground temperatures were also taken using data loggers buried in abandoned or predated nest
cavitites. This data will be useful in determining if metabolic heat has an effect on the ambient temperature of nest
cavities, and possible implications for overwintenng strategies.

    630                        14:15 Wednesday                                 CR3                                CHM
 Spotted turtle (Clemmys gt^ta) hibernation near the northern range limit. J.D. Litzous and J.P. Costanzo
 S        ?                                                      "•J- »«*»• Departiiert of Zoology, Universitj;
 USA^®                     G 2W1, R.E. Lee (Jr.), Department of Zoology, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio 45056,


Spotted turtles (Qemmys guttata) are listed as Vulnerable" in Canada, and are similarly listed throughout the
eastern U.S. Not rnuch is knowri about hibernation in this species, therefore information on site fidelity and
communal hibemaoulum use may be important to the creation of conservation programs. We examined various
aspects of hibernation in a population of northern temperate spotted turtles residing on an island in Georgian Bay
Ontano. Using temperature-sensitive radiotransmitters and miniature dataloggers, we monitored the phenology and
               a* entrance info and exit from hibernation over 4 winters (1993-97). Nineteen hibernacula occupied by
a total of M turtles were discovered; 12 hibernacula were apparently occupied by individual turtles and 7 were used
communally (minimum of 2-6 individuals). Many individuals returned to the same hibernaculum in subseguent
                           hibernation in late September and October when body temperatures were approximately
         u exrted hibernacula In late April when turtles experienced temperatures of about'4®C. Turtles were
protated from subzero temperatures in their thermally stable hibernacula (range 0.3 to 3.9®C), despite hlahiv
vanable and low winter air temperatures (average minimum of -33’C). Turtles lost little weight over winter (loss of 2-
4% of pre-hibemation mass).                                                                                '




   634                  .     15:45 Wednesday                                 CR3                               .CHM.
Corallus grenadensls revisited: population trends In a West Indian snake. R.W. Henderson, Milwaukee Public
Museum, 800 W. Wells St., Milw, Wl 53233, USA; R.A. Saidak. 4 Callingham Road, Pittsford, NY 14534, USA.

During the course of field work over a 10-year period with the arboreal boa Corallus grenadensls on the West Indian
island of Grenada, locals (e.g., fanners, forestry officials) invariably informed us that tree boas were not as common
as they had been in the past. During the same decade-long span we had recorded the numbers of snakes observed
during nocturnal timed searches at each of 5 sites situated from sea level to 460 m. At 3 of the 5 sites, we
encountered more snakes/man-hour (mh) of searching during our 1998 counts than we did in counts made in the late
1980s, although snakes/fnh may have reached higher numbers during intervening years. Only one site exhibited a
steady decline in the number of snakes obsenred, and one exhibited a steady increase; fluctuations occurred at the
other sites.

Corallus grenadensls is most common at elevations below 100 m in agriculturally disturbed sites (which provide
more edge habitat) with a high incidence of mango trees or trees with similar shape and foliage. In such favorable
habitats we have encountered it at rates of up to 8 snakes/mh (est. density of 61 snakes/hectare).

Many factors can contribute to ths differences in numbers we have observed between and within localities; type of
habitat, habitat modification, elevation, moon phase, preciptation, etc. However, we have not in general observed
declines in boa numbers on Grenada.




   635                        16:00 Wednesday                                 CR3                                CHM
Refuge-site selection and fidelity by Gila monsters in the Chihuahuan Desert at New Mexico. D.D. Beck.
Department of Biological Sciences, Central Washington University, Ellensburg, WA 98926, USA; R.D. Jennings,
Department of Natural Sciences, Western New Mexico University, P.O. Box 680, Silver City, NM 88062, USA.

We investigated the role of underground refugia in the ecology of Heloderma suspectum, which spends over 95% of
its time in shelters. Using radiotelemetry, we monitored eight lizards from April 1992 through June 1998, and
characterized over 400 shelters. We addressed two questions 1) Does availability of refuges influence the habitats
selected by Helodermsi? 2) How commonly are shelters reused? We also explored whether shelter reuse
contributes to population social structure. We found that Gila monsters spend more time in areas containing a higher
density of potential shelters (high-use) than in adjacent areas with lower densities of potential shelters (low-use).
Shelters in high-use areas were in rockier substrata, and more frequently on slopes with SE orientations than those
in low-use areas. Over 25% of total shelters were reused by Gila monsters, many by two or more lizards, especially
in the spring. Some individuals reused over 65% of their shelters. Certain revisited shelters appear important in
intraspecific interactions, whereas others are more important as refuges from harsh environmental conditions. Gila
monster distributions appear to be strongly influenced by the availability and suitability of subsurface refugia, and
shelters play an important role in the social structure of this normally solitary venomous lizard.




   636                        16:15 Wednesday                                 CR3                               CHM
Effect of density on predation rate for turtle nests in a complex landscape. VJ. Burke. Vincent J Burkel ,
University of Missouri, School of Natural Resources, Columbia, MO 65211; S.L. Rathbun, J.R. Bodie and J.W.
Gibbons*'*’’", "Stephen L. Rathbun, Department of Statistics,, University of Georgia, , Athens, Georgia, USA 30602
USA; '’J. Russell Bodie, Division of Biological Sciences,, University of Missouri,, Columbia, Missouri 65211 USA; °J.
Whitfield Gibbons, Savannah River Ecology Laboratory,, Drawer E„ Aiken, South Carolina 29802 USA.

The relationship between the spatial distribution of turtle nest sites and nest predation was investigated in a
landscape encompassing a 12-ha freshwater wetland in west-central South Carolina. The goals of the study were to
detennine if nest predation is a function of nest density, and if two other spatial factors, habitat type and distance of
nests from the wetland, influence survival rate. Gravid females of three turtle species (Kinostemon subrubrum,
Pseudemys concinna Horidana, and Trachemys scripta) inhabiting the wetland were monitored from the time they
exited the wetland to nest until they returned from their nesting forays. A total of 145 nests were located during three
nesting seasons (1992 - 1994). Nests were monitored from the day of oviposition until they were deemed to have
successfully produced hatchlings or depredation was documented. The three-year mean predation rate was 84.2%
(80%, 88%, and 81% for 1992, 1993 and 1994, respectively). Modeling of the point pattern of nest locations
suggests that nests were distributed at varying densities. Logistic and autologistic regressions provided no evidence
indicating that nest survival is dependent on the survivorship ^)f neighboring nests. In summary, no evidence was
found that linked predation rate to any of the spatial characteristics of nest distribution that were examined. The lack
of density-dependent nest predation is contrary to findings from some previous avian and chelonian studies, but
supports the findings of other researchers.  ■ 637                     13:30 Wednesday                                CF1                                MCN
A quantitative comparison of fish communities from mangrove and seawaii habitats in a southeastern United
States estuarine system. K.Y. Guindon-Tisdel and D.L. Leffler, Honda Department of Environmental Protection,
Florida Marine Research Institute, 100 8th Ave. SE, St. Petersburg, FL 3370 USA.

Mangrove communities are important habitats for fishes, yet significant extents of mangrove shorelines are being
replaced by seawalls. Few studies have quantitatively described mangrove faunal communities or determined the
effects of mangrove habitat loss on fish communities. We used blocknets to quantitatively compare differences
between ichthyofaunal communities at two fringing mangrove islands and two seawall sites within the Tampa Bay
estuary, along the west coast of Florida. A total of 192 blocknet sets were made over two years, yielding 1,321,949
fish and selected invertebrates (99 species). Cluster and nonmetric multidimensional scaling (MDS) ordination
analyses revealed faunal community differences between mangrove and seawall habitats and identified four biotic
groups (mangrove 1, mangrove 2, seawalls, and spring- mangrove/seawalls). Community composition at seawalls
was dominated by Anchoa mitchilli and other transient, schooling species. Mangrove habitats harbored resident,
nonschooling forage fishes (e.g., Eucinostomus gula) and larger predatory species (Cenfropomus undecimalis}.
Water depth and water temperature significantly influenced the abundance and comrnunity structure of fishes
between mangrove and seawall habitats and between sites within these habitats. Groupings of day and nighttime
samples from seawall habitats indicated that diel variations in fish community assemblages were more prevalent at
the seawall sites than at the mangrove sites.




   638                       13:45 Wednesday                               CF1                                MCN
The community structure of fishes found on ecologically shifted patch reefs of Glovers Reef Atoll, Belize. J,_
Carter and G. Sedberry**, ■Department of Life Sciences, University of New England, Biddeford, ME 04005 USA;
'•Marine Resources Research Institute, SCDNR, Box 12559, 217 Ft. Johnson Rd.,, Charleston, SC 29412 USA.

Data and observations from recent studies of hard corals and algae indicate that lagoonal patch reefs have
undergone a major change in their ecology associated with the 99% loss in the cover of branching corals {Acropora
cervicornis and A. palmata}, a 75% reduction in hard coral, and a 315% increase in erect brown algae {Lobophora,
Dictyota, Turbinaria and Sargassurri). These changes are attributed to a variety of factors including disease-induced
loss of Acropora in the region and a reduction in herbivory by sea urchins and grazing fishes. Interestingly there is
no evidence that these major changes have occurred on the fore reef where branching corals are abundant and
erect brown algal abundance is low.       There also exist a few refugia-like patch reefs within the lagoon where
Acropora remains abundant and relatively free of algal cover. We present data on the diversity, relative abundance,
and basic community structure of fishes from ecologically shifted lagoonal patch reefs distributed throughout the reef
atoll and compare these findings with a similar data from patch reefs more typical of the lagoonal environment as
reported by scientists 25 years earlier. Finally these results are discussed as they relate to the effective
management and conservation coral reefs.




   639                       14:00 Wednesday                                CF1                               MCN
A comparison of fish assemblages between submerged Prefabricated Erosion (PEP) breakwaters and
natural re^s. D.T. Reinoold. Oceanography Department, Division of Marine and Environmental Systems, Florida
Institute of Technology, Melbourne, FL 32901 USA; W.G. Nelson, Coastal Ecology Branch, Western Ecology
Division, US EPA, Newport, OR 97365-5620 USA; J. Tabar, Indian River County, Coastal Engineering Division, Vero
Beach, FL 32960 USA.

Fish assemblages on submerged Prefabricated Erosion Prevention (PEP) breakwaters and natural nea^y reefs
were investigated in an attempt to determine the impact of submerged PEP reefs on natural fish communities. The
PEP breakwater was installed in the surf zone in an alternating inshore-offshore conformation of 11 segments on the
7 and 9 ft depth contours off Vero Beach, FL. Seasonal fish surveys were performed on three pairs of offshore and
inshore segments using visual census techniques with the aid of SCUBA. In June and August of 1997, random units
were sunreyed on each segment to count fish in the worm rock on the reef surface. In August SCUBA divers
surveyed nearby natural reefs. On the PEP segments, number of juvenile fish per unit, mainly Haemulidae and
Lu^'anidae, and species abundance were significantly higher in summer months. Blennies, the most dominant fish
on the PEP reef, were most abundant on the inshore segments and least abundant on the natural site. Although
there was no difference between species richness, density of adult or juvenile fish, on the PEP and natural sites,
there appeared to be a different assemblage of fish between the two habitats.




   643                       15:30 Wednesday                                CF1                               MCN
Using surrogate species to develop endangered species recovery plans: Conceptual and methodological
issues. C.C. Blanco. Department of Biological Sciences, Box 870345, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0345 USA.

The traditiohal approach in developing recovery plans for endangered species has been to directly sample the
imperiled species. Utilizing surrogate species, however, provides a direct estimate of the imperiled species' biology
while minimizing the impacts of direct sampling. For example, the Vermilion darter, Etheostoma chermocki, occurs
in 11.5 kilometers of Turkey Creek, Jefferson County, Alabama. Although relatively common throughout its range,
urban development continues to deteriorate conditions within the watershed. The surrogate method permits
construction of a habitat suitability model using the sister species. This model incorporates multivariate statistical
methods which identifies variables (e.g., discharge, habitat type, dominant substrate type, water pH, conductivity,
temperature, relative abundance) that will be entered into a GIS spatial database. This model will then be tested on
the surrogate prior to its application on the target species. Thus it is possible to construct a species recovery plan
within the context of the species requirements, and compare expected results against field observations obtained
with minimal sampling.

   640                         14:15 Wednesday                                  CF1                        .       MCN
Fish assemblage structure modification due to reservoir contruction (Itaipu, Parent, Brazil). A.A. Agostinho,
E. Benedicto-Cecflio^** and C.V. Minte-Vera, “Nucleo de Pesquisas em Limnologia, Ictiologia e Aquiculture,
Universidade Estadual de Maringa; ‘’Programa de Pos-Graduagao em Ecologia, Institute Nacional de Pesquisas da
Amazonia.

The distribution and abundance of fish species collected during the periods previous to the damming (1980), after the
formation of the resen/oir of Itaipu (Parana, Brazil) (1983-1989) and after 15 years the closing of the dam (1997)
were analyzed. The samplings were realized into the dammed segment of the Parana River (Itaipu reservoir), in two
of it tributaries, in the upstream portion and in four tributaries that run into the reservoir. Itaipu reservoir showed the
largest number of constant and persistent species. This fact, associated to the smallest variance of the abundance of
the species in this environment, indicates larger spatial and temporal homogeneity. The ordination analysis (DCA)
clear up annual alterations in the composition and abundance of the species in the 1983-1989 period, denoting
gradual modifications in the assemblage of fish in the reservoir influence area due to a possible temporary
substitution of the abundant species. The 1997 samplings of resen/oir influence area were more homogeneous than
the ones of the ofter years, indicating a homogenization of the assemblage. The first years after damming were
marked by the success of opportunist species, which, after the colonization process, were replaced by others, in a
slow, but seemingly definitive way.




   641                        14:30 Wednesday                          ....    CF1                                 MCN
Habitat isolation in streams: consequences on fish movement and pool assemblage dynamics.                  D.G.
Lonzarich and M.R. Lonzarich, University of Wisconsin, Eau Claire, Department of Biology, Eau Claire, Wl 54702
USA; M.L. Warren, U. S. D. A. Forest Service, Forest Hydrology Laboratory, 1000 Front St. , Oxford MS, 38655
USA; W.J. Matthews, University of Oklahoma, Department of Zoology, Norman OK 73019 USA.

Recent research has suggested that the dynamics of fish populations and assemblages within habitats can be
affected by the spatial distribution (i.e., isolation) of these habitats within streams. In this study, we determined the
extent to which pool isolation (determined by the distance between adjacent pools) influenced fish movement and
assemblage dynamics in two Arkansas streams. We marked common species from 14 pools assigned to two
treatment categories: pools isolated by long-riffles (> 40m) and those by short riffles (< 10m). Repeatedly snorkeling
each pool tor three days in 1995 and 1997, we discovered significant effects of isolation. Generally, fish moved
frequently among habitats (10-50%); however, combined movement from short-riffle into adjacent pools was six-
times higher (24%) than movement from long-riffle pools (4%). Further, fish in short-riffle pools moved up and
downstream with equal frequency, whereas those in long-riffle pools moved three-times more often downstream.
Consistent with these results, we also found that assemblages in long-riffle pools were more stable than those in
short-riffle pools (overall percent similarity, 87 vs 72%). Collectively, these findings strongly indicate that the spatial
distribution of habitats wittiin streams can have significant effects on the characteristics of fish assemblages and the
processes regulating populations within individual pools. Because land-use activities can alter habitat spacing, these
findings have important implications for fish conservation in degraded streams.




   642                       .14:45 Wednesday                                   CF1        . .                 .   MCN
Conservation of the bayou darter, Etheostoma rubrum (Percidae): larval ecology and population structure.
W.T. Slack, S.T. Ross and J.A. Ewing, University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, MS 39406-5018 USA,

Etheostoma rubrum is endemic to the Bayou Pierre system of west-central Mississippi and juveniles and adults are
virtually restricted to riffles underlain with coarse substrata. Streams in the Bayou Pierre system are experiencing
rapid headward erosion, resulting in the creation of new riffles upstream and the loss of riffles due to sedimentation
downstream. Viewed as a mefapopulation comprising linearly arranged local populations, we hypothesized that
downstream populations of E rubrum (characterized by lower density) might be maintained by more dense upstream
populations through larval drift or juvenile/adult movement.          Upstream riffles would thus constitute source
populations contributing individuals to downstream sinks. We tested two predictions of a source-sink hypothesis.
First, based on a longitudinal array of drift nets set above and below riffle habitats, we documented that both
protolanral and mesolarval stages of E. rubrum are common, although not abundant, components of the drift.
Drifting larvae were taken both downstream and upstream of riffles. Although a potential mechanism exists for
transport from source to sink populations, length-frequencies (and inferred age structure) did not differ between
upstream and downstream populations. Thus, predictions of the source-sink hypothesis are not fully supported and
local downstream populations may be self-sustaining.




   646                        16:15 Wednesday                                   CF1                                MCN
The role of artificial reefs in fisheries and ecosystem management.                    SA. Bortone. Horida Center for
Environmental Studies, 135 NE 19th Ave., Cape Coral, Florida 33909 USA.

Artificial reefs currently play only a minor role in fisheries or ecosystem management. The most notable example is
their use in the spiny lobster fishery. Further examination of the role that artificial reefs can play in fisheries
management needs to be explored. An example may be with regard to facilitating recruitment of juvenile and ydUng
adult serranid fishes (grouper and seabass) from inshore grassbeds to offshore, natural reefs. Further, artificial reefs
can play a significant role in sanctuary and marine resen/e programs. Moreover, purposeful and timed
exploitation/rehabilitation of fish assemblages through artificial reefs may help sustain both fisheries and fish
assemblages. Artificial reefs may not be effective in habitat mitigation where natural habitat has been destroyed.
Information on the complete role that reefs play in trophic dynamics therefore needed. Additionally, an understanding
of the time and spatial scales necessary to effect management objectives is essential. While, most artificial reef
research, to date, has been directed toward fish and fish assemblages, additional insight into ecological processes
and large scale ecosystem management may be gleaned through their study. In the future, artificial reefs
(xrnstruction and deployment design should be directed toward adding to our knowledge base to better manage
nearshore and coastal ecosytems. Interagency, interstate, and international cooperation are the cornerstones for this
endeavor. Both the positive and negative features of artificial reef deployment as a management tool need to be
understood before they are generally accepted as a ecosystem management alternative.       uy ociciiii5,ia   ye«irb earner,       rinaiiy mese results are discussed as they relate to the effective
management and conservation coral reefs.




   639 .                     14:00 Wednesday                                 CF.1                          .    MCN
                         assemblages between submerged Prefabricated Erosion (PEP) breakwaters and
natural re«8. p.T. Reingold, Oceanography Department, Division of Marine and Environmental Systems, Florida
fostitute of Technology, Melbourne, FL 32901 USA; W.G. Nelson, Coastal Ecology Branch. Western Ecoloav
Division, US EPA, N^port, OR 97365-5620 USA; J. Tabar, Indian River County, Coastal Engineering Division, Vero
DOacn, HL 32960 USA.

 Fish assernblages on submerged Prefabricated Erosion Prevention (PEP) breakwaters and natural nearby reefs
were investigated in an attempt to determine the impact of submerged PEP reefs on natural fish communities. The
                      installed in the surf zone in an alternating inshore-offshore conformation of 11 segments on the
7 and 9 ft depth contours off Vero Beach, FL. Seasonal fish surveys were performed on three pairs of offshore and
inshore segments using visual census techniques with the aid of SCUBA. In June and August of 1997, random units
were surveyed on each segment to count fish in the worm rock on the reef surface. In August SCUBA divers
surveyed nearby natural reefs. On the PEP segments, number of juvenile fish per unit, mainly Haemulidae and
Luqanidae, and species abundance were significantly higher in summer months. Blennies, the most dominant fish
on the PEP reeL were most abundant on the inshore segments and least abundant on the natural site. Althouqh
there was no difference between species richness, density of adult or Juvenile fish, on the PEP and natural sites
there appeared to be a different assemblage of fish between the two habitats.




  . 643                      15:30 Wednesday                                CF1                                MCN
Using surrogate species to develop endangered species recovery plans: Conceptual and methodological
Issues. C.C. Blanco. Department of Biological Sciences, Box 870345, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0345 USA.

The tradHiohal approach in developing recovery plans for endangered species has been to directly sample the
imperiled species. Utilizing surrogate species, however, provides a direct estimate of the Imperiled species' biology
while minimizing the impacts of direct sampling. For example, the Vermilion darter, Elheosfoma c/iermockf, occurs
in 11.5 kilometers of Turkey Creek, Jefferson County, Alabama. Although relatively common throughout its range,
urban development continues to deteriorate conditions within the watershed. The surrogate method permits
construction of a habitat suitability model using the sister species. This model incorporates multivariate statistical
methods which identifies variables (e.g., discharge, habitat type, dominant substrate type, water pH, conductivity,
temperature, relative abundance) that will be entered into a QIS spatial database. This model will then be tested on
the surrogate prior to its application on the target species. Thus it is possible to construct a species recovery plan
within the context of the species requirements, and compare expected results against field observations obtained
with minimal sampling.




   644                       15:45 Wednesday                                CF.I    .                          .MCN
The influence of the Dawesville Channel on the fish fauna of the shallows of the Peel-Harvey Estuary. G.C.
Young and I.C. Potter, Division of Science, School of Biological Sciences, Murdoch University, Perth, Western
Australia.

The Peel-Harvey Estuary, located in south-western Australia has become very eutrophic since the early 1970s. This
extreme eutrophication is reflected by a vast Increase in macroalgae and massive seasonal blooms of blue^reen
algae. Increases in macroalgal growth, particularly in the Peel Inlet, have been accompanied by increases in fish
abundance, whereas, in the Harvey Estuary, the spring blooms of foe blue-green alga Nodularia spumigena have
resulted in a movement of the more mobile fish species out of this area and to foe death of a number of inidividuals
of foe more benthic and less mobile species. In an attempt to alleviate the eutrophication problem, the Dawesville
Channel was constructed in 1994 between foe Harvey Estuary and the ocean to help discharge nurtients to the sea
anrf reduce algal growth. Intensive seine netting was undertaken in 1996 and 1997 at the same sites and using the
same net as foat used in previous studies of the fish fauna of ths Peel-Harvey Estuary 15-20 years earlier. The
results of the multivariate analyses used to determine patterns in species abundance and distribution of fish and the
influence of region and season on fish both prior to and after the construction of foe Dawesville Channel will be
presented.




   645                       16:00 Wednesday                                CFJ                                MCN
Biology of the greater redhorse (Moxoatoma valeiKletmesI^ - a neglected species. SJ. Cooke. C.M. Bunt and
R.S. McKinley, Waterloo Biotelemetry Institute , Department of Biology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON., N2L
3G1.

Biology of foe greater redhorse was studied in the middle reaches of the Grand River, Ontario from 1995 to 1997.
Spawning began in late May when water temperatures were above 13°C, and lasted for up to 14 days. Spaviming
occurred in shallow riffle areas comprised of pebble, cobble and gravel. Videographic observations indicated foat
males usually remained on or near foe spawning riffles and females were either attracted by the presence or
conspicuous behaviour of males. Males produced rapid snout vibrations which usually preceded spawning activity.
Post spawning movements and habitat use were determined using radio telemetry. After spawning, most fish moved
several kilometres downstream and occupied deeper margins of riffles, usually in aggregation with conspecifics. By
early summer, fish had dispersed evenly throughout foe 17 km study reach. An access point creel survey indicated
foat there was a significant recreational fishery targeting greater redhorse, although anglers were unsure of foe
correct name for foe species. Very little information is available on the greater redhorse, or any member of the
Moxostomatini tribe, although it is an important and conspicuous species in the middle reaches of foe Grand River,
and likely elsewhere.

 z*      • *   1   ..   •   ,7------ n.                                    aiiwvww wi(0o~u(iioo iiiuio Ullcil UUrViloireani
                        results, we also found that assemblages in long-riffle pools were more stable than those in
                                                           Collectively, these findings strongly indicate that the spatial
distnbution of habitats within streams can have significant effects on the characteristics of fish assemblaaes and the
pnxesses regulating populations within individual pools. Because land-use activities can alter habitat soacino these
findings have important implications for fish conservation In degraded streams.




       642                    .14:45 Wednesday                                 CF1                                 MCN
                                                         (Percldae): larval ecology and population structure.
W.T. Slack, S/LBoss and J,A. Ewing, University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, MS 39406-5018 USA.

                                5               Pierre system of west-central Mississippi and juveniles and adults are
                   to nffles uiiderlain with coarse substrata. Streams in the Bayou Pierre system are experiencing
 rapid headward erosion, resulting in the creation of new riffles upstream and the loss of riffles due to sedimentation
downstream. Viewed as a metapopulation comprising linearly arranged local populations, we hypothesized that
downstream populations of E■ rubrum (characterized by lower density) might be maintained by more dense upstream
populations through larval dnft or juvenile/adult movement           Upstream riffles would thus constitute source
populations contnb^ng individuals to downstream sinks. We tested two predictions of a source-sink hypothesis.
Rrel, based     a longitudinal array of drift nets set above and below nnle habitats, we documented that both
       ® 1      niesolanral stages of E. rubrum are common, although not abundant, components of the drift
Dnfling larvae were taken both downstream and upstream of riffles. Although a potential mechanism exists for
transport frorn source to sink populations, length-frequencies (and inferred age strucfure) did not differ between
upstream and downstrearn populations. Thus, predictions of the source-sink hypothesis are not fully supported and
local downstream populations may be self-sustaining.




      .646 .                  16:15 Wednesday                                  CF1                    . .         MCN
The role of artificial reefs in fisheries and ecosystem manamment.                    SA. Bortone. Florida Center for
Environmental Studies, 135 NE 19th Ave., Cape Coral, Florida 33909 USA.

Artificial reefs currently play only a minor role in fisheries or ecosystem management. The most notable example is
their use in the spiny lobster fishery. Further examination of the role that artificial reefs can play in fisheries
management needs to be explored. An example may be with regard to facilitating recruitment of juvenile and young
adult serranid fishes (grouper and seabass) from inshore grassbeds to offshore, natural reefs. Further, artificial reefo
can play a significant role in sanctuary and marine reserve programs. Moreover, purposeful and timed
exploitation/rehabilitation of fish assemblages through artificial reefs may help sustain both fisheries and fish
assemblages. Artificial reefs may not be effective in habitat mitigation where natural habitat has been destroyed.
Information on the complete role that reefs play in trophic dynamics therefore needed. Additionally, an understanding
of the time and spatial scales necessary to effect management objectives is essential. While, most artificial reef
research, to date, has been directed toward fish and fish assemblages, additional insight into ecological processes
and large scale ecosystem management may be gleaned through their study. In the future, artificial reefs
construction and deployment design should be directed toward adding to our knowledge base to better manage
nearshore and coastal ecosytems. Interagency, interstate, and international cooperation are the cornerstones for this
endeavor. Both the positive and negative features of artificial reef deployment as a management tool need to be
understood before they are generally accepted as a ecosystem management alternative.




      647                    16:30 Wednesday                                   CF1                                 MCN
Species at risk In the GuH of Mexico and adjacent coastal habitats: a website. S.G. Poss and A.M. O'Connell,
ASIH. Gulf Coast Research Laboratory Museum, P.O. Box 7000, Ocean Springs, MS 39566-7000, USA.

A website (htfp'y/www.ims.usm.edu/~musweb/endanger.html) has been created that provides information on
vertebrate and invertebrate species potentially at risk in the Gulf of Mexico and adjoining coastal habitats. Ths
website was developed as a means to disseminate the results of a workshop on ths identification of potentially
endangered species in the Gulf and to establish research needs for these species through a cooperative agreement
between the US Gulf of Mexico Program and Gulf Coast Research Laboratory Museum.

Detailed information is provided for 78 species, including 24 fish, 3 amphibians, and 8 reptiles. Data include
synonyms, nomenclatural remarks, distinguishing features, similar species, species photographs, summaries of
species biology, distribution, size, scientific basis for assessment of risk, status of gulf populations, and
bibliographies. For fishes, online distributional maps and extensive archival records for each-species were compiled
through foe assistance of many collections, most notably those of foe five gulf states. These compilations were used
to assess historical changes in species distributions. A bibliography of over 8,500 papers dealing with endangered
species and related topics is also available, as well as links to other related websites.

Extensions are directed toward more structured data collection, standardized online databasing, and inclusion of non-
indigenous species so that information can readily accessed for management and educational purposes.




      648                   13:15 Wednesday                           ..   . CF9                        ...        CHM
Fine structure of the notochord of the chestnut lamprey. R.J. Schmitz and H Roskins, Department of Biology,
University of Wisconsin Stevens Point, Stevens Point, Wl 54481 USA.

The notochord of foe lamprey is a solid cylindrical organ consisting of a cellular medulla surrounded by an
extracellular fibrous sheath and an elastic externa. The base of the medulla consists of a layer of columnar cells with
an extensive network of rough endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria. The cytoplasm of these cells also contains
distinct lipid droplets and a peripheral network of intermediate filaments. The vacuoles in the ceils located in foe
middle of foe medulla are reinforced with a peripheral network of intermediate filaments. These cells are
interconnected with numerous desmosomes. Lipid droplets and huge deposits of glycogen granules are also
obsenred in foe vacuolated cells. The fibrous sheath is made of several layers of collagen fibers. Interspersed
between the collagen layers are deposits of extracellular matrix similar to that found in the elastic externa. The
elastic externa is an amorphous layer of extracellular matrix foat appears to be secreted by the fibroblasts and
chondroblasts that surround foe periphery of foe notochord. There are several differences in the organization of the
lamprey notochord when compared to foe fine structure of foe sturgeon and lungfish notochord (J. Morphol. 1998).
These differences may have furrctional and phylogenetic implications foat remain to be determined.




4   649                        13:30'Wednesday                                  CF9                               CHM
Osteology of the remora (Echeneididae: Carangoidei) sucking disc. B. OToole. Center for Biodiversity and
Consen/ation Biology, Royal Ontario Museum, 100 Queen's Park, Toronto, Ontario M5S 2C6, Canada; and
Department of Zoology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1 Al, Canada.

Remoras (Echeneididae: Carangoidei) are medium sized, specialized pelagic fishes, inhabiting the warm water of
the world. Remoras are found in close association with certain marine animals and inanimate objects. In all cases
remoras use their sucking disc to attach to smooth surfaces. An osteological examination of cleared and stained
remoras reveals that the disc is homologous with the dorsal fin of other percoids. The disc is composed of 4
structures: proximal, medial and distal pterygiophores, and the dorsal spines. These 4 structures are serially
repeated to form the disc. The dorsal spine is reduced in size and enclosed in the fin membrane. The paired distal
pterygiophore forms the denticulated laminae, and also supports the spine. The medial pterygiophore forms the
perimeter of the disc, and supports the laminae fonning a hinged Joint which allows rotation. The proximal
pterygiophore supports the entire unit, it connects to both the laminae and the medial pterygiophore. Each of these
units IS connected to the previous one by the proximal pterygiophore. The remora attaches itself by pressing the disc
against a surface and rotating the dist^ pterygiophore around the hinged joint. This increases the volume of the
sealed chamber creating a partial vacuum.




   650                        13:45 .Wednesday                                 CF9                               CHM
Development of the cartilaginous cephalic skeleton in the sole, Solea solea (Pleuronectiformes, Soleidae).
F. Waaemans and P. Vandewalle, University de Liege, Institut de Zoologie, Laboratoire de Morphologie fonctionnelle
et evolutive, 22 Quai Van Beneden, B-4020 Lidge, Belgium.

The postembryonio development of the cartilaginous cephalic skeleton in Solea solea (Linne) was observed from
hatching to the juvenile stage. Fry were trypsin-cleared and alcian-blue stained. At hatching, S. solea displays no
cartilaginous structure. On day 3, the fry exhibit trabecular bars, Meckel's cartilages, palatoquadrates,
hyosymplectics, hyoid bars, the first two ceratobranchials and basibranchials 1-3. On day 4, ceratobranohials 3 and
4 fomi. On day 12, short taeniae marginales are formed on the well-developed otic capsules and the branchial
basket is nearly complete. On day 14, cartlage reduction begins as the posterior part of the trabecula communis
separates from the otic capsules. On day 18, metamorphosis begins. The tectum posterius completes posteriorly the
braincase dome. On day 20, the left eye moves to the median crest of the head and the right eye shifts a bit
downwards. Consequently, displacement of the right eye induces a deformation extending to the right pterygoid
process. On day 23, both eyes are located on the same side. On day 29, cartilage reduction affects 9ie
hyosymplectics; it continues with the first two ceratobranchials on day 32 and with the otic capsules on day 40,




   651                      ...14:00 Wednesday                                 CF9                      .       CHM
Volumetric study of brain regions in Xenopoecilius oophorus (Belonlformes:Adrianichthyidae). J.S. Albert,
Department of Anatomy;, Nippon Medical School;, Sendagi 1-1-5, Bunkyo-ku;, Tokyo 113 Japan.

Xenopoecilius oophorus is a member of the basal clade of Adrianichthyidae. In order to determine the size and
shape of brain regions in these fishes I used a 3-dimensional computer reconstruction system (TRI 3,10). To
preserve the original size of structures specimens virere immersion-fixed in 10% formalin and brains sectioned at 30
um (B on a cryostat. Outlines of 180 serial sections were traced to calculate the volume of one whole brain and six
brain regions; olfactory bulbs (BO), telencephala (TE). optic tecta (TO), inferior lobes (IL), cerebellum (CE), and facial
lobes (FL). Volumetric estimates from sampling every section were compared with estimates from sampling each
2nd, 4th and 8fh section, as well as from ocular micrometiy using linear measurements taken under a dissecting
microscope. Estimates from section sampling and ocular micrometry did not differ significantly from the complete
volumetric values. Estimates from ocular micrometry were derived from the ellipsoid model [V=1/6 pi’Iwdl (l=length,
w=width, and d=depth). except for the TO. which was estimated from [V=SA‘T] [SA=surface area, T=tnickness).
Estimates of total brain size derived by measuring the linear distance between the anterior margin of the
telencephalon and the obex did not differ significantly from estimates derived from weighing brains.




   655                        15:30 Wedresday                                  CF9                                CHM
Sturgeons and their parasites: the historical biogeography of a host-parasite association. A Choudhury.
Department of Zoology, University of Toronto, Toronto. Ontario, M5S 3G5; TJt. Teny, Department of Zoology,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg.

Sturgeons (Osteichthyes: Acipenseridae) are evolutionaiy relicts with a wide distribution in the northern hemisphere.
The historical biogeography of their association with their diverse assemblage of host specific parasites is exploreri
using phylogenetic systematics and information from geology, paleontology and paleogeogtaphy. The patterns
indicate historical exchanges with a variety of host taxa and low levels of conspeciation, resulting in small clades of
vyidely distributed parasite species. Sister taxa of parasites generally exhibit allopatric patterns associated with
discrete iandrnasses and basins. A trans-Atlantic track involving Adpenser oxyrhynchus and A. sturio and a trans­
pacific track invoivirig A. medimstris are evident. The parasite relationships also support a historical connection
between North America and North Asian freshwater sturgeons (A. fulvescens and A. baeri or their ancestors) and the
biogeographical and phylogenetic relationship of A. mlvescens and A. brevirostrum. Based on these parascript
studies, it is hypothesized that a former contiguous distribution of Palaeartic and Neartic sturgeons was fragmented
by climatic and tectonic events in ths Tertiary causing displacement of the lake sturgeon lineage and its association
with the Gulf of Mexico drainages.




   656                        15:45 Wednesday                                 CF9                                CHM
Biogeography of giant bacteria and their surgeonfish (Acanthuridae) hosts in the north Pacific. W.L.
Mo^gomerv. P.E. Pollak, S. Treutner and T. Scarborough, Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona
University, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA 86011- 5640 USA; KJ3. Clements, School of Biological lienees. University of
Aimldand. PrivatA Rnn QPniQ Air'ktand Naut 7oaland

   652                       '14:15 Wednesday                                CF9                            . CHM
Pleomerism of vertebrae, fin rays, and scale rows In the gobiid fishes: observations and possible
explanations. A.S. Golubtsov. Severtsev Institute of Ecology and Evolution, Moscow 117071, Russia.

According to Lindsey (1975), pleomerism is a correlation among related animal species between their numbers of
meristic parts and their characteristic body sizes. Lindsey found a striking tendency for vertebral number to be
positively correlated with maximum length in many families of fish; however, he did not find the same correlation
among 36 species of the family Gobiidae in his analysis. Data on the maximum recorded size, numbers of vertebrae,
fin-rays (in dorsal,anal, and pectoral fins), and scales in longitudinal row were taken from published reviews of the
gobiid species occurring in the Indo-West-Pacific (120 species). South African (107), North East Atlantic (73), Black
Sea (26) regions. Not only vertebral numbers, but ail other counts appeared to be positively correlated with size of
gobiid species in the four regions. Taxonomic applications of this phenomena and possible evolutionary explanations
(e.g., life history correlates, structure of heritable morphological variation) are discussed.




   653                       14:30 Wednesday                                 CF9                               CHM
Functional morphology of pectoral fin locomotion in basal actinopteryglans. J.E. Janovetz. Department of
Organismal Biology and Anatomy,, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637 USA; M.W. Westneat, Department of
Zoology,, Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, IL 60605 USA.

Fishes use their pectoral fins for a variety of locomotor functions including providing thrust for rectilinear movement
Most previous analyses of pectoral fin swimming in fishes have focused on the Peroiformes, a relatively derived
group. In this study we examine pectoral fin swimming in Polypterus palmas, Leplsosteus platostomus, and Amia
calva, representing three basal clades of ray-finned fishes. Both fonward and reverse swimming are analyzed to
reflect the wide range of behaviors during which fishes use their pectoral fins. Anatomical changes which have
occurred in the pectoral fin complex include duplication of musculature and the formation of a specialized fin ray to
act as the leading edge of the fin. Kinematically, the frequencies of fin beats and three-dimensional excursions of the
fin differ greatly between species. Electroinyograms reveal differences in the duration, relative timing, and amplitude
of activity in the pectoral muscles suggesting that motor patterns during swimming are not highly consenred in these
taxa. These data are compared with information from more derived taxa to trace the evolution of pectoral fin
swimming in actinopteryglans.




   654                       14:45 Wednesday                                CF9                               CHM
Geographic variation in the skeleton of the stoneroller, Campostoma anomalum. T.M. Cavender. Museum of
Biological Diversity. The Ohio State University, 1315 Kinnear Road, Columbus, OH 43212 USA.

Comparative osteology of the nominal species Campostoma anomalum was investigated across most of its
geographic range in North America. Considerable variation was found associated with the food cropping and food
processing mechanisms Qaws, pharyngeals) and bones associated with ths operation of these structures.
Transformations in character states (using Campostoma omatum and Dionda diaboli as outgroups) were found in the
laws, pharyngeals, suspensorium, opercular series, sphenotic, ethmoid, cranial roof and vertebral number. Results
from the skeletal analysis were interpreted as follows. Two broadly defined groups were recognized. One,
represented by Campostoma anomalum pullum, is widespread across the glaciated mid-section of North America
and southward in the plains region. The second is a complex of forms (represented in the upper Ohio Valley by
Campostoma a. anomalum) distributed in the Ohio River basin and peripheral areas to the east, south and west.
The sfonerollers found in the northern portions of the Ohio Valley can be pullum, anomalum or possible
intermediates between the two depending on the drainage system. The largescale stonerolier, C. 'oligolepid',
distributed in the Ozark uplands is a western component of the anomalum complex that is related to the similar but
slightly more derived Tennessee-Cumberland stoneroller.        The stoneroller that dominates the Tennessee-
Cumberland is the most derived form of the anomalum complex. It has peripheral (extensions?) in the Green River,
New River and on the gulf and east slopes. The name C. a. michauxi Fowler might apply to this form. Two of the
most recognizable populations within the anomalum complex have smaller distributional ranges. One is found in the
Roanoke-James and the other in the Ouachita drainage.




   653 ._________________ 13:15 Wednesday______________________ CF12                 _____________________ mcN
Sperm competition and the evolution of aRemative male life histories.              P. Fu. B.D. Neff and M.R. Gross,
University of Toronto, 25 Harbord Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G5,

Sperm competition is one vehicle by which males compete with each other for reproductive success. This paper
examines sperm competition between the specialized cuckolder and parental male life histories of bluegill sunfish
(Lepomis macrochirus). First, we find that the investment in total sperm production is higher in cuckolders frran
parentals and within cuckolders, males that have higher sperm production obtain higher fertilization success.
Second, the longevity of sperm is lower in cuckolders than parentals. The alternative male reproductive life histories
of bluegill therefore utilize sperm in different ways to compete for reproductive success. Cuokoiders invest in
quantity because they always face sperm competition, while parentals invest in quality because they only rarely face
sperm compeUtion. We compare these findings to those in other fishes by analyzing differences in sperni
competition intensities and sperm quantity-quality tradeoffs.   '651                       14:00 Wednesday                                CF9                               CHM
                                     Xmopoecilius oophorus (BelonIformesiAdrIanIchthyidae). J.S. Albed.
Department of Anatomy;, Nippon Medical School;, Sendagi 1-1-5, Bunkyo-ku;, Tokyo 113 Japan.’ ’

                                                                  Adrianichthyidae. In order to determine the size and
 shape of brain regions in these fishes I used a 3-dimensional computer reconstruction system (TRI 3.10) To
 preserve the original size of structures specimens were immersion-fixed in 10% formalin and brains sectioned at 30
 um (B on a cryostat. Onlines of 180 serial sections were traced to calculate the volume of one whole brain and
                                       te'en'^Phala (TE), optic tecta (TO), inferi!,^^lob!! (l™Sr!b™(CEL and
Pnrt 4th^inH RfhSection were compared with estimates from sarnpling each
                                      “ frat" ocular micrometry using linear measurements taken under a dissecting
                                section sampling and ocular micrometry did not differ significantly from the complete
                                      oSufo;.hi'S'’ometty were denved from the ellipsoid model [V=1/6 pi’Iwd] (telength
                           except for the TO, which vyas esbmated from [V=SA*TI [SA=surfdce area, T=fliicknessT
Estimates of tot^ brain size denved by measunng the linear distance between the anterior maroin of the
telencephalon and the obex did not differ significantly from estimates derived from weighing brains.




   655                       15:30 Wednesday                                CF9                  . .   .      CHM .
Sturgeons and their parasites: the historical biogeography of a host-parasite association. A Choudhurv.
Department of Zoology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G5; T.A. Teny, Department of Zoology,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg.

Sturgeons (Osteichthyes: Acipenseridae) are evolutionaiy relicts with a wide distribution in the northern hemisphere.
The historical biogeography of their association with their diverse assemblage of host spedfic parasites is explored
using phylogenesc systematics and information from geology, paleontology and paleogeography. The patterns
indicate historical exchanges with a variety of host taxa and low levels of conspeciation, resulting in small dades of
widely distributed parasite species. Sister taxa of parasites generally exhibit allopatric patterns associated with
discrete landmasses and basins. A trans-Atlantic track involving Adpenser oxyrhynchus and A. sturio and a trans­
pacific track involving A. medirostris are evident. The parasite relationships also support a historical connection
between North America and North Asian freshwater sturoeons (A. fulvescens and A. baeri or their ancestors) and the
biogeographical and phylogeneric relationship of A. fulvescens and A. brevirostrum. Based on these parascript
studies, it is hypothesized that a former contiguous distribution of Palaeartic and Neartic sturgeons was fragmented
by dimatic and tectonic events in the Tertiary causing displacement of the lake sturgeon lineage and its association
with the Gulf of Mexico drainages.




   656                       15:45 Wednesday                                CF9                               CHM
Biogeography of giant bacteria and their surgeonfish (Acanthuridae) hosts in the north Pacific. W.L.
Montgomery. P.E. Pollak, S. Treutner and T. Scarborough, Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona
University, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA 86011- 5640 USA; K.D. Clements, School of Biological Sciences, University of
Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealand.

Surgeonfishes harbor a group of gut symbionts that include the largest known Eubacteria (cell lengths of 30pm to
>500pm). Because the bacteria are acquired after larval surgeonfishes settle from the plankton, me fish/symbiont
system in the Hawaiian Archipelago and other north' Pacific locations provides an opportunity to address questions
about evolution of host and symbionts within and among hosts, within and among islands, and among island
systems. We have sunreyed microbes in host surgeonfishes from Hawaii, Maui, Oahu, Kauai, French Frigate
Shoals, Pearl & Hermes, and Midway Islands in the Hawaiian Archipelago, as well as from the Red Sea, Great
Barrier Reef, Tuvalu, Moorea (French Polynesia), Ishigaki Island (Japan) and Gulf of California. A variety of
structural morphs of the bacteria, differing in maximum size, cell shape, and the number and mode of formation of
daughter cells, have been recorded from all sites except the Gulf. There appears to be considerable consistency in
morphs occupying particular host species among the Hawaiian islands, but little consistency among island systems
in terms of morphs occupying given host species. Prelimin^ molecular studies suggest loca divergence of
microbes within a single host, at least for widely separated localities.




   657 .                     13:00 Wednesday                                CF12                              MCN
Parasites, life histories, mating systems. B.D. Neff, S. D'Amelio and M.R. Gross, Department of Zoology
University of Toronto, 25 Harbord Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G5.

Parasites may play an important role in fish life history and mating system evolution. This paper examines parasite
loads in a natural colony of bluegill sunfish (Lepomis macrochiiu^. All 8 parasite-types were quantified in selected
tissues of over 200 females, cuckolders and parentals (n= 16,438 parasites). Femdes and cuckolders have fewer
parasites than do parental males. Parental males that obtain nest sites within ths colony have fewer parasites than
unsuccessful parental males. Thus, parasites apparently determine parental male opportunity to breed, and sexual
selection for delayed maturation in parental males increases their average parasite loads. The evolution of the
mating system and life histories in this fish is therefore subject to forces of selection from parasites.

   654                       14:45 Wednesday                                CFO .                             CHM.,
^graphic variatlOTln^me skeleton of the stoneroller, Campostoma anomalum. TM Cavender Museum nf
Biological Diversity, The Ohio State University, 1315 Kinnear Road, Columbus, OH 43212 USA. *

Comparative osteology of the nominal species Campostoma anomalum was investioated acrns.s most nf its
geographic range in North America. Considerable variation was found associated with the food cronoina and food
                               Phanfngeals) and bones associated with the SJSrSSn            S ftmXr^s
terns                                   (using Campostoma omatum and Dionda diaboli as outgroups) were found in the
                      suspensonum, opercular series, sphenotic, ethmoid, cranial roof and vlrtebr^' nurnber Result!
                      analysis were interpreted as follows. Two broadly defined groups were recognized           One
Srt                                anomalum pullum, is widespread across the glaciated niid-sectionrrfNorlh AmerirS
                                          TP?            ® “’’’Plex o1 forms (represented in the upper Ohio Valley by
                                 distnbuted in the Ohio River basin and peripheral areas to the east, south and west^
The stonerollers found in the northern portions of the Ohio Valley can bo pullum, anomalum or possible
SSmldte® the n!!! nnte’Ti® .*>*«*'';«               ‘'’® drainage system. The largescale stoneroller, C. •ol^olepi^,
E tehnl?                  uplands is a western component of the anoma/um complex that is related to the similar but
rumhoriSJ.'dte t'ho''     3L®’?’'®®®®®"CJumb©rtand stoneroller.    The stoneroller that dominates the Tennessee-
                n! ih!                           ^oma/um complex. II has peripheral (extensions?) in the Green River
               J?''                      slopes. The name C. a. michauxi Fowler might apply to this form Two of the
R!!fi!k!SrmMandttIirth"®''*fh'"r?® a'’°'”a/um complex have smaller distributional ranges. One is found in the
Hoanoke-James and the other in the Ouachita drainage.




   658                      13:15.Wednesday                                CF12                              MCN
Sperm competition and the evolution of alternative male life histories.           P. Fu. B.D. Neff and M.R. Gross,
University of Toronto, 25 Harbord Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G5.

Sperm competition is one vehicle by which males compete with each other for reproductive success. This paper
examines sperm competition between the specialized cuckolder and parental male life histories of bluegill sunfish
{Lepixnis macrochirus). First, we find that the investment in total spemn produdion is higher in cuckolders ^an
parentals and within cuckolders, males that have higher sperm production obtain higher fertilization success.
Second, the longevity of spenn is lower in cuckdders than parentals. The alternative male reproductive life histories
of bluegill therefore utilize sperm in different ways to compete for reproductive success. Cuckolders invest in
quantity because they always face sperm competition, while parentals invest in quality because they only rarely face
sperm competition. We compare these findings to those in other fishes by analyzing differences in spenn
competition intensities and sperm quantity-quality tradeoffs.