ippi River. In
the process of describing the Yazoo shiner, N. rafinesquei, Suttkus noted the presence of Al. sabinae within the
Yazoo River, a system which Iles east of the Mississippi River. Further sampling uncovered yet another eastern
population within the Big Black River system. Upon preliminary examination, the latter population appears to show
morphological novelties for this group. Given the diversity exhibited among populations of Al. sabinae, a genetic data
set was assembled to aid in defining operational taxonomic units (OTUs, sensu Mayden and Wood, 1995) within this
species, and to suggest avenues for further study. Sequences were collected from the mitochondrial cytochrome b
gene from individuals representing the geographic range of this species and were subjected to phylogenetic and
population-level analyses. In all analyses, the Big Black River population was strongly supported as monophyletic
and distinct from any other population.




   320                          13:30 Sunday                                 GS1                              MCN
Quick and accurate identification of triggerfishes (Balistidae) using PCR with species-diagnostic
mitochondrial (12S/16S) primers. H.A. Balchowsky. Nova Southeastern University, Oceanographic Center, 8000
Ocean Drive, Dania, FL 33004 USA.
Identification of ichthyoplankton (eggs, larvae, and juveniles) can be a challenging task due to their small sizes and
dynamic development. This problem is particularly acute for tropical and subtropical ichthyoplankton, most of which
can be identified to family-level only. As part of a broader initiative to develop molecular markers for tropical and
subtropical fish identification, we report on the utility of mitochondrial ribosomal gene sequences for triggerfish
species identification. A 1,510 bp fragment, containing portions of the mitochondrial ribosomal genes (12S, 16S) and
the complete tRNA valine gene, was sequenced from six triggerfish species (4 genera) inhabiting the western central
Atlantic Ocean. Forty-three sequences were examined to assess intra- and interspecific variation. Intraspecific
differences were minor (less than 0.5%); however, sufficient interspecific differences occur within this locus to allow
the design of robust species-specific PCR primers. When tested in a multiplex PCR assay, these primers yielded
species-diagnostic size fragments that unambiguously identified all 4 genera and 4 of the 6 species. Distinction
between the two Canthidermis congeners (0.9% interspecific variation) was not possible using this approach;
however, these congeners were readily distinguished using RFLP analysis of the PCR amplicon, we suggest that
molecular genetic approaches can provide a robust and rapid method to tackle long-standing problems in the
identification of fish species.




   321                          13:45 Sunday                                 GS1                               MCN
Evolution of karyotypes, reproductive organs, and trophic structures In the Goodeidae (Pisces:
Cyprindontiformes) based on nuclear and mithochondrial DNA phylogenies: The continuing sa^. L.E.
Thompson. The University of /Uabama, Department of Biological Sciences, Box 870345, Tuscaloosa, Alabama
35487-0345 USA.
The family Goodeidae is a distinct North American lineage of freshwater fishes and is comprised of two monophyletic
subfamilies (Empetrichthyinae and Goodeinae). Empetrichthyinae contains all egg-laying species and Goodeinae
contains all viviparous spedes. The Goodeinae is recognized as a monophyletic group based on the presence of
unique morphological traits associated with internal fertilization and viviparity. The classification of goodeids has
been based largely on variation of reproductive and trophic characters. A molecular phylogenetic hypothesis is
presented based on the cladistic analysis of mtDNA (portions of the 16s rRNA, control region, and c^ochrome b
genes) and nDNA (a portion of the tyrosine kinase X-src gene) of representative goodeid fishes. The comparative
method based on the molecular phylogeny was used to reconstruct the evolution or key characters traditionally used
in the classification of the group such as: trophotaeniae (external projections of the embryonic gut that absorb
maternal nutrients), karyot^es, and tooth and jaw structures. The phylogeny agrees with some but not all
conclusions from earlier studies regarding phylogenetic relationships and reproductive and trophic character
evolution.

Deiween irie uusivy                 fjui9fjvpunn;aiiat ariu uie uiiwtsopui                           neiauve yui leiiyiii
is significantly different between the two damselfish species. Dusky damselfish have a relative gut length ratio (gut
length/standard length) of 1.20 and a Zihler indes ((gut length/(weighM/3)) if 3.42. Values for the threespot
damselfish are 3.01 and 824 respectively. Despite striking differences in RGL and Zl, the gut retention time is the
same for both species. Additionally, only protein assimilation efficiency (and thus total assimilation efficiency) varies
between species; significantly mote protein is assimilated by the threespot damselfish than the dusky damselfish.
These results have several important implications. First, as both species feed on the same algal diet, the greater
assimilation efficiency of the threespot damselfish may translate into faster growth rates and greater reproductive
capacity. Second, it has long been held that relative gut length ratios of herbivorous fishes fall between 2 and 21,
with most herbivorous damselfishes in the range of 5. The significantly lower relative gut length of dusky damselfish,
unquestionably an herbivore, challenges trophic classifications based on relative gut length ratios. Third, gut
moqihologiss are often used in phylogenetic analyses. These two damselfish are closely related congeners yet their
gut morphologies vary significantly. This questions the applicability of such characters in phylogenetic analyses.




                                                                                              MCN
Are you considering transplantantion as a management tod? Be cautious - mixing gene pods may be more
harmful than helpful due to outbreeding depression. J.D. Hemandez-Martich. The University of Georgia
Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, Drawer E, Aiken, SC 29802 USA.

Mixing gene pools may cause outbreeding depression (OD). However, it is unknown what kind and degree of
between-mate dissimilarity should exist for OD to occur. The Optimum Outbreeding Paradigm (OOP) predicts
inbreeding depression (ID) for offspring of close relatives. As similarities between mates decrease, offspring fitness
increases, reaches an optimal level and then decreases to levels below parental fitness (i. e., OD occurs).
Populations of eastern mosquitofish (Gambusia holbrooki: Poeciliidae) from the Piedmont and Coastal Plain of two
drainages were used as sources of fish for seven crosses and six pure controls each replicated in four mesocosms.
OD occurred in populations of some crosses between fish from different regions and/or drainages. There were
significantly more extinct populations among those founded with fish from the same vs. different region/drainage
sections (7of 20 vs. 3 of 32). Population size and growth rate, fecundity and juvenile survival were significantly lower
for populations of crosses of fish from different regions and/or drainages than for those of their controls. I examined
potential predictors of OD and the per-locus number of unshared alleles (Nu) between sources was the best
predictor under the OOP. Optimum outcrossing and OD are expected when Nu = 0.25 and >0.45, respectively.




   323                          14:15 Sunday                                  GS1                               MCN
Evolution of the biomechanical attributes of long bones in fish, amphibians, and reptiles.               G.M. Erickson.
Biomechanical Engineering Division, Mechanical Engineering Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-
3030 USA.
Long bones are the major skeletal elements of vertebrate appendages. The radiations of many vertebrate clades
were facilitated by locomotory innovations Involving these elements (e.g. the terrestrial diversification of tetrapods)
and thus it is necessa^ to understand how these elements changed biomechanically to more fully understand
vertebrates evolution. Biomechanical attributes of long bones such as strength, modulus, and loading conditions are
well documented in avian and mammalian taxa. However, data for taxa from outgroup clades are virtually non­
existent and the results from the few studies that have been conducted are not in accord with those obtained for bird
and mammal bones. In order to provide a better understanding of skeletal evolution, I conducted a series of
biomechanical tests on long bones from a diversity of fish, amphibians, and reptiles that possessed basal locomotory
attributes within their respective clades. Evolutionary trends were assessed using phylogenetic character analysis.
The results suggest; 1) material properties (strength, modulus, and failure strain) did not vary throughout evolution,
2) in vivo strain regimes increased Independently in birds and mammals, 3) the capacity of long bones to functionally
adapt is a plesiomorphic osteichthyan trait, and 4) size and shape changes were the primary means by which long
bones changed to meet evolutionary locomotory challenges.




   324                          14:30 Sunday                                 GS1                               MCN
Comparative locomotor kinematics of three stingray species (Taeniura lymma, Dasyatls americana, and D.
sabina}. L.J. Rosenberger. University of Chicago, Dept. OBA, 1027 E. 57th, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
Locomotion in stingrays occurs as waves are propagated along their broadly expanded pectoral fins and can range
from being undulatory to oscillatory. This study compares swimming behavior in three stingray species (Taeniura
lymma, DasyaBs americana, D. sabina} differing in fin design (disc shape) as measured by aspect ratio (AR). Three-
dimensional video recordings captured swimming kinematics over a range of velocities for the three species.
Results indicate that D. americana (highest AR) has a significantly lower wing beat frequency and lower number of
waves than the other two species. Wing amplitude, as a percentage of wing span, differs significantly in T. lymma
(highest) and D. sabina (lowest). The results of frequency and number of waves corroborate previous studies
suggesting that higher aspect ratio fins tend to have a lower frequency and lower number of waves than low aspect
ratio fins; however, the amplitudo data does not lit the prediction of high AR fins having greater amplitude. Overall, D.
americana falls more toward the oscillatory end of the continuum and T. lymma falls toward the undulatory end, with
D. sabina somewhere in between these two.   325                 . ,      14:45 Sunday                                   GS1                                MCN
Light attenuating molecules In the lens of the fish eye.            M. Posner. Dept, of Biological Sciences, Univ, of
Southern California, Los, Angeles, CA, 90089; Section of Vertebrates, Natural History Museum of Los, Angeles
County, 900 Exposition Blvd., Los Angeles, CA, 90007 USA.
The ocular lens of fishes contains mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs), which attenuate short wavelengths of light.
The causes for the varied distribution of MAAs in the lenses of different fish species are still in question. In this study
I examined the lenticular MAA content of 42 flatfish species (order Pleuronectiformes) from nine families to
investigate the controlling factors on lens pigmentation and changes in pigmentation during ontogeny. MAAs were
actively transporteri and concentrated by fie lens from the surrounding humors in the eye. These MAAs produced
two absorbance peaks when analyzed spectrophotometrically, one near 320 nm and another near 360 nm. The
relative amounts of different MAAs in the lens was correlated with phylogeny, while the total MAA concentration
reflected the depth distribution of each species. Species living in deeper water contained lower concentrations of
MAAs. Both the total amount of MAAs and their relative proportions changed during ontogeny. MAAs began
accumulating after settlement, and increased in concentration with standard length. The phylogenetic trend in the
relative proportion of MAA peaks suggests that lens pigmentation is under genetic control. This control is not
exerted by the lens itself, but may occur at the level of food metabolism.




   326                        ...16:00 Sunday                                  GS1                                MCN
The effects of chronic and periodic acute hypoxia on the growth and physiology of Juvenile southern
flounder, Paralichthys lethostigma. J.C. Tavlor. Department of Zoology, Box 7617, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC , 27695.
Dissolved oxygen (DO) is proving to be one of the most important determinants of Juvenile fish growth and survival
in our estuaries. Laboratory experiments were conducted to determine the effects of chronic hypoxia and periodic
acute hypoxia on the growth, metabolic rate and blood hematocrit of juvenile southern flounder, Paralichthys
lethostigma. Fish were maintained in aquaria having constant salinity (15 psu) and temperature (25 °C) and
exposed to constant normoxia (6 mg 02 P-l), constant hypoxia (2.75) an intermediate level (4.5), and a diel
oscillating treatment (daily mean = 4.5 mg 02 k^l). Results from the blood hematocrit analysis indicate a
secondary stress response to the nocturnal hypoxia in the oscillating treatment resulting in increased blood
hematocrit levels. Flounder also exhibited limited growth in the low DO treatment (1.9 % Wt d*-1, p<0.001)
suggesting a species-level limiting oxygen concentration for growth between the low (2.75) and intermediate (4.5)
DO levels. Furthermore, fish in the oscillating treatment realized growth similar to the intermediate treatment
indicating that daily growth is a function of the daily mean DO concentrations. This hypothesis is supported by the
dramatic overcompensafion in the afternoon routine respiration rates exhibited by the oscillating treatment. Further
work is necessary to address the synergistic effects of temperature and variable DO on the grrjwth and physiology
of juvenile estuarine dependent fish.




  . 327                          16:15 Sunday                                  GSI                                MCN
The influence of temperature on the otolith-somatic growth relationship for Juvenile southern flouiKier,
Paralichthys lethostigma. D.D. Davis. NCSU; Dept, of Zoology; Box 7617; Raleigh, NC 27695-7617 USA.
Temperature effects on the ofolith-somatio growth relationship of southern flounder, Paralichthys lethostigma were
determined in order to back-calculate somatic growth rates of wild-caught fish. Laboratory growth experiments were
conducted to measure the somatic and otolith growth of juvenile flounder at five temperatures: 17, 20, 25, 30, and 33
°C. To measure growth rates of wild-caught fish, temperatures were continuously monitored and fish were collected
in a known flounder nursery area. With slow somatic growth and/or low temperatures (17 and 20 °C), ring counts
from laboratory fish were underestimated. Otolith growth (OG) was significantly correlated with temperature (T) and
somatic growth (G) with the strongest relationship measured at areas near the sulcus on the right otolith: OG =
0.2352(G) +■ 0.0481 (T) - 0.5842 (R® = 0.74). Increment counts from fish exposed to 17 and 20 °C were
underestimated; therefore, reliable estimates of growth could not be obtained. Therefore, this otolith-somatio growth
equation can only be used for temperatures greater than 25 °C. In this case, predicted growth rates were 2.7 -15.7
% d''-*! showing that flounder are not growth limited in North Carolina estuaries.




   :331__________________ 13:30 Su'-iday                ________________ eS4                    _____________ -AXL,
Ecology and habitat use of juvenile box turtles at Egmont Key, Florida. A.M. Hamilton. Department of Wildlife
Ecology and Conservation, 303 Newins-Ziegler, HaH, University of Rorida, Gainesville, FL 32611 USA.
Studies on box turtles (Terrapene Carolina baun} on Egmont Key have been ongoing since 1991. This island off the
west coast of Florida is home to more than 2000 turtles. During previous fieldwork, large numbers of juveniles were
found. Data on size, habitat, and activity were recorded. Beginning in June 1997, I began an intensive study of
juvenile habitat use and movement patterns. Through November, a total of 192 juveniles were located and
marked. Thread trailers were attached to 59 juveniles (<121mm) that were tracked until die thread ran out
(generally within four days). I recorded canopy cover density and species composition along trails at 10m
intervals. Juveniles were found primarily under dense, low ground cover, and frequently travelled at the ecotone
between dense canopy and more open areas. Small juveniles (<65mm) were mostly found during the hottest part
of the day, and appeared to be basking; at other times, they chose forms under Australian pine needles.
AddiSorially, juvenile habitat use varies with body size. These habitat data can be used to assist in planning island

   328                           16:30 Sunday                                 GS1                                MCN
Comparative physiology of metabolic rate and thermal tolerance: physiological parameters for Investigating
macroecological patterns. W.l. Lutterschmidt. University of Oklahoma, Dept, of Zoology, Univ, of Oklahoma,
Norman, OK 73019.
Distributional patterns of species result in part from their ability to tolerate physiologically the environmental extremes
characteristio within their geographical range. Macroecology attempts to reveal relationships between organisms
and their environments by investigating statistical patterns of abundance and distribution. In such analyses, species
serve as replicates where the relationship between range and body size is used to understand how physical space
and ecological resources are partitioned to create fie unique distributions of species. However, these studies often
fail to consider the underlying physiological capacities and tolerances that are most likely to be the limiting factors in
determining distributions. I measured temperature dependent metabolic rate and high temperature tolerance in
several ectothermio species in a attempt to investigate two subsidiary principles of Shelford's law and determine if
physiological parameters are better predictors of distributional patterns than are measures of body size. After
controls tor phylogeny, I found species-specific plasticity of metabolic rate and high temperature tolerance to predict
better the statistical patterns of ger^raphic range size and latitudinal range among the fishes and snakes studied.
These findings support Shelforas idea that the distributions of species often are governed by the environmental
factor for which species have the narrowest tolerance range or least adaptability.




   329                           13:00 Sunday                                  GS4                                 AXL
Patterns of variation in spring emergence by black rat snakes (Elaphe obsoleta obsoleta). G. Blouin-Demers.
P.J. Weatherhead and K.A. Prior, Department of Biology, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, On,
K1S 5B6.
Substantial individual variation in timing of emergence from hibernation has been reported among reptiles, although
few studies have addressed the causes of that variation. Here we report patterns of spring emergnece by black rat
snakes (Elaphe obsoleta obsoleta}, observed at 13 communal hibernacula in eastern Ontario from 1992 to 1997.
Although we found significant variations in timing of emergence among years and among hibernacula, we found no
evidence of a simple latitudinal gradient in mean emergence dates. Within hibernacula, significantly more snakes
emerged on days with high maximum air temperatures, but maximum air temperature only explained a small amount
of the variation among years in emergence dates. Larger individuals emerged earlier than smaller individuals and
females tended to emerge earlier than males. Condition was not a significant factor determining timing of
emergence in our black rat snake population. Based on these results, we proposed the preparation for reproduction
hypothesis which states that mature individual snakes emerge earlier than immature individuals to prepare their
gonads for reproduction.




  ■330                           13:15 Sunday                                  GS4                       AXL
Movement patterns and microhabitat use of the brown tree snake, Boiga irregularis.             C.S. Clark. Ohio
Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit Ohio State University, 1735 Neil Avenue, Columbus OH 43210 USA.
The Brown Tree Snake (BTS), Boiga irregularis, is a nocturnal, arboreal species accidentally introduced to the
island of Guam, and associated with the loss of most of the island's native forest vertebrates. Little Is known about
the movement patterns of this species or that of other nocturnal, arboreal snakes. I investigated the overnight spatial
movement patterns of BTS using two tracking devices; standard radio telemetry and a quilting cocoon of cotton
thread (240 m), which delineated the snake's path. I recorded microhabitat data at every one meter interval along
the tracking thread path. Ten BTS were tracted a minimum of 30 meters ( mean = 92.9 m). The total distances
moved were on average twice the straight-line distance from initial capture/release location to refugium. There was
no significant correlation between body size and percentage of movement above ground, mean height above ground,
or mean height of forest canopy used. There was a significant positive relationship between mean support diameter
and BTS body size (R square = 0.596, P = 0.0148). There was also a significant positive relationship between
available forest rxjnnectivity and snake pathways. Snakes used certain plants in disproportion to their occurrence in
the forest according to relative stability or degree of connectivity.




                                 •’4.13-SLi^day       . ._______               GS4          .         .             AXL
Prey preference in neonate brown water snakes, Nerodia taxispilola.                   M.S. Mills. University of Georgia,
Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, Drawer E, Aiken, SC 29802, USA.
I experimentally tested innate prey preference in brown water snakes, Nerodia taxispilota. Nerodia laxispilota is a
piscivorous species, and adults consume primarily catfishes (Ictaluridae). Six prey odors (4 fish, 2 amphibians) and
a water control were presented on cotton swabs to 13 neonate individuals housed individually in aquaria. Fish odors
elicited more tongue flicks than amphibian odors, with catfish (Ictalurus punctatus] odors receiving the most tongue
flicks. These results support field results that indicate N. taxispilota prefers fish, especially catfish. Basic foraging
ecology and its relationship to recent toxicological studies will also be discussed.in a Known nounaer nursery area, wnn Slow somatic growtn ano/or low temperatures ( ana                "U), nng counts
from laboratory fish were underestimated. Otolith growm (OG) was significantly comelated with temperature (T) and
somatic growtn (G) with the strongest relationship measured at areas near the sulcus on the right otolith: OG =
0.2352(G) + 0.0481 (T) - 0.5842 (R’ = 0.74). Increment counts from fish exposed to 17 and 20 °C were
underestimated; therefore, reliable estimates of growth could not be obtained. Therefore, this otolith-somatic growth
equation can only be used for temperatures greater than 25 °C. In this case, predicted growth rates were 2.7 -15.7
% d*-A1 showing that flounder are not growth limited in North Carolina estuaries.




Ecology and habitat uaa of Juvenile box turtles at Egmont Kay, Aorlda. A.M. Hamilton. Department of Wildlife
Ecology and Conservation, 303 Newins-Ziegler . Hall. University of Rorlda, Gainesville, FL 32611 USA.
Studies on box turtles ijerrapene Carolina baurii on Egmont Key have been ongoing since 1991. This island off the
west coast of Rorida is home to more than 2000 turtles. During previous fieldwork, large numbers of juveniles were
found. Data on size, habitat, and activify were recorded. Beginning in June 1997, I began an intensive study of
juvenile habitat use and movement patterns. Through November, a total of 192 juveniles were located and
marked. Thread trailers were attached to 59 juveniles (<121 mm) that were tracked until the thread ran out
(generally within four days). I recorded canopy cover density and species composition along trails at 10m
intenrals. Juveniles were found primarily under dense, low ground cover, and frequently travelled at the ecotone
between dense canopy and more open areas. Small juveniles (<65mm) were mostly found during the hottest part
of the day, and appeared to be basking; at other times, th^ chose forms under Australian pine needles.
Additionally, juvenile habitat use varies with body size. These habitat data can be used to assist in planning island
restoration and management.




   332                           13:45 Sunday                                  GS4                                 AXL
Distribution of the diamondback terrapin, Malaclemys terrapin , in South Carolina salt marshes.                      E.M.
Levesque and J.E. Fauth, Graduate Program in Manne Biology, University of Charleston, Grice Marine Biological
Laboratory, 205 Fort Johnson Road. Charleston, SC 29412-9110, USA; WA Roumillat, South, Carolina Department
of Natural Resources/ Marine Resources Division, USA.
The diamondback terrapin, Malaclemys terrapin, is the only species of estuarine turtle. The range of Malaclemys
extends along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts from Cape Cod to Corpus Christi. Terrapins were nearly hunted to
exfinctiori in the early 1900s due to the popularity of terrapin soup. In the years following intense commercial harvest
of terrapin, some populations of Malaclemys have recovered. However, although commercial harvesting is no
longer a threat to Malaclemys, the stability of terrapin populations is being challenged by incidental drowning in crab
traps and habitat destruction. Malaclemys terrapin is frequently caught incidentally in trammel nets used by Inshore
Fisheries, South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Marine Resources Division. Inshore Fisheries, has
been recording incidental catches of Malaclemys since January 1995. The objective of this study is to determine the
distribution of M. terrapin in South Carolina based on incidental catches and physical and geographical data
recorded by Inshore Rsheries. The effects explaining most of the variation in terrapin distribution are month and
individual location of a sample within one of six major sampling sites. The long-term collection of this data will allow
monitoring of Malaclemys populations in regions supporting large crabbing industries and areas undergoing coastal
development.




   333_____________              14:00:Sunday_____________________ GS4_____________________ AXL
Activity and behavior of nesting yellow-blotched map turtles (Graptemys fiavimaculata} and their nest
predators. M.J. Coulombe-Moore. B.D. Home and R.A. Selgel, Department of Biological Sciences, Southeastern
Louisiana University; Hammond, LA 70402-0736 USA.
Populations of the yellow-blotched map turtle {Graptemys fiavimaculata) are known to be declining throughout their
limited range. As a result of this decline, the U.S. Rsh and Wildlife Senrice placed this species on the Federally
Endangered Species list in 1991. Low nesting success and high rates of nest depredation are among the
contributing factors to this decline, but little is known about nesting behavior and activity or the behaviors of nest
predators. We studied nesting behavior, nesting activity, and the behaviors of nest predators of G. Havimaculala on
the Pascagoula River in Southeastern Mississippi during 1997. Over 182 hours of observations were made from a
blind from 28 May to 13 August. Most nesting attempts occurred between mid May and late July. Nesting was
exclusively diurnal; although nesting attempts occurred throughout the day, nesting peaked between 1500-1700
hours. Of the 48 nesting attempts observed, only 11 females completed oviposHion. Although the presence of the
observer/blind did not significantly affect the completion of oviposition once the female entered the beach, the
number of nesting attempts increased when the obsenrer/blind was not present. The only diurnal nest predators
observed were fish crows {Corvus ossifragous) and fire ants {Solenopsis Invicta).                 Rsh crows were highly
aggressive in attacking nests, sometimes driving away nesting females. In six of 21 monitored nests, humans either
directly or indirectly influenced nest mortality. Additionally, of the over 78 nests found, only six survived to hatching.

mreaa (24U m), wnicn aeiineated tne snake s path. I recorded microhabitat data at every one meter interval along
the tracking thread path. Ten BTS were tracked a minimum of 30 meters ( mean = 92.9 m). The total distances
moved were on average twice the straight-line distance from initial capture/release location to refugium. There was
no significant correlation between body size and percentage of movement above ground, mean height above ground,
or mean height of forest canopy used. There was a significant positive relationship between mean support diameter
and BTS body size (R square = 0.596, P = 0.0148). There was also a significant positive relationship between
available forest connectivity and snake pathways. Snakes used certain plants in disproportion to their occurrence in
the forest according to relative stability or degree of connectivify.




Prey preference In neonate brown water snakes, Nwodta tsixlspllota.                  M.S, Mills. University of Georgia,
Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, Drawer E, Aiken, SC 29802, USA.

I experimentally tested innate prey preference in brown 'water snakes, Nerodia taxispilota. Nerodia taxspUota is a
piscivorous species, and adults consume primarily catfishes (tctaluridae). Six prey odors (4 fish, 2 amphibians) and
a water control were presented on cotton swabs to 13 neonate individuals housed individually in aquaria. Rsh odors
elicited more tongue flicks than amphibian odors, with catfish [Ictalurus punctatus) odors receiving the most tongue
flicks. These results support field results that indicate N. taxispilota prefers fish, especially catfish. Basic foraging
ecology and its relationship to recent toxicological studies will also be discussed.




   335                          14:30 Sunday                                 .GS4                                AXL
Do incubation-induced changes to a lizard's phenotype affect its vulnerability to predators? S.J. Downes and
R. Shine, School of Biological Sciences, University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.
Recent work on a variety of reptiles provides strong evidence that incubation temperatures can influence many
aspects of a hatchling's phenotype (i.e., size, shape, activity, locomotor performance, etc.). However, although these
traits seem likely to affect the hatchling's fitness, few studies have tested this assumption. Vulnerability to predation
is one plausible way that phenotypic modifications could affect an organism's fitness. Therefore, we incubated the
eggs of lizards at temperatures similar to the extremes of natural nests, and examined both the response of
hatchlings to predator (snake) scent and actual vulnerability in staged encounters in the laboratory. We used two
species of montane Australian scincids: one heliotherm (Lampropholis delicate} that deposits eggs in relatively warm
nests, and one thigmotherm (Nanoscincus maccoyf) that lays In relatively cool nests. For both species, our results
show that incubation temperature affects both an individual's response to predator scent and its vulnerability to
predation. These patterns are complex, and change with the age of the hatchling, perhaps through differential growth
rates and changes in activity patterns. Nevertheless, these experiments support the notion that incubation-induced
modifications to a lizard's phenotype may be biologically significant, and that some of these effects are mediated
through predator-prey interactions.




. -336                          14:45 Sunday       .                         GS4                                AXL
Intrapopulational variation in demographic patterns and reproductive traits of gopher frogs {Rana capita) in
Mississippi. S.C, Richter and R.A. Seigel, Department of Biological Sciences, Southeastern Louisiana University,
Hammond, LA 70402-0736 USA.
      Since 1995, we have been studying the only known population of gopher frogs {Rana capita) in Mississippi to
investigate variation in reproductive traits and population demography. Adult size structure, adult survivorship,
reproductive success, and juvenile recruitment were monitored through the combination of a complete drift fence and
egg mass sunreys. There was extensive variation both among and within years in adult traits including infra- and
intersexual differences in size, rate of return to the breeding site, survivorsnip, and breeding-season weight loss.
Reproductive success and timing of mortality in eggs and lanrae also varied among years. We found no repeatability
among years in the relationship between the number of females, egg masses, and emerging juveniles. These data
suggest that monitoring through the exclusive use of either egg mass surveys or drift fences may not accurately
determine the status or anuran populations. In addition, the wide variation we found among years indicates that
short-term studies are inadequate in understanding amphibian population dynamics.   337                          15:30 Sunday                                  'GS4
Sex and the single female: when do males become unnecessary? M-L- Bpbyn, Dept, of Palaeobiology, and
CBCB, Royal Ontario Museum, 100 Queen's Park, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5S 2C6.
Whiotail lizards of the species genus Cnemidophorus range across the southwestern U.S. info South America.
They occupy a yariety of habitats and, although they yary in behaviour and ecology, are rnorphologicaliy
conservative. At some point in their evolutionary history, different combinations of species have hybndized to form
all-female, self-cloning species. Using information from allozymes, skull morphology, and mitochondnal DNA
sequences genes, I am sorting out the evolutionary relationships among North Amencan species of
Cnemidophorus to determine: (a) how closely related species have to be to fonn viable, hybnd unisexuals, (b)
whether morphological arid ecological similarities among the various species result from commoni descent or
adaptation to similar environments; (c) how and when these lizards speclated and got to where we find thern today.
Results to date suggest that some of the incredible speciation in Cnemidophorus is due to rapid fragmenfafm arid
isolation during the Late Pleistocene, but that some speciation events may have occurred much earlier. This is
leading to interesting speculations about the origins of unisexuality in this fascinating group of lizards.




   338                           15:45 Sunday                                 GS4                             __A)^
Offspring sex ratio variation In northern water snakes, Nerodia sipedon.            ICK, K'S^er, P.J VVeatherheaiJ and
G.P. Brown, Department of Biology, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By, Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 5B6,
Prosser, Department of Biology, McMaster, University, Hamilton, Ontario..
Wo used data from 88 litters of northern water snakes (Nerodia sipedon} to test predictions about how mothers
should adaptively vary the sex ratios of their offspring. Sex ratios did not vary with birth date, but larger mothers
produced significantly more daughters, and mothers producing larger offspring produced significantly more
dauqhters Because neonate size did vary with maternal size, the two significant sex ratio patterns were
independent of each other. Although these relations provide clear evidence that sex ratios vaned non randomly, only
the relation between sox ratio and neonate size was consistent with our predictions if females vary sex ratios
adaptively. The limited evidence on neonatal sex ratios for other snake species also indicates vanation that is non
random but not necessarily adaptive. Better understanding of these patterns will require information on the factors
that differentially affect the fitness of male and female neonates.




   ■339                          16:00 Sunday             ,                   .GS4                                 AX£_
The reproductive ecology and natural history of the northern leopard frog, Rana piplens, in a reh^ilitated
wetland in northeastern Ohio. A. Collier and O. Lowell. Department of Biological Sciences. Kent State University.
Kent. OH 44242.
We examined the reproductive ecology and natural history of Rana pipiens in a recently rehabilitated wetland in
Barberton, Ohio during the spring and summers of 1996 and 1997. Spawning took place within a three week penod
beginning in late March when water temperatures exceeded 11 “C. Egg deposition was                            Kn
waters af an average depth of 9 cm. No masses were deposited at depths greater than 20 cm. An estimated 556,000
eqqs were deposited by 203 breeding females. 67% of these masses were attached to either emergent, or non-
emerqent Juncus eflusus, Typha angustifolia, or T. latifbiia. Juvenile frogs metamorphosed in mid June at an
average snout-vent length of 302 mm and a weight of 5.4 g. Mark-recapture analysis reveled a mortality rate
suffered between the egg and juvenile stage of over 99%. The stomach contents of 13 adult and 19 juvenile R.
pipiens contained invertebrates belonging largely to the insect orders Coleoptera, Hemiptera and Hornoptera.
Although juvenile frogs consumed more individual prey items than adults (t = 2.196, p<0.05), neither ^eci^ized on
active or inactive prey (X2 = 3.84, p<0.05). Juvenile frogs in this population failed to reach sexual maturity within their
first season of growth.




    3.43     ..                  .16:00 Sunday                                 GS2                                PCH
             '■®®P‘’'®*°ry rates of Juvenile southern stingrays (Dasyatls americana}, and the effects of tonic
 Immobility on these systems. W-R. SiHiman, Millersville University, Millersville. PA; National Aquarium in
 Baltimore, Baltimore, MD.

 This study WM performed to establish a mean cardiac and respiration rate in juvenile southern stingrays ( Dasyatis
 arnen^a). Thirteen stingrays (23 to 36.6 cm disk width) were used to establish a “normar cardiac and respiratory
 rate. The sex, size ^d individual proved to show no significant change in their respiratory rate. Sex proved not to
 be significant in relation to their heart rate; yet an allometric relationship was found between their heart rate and body
          A niarginal correlation was found between the cardio-respiratory rates. Further analysts found this
 relationship to be a function of time; therefore, showing that these systems were out of phase varied between
 individuals. Tonic immobility (TP) was induced in nine of the Juvenile southern stingrays while their cardiac and
 respiratory rates were monitored. The onset of Tl was correlated with a significant decrease from their •normal"
 cardiac and respiratory rates. The results from the preliminary Tl study showed correlation's mentioned earlier*
 including an lalometric relationship between heart rate and body size. Therefore, Tl causes the cardiac and
 respiratory rates to slow, ultimately resulting in the animal to exhibit the classic “limp” response.

  340                          16:15 Sunday                           .       GS4                              __A^
Patterns of frog communities from marshes of the Great Lakes area: amultivariate analysis of habitat and
development factors. N.J. Heifertv. University of Toronto, Zoology Department, Toronto, ON, M5S 3G5.

Sunreys of calling amphibians in marshes located in Ontario and the Great Lakes’ states were conducted by
volunteers from April to July in 1995 through the Marsh Monitoring Program. Data from 304 marsh sites were
obtained and showed that frog community composition is related to marsh vegetation structure and diversity,
surrounding habitat and landuse, and human alterations to marshes. Correspondence analyses showed p^ems in
frog assemblages that were related to geographic location, species abundance and habitat preferences. One-way
ANOVAs of correspondence analysis axes of environmental variables with frog species showed significant
differences for some species. These analyses indicate that frog community composition and presence of a species
are influenced by the habitat and quality of marshes available in the Great Lakes area.




  .341            .             16:30 Sunday                              .   GS4                                 AXL
Ecology of an equatorial African leaf-litter herpetofauna, Kibale National Park, Uganda.                    J.P. Vonesh,
Department of Zoology, 223 Bartram Hall, University of Rorida, Gainesville, Forida 32611, USA.
Plot sampling was used to compare the wet and dry season litter herpetofaunas of three forest types in Kibale
National Park, Uganda. Species richness, abundance, and evenness were measured in pristine, selectively logged,
and exotic pine forests, A repeated measures design was also employed to examine whether Reus natalensis
fruiting events influence litter arthropod and herpetofaunal abundances. The diets of the six most common leaf lifter
anurans were examined to determine important prey-taxa. The richest herpetofaunas were in the pine and ogged
forests. Lizard richness, abundance, and diversify were greatest in the pine forest. Anuran abundance in the logged
forest was double that of the other forests, while diversity was highest in the unlogged forest. The number of
herpetofauna in all sites declined during the dry season, with the distribution of captures indicating limited use of hill­
tops during that season. Relative to Kibale, other tropical wet forests of similar latitude and elevation support a
rouqhly equivalent species richness but at higher densities. This paucity of litter herpetofauna at Kibale does not
appear to result from low prey availability, for though the abundance of many prey arthropods increases under
fruiting F. natalensis, there is no corresponding increase in herpetofaunal densities.




   342                __________ 16:45 Sunday                                  GS4
Reptile diversity in a disturbed tropical forest landscape. R.E. Glor, A.S. Flecker and M.F. Wasson, Section of
Ecology and Systematios, Cornell University, Ithaca. NY 14853, USA.
Throughout the tropics, mature forests are rapidly being replaced with pastures, gardens, and plantations. The goal
of this study was to examine the reptile diversify in different agricultural land use regions in and around Los Haitises
National Park, Dominican Republic. Transects and trapping grids were used to sample reptiles in nine land use
types; active pasture, oil palm and cacao plantations, abandoned pasture, cacao, and conucos (home gardens), and
relatively undisturbed forests and karstio hilltops (mogotes).
 Results indicate that faunal composition varies significantly between land use types. Species richness and
 abundance per sample were highest on the undisturbed mogotes and lowest in the active pastures. Several rare
 species of geckos (Sphaerodactylus} were found exclusively on the mogotes. Anolis lizards representing five
 different ecomorphs were the most abundant lizards in all habitats with each ecomorph being present wherever the
 appropriate microhabitat was available. Differences in diversity between land use regions were analyzed using
 ordination plots, diversity indices, and cluster analyses. The results of these analyses suggest that the preservation
 of undisturbed habitats is critical to the conservation of reptile biodiversity.




    346                         16:00 .Sunday                                 GS2                                 PCH
          population stwrture of groupers In the Western Atlantic. M.S. Zateoff. University of Chariesfon, SC,
 205 Fort Johnson Road, Chariesfon. SC 29412 USA; R.W. Chapman. SCDNR, Marine Resources Div 217 Fort
 Johnson Road, Charleston. SC 29422 USA.                 -r   .      ,              cco uiv.,   run

 The short-term, localized nature of grouper spawning aggregations and unequal sex ratios due to protogyny renders
 many groupers particularly vulnerable to fishing pressure and therefore in need of special management te^niques
The degree of genetic variation within a species can allow recognition of distinct stocks which is essential for
 sucressful managernent. Larval dispersal, and therefore gene flow, may also be indicated by the lack of genetic
Mructuring of a species. The genetic variation that has been found in species such as gag grouper (Sedberry et al
in prep) should be qualified by the existence or non-existence of such differences in other species with similar life-
histo^ strategies. The extent of genetic variation within species separated by a known geographic barrier can serve
as a baseline against which to interpret population differentiation within species that exhibit little or no such physical
separation within their range, such as gag. The purpose of this study is to determine the genetic relationships among
several grouper species that have ranges encompassing the southeastern U.S., Caribbean, and Brazil using
molecular genetics techniques. Within this western Atlantic distribution, freshwater input from the Orinoco and
Amazon nvers may form a barrier for recruitment to the north from southerly populations. If populations of these
species are ^eiAvely iMlated by this barrier, genetic divergence may have occurred between them and can be
measured m the form of inherited mitochondrial DNA differences. Samples of Mycteroperca bonaciwere collected
from several U.S. and Canbbean locations and Brazil. Preliminary results from restriction fragment lennth
Dolvmnmhi.Qrrtft rtf mtnMA will ha rauiauuaH            ______                     ___ —-------------The reproductive ecology and natural history of the northern leopard frog, Rana pipiens, in a rehabilitated
wetland In northeastern Ohio. A. Collier and O. Lowell, Department of Biological Sciences, Kent State University,
Kent, OH 44242.
We examined the reproductive ecology and natural history of Rana pipiens in a recently rehabilitated wetland in
Barberton, Ohio during the spring and summers of 1996 and 1997. Spawning took place within a three week period
beginning in late March when water temperatures exceeded 11 °C. Egg deposition was most concentrated in shallow
waters at an average depth of 9 cm. No masses were deposited at depths greater than 20 cm. An estimated 556,000
eggs were deposited by 203 breeding females. 67% of these masses were attached to either emergent, or non-
emergent Juncus effusus, Typha angustifoliat or 7. latifoiia. Juvenile frogs metamorphosed in mid June at an
average snout-vent length of 302 mm and a weight of 5.4 g. Mark-recapture analysis revealed a mortality rate
suffered between the egg and juvenile stage of over 99%. The stomach contents of 13 adult and 19 juvenile R.
pipiens contained invertebrates belonging largely to the insect orders Coleoptera, Hemiptera and Hornoptera.
Although juvenile frogs consumed more individual prey items than adults (t = 2.196, p<0.05), neither specialized on
active or inactive prey p<2 = 3.84, p<0.05). Juvenile frogs in this population failed to reach sexual maturity within their
first season of growth.




   343                      16:00 Sunday                            652                             . PCH
Cardiac and respiratory rates of Juvenile southern stingrays (Oasyat/s amerlcana), and the effects of tonic
Immobility on these systems. W.R. Silliman. Millersville University, Millersville, PA; National Aquarium in
Baltimore, Baltimore, MD.

This study was performed to establish a mean cardiac and respiration rate in juvenile southern st'ngrays ( DasyaSs
americana). Thirteen stingrays (23 to 36.6 cm disk width) were used to establish a “normal’ cardiac and respiratory
rate. The sex, size and individual proved to show no significant change in their respiratory rate. Sex proved not to
be significant in relation to their heart rate; yet an allometric relationship was found between their heart rate and body
mass. A marginal correlation was found between the cardio-respiratory rates. Further analysis found this
relationship to be a function of time; therefore, showing that these systems were out of phase varied between
individuals. Tonic immobility fTT) was induced in nine of the juvenile southern stingrays while their cardiac and
respiratory rates were monitored. The onset of Tl was correlated with a significant decrease from their “normal”
cardiac and respiratory rates. Ths results from the preliminary Tl study showed coirelation’s mentioned earlier;
including an lalometric relationship between heart rate and body size. Therefore, IT causes the cardiac and
respiratory rates to slow, ultimately resulting in the animal to exhibit the classic ’limp’ response.




   344            _              16:00.Sunday                                  GS2                                PCH
The fathead minnow (Pimephales promeias} In western boreal lakes:        Will forest harvesting affect
population-level processes? A.J. Danylchuk. Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, ,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2E9,.
Harvesting of Alberta's boreal forest is increasing dramatically. Predicted effects of forest hanresting on lakes in this
region involve increases in nutrient loading and primary productivity. In turn, these changes may affect fish by
modifying food resources and increasing winter oxygen depletion rates. The fathead minnow is common to small
lakes in the western boreal forest. Because it is often the most abundant, or only fish present, the fathead is an
important component of aquatic food webs in this region. However, little is known about the basic ecology of fathead
populations inhabiting these lakes. The objectives of my research are to determine: 1) what factors regulate fathead
populations in boreal Alberta lakes; and 2) how potential changes in environmental conditions resulting from forest
harvesting may affect these populations. My research is divided into three components: i) the intensive study of four
fathead populations before and after experimental forest harvesting; ii) an extensive survey of populations inhabiting
lakes throughout the boreal forest of Alberta; and iii) mechanistic pond experiments. Together, these three
components should provide important insights into the factors and mechanisms regulating fathead populations, and
allow ms to assess the effects of forest harvesting on fathead populations in this region.




   345                          16:00 Sunday                                   GS2                                PCH
Phylogeny of anoles: morphological and combined analyses. S. Poe. Texas Memorial Museum; Department of
Zoology, University of Texas at Austin; Division of Amphibians and Reptiles, National Museum of Natural History,
Washington, DC 20560 USA.
Anole lizards (Anoiis, Phenacosaunjs', formerly Chamaeleolls, Chamaelinorops) are important study subjects for
organismal and evolutionary biology. Evolutionary interpretation of the numerous comparative data tor these species
requires a phylogeny. The content of and relationships within several small groups of anoles have been clarified by
many workers. Despite recent molecular work and reanalysis of morphological data, the higher level phylogeny of
anoles has remained unresolved due to the paucity of characters used and the large number of species (at least
350) in the clade. Furthermore, it is believed that the few morphological and molecular data available for anoles are
incongruent. I assembled a new morphological data set of approximately 80 characters scored for 171 anole species
to address several objectives: 1) Estimate the higher level phylogeny of anoles using morphological data combined
with chromosome, DNA, and allozyme data from the literature, 2) fest the monophyly of previously recognized
species groups, 3) test the monophyly of Anoiis relative to other anole genera, 4) Test whether this new
morphological estimate is significantly in conflict with existing molecular data sets.

Reptile diversity In a disturbed tropical forest landscape. R.E. Glor. A.S. Recker and M.F. Wasson, Section of
Ecology and Systematics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
Throughout the tropics, mature forests are rapidly being replaced with pastures, gardens, and plantations. The goal
of this study was to examine the reptile diversify in different agricultural land use regions in and around Los Haifises
National Park, Dominican Republic. Transects and trapping grids were used to sample reptiles in nine land use
types; active pasture, oil palm and cacao plantations, abandoned pasture, cacao, and conucos (home gardens), and
relatively undisturbed forests and karstic hilltops (mogotes).
Results Indicate that faunal composition varies significantly between land use types. Species richness and
abundance per sample were highest on the undisturbed mogotes and lowest in the active pastures. Several rare
species of geckos (Sphaerodactyius} were found exclusively on the mogotes. Anoiis lizards representing five
different ecomorphs were the most abundant lizards in all habitats with each ecomorph being present wherever the
appropriate microhabitat was available. Differences in diversity between land use regions were analyzed using
ordination plots, diversity indices, and cluster analyses. The results of these analyses suggest that the preservation
of undisturbed habitats is critical to the conservation of reptile biodiversity.




   346                      16:00 Sunday'                          GSg      . . ..                    pCH
Genetic population structure of groupers In the Western Atlantic. M.S. Zaleoft. University of Charleston, SC,
205 Fort Johnson Road, Charleston, SC 29412 USA; R.W. Chapman, SCDNR, Marine Resources Div., 217 Fort
Johnson Road, Charleston, SC 29422 USA.

The short-term, localized nature of grouper spawning aggregations and unequal sex ratios due to protogyny renders
many groupers particularly vulnerable to fishing pressure and therefore in need of special management techniques.
The degree of genetic variation within a species can allow recognition of distinct stocks which is essential for
successful management. Larval dispersal, and therefore gene flow, may also be indicated by the lack of genetic
structuring of a species. The genetic variation that has been found in species such as gag grouper (Sedberry et al.
in prep) should be qualified by the existence or non-existence of such differences in other species with similar life­
history strategies. The extent of genetic variation within species separated by a known geographic barrier can serve
as a baseline against which to interpret population differentiation within species that exhibit little or no such physical
separation within their range, such as gag. The purpose of this study is to deteimine the genetic relationships among
several grouper spedes that have ranges encompassing the southeastern U.S.. Caribbean, and Brazil using
molecular genetics techniques. Within this western Atlantic distribution, freshwater input from the Orinoco and
Amazon rivers may form a barrier for recruitment to the north from southerly populations. If populations of these
species are effectively isolated by this barrier, genetic divergence may have occurred between them and can be
measured in the form of inherited mitochondrial DNA differences. Samples of Mycteroperca bonacivtere collected
from several U.S. and Caribbean locations and Brazil. Preliminary results from restriction fragment length
polymorphisms of mtDNA will be reviewed.



   347                          16:00 Sunday                                  GS2 .                              PCH
The comparative development of the postcranial skeleton in a normal and mutant strain of zebrafish, Danio
rerlo. L.O. Lapsys and T. Grande, Loyola University Chicago, Dept, of Biology, 6525 N. Sheridan Rd., Chicago, IL,
60626, USA.
The zebrafish, Danio rerio, has become a popular model organism in the field of vertebrate development. However,
very little is known about the morphology of this fish especially during the stages after hatching. For example, the
normal development of the vertebral column, specifically the caudal fin, has gone without critic^ examination. The
ossification patterns of the dermal and chondral bone are yet to be defined. In this study, the development of the
caudal fin was examined as a series from egg to adult. The noimal wild-type zebrafish was then compared with a
mutated strain. The specimens were either cleared and stained or sectioned for histological observations. The
development of the vertebral column including the caudal fin was mapped and illustrated. The results of this study
provide valuable comparative information for researchers working with zebrafish and for those investigating the
vertebral column formation and ossification.




   348                          16:00. Sunday                                 GS2                               PCH
Using GIS to analyze the spatial distribution of nests of the common snapping turtle, Chelydra serpentina.
J.J. Kolbe. Iowa State University, Department of Zoology & Genetics, Ames, lA, 50011, USA.
Few studies exist that attempt to analyze the spatial distribution of turtle nests. This study utilizes the analytical
capabilities of Geographic Information System (GIS) software to examine the spatial distribution of common
snapping turtle nests in relation to each other and to the physical characteristics of the landscape. Seven years of
nest location data from a sand prairie along the eastern snore of the Mississippi River are included in this analysis.
Nests were found to be significantly clustered in their distribution over the entire study site. Additionally, a higher
proportion of nests were located in sand blowouts (i.e., areas of exposed sand with no vegetation) than expected
based on area ratios of landcover. Other factors, not included in the spatial analysis, were identified as potential
influences on turtle nest location. This study highlights the utility of GIS in the area of spatial analysis.    349      .                  16:00 Sunday                           .       GS2                             .PCH
Diet and Coloration In Female Convict CIchlids {CicMasoma niarofysclatum}.                J.K. Jackson and V. Rush,
Center for Ecology, Evolution and Behavior, 101 Morgan Building, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, 40506-
0225, USA.
Many sexual selection models predict the evolution of male ornamentation. Female sexually dimorphic features are
less well understood. Female convict cichlids {Cichlasoma nigrofasciatum}, Central American stream-dwelling fishes,
are more colorful than males. Males and females form pair bonds to defend a territoiy and care for young for several
weete. Prior to pair formation,, females develop gold flecks in their fins and along their ventral surfaces. These
colorful females often court males and show aggression toward other females. Orange coloration in fish is derived
from catotenoid pigments in their diets. One hypothesis for the production of such coloration is that it shows that arj
animal is a good forager and is in good physical condition. This hypothesis was tested in a laboratory expenm^t
using 64 female convict cichlids housed separately. The females were divided into 4 groups and fed one of me
followino four diets: good quality food with and without carotenoids, poor quality food with and without carotenoids.
After 3 months, the reflectance spectra of the females' gold flecks were measured and compared with their physical
condition, fecundity, egg carotenoid content and body lipid content. This study provided insight into the relationship
between diet and coloration in females.




    350                        16:00 Sunday                        .       .   'GS2             .               PCH
Swallowing In elapid snakes: does the palatine dragger/erector model predict behavior?               A. Deufel, Lehigh
University, Biological Sciences, 31 Williams Dr., Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA.
The morphology of the palatine bone has previously been used to predict the swallowing behavior of elapid snakes,
splittinq the family into palatine draggers (terrestrial and aquatic hydrophiines) and palatine erectors (all other
elapids) To test this behavioral prediction, swallowing was videotaped in two palatine draggers (Acanmopnis
an&rcticus and Oxyuranus scutellatus) and three palatine erectors (Dendroaspis polylepis, Na/a pallida, and
Ophlophagus hannah). In hydrophiines the pterygoid and palatine move as a unit, showing only slight lateral or
ventral bending along the entire length of the bar. Maxilla and prefrontal show a high degree of antero-latera!
excursion. In the other elapids protraction depresses the palato-pterygoid joint, rotating the palatine vertically.
Maxillary anri prefrontal excursion are more limited. Snout rotation along the long axis is greater in hydrophiines anti
Dendroaspis than in the remaining elapids. In all snakes maxillary depression always closely followed retra^on of
the palato-pterygoid bar. Whereas the dragger/erector model generally predicts palahne movements, the
relationship of these movements to the kinesis ofthe rest of the skull remains obscure.




    351                         16:00 Sunday                                   GS2          .            ^__PCjrt
Effect of substrate Ingestion during feeding on buoyancy of mink frog larvae, Rana septentrlonalis. S.L.
Rondeau and J.H. Gee. Department of Zoology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB. R3T 2N2.
Aquatic organisms must maintain an optimal buoyancy to minimize energy expended in Itxjomotion and holding
vertical position In the water column. Little is known of the Importance of lungs of larval anurans in buoyancy
regulation. Benthic tadpoles feed on a variety of substrates and could ingest substrate particles ultimately affecting
buoyancy. Our research determines if: 1) Mink Frog larvae, Rana septentrionalis, ingest substrate particles during
feeding, 2) tadpole weight in water is significantly increased, and 3) tadpoles respond by altenrig lung volume
correcting buoyancy. Our results showed conclusively that these events occured. Silt particles doubled tadpole
weight in water and lung volume increased almost 4 times maintaining buoyancy. Experiments with starved tadpoles
placed on silt showed that the digestive tract was filled over 48 h and during this time, increases in weight and lung
volume occured concurrently and a constant buoyancy level was maintained. Buoyancy regulation was immediate
and precise.




                                 •j'S.'CO Sujiaay,    ___________              GS2______ ,                      PCH!
                                                         Inscutpta) population. T.S.B. Akre. Department of Biology
George Mason University Fairfax, VA, USA.

J         ® largw study on aspects of the ecology of wood turtle (Clemmys insculpta] population in northern Virginia
                                                         ^^93 wetB detected by palpation and radiography in 1996
and palpabon in 1997. In June 1996,13 gravid turtles were treated with argenine-vasotocin to induce opposition in
the laboratory Seven of thirteen (54%) laid complete clutches. Clutch size averaged 10.23 eggs/female with a
?■ u?                                  wood turtles were monitored by radio-telemetry and visual-search methods.
Ercht (57%) were recaptures from 1996. Two recaptures did not become gravid. Clutch size averaged 9 5
egg^emale from two wild nests found during this time. Comparison will be made with data collected during the 1998
nesting season and with previously studied, more northeity populations

   352                         16:00 Sunday                                 GS2                  .             PCH
Estimation of the genetic variability of a fragmented population of brook char (Salvelinus fontinalis) In
western Pennsylvania using microsatellites. C.J. Lee. R.J. McPherson and F. Ammer, Biology Department,
Clarion University. Clarion, PA 16214, USA; T. Martin, School of Forest Resources, The Penn State University,
University Paik, PA 16802, USA; L. Bematchez, Department de Biologie, GIROQ, Universite Laval, Sainte-Foy,
Quebec G1K7P4.
The structure of a brook char (Salvelinus fontinalis) population inhabiting a polluted watershed in western
Penns^vania was assessed by estimating allelic variation at three microsatellite loci. The Mill Creek watershed is
relatively intact in its upper reaches, however, acid mine drainage-fouling of the lower portion’has made it largely
uninhabitable and has isolated brook char populations into smaller unaffected tributaries. We have estimated the
interpopulation and intrapopulation heterogeneity in tributary populations of brook char both within and above the
polluted portion of the system. We will also present an analysis of the brook char strain annually stocked into the
upper portion of the watershed.




   353                          16:00 Sunday                                 GS2                               PCH
Mitochondrial dna analysis of wild brook char {Salvelinus fontinalis) populations In north western
Pennsylvania using PCR-SSCP. F.K. Ammer. R.J. McPherson and C.J. Lee, Biology Department, Clanon
University, Clarion, PA 16214, USA; T. Martin, School of Forest Resources, The Penn State University. University
Park, PA 16802, USA; L. Bematchez, Department de Biologie, GIROQ, Universite Laval, Sainte-Foy, Quebec G1K
7P4.
Wild brook char populations are an ecologically and economically important species inhabiting cold water
ecosystems of western Pennsylvania. A considerable portion of the Mill Creek watershed in Clarion and Jefferson
counties is severely acidified due to acid mine drainage (AMD), and contains high concentrations of aluminum.
Pollution from AMD in the main stem of Mill Creek has effectively fragmented the watershed by isolating brook char
subpopulations in several of the smaller, non-impacted tributaries. To examine the effects of habitat degradation and
fragmentation on these populations, we used polymerase chain reaction single strand conformation polymorphism
(PCR-SSCP) analysis to access genetic variability in mitochondrial DNA. With this method, sequence-specific
conformations exhibit distinctive electrophoretic mobility on non-denaturing polyacrylamide gels. SSCP analysis of
haploid cytotypes in conjunction with microsatellite DNA analysis of diploid genotypes will provide explicit information
pertaining to the overall genetic character of Isolated subpopulations. Data obtained from this study may prove
valuable in developing future conservation and management programs for Salvelinus fontinalis.




   354                          16:00 Sunday                                 GS2                                PCH
Recreational disturbance and a desert stream fish community: Detecting ecological effects of environmental
impact. J.M. Sanoington. Department of Biological Sciences, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 4505 Maryland
Parkway, Box 454004, Las Vegas, NV 89154-4004 USA.
Research was conducted in the North Fork of the Virgin River within Zion National Park, Utah, USA, to investigate
the effects of chronic recreational disturbance on the native fish community. Fish were sampled both in river areas
with high levels of recreational disturbance and in river areas with low levels of recreational disturbance during the
summer of 1997. Communities in both areas were dominated by Virgin River spinedace {Lepidomeda mollispinis
mollispinis} and desert sucker (Catostomus darid). Community diversity was similar in both areas at the beginning of
the summer but was significantly lower in high disturbance areas later in the summer due to lower abundance of
desert sucker in these areas. Benthic algal biomass is being compared between low and high disturbance areas to
test the hypothesis that lower abundance of desert sucker in high disturbance areas is a result of lower algal
biomass, their primary food source, in these areas. Recreational disturbance priinarily disturbs the over substrate,
possibly reducing algal biomass in high disturbance areas. Surveys for larval fish indicate that larval densities were
similar in low and high disturbance areas early In the summer but significantly lower in high disturbance areas later in
the summer. This result is suggestive that recreational disturbance may increase larval mortality in high distumance
areas. Interestingly, a major flash flood event at the end of the summer effectively "reset*; the sy^em, redistnbuting
fish species equally between low and high recreational disturbance areas and Increasing diversity in both areas.




   358                          09:30 Monday                                 CF13                               CHM


                                               liLCmer, Department of Biological Sciences, Old Dominion

Mm                                   fhe family Sparidae (Percifoimes, Percoidei) are examined. Mitochondrial DNA
                             cytochrome b gene (1140brt from representative genera of the family Sparidae are used
CnoriHM®          960600 sod subfaTiiily (Boopsinae, Sparinae, Denticinae, Pagellinae) level relationships within
Spandae. Phylogenetic analysis using parsimony was conducted with members of the family Moronidae as
outgroup Sequence data are also used to examine the relationships of the superfamily Sparoidea to other percoid
superfamilies classically related to the sparids (Haemuloidea and Lutianoidea).*                    VVIWW* I I                              ItniVMIMAVW               VWWV >■ ■ VW^^IVWWIV WTM • iwiwa
vertical position in the water column. Little is known of the importance of lungs of larval anurans in buoyancy
regulation. Benthic tadpoles feed on a variety of substrates and could ingest substrate particles ultimately affecting
buoyancy. Our research determines if: 1) Mink Frog larvae, Flana septentrionalis, ingest substrate particles during
feeding, 2) tadpole weight in water is significantly increased, and 3) tadpoles respond by altering lung volume
correcting buoyancy. Our results showed conclusively that these events occured. Silt particles doubled tadpole
weight in water and lung volume increased almost 4 times maintaining buoyancy. Experiments with starved tadpoles
placed on silt showed that the digestive tract was filled over 48 h and during this time, increases in weight and lung
volume occured concurrently and a constant buoyancy level was maintained. Buoyancy regulation was immediate
and precise.




  •355                        16.00 Sunday                         GS2 ..                         PCH
Reproduction In a Virginia wood turtle (Clemmys Insculpta) population. T.S.B. Akre. Department of Biology
George Mason University Fairfax, VA, USA.

As part of a larger study on aspects of the ecology of wood turtle (Clerrmys insculpta) population in northern Virginia,
data on reproduction were collected in 1996 and 1997. Eggs were detected by palpation and radiography in 1996
and palpation in 1997. In June 1996,13 gravid turtles were treated with argenine-vasotocin to induce oviposition in
the laboratory. Seven of thirteen (54%) laid complete clutches. Clutch size averaged 10.23 eggs/female with a
mode of 10. In June 1997, 14 female wood turtles were monitored by radio-telemetry and visual-search methods.
Eight (57%) were recaptures from 1996. Two recaptures did not become gravid. Clutch size averaged 9.5
eggs/female from two wild nests found during this time. Comparison will be made with data collected during the 1998
nesting season and with previously studied, more northerly populations.




   356                       .. 16:00 Sunday                                 GS2                                PCH
Initial results in a resampling survey of Nebraska amphibians as a test for declines. D.S. McLeod. School of
Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68588-0188, USA.
 An inventory of historical sites for amphibian larvae was conducted to verify or reject the hypothesis that amphibian
populations have declined in Nebraska over the past twenty years. In the early 1970’5 larval sampling was used as
a means of surveying these ponds as a part of an exercise in mapping amphibian distributions within the state.
Because amphibian larvae remain in a pond for a much longer time than do the reproducing adults, such a
methodology allows rapid acquisition of distributional data. Larvae were found al 100% of the ponds sampled during
the 197O’s, with a range of one to five species found per pond. During the 1997 field season between one and four
species were found at any one site (accounting forthose ponds which has no lanzae present). More importantly, only
58% of the ponds sampled were occupied by amphibian larvae. Of the 10 commonly occurring species of
amphibians in Nebraska, two (Hyta chrysoscelis and Bufo cognatus) were not found represented by larvae during the
sampling period, and one species {Acris crepitans) was found at only one site. Spea bombifrons, found at 25% of
the sites sampled in the 197O’s, was found at only 8% of the sites during 1997. While conclusions cannot be made
until further work is completed, this data suggests that declines have occurred in Nebraska's amphibian populations.




   357         ,              09:15 Monday                                 CF13                               CHM
Mitochondrial DNA variation in desert pupfish. A.A. Echelle. R. Van Den Bussche and T. Malloy, Zoology Dept,
arid OWa. Coop. Fish and Wildl. Res. Unit, Oklahoma State Univ., Stillwater, OK 74078 U.S.A; C.O. Minckley, U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, Parker, AZ 85344 U.S.A: P.C. Marsh, Center for Environ. Stud., Arizona Stale Univ.,
Tempe, AZ 85287 , U.S.A..
We used single-stranded conformation polymorphism analysis to identify variant haplotypes in a 333-bp region near
the 3' end of the mitochondrial ND2 gene in desert pupfish Cyprinodon macularius. Approximately 250 specimens
were examined from 10 localities throughout the geographic range of the species. For each SSCP variant,
specimens from separate populations were subjected to automated DNA sequencing. Results support recognition of
two groups: 1) the Rio Sonoyta population of C. m. macularius and the Quitobaquito pupfish C. m. eremus, and 2)
ths populations of C. m. macularius from Laguna Salada, the lower Colorado River Delta, and the Salton Sea area.
Levels of sequence divergence and patterns of geographic variation in occurrence of haplotypes support recent
divergence times within these two groups, and indicate a relatively long history of isolation between the two groups.

Research was conducted in the North Fork of the Virgin River within Zion National Park, Utah, USA, to investigate
the effects of chronic recreational disturbance on the native fish community. Fish were sampled both in river areas
with high levels of recreational disturbance and in river areas with low levels of recreational disturbance during the
summer of 1997. Communities in both areas were dominated by Virgin River spinedace (Lepidomeda mollispinis
mollispinis) and desert sucker {Catostomus dark!). Community divers!^ was similar in both areas at the beginning of
the summer but was significantly lower in high disturbance areas later in the summer due to lower abundance of
desert sucker in these areas. Benthic algal biomass is being compared between low and high disturbance areas to
test the hypothesis that lower abundance of desert sucker in high disturbance areas is a result of lower algal
biomass, their primary food source, in these areas. Recreational disturbance primarily disturbs the river substrate,
possibly reducing algal biomass in high disturbance areas. Surveys for lanral fish indicate that larval densities were
similar in low and high disturbance areas early in the summer but significantly lower in high disturbance areas later in
the summer. This result is suggestive that recreational disturbarice may increase larval mortality in high disturbance
areas. Interestingly, a major flash flood event at the end of the summer effectively "reset* the system, redistributing
fish species equally between low and high recreational disturbance areas and increasing diversity in both areas.




   358                           09.30 Monday   ...                       CF13                              CHM
Phylogenetic relationships of the family Sparidae (Perciformes: Percoidei) based on complete cytochrome b
sequence data. T.M. Orrell, School of Marine Science, Virginia Institute of Marine Science, College of William and
Mary, Gloucester Point, VA 23062 USA; K.E. Carpenter, Department of Biological Sciences, Old Dominion
University, Norfolk, Virginia 23529 USA.

The phylogenetic relationships of the family Sparidae (Perciformes, Percoidei) are examined. Mitochondrial DNA
sequences of the complete cytochrome b gene (1140bp) from representative genera of the family Sparidae are used
to elucidate the generic and subfamily (Boopsinae, Sparinae, Denticinae, Pagellinae) level relationships within
Sparidae. Phylogenetic analysis using parsimony was conducted with members of the family Moronidae as
outgroup. Sequence data are also used to examine the relationships of the superfamily Sparoidea to other percoid
superfamilies classically related to the sparids (Haemuloidea and Lutjanoldea).




   359     .                   09:45 Monday                                 CF13                              CHM
Phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial ND2 and ND4L genes in the genus C)rprinella and related cyprinid
fishes. R.E. Broughton. Section of Ecology and Systematics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853-2701 USA; J.R.
Gold, Department of Wildlife and Fisheries Sciences, Texas A&M University, USA.
We have obtained sequences of the entire mitochondrial ND2 and ND4L genes (1344 nucleotides) from 30 species
of North American cyprinid fishes. Twenty-four of these are currently recognized as members of the genus
Cyprineiia, or have been suggested to be included in Cyprinella. For most species, several individuals from
geographically distant localities were included for a total of 59 OTUs. Phylogenetic analysis, employing equal
weighting of all characters, yields a single most parsimonious tree. This tree is similar to Gibbs' phylogeny of
Cyprinella and supports his scattered-tuberoles and linear-tubercles groups except for the placement of C. caerulea.
The mitochondrial phylogeny also has substantial similarity with Mayden's analysis of Cyprinella and supports his
placement of C. caerulea in the linear-tubercles group. The primary difference with Mayden's phylogeny is
placement of the root. In the present case, C. callistia appears to be most basal while the C. lutrensis group of
southwestern species, and its sister group of C. spiloptera, C. whipplei, and C. venusta, appear most derived. When
transversion changes were weighted three times transitions, a single tree was obtained that differed from the equal­
weight tree in the placement of a clade containing C. caerulea, C. leedsi, C. callitaenia, C. callisema, and C. nivea.
This placement is inconsistent with both Mayden's and Gibbs' analyses suggesting that unequal weighting is
unjustified. Our analysis also suggests that recognition as Cyprinella of some species formerly considered Hybopsis
may be warranted.




  . 360                        10:30 Monday                                 CF13. ,                           CHM
Molecular phylogeny of lower euteleosts. T. Saruwatari. Ocean Research Institute, Univerisly of Tokyo, Nakano,
Tokyo, 164-8639, JAPAN; I. Oohaia and T. Kobayashi, National Research Institute of Aquaculture, Tokai-Gun, 516-
01, JAPAN; N. Takeshita, National Fisheries University, Shimonoseki, 759-65, JAPAN; J.W, Orr, National Marine
Fisheries Service, CIN C15700, Seattle, WA. 98115-0070, USA; R.M. McDowall, NIW AR, P.O.box 8602,
Christchurch, New Zealand.

The phylogenetic relationships of lower euteleosts is still a target of debate among ichthyologists. We have taken a
molecular approach to solve this long standing problem in ichthyology. mtDNA sequence data was obtained from at
least one species of following ten families; Alepocephalidae, Aplochitonidae, Argentinidae, Balhylagidae, Galaxiidae,
Lepidogalaxiidae, Osmeridae, Plecoglossidae, Retropinnidae, and Salangidae. Oncoibynchus mykiss and Esox
niger were used as outgroup. The obtained tree exhibits the mesopelagic Argentinidae, Alepocephalidae and
Balhylagidae forming a distinct clade as the primitive sister group of the remaining families. Southern Hemisphere
families, less Retropinnidae, formed a distinct clade and branched off next. Retropinnidae formed the sister group of
Northern Hemisphere families Osmeridae, Plecoglossidae. and Salangidae. Plecoglossus altivelis is the sister group
of Salangidae and together form a sister clade of Osmeridae. We are hoping to add more OTU to our analysis
before the meeting to give a more detailed phylogeny of this controversial group. .   361                            10:45 Monday                                   CF.13          CHM
Notograptidae: sister to Acanthoplesiops (Acanthoclininae, Plesiopidae). R.D. Mooi. Vertebrate Zoology,
Milwaukee Public Museum, 800 West Wells St., Milwaukee, Wl 53233-1478 USA; A.C. Gill, The Natural History
Museum, Cromwell Rd., London SW7 5BD.
The family Notograptidae contains one genus, Notograptus Gunther, and five nominal species known only from
northern Australia and New Guinea. Monophyly of the family is supported by numerous apparent autapomorphies
(e.g., anterior expansion of the median ethmoid, highly reduced gill-arch skeleton, composite A1+A2 section of the
adductor mandibulae, which originates broadly on the skull). Traditionally, the family has been considered a
blennioid or trachinoid, but in 1993 we suggested a relationship with acanthoclinine plesiopids. Here, we re-examine
this relationship and find strong evidence to place Notograptus among acanthoclinines (continuous free margin of
lower lip; head naked; dorsal and anal fins with high numbers of spines and low numbers of segmented rays;
reduced number of branched caudal-fin rays and total rays). Additional evidence supports a sister taxon relationship
with Acanthoplesiops, a derived acanthoclinine genus (symphyseal flap on lower lip; reduced hypural 5; reduced
hypurapophysis). This hypothesis helps to resolve the relationships among Acanthoplesiops by clanfying the polarity
of an otherwise equivocal character (autogenous middle radials of dorsal- and anal-fin pterygiophores). It also
produces a general pattern of distribution of the Notograptus^-Acanthoplesiops clade that compliments that of its
congeners.




   362                            11:00 Monday                                 . . CF13                                CHM
A preliminary phylogenetic investigation of the interrelationships among the extant species of the family
Triacanthodidae. F. Santini. Department of Zoology, University of Toronto &, CBCB, Royal Ontario Museum,, 100
Queens Park, M5S 2C6, Toronto Ontario.
A phylogenetic systematic analysis of the extant species of the family Triacanthodidae (Tetraodontiformes), using
morphological characters (obtained from the examination of the external morphology and osteology) is being
conducted in order to establish ths existing evolutionary interrelationships among the several taxa. Once the
phylogenetic tree is obtained it will be possible to start formulating hypothesis about the evolutionary mechanisms
that have lead to the origin of this bizarre looking deep-sea group. The preliminary results of this study are
presented and discussed.




   363                           11:15 Monday                                    CF13                               . CHM
Molecular phylogeny of Ictaluridae with emphasis on the Mexican blindcats, genus Prietella. F.J. Garcia de
Leon. Institrjto Tecnologico de Ciudad Victoria, Cd. Victoria, Tamaulipas, Mexico; D.A. Hendrickson, Texas Memorial
Museum, Texas Natural History Collections, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712-1100 USA; D.M. Hillis, Zoology
Department, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712 USA.
  Sequences were obtained for mitochondrial cytochrome-b (648 bases) and 12S rRNA (390 bases) of representative
  Ictalurids [Ameiunjs natalis, Ictalunjs punctatus, Pylodictus olivaris, Noturus insignis, N. gyrinus, N. flavus, Prietella
  cf. lundbergi, P. phreatophila} and a single Bagrid (Mystus sp.), considered on the basis of morphological characters
 to be the sister group of the Ictaluridae (Pinna 1993). Phylogenetic relationships were investigated in PAUP ver.
  4.0.0d56 (D. Swofford, Smithsonian Institution), using combined gene sequences with branch and bound and the
  maximum parsimony optimality criterion. 194 characters were found to be informative. The single best tree
  (Ameiurus(lclalurus(Prietella[Pytodictusl,Noturus})})) had a score of 682, and consistency index = 0.6716. The next
  best tree was 2 steps longer. Prietella was monophyletic in the optimal tree, but constraining the tree to include the
 traditional Prietella + Noturus sister-group relationship (Taylor 1969; Amemiya ef al. 1986; Lundberg 1982, 1992)
  required an additional 9 steps (C.l. = 0.6628), and 100 of the possible trees were more parsimonious than any tree
  including this traditional relationship. A likelihood ratio test indicated the traditional Prietella + Noturus relationship to
  be a significantly poorer fit to the data compared to the optimal free, although some other alternatives are not
  significantly different from the placement of Prietella as sister to Pylodictus + Noturus. Divergence between the two
  species of Prietella is substantial, but the P. phreatophila analyzed (22 specimens from 8 sites) were nearly invariant
 for both genes, with only single bass substitutions in each gene in the northernmost population. It appears that P.
..frirASViPfSi/seuJbJSa lono breisn leotoearf tnprri    In Co^huUa,                                            anwns eq^LUfera




                                   •ia:4G Monday                         ______ _________________________ pyc
 ^pecta of the life history of the Pacific electric ray, Torpedo caHfornlca (Ayres), In central and southern
 CsRfornia. lA. Neer and G.M. Cailliet, Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, P.O, Box 450, Moss Landing, California
 95039 USA.

Pacific electric rays were collected from central and southern California rom July 1994 through January 1996 for an
age and growrth, reproduction and demography study. Vertebral centra were used for ageing. The maximum age
estimate from vertebral centra was 16 years. The von Bertalanffy growth model provided the best fit to the size at
age estimate data, predicting an asymptotic total length (TL) of 1372 mm for females and 921 mm for males
Estimated size (and age) at sexual maturity is 600 mm TL (6 years) for males and 840 mm TL (11 years) in
females. Pacific electric rays have a owfecundityof approximately 17 young per litter. Time of partuition could not
be determined. Instantaneous mortality estimates (z) ranged from 0.048 to 0.277, depending on the longevity
estimates used. Best demographic estimates indicate that the Pacific electric ray population is al or slightly
exceeding a stable equilibrium with a generation time of 12.7 to 14.7 years.

  .364                          11:30 Monday                               .CF13                              CHM
A review of western north Atlantic species of Bembrops, family Percophidae, with descriptions of three new
species and additional comments on two eastern Atlantic species. B.A. Thompson. Coastal Rsheries Institute,
Wetland Resources Building, Louisiana State University,Bafon Rouge, Louisiana 70803-7503 USA; R.D. Suttkus,
Tulane University Museum of Natural History, Belle Chasse, Louisiana.
Ths Atlantic members of the genus Bembrops were examined from approximately 700 specimens, using meristic,
morphometric, and pigment characters to redescribe six species: B. anatirostris, B. gobioides, B. greyi, B. heterurus,
B. macromma, and B. magnisquamis. Three new species are recognized: one species known only from the
Bahamas Islands and two forms widespread in the Caribbean Sea. The three new species possess wide dorsal
saddles. Fin ray, scale, and vertebral counts, although overlapping, separate the nine species into high,
intermediate, and low meristic species groups. Bembrops gobioides, B. gieyi, and one new species are sexually
dimorphic in caudal pigment with females having a black ocellus that is lacking in males. Both sexes possess black
caudal spots in two of the new species. Each of the nine Atlantic species examined possesses distinctive patterns of
black pigment in the first dorsal fin. Bembrops anatirostris is unique in the genus having the second dorsal spine
elongated in males and B. macromma Is unique in having the dorsal surface of Its eyes scaled. The eastern Atlantic
fonri presently considered the same species, B. heterurus, found off eastern South America, may represent an
undescribed species. The nine species are generally separated by depth strata within each geographical region,
with few syntopic collections.




   365                          11:45 Monday                                CF13                               CHM
Gambusla and Belonesox are sister taxa but Brachyrhaphis is not a Gambuslini (Cyprinodontiformes:
Poeciliinae). C.M. Rodriquez. Museo Nacional de HIstoria Natural, Plaza de la Cultura, Santo Domingo, Dominican
Republic.
Rosen and Bailey (1963) placed Gambusia, Belonesox and Brachyrhaphis in the tribe Gambuslini on the basis of
moqjhological data, and this action was corroborated by Rauohenberger (1989). On the basis of cytochrome b gene
of the mithochondrial genome, Mojica et al (1997) found that Belonesox was not closely related to the other two
genera above. A cladistic analysis of Poeciliinae based on morphology shows that the tribe Gambuslini is
polyphyletic if Brachyrhaphis is included. Gambusia and Belonesox are sister taxa based on the hook of rays 4p and
5a of the gonopodium, the shape of the gonactinostal complex and the ligastyle. Brachyrhaphis does not belong to
Gambuslini; instead, it is more closely related to Alfaro with which it shares the position and pattern of migration of
the ligastyle. Mojica et al's hypothesis and the implications of their cladograms are discussed in the context of
incongnjence between ths morphological and molecular data.




   366                          10:30 Monday                                 CE8                               OVC
A first glance at pelagic shark catches in the Azores. A.A. Silva. G. Menezes and J.J. Pereira, Universidade dos
Acores, Departamento de Oceanografia e Pesoas, PT-9900 Horta, Portugal.
This paper reports a first attempt to estimate pelagic shark catches in the northeastern Atlantic Ocean around the
Azores. Blue shark (Prionace glauca} and shortfin mako {Isurus oxyrinchus) commercial catches reported for the
Azorean archipelago as well as non-reported fishing data from logbooks of swordfish longliners operating in the area
are presentee! for the period 1993-1996. Three major fleet components catching pelagic sharks are identified
according to vessel characteristics and fishing regime: open deck wooden boats, small covered deck boats (gross
tonnage less than 100 tons) and large covered deck boats (GRT exceeding 100 tons). The latter vessel class lands
most of the catches In Portuguese and Spanish mainland ports, accounting for 86-89% and 71-85% of the total
estimated blue shark and mako catches taken In the Azores during the study period. Catch rates for blue shark and
swordfish exhibit a pronounced seasonal and asynchronic nature. While the highest catch levels for the former
species are obtaineefin the Spring (averaging 807 Kg/1000 hooks), the fishing season for the latter targeted species
is from August to February. The implications of this pattern for future management are discussed. Blue shark bycatch
represents a major proportion of the total catches taken by the Azorean swordfish longline fishery, reaching a
minimum and a maximum of 39% and 91% respectively dunng October and June. Blue shark catches have been
gradually increasing over the period 1993-1996, peaking at an estimated maximum of 2,433 mt in 1996. Shortfin
mako catch levels have increased to an estimated maximum of 76 mt in 1995, followed by a decline to 54 mt in
1996. An observed increase of pelagic shark catch rates over the study period is probably due to a shift of fishing
effort towards pelagic sharks during times of low abundance of swordfish.




   370                .        11:30 Monday                                 CE8                               OVC
                               flower garden banks national marine sanctuary by pelagic elasmobranchs. J.N.
EhildS, Wildlife & Fisheries Sciences Dept., Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA, 77843-2258.
Tile Hower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary consists of three topographic highs in the northwestern Gulf of
Mexico, that support the northernmost coral reefs on the North American continental shelf. These banks are
seasonally inhabitated by a variety of pelagic elasmobranchs, which often occur in considerable numbers To date
20 elasmobranch species have been reported or recorded in the Sanctuary. Seasonal occurrence, size and soci^
organization will be presented for several of the pelagic elasmobranchs known to frequent the Sanctuary. ’   363                               11:15 Monday                                CF13                                CHM
Molecular phylogeny of Ictaluridae with emphasis on the Mexican bllndcats, genus Prietella. F.J. Garcia de
Leon. Institute Tecnoldgico de Ciudad Victoria, Cd. Victoria, Tamaulipas, Mexico; D.A. Hendrickson, Texas Memorial
Museum, Texas Natural History Collections, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712-1100 USA; D.M. Hillis, Zoology
Department, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712 USA.
Sequences were obtained for mitochondrial cytochrome-b (648 bases) and 12S rRNA (390 bases) of representative
lotalurids [Ameiurus natalis, Ictalurus punctatus, Pylodictus olivaris, Noturus insignia, N. gyrinus, N. fiavus, Prieteiia
cf. iundbergi, P. phreatophiia} and a single Bagrid (Mystus sp.), considered on the basis of morphological characters
to be the sister group of the Ictaluridae (Pinna 1993). Phylogenetic relationships were investigated in PAUP ver.
4.0.0d56 (D. Swofford, Smithsonian Institution), using combined gene sequences with branch and bound and the
maximum parsimony optimality criterion. 194 characters were found to be infonnative. The single best tree
{Ameiurus(lctalunjs(Pneteiia{Pylodictus{Noturus}))'i) had a score of 682, and consistency index = 0.6716. The next
best tree was 2 steps longer. Prietella was monophyletic in the optimal tree, but constraining the tree to include the
traditional Prietella + Notunjs sisfer-group relationship (Taylor 1969; Amemiya ef al. 1986; Lundberg 1982, 1992)
required an additional 9 steps (C.l. = 0.6628), and 100 of the possible trees were more parsimonious than any tree
including this traditional relationship. A likelihood ratio test indicated the traditional Prietella + Noturus relationship to
be a significantly poorer fit to the data compared to the optimal tree, although some other alternatives are not
significantly different from the placement of Prietella as sister to Pylodictus + Noturus. Divergence between the two
species of Prietella is substantial, but the P. phreatophiia analyzed (22 specimens from 8 sites) were nearly invariant
for both genes, with only single base substitutions in each gene in the northernmost population. It appears that P.
Iundbergi has long been isolated from congeners in Coahuila, but that subterranean interconnections among aquifers
have atlowed for relatively recent or continuing gene flow among populations of P. phresdophUa.




    367                       ...    10:45 Monaay                   . ..   .      CE8         ...                    OVC
Aspects of the life histora of the Pacific electric ray. Torpedo caHfornlca (Ayres), In central and southern
California. J A. Neer and G.M. Cailliet, Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, P.O. Box 450, Moss Landing, California
95039 USA.

Pacific electric rays were collected from central and southern California rom July 1994 through January 1996 for an
age and growth, reproduction and demography study. Vertebral centra were used for ageing. The maximum age
estimate from vertebral centra was 16 years. The von Bertalanffy growth model provided the best fit to the size at
age estimate data, predicting an asymptotic total length (TL) of 1372 mm for females and 921 mm for males.
Estimated size (and age) at sexual maturity is 600 mm TL (6 years) for males and 840 mm TL (11 years) in
females. Pacific electric rays have a owfecundity of approximately 17 young per litter. Time of partuition could not
be determined, instantaneous mortality estimates (z) ranged from 0.048 to 0.277, depending on the longevity
estimates used. Best demographic estimates indicate that the Pacific electric ray population is at or slightly
exceeding a stable equilibrium with a generation time of 12.7 to 14.7 years.




. .368                              T1:00 Monday                                CE8                                 OVC
Atlantic shark management update: developing a combined fishery management plan for Atlantic sharks,
tunas, and swordfish. M.B. Schulze. K. Brewster-Geisz and R. Lent, Highly Migratory Species Management
Division, National Marine Rsheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 1315 East-West
Highway, Silver Spring, MD 20910 USA.
The Highly Migratory Species (HMS) Management Division of the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) is
responsible for management of Atlantic tunas, swordfish, billfish and sharks. Thirty-nine species of Atlantic sharks
are grouped into 4 management units - large coastal sharks, pelagic sharks, small coastal sharks, and prohibited
species. In the 'Report to Congress: Status of the Rsheries of the United States’ (September, 1997), NMFS
identified all large coastal sharks and prohibited species as overfished, and pelagic and small coastal sharks as
fully fished. The Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act of 1996, as amended, requires
that all species designated as overfished must have fishery management plans (FMPs) or FMP amendments that
include rebuilding plans submitted for Secretarial review within one year (September, 1998) and that NMFS
establish an advisory panel for each FMP or amendment. The HMS Management Division is developing a
combined HMS plan, with assistance from an HMS Advisory Panel, which will build on the existing plans for sharks
and swordfish and will add a new management framework for tunas. An FMP amendment for Atlantic billfish will be
prepared separately. An update on the status of the HMS plan will be provided.




   369                              .11:15 Monday                               CE8                                 OVC
Experimental homing in juvenile lemon sharks, Negaprion brevlrostris, at Bimini, Bahamas. S.M. Clermont.
Zoological Institute, University of Copenhagen, Tagensvej 16, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark; S.D. Gruber, Bimini
Biological Reid Station, RSMASAJniversity of Miami, 4600 Rickenbacker Causeway, Miami, FL 33149-1098.
This study represents the first eimerimental trials on an elasmobranch's ability to return home from an unfamiliar
area. Ten juvenile lemon sharks (66.0 to 96.0 cm total lengths) were tagged with ultrasonic transmitters and their
home ranges determined over a minimum of 3 days of tracking. Thereafter they were recaptured and experimentally
displaced 4 km off shore, south of the island. From late October 1997 to February 1998, seven displacements during
daylight and three displacements at night were performed. Sharks were tracked for between 2 and 14 hours, and in
all ten cases successfully returned to their home ranges. Ths behavioral pattern of the sharks at the time of release
was characterized by circling and vertical migrations suggesting that they were attempting to orient to sensory cues
in a way similar to homing pigeons. Further, sharks released at night appeared to change course to a more direct
route home at sunrise, suggesting that visual cues may play an important role in the final stages of homing.
Therefore, we are testing the hypofriesis that sharks are able to use the position of the sun as a cue for orientation.
Rnally, we are carefully documenting the behavior of sharks at the time of release to give insight into possible
mechanisms of orientation. Supported by the Rorida State Department of Education with a grant to SHG.

   366                         10:30.Monday ..                             CE8                               OVC
A first glance at pelagic shark catches in the Azores. A.A. Silva. G. Menezes and J.J. Pereira, Universidade dos
Acores, Departamento de Oceanografia e Pescas, PT-9900 Horta, Portugal.
This paper reports a first attempt to estimate pelagic shark catches in the northeastern Atlantic Ocean around the
Azores. Blue shark (Prionace glauca) and shortfin mako (Isurus oxyrinchus) commercial catches reported for the
Azorean archipelago as well as non-reported fishing data from logbooks of swordfish longliners operating in the area
are presented for the period 1993-1996. Three major fleet components catching pelagic sharte are identified
according to vessel characteristics and fishing regime: open deck wooden boats, small covered deck boats (gross
tonnage less than 100 tons) and large covered deck boats (GRT exceeding 100 tons). The latter vessel class lands
most of the catches in Portuguese and Spanish mainland ports, accounting for 86-89% and 71-85% of the total
estimated blue shark and mako catches taken in the Azores during the study period. Catch rates for blue shark and
swordfish exhibit a pronounced seasonal and asynchronic nature. While the highest catch levels for the former
species are obtained in the Spring (averaging 807 Kg/1000 hooks), the fishing season for the latter targeted species
is from August to February. The implications of this pattern for future management are discussed. Blue shark bycatch
represents a major proportion of the total catches taken by the Azorean swordfish longline fishery, reaching a
minimum and a maximum of 39% and 91% respectively dunng October and June. Blue shark catches have been
gradually increasing over the period 1993-1996, peaking at an estimated maximum of 2,433 mt in 1996. Shortfin
mako catch levels have increased to an estimated mawmum of 76 mt in 1995, followed by a decline to 54 mt in
1996. An observed increase of pelagic shark catch rates over the study period is probably due to a shift of fishing
effort towards pelagic sharks during times of low abundance of swordfish.




   370                          11 ;30 Monday                              CE8.    ..                        OVC
Seasonal habitat use of the flower garden banks national marine sanctuary by pelagic elasmobranchs. J.N.
Childs. Wildlife & Fisheries Sciences Dept., Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA, 77843-2258.

The Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary consists of three topographic highs in the northwestern Gulf of
Mexico, that support the northernmost coral reefs on the North American continental shelf. These banks are
seasonally inhabitated by a variety of pelagic elasmobranchs, which often occur in considerable numbers. To date,
20 elasmobranch species have been reported or recorded in the Sanctuary. Seasonal occunence, size, and social
organization will be presented for several of the pelagic elasmobranchs known to frequent the Sanctuary.




   371                         11:45 Monday                                 CE8                               OVC
Archival tagging of school sharks In southern Australia. J. Stevens. CSIRO MarineResearch, GPO Box 1538
Hobart Tas 7001, Australia.
School sharks, Galeorhinus galeus, are an important commercial species in the Australian Southern Shark Fishery.
A current project is using archival tags to try and answer certain questions on vertical distribution, 'onshelf and
'offshelf movement components, Tasman Sea distribution, pupping migrations and pupping areas. A 'dummy'
tagging eiqieriment was carried out to evaluate the suitability of internal versus externally located tags and between
unstreamlined and hydrodynamically shaped external tags. The overall recapture rate after three years was 15% and
although unstreamlined external tags vrere returned at a lower rate (11%) than streamlined externals (16%) and
internal tags (19%) these differences were not statistically significant. In November 1997, 30 archival tags were
deployed on school sharks in waters off South Australia; these tags were mounted externally on the first dorsal fin
and were semi-streamlined. One tag was returned after 7 days and another after 23 days. No further returns have
been made to date. Both recaptures showed an interesting diurnal vertical migration between as deep as 500 m
during the day to near the surface at night. Geo-positioning from the light data are discussed. Immediate plans are to
release a further batch of fish with internal tags.




   372                         08:00 Monday          .   .                 CE6                               QVC
Age and growth of the spiny butterfly ray, Gymnura altavela. A. Piercy. Department Of Biology, Christopher
Newport University, 50 Shoo Lane, Newport News, VA 23062 USA; J. Gelsleichter and J.A. Musick, Virginia Institute
of Marine Science, School of Marine Science, College of William and Mary, P. O. Box 1346, Gloucester Pt., VA
23062 USA.
Age and growth of the spiriy butterfly ray, Gymnura altavela, was estimated from growth increments visible in the
vertebral centra of 175 individuals. Data were comprised of 93 males and 82 females, ranging in size from 250
(embryos) to 2020 mm in disk width. Rays were only collected in August and September (1995-97), thus vertebral
increments were assumed to be deposited annually for the purposes of ageing. Vertebral centra were sectioned
longitudinally and annuli counted multiple times. Precision of vertebral ageing was estimated using the index of
average percent error. Back-calculated size-at-age data were used to estimate von Bertanlanffy growth function
parameters to describe sex-specific and overall patterns of growth. This study represents a major contribution to
general information on this poorly-studied species.   373    . .                   08:15 Monday                                CE6                               OVC
A preliminary demographic analysis of the bigeye thresher shark, Aloplas superclliosus. C.T. Chen and K.M.
Liu, Department of Rshery Science, National Taiwan Ocaean, University, Keelung 202, Taiwan.
Population growth and exploitation of Alopias superciliosus were estimated by demographic analyses using best
known life history parameters. Life history tables were constmcted by using both estimates of natural mortality (M) of
0.1316 and age-specific natural mortality for maximum ages of 30. Fecundity was 1 and age at maturity was at age
12. With age-specific mortality, the population increase rate was 1.2%/year, and the generation time was about
16.45 years without exploitation. Sensitivity analyses indicated that the mortality of juvenile stage was the most
senshive factor in input parameters and net reproductive value was the most sensitive factor in computed
parameters. The net reproductive value, generation time and intrinsic population growth rate decreased with the
increase of fishing mortality. At F=0.1 and fishing started at age 12, the population increase rate was 0.3%/year, and
the generation time was 17.0 years with age-specific natural mortality. The bigeye thresher population would decline
when F^O.t and fishing started at age 10.




   374                      .   08:30 Monday                                 CE6                          .   OVC
A comparison of a stage-based model and a yield per recruit model of the sandbar shark (Carcharhinus
plumbeus}. K.K. Brewster-Geisz and T.J. Miller, Chesapeake Biological Laboratory, University of Maryland Center
for Environmental Science, Solomons, MD 20688, USA.
A stage-based model of sandbar shark populations indicates that fishing mortality (F) needs to be reduced to 0.08 to
ensure sustainability of the population. This model assumes the natural mortality (M) is 0.10. However, stage-based
models do not consider the effect size limits may have on the fishery. We have used a yield per recruit (YPR)
analysis to examine the effects of adopting different size limits in the fishery. We used various growth parameter
estimates, an age of recruitment of 1, and M = 0.10. Based on estimates from Casey ef. al (1985), peak YPR occurs
at a combination of F = 0.40 and an age of first capture of 10 years or approximately 144 cm fork length (fl). When
growth parameter estimates from Casey and Natanson (1992) are used, peak YPR occurs at a combination of F =
0.30 and an age of first capture of 10 years or approximately 99 cm fl. Maximum YPR for F = 0.08, predicted by the
stage-based model, is approximately 80% of the peak YPRs found above, and occur at an age of first capture of
approximately 6 years. With growth parameters estimated for 1991 to 1992 from Sminkey and Musick (1995), peak
YPR occurs at an F = 0.45 and an age of first capture of 9 years or approximately 124 cm fl. In this case, maximum
YPR for F = 0.08 is approximately 75% of the peak YPR estimated and occurs at an age of first capture of
approximately 5 years. These results suggest that in order to have a stable population, YPR for each set of growth
parameter e^’mates must be 20 to 25% smaller than the peak YPR.




   375                          08:45 Mort^            .                    CE6                               OVC
Local occurrence of basking sharks (Cetorhinus maximus Gunnerus) in relation to spatio-temporal patterns
of zooplankton abundance. TJ. Thom. M.J. O'Connell, M.C. Lucas and L. Joplin, Department of Biological
Sciences, University of Durham, DH1 3LE, England, UK; A. Downie, Scottish Natural Heritage, Maritime Group 2
Anderson Place, Edinburh, EH6 5NP,Sootland, UK.
The distribution of basking sharks (Cetorhinus maximus} around the Isle of Arran in the Clyde sea area on the west
coast of Scotland, UK was investigated during July 1997. A network of shore based volunteers conducted visual
searches between 06-00 and 22-00 from seven vantage points for a total of 1538 hours over 20 days between July 6
and 28. Twenty-nine sightings were recorded. A plankton sampling programme was carried out in the same area
and over the same time period. The majority of shark sightings occurred in the afternoon and evening corresponding
to an increase in zooplankton abundance during this period. Three peaks in shark sightings occurred over the study
period which followed peaks in zooplankton abundance with a lag of one to three days. The spatial distribution of
shark sightings was also associated with the distribution of zooplankton in the area. Increases in the number of
sharks occurred when zooplankton dry weights were at the maximum normally found in the area. This study, has
shown, therefore, that fine-scale spatio-temporal variability in the distribution of basking sharks can be explained in
terms of patchiness in the distribution and abundance of zooplankton.




   379                          09:45 Morday                                 CE6                              OVC
Sharks associated with the gulf menhaden Brevoorlla patronus fishery and their relevance to shark
populations of the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico. J.A. de Silva. Department of Oceanography and Coastal
Sciences, Louisiana State University, 153 Howe-Russell Geoscience, Baton Rouge LA 70803. USA; R.E. Condrey
and BA Thompson, Department of Oceanography and Coastal Sciences, Coastal Fisheries Institute, CCEER,
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge LA 70803-7503. USA.
We describe the shark bycatch in the U.S. gulf menhaden fishery; their species composition, fates, distribution and
estimate the annual number of sharks caught by the fishery. Ten species of sharks were identified, with blacktip
sharks Carcharhinus limbatus accounting for 50% of those obsenred. Approximately 75% of the sharks encountered
died, 12% were released disoriented and 8% were released healthy. Using loglinear and logit models we determined
spatial and temporal patterns in the shark bycatch. Contrasts revealed the odds of observing a fishing set with shark
bycatch was significantly greater in June-August than September-October. The odds of observing shark bycatch
during April-May was also significantly different from September-October. However, these differences were only
apparent east of 93 degrees W (central Louisiana). For the 1994 and 1995 fishing seasons we estimated an annual
take of approximately 30,000 sharks. Stomach analyses on sharks indicated that the menhaden schools were
functioning as a foraging base tor those sharks captured. While detailed age and growth information were not
collected, comparisons to length distributions in the literature indicated that the fishery appears to be impacting the
summer nursery grounds of sharks in the northern Gulf of Mexico.

   376                         09:00 Monday                                  CE6                               OVC
Length-at-birth of the sandbar shark, Carcharhinus plumbeus, in Delaware Bay. R.R. Merson. Department of
Biological Sciences, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, Rl 02881, USA; H.L. Praft(Jr.), National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, National Marine Fisheries Service, Northeast Rsheries Science Center, 28 Tarzwell Dr.,
Narragansett, Rl 02882-1199, USA.
Young-of-the-year sandbar sharks grow in length before their umbilical scars are healed. This study takes that into
account by separating umbilical scar healing stages and produces a more accurate length-at-birth than studies which
report the tenths of sandbar sharks with open umbilical scars. We examined 798 sandbar sharks captured by gill
net or longline in Delaware Bay between 1995 and 1997. Six distinct umbilical scar healing stages were termed cord­
remains, open-fresh, partly-healed, mostly-healed, well-healed and none. Sharks with the three earliest umbilical
healing stages did not differ in length, thus represented the length-at-birth. The mean length-at-birth is 49.3 cm ±0.3
cm fork length (95% confidence interval, n=238) with a range of 40 to 55 cm fork length in Delaware Bay. Our
results are comparable to published reports of sandbar length-at-birth along the US east coast and therefore do not
support the hypothesis that sandbar sharks are bom 'somewhat' smaller in the northern pupping range.




   377                         .09:15 Monday                                .CE6                          .    OVC
History and management of the dogfish fishery of British Columbia, Canada. R. Bonfil. Fisheries Centre, UBC,
2204 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4.
The fishery for dogfish (Squalus acanthias} of British Columbia is one of the oldest shark fisheries in the world. This
paper describes the main features in the long evolution of this fishery. It also analyses the current situation and the
management system of the fishery. Presently, this is a small fishery characterized by strong market limitations.
Although there is a reasonably modem management system for the fishery, the apparent success to keep the
dogfish stocte at healthy levels for the major part of the 125+ years of the fishery is more a product of the lack of
strong demand for dogfish which has offered a fortuitous protection to the stock. Some suggestions for
improvements to the stock assessment and possible ways to develop the fishery are given.




 . 378                         09:30 Monday                                 CE6      ,                        OVC
Catch and effort data of whale sharks In the Philippines. A.A.S.P. Yaptinchay, Kabang Kalikasan ng Pilipinas
(WWF-Philippines), No. 32-A Maalindog St. UP Village, Diliman, Quezon City 1101, Philippines; R. Uy, Mantangale-
Alibuag Resort, Balingoan, Misamis Oriental; M.N.R. Alava. Marine Laboratory, Silliman University, Dumaguete City
6200, Philippines.
Catch volume and trade of the whale shark fishery for the 1997-1998 season was monitored by WWF-Philippines
and Silliman University. Methods of data collection include site-visits to coastal villages involved in whale shark and
manta fishery, market surveys, fishers’ intenriews and daily landing-site enumeration. Eight fishery sites were
identified in the 1997 season, tha major landing sites of which were in Pamilacan, Bohol and Talisayan, Misamis
Oriental. A fishery site in Sorsogon, Luzon is recently operational for the 1998 season. Fishery profiles and changes
in activity patterns related to whale shark fishery in these sites are presented. Increasing fishing effort, due to
increasing demand, and decreasing catch per unit effort characterized the fishery. Management strategies employing
Integrated Conservation and Development-projects protecting both whale sharks and the fishing population
dependent on them was recommended in the previous year. This recommendation is being evaluated against a
government directive on total ban on whale shark fishery and trade.




   382                       , 11:00 Monday                                 CA11                              THN
Reproductive success in the bullfrog, Rana catesbelana.            J.C. MacDonald and R.J. Brooks, Department of
Zoology, University of Guelph, Ontario, N1G 2W1.

We studied mating behavior and reproductive success in a wild, northern population of bullfrogs (Rana
catesbelana}. The predominant selective mechanism in this system was female choice. Male bullfrogs gathered
annually at traditional chorusing sites where they competed aggressively or employed alternate mating strategies in
an attempt to acquire mates. Females entered the choruses briefly to select a mate, engage in amplexus, and
deposit eggs. Compared with males that were unsuccessful in obtaining mates, reproductively successful males
were larger, had longer tenures in the choruses, spent more of their tenure calling, and had previous chorusing
experience. Male size was related to reproductive effort with larger males losing proportionately more weight over
the chorusing season. In females, dutch volume was positively related to body size with large females depositing
egg masses up to three times larger than those of small females. There was no evidence of assortative mating by
body size. We also postulated that, because of a low population density, this system may best be described as a lek
in contrast to the resource-defense system described previously for this species .. 375                         08:45 Monday .            .   ..              CE6                               QVC
 Local occurrence of basking sharks (Cetorhinus maximus Gunnerus) In relation to spatio-temporal patterns
 of zooplankton abundance. T.J, Thom. M.J. O'Connell, M.C. Lucas and L. Joplin, Department of Biological
Sciences, University of Durham, DH1 3LE, England, UK; A. Downie, Scottish Natural Heritage, Maritime Group 2
Anderson Place, Edinburh, EH6 5NP,Scotland, UK.
The distribution of basking sharks (Cetorhinus maximus} around the Isle of Arran in the Clyde sea area on the west
coast of Scotland, UK was investigated during July 1997. A network of shore based volunteers conducted visual
searches between 06-00 and 22-00 from seven vantage points for a total of 1538 hours over 20 days between July 6
and 28. Twenty-nine sightings were recorded. A plankton sampling programme was carried out in the same area
and over the same time period. The majority of shark sightings occurred in the afternoon and evening corresponding
to an Increase in zooplankton abundance during this period. Three peaks in shark sightings occurred over the study
period i^ii^ followed peaks in zooplankton abundance with a lag of one to three days. The spatial distribution of
shark sightings was also associated with the distribution of zooplankton in the area. Increases in the number of
sharks occurred when zooplankton dry weights were at the maximum normally found in the area. This study, has
shown, therefore, that fine-scale spatio-temporal variability in the distribution of basking sharks can be explained in
terms of patchiness in the distribution and abundance of zooplankton.




   379                       09.45 Monday.                         CE6                         OVC
 Sharks associated with the gulf menhaden Brevoortia patronua fishery and their relevance to shark
 gopulations of the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico. J.A. de Silva. Department of Oceanography and Coastal
  ciences, Louisiana State University, 153 Howe-Russell Geoscience, Baton Rouge LA 70803. USA; R.E. Condrey
 and BA Thompson, Department of Oceanography and Coastal Sciences, Coastal Fisheries Institute, CCEER,
 Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge LA 70803-7503. USA.
Wo describe the shark bycatch in the U.S. gulf menhaden fishery; their species composition, fates, distribution and
estimate the annual number of sharks caught by the fishery. Ten species of sharks were identified, with blacktip
sharks Carcharhinus limbatus accounting for 50% of those observed. Approximately 75% of the sharks encountered
died, 12% were released disoriented and 8% were released healthy. Using loglinear and logit models we detemiined
spatial and temporal patterns in the shark bycatch. Contrasts revealed the odds of observing a fishing set with shark
bycatch was significantly greater in June-August than September-October. The odds of observing shark bycatch
during April-May was also signifioantly different from September-October. However,' these differences were only
apparent east of 93 degrees W (central Louisiana). For the 1994 and 1995 fishing seasons we estimated an annual
take of approximately 30,000 sharks. Stomach analyses on sharks indicated that the menhaden schools were
functioning as a foraging base for those sharks captured. While detailed ago and growth information were not
collected, comparisons to length distributions in the literature indicated that the fishery appears to be impacting the
summer nursery grounds of sharks in the northern Gulf of Mexico.




   380                          10:30 Monday                                CA11                                THN
Density effects of oophagous tadpoles of Chirbtaius elffingeri, (AnuraiRhacophoridae): Importance of
material brood care. Y.-C. Kam and Y.F. Tsai, Department of Biology, National Changhua University of
Education, Taiwan; C.F. Lin and Y.S. Un, Dept of Zook, National Taiwan University, Taiwan.
  We studied the density-dependent aspects of growth, development, and survivorship of arboreal tadpoles of
 Chirixaius eifUngeri in bamboo forests at the Experimental Forest of the National Taiwan University at Chitou,
Taiwan, from May-Septeinber 1995. Newly hatched tadpoles were randomly assigned to one of the three
treatments: low (LD), medium (MD), and high density (HD) (six, 18, and 54 tadpoies/bamboo stump, respectively),
and each treatment consisted of 15 replicates. Tadpoles are obligatorily oophagous; thus, growth, development, and
survivorship of tadpoles are totally dependent upon trophic egg availability. Tadpoles in all treatments increased in
mass during development, but LD and MD tadpoles grew faster and weighed signifioantly heavier than HD tadpoles
by week 5. During the first 5 weeks of development, the biomass increase of tadpoles (BMI) in successful nests was
substantially greater than zero and was significantly different between treatments, indicating that female frogs are
capable of increasing the supply of trophic eggs as the tadpole number increased in MD and HD treatments. Body
size at metamorphosis was density-dependent but the time required to reach metamorphosis was not, which was
different from earlier studies on pond breeders. This discrepancy is probably due to the different feeding habits (i.e.,
herbivory versus oophagy) and size-selective feeding behavior. Results suggest that the energetic reserves of
female frogs for brooding strongly affect the growth, development, and survivorship of tadpoles.




   381                      ,   10:45 Monday                                CAII                               THN
Contributions to the life history of the redback salamander: preliminary evidence for kin recognition. D.C.
Fgreslgr and C.L. Anders, Biological Sciences, Towson University, Towson, MD 21252 USA.
We tested two questions critical to the reproductive life history of the redback salamander (Pielhodon cinereus): (1)
Do females recognize and preferentially brood their own eggs during pair-wise discrimination trials? (2) Are
hatchlings able to recognize their mother using substrate-bome chemical cues, and if so, is this ability innate or
learned? To address the first question, we tested brooding females collected from the field within a few days of
oviposifion. They were given a choice of their own eggs and those of a conspecific female, and their association
monitored over a 24 h period. To address the second question we cottected 60 females within 24 h post-oviposition,
and divided thern into two groups. The eggs of group 1 were raised by their mothers until they hatched. The eggs
of group 2 were isolated on filter paper throughout development. Beginning at 2 weeks post-hatching, each juvenile
was tested twice (24 h each) in pair-wise trials contrasting unmarked filter paper with filter paper scented with
matema odors. Our results confinn maternal egg recognition in P. cinereus, and we present preliminary data
suggesting that juveniles chemically imprint on their mother during the prolonged maternal brooding period.

    378                          09:30 Monday                               ,    CE6                             ovc
 Catch and effort data of whale sharks in the Philippines. A.A.S.P. Yapfinchay, Kabang Kalikasan ng Pilipinas
 (WWF-Philippines), No. 32-A Maalindog St. UP Village, Dillman, Quezon City 1101, Philippines; R. Uy, Mantangale-
 Alibuag Resort, Balingoan, Misamis Oriental; M.N.R. Alava. Marine Laboratory, Silliman University, Dumaquete City
 6200, Philippines.
 Catch volume and trade of the whale shark fishery for the 1997-1998 season was monitored by WWF-Philippines
 and Silliman University. Methods of data collection include site-visits to coastal villages involved in whale shark and
 manta fishery, market sunreys, fishers' interviews and daily landing-site enumeration. Eight fishery sites were
 identified in the 1997 season, tha major landing sites of which were in Pamilacan, Bohol and Talisayan, Misamis
 Orien^. A fishery site in Sorsogon, Luzon is recently operational for the 1998 season. Fishery profiles and changes
 in activity patterns related to whale shark fishery in these sites are presented. Increasing fishing effort, due to
 increasing demand, and decreasing catch per unit effort characterized the fishery. Management strategies employing
 Integrated Conservation and Development projects protecting both whale sharks and the fishing population
 dependent on them was recommended in the previous year. This recommendation is being evaluated against a
 government directive on total ban on whale shark fishery and trade.




    382                         11:00 Monday                                 CA11                          'THN
 Reryoductive success in the bullfrog, Rana catesbeiana.             J.C. MacDonald and R.J. Brooks, Department of
 Zoology, University of Guelph, Ontario, NIG 2W1.

We studied mating behavior and reproductive success in a wild, northern population of bullfrogs (Rana
catesbeiana}. The predominant selective mechanism in this system was female choice. Malo bullfrogs gathered