 can help interpret social structure, and can also indicate habitat preferences.
Meroles cuneirostris, a diurnal lacertid endemic to the west-central coast of Namibia , occupies an
ecotone consisting of sparsely vegetated sand dunes and an interdune gravel plain. The habitat varies in
both prey availability, with termites common in the gravel plain but rare in the dunes, as well as in
predator avoidance options; lizards can easily bury themselves in sand or escape into bushes in the
dunes but the coarse, packed sand and dearth of large shrubs precludes these strategies in the gravel
plain. Space use may reflect the relative advantages offered by the two habitat types as well as social
structure. Over a 4 week period during December 2011 – January 2012, resighting locations were
recorded for 95 marked adults on a study site approximately 30 m x 500 m following the base of a large
sand dune in the Namib-Naukluft National Park, Namibia. Recorded locations were compiled to estimate
home ranges and core areas using the Minimum Convex Polygon method. Home range estimates were
calculated for 89 animals. The mean ± SE home range size was 0.1887 ± 0.0417 ha for females and
0.1896 ± 0.0278 ha for males. Home range size did not differ significantly between the sexes. Results of
regression analysis also showed no significant relationship between body size and home range size.
Individuals in this population exhibit a high level of home range overlap (mean overlap: males = 973.4 ±
54.5% and females = 929.6 ± 54.5%), and with no relation to body size. The high levels of home range
overlap we found suggest that M. cuneirostris is not territorial. For each resighting, habitat was recorded;
the proportion of sightings and home range relative to each habitat was determined. Patterns of home
range/core area size, overlap, and habitat characteristics will be addressed by further analyses within and
between the sexes.



White, Mary (Southeastern Louisiana University); Sandage, Kelly (Southeastern Louisiana University,
Canada)

Salinity Stress in Green Treefrogs (Hyla cinerea)

Salinity levels in the Lake Pontchartrain Basin of southern Louisiana have been rising over the past few
decades, potentially placing osmotic stress on the freshwater inhabitants of the region. Amphibians are
often considered to be indicators of environmental quality, as their permeable skin and reliance on
aquatic habitats make them susceptible to disturbances in their environment. Studies have shown that
increases in salinity can have large effects on amphibian survival and development, though there is a
great deal of variation in salt tolerance among species. We have been investigating biochemical effects
of increased salinity during the development of Green Treefrogs ( Hyla cinerea ). Our work focuses on
expression of stress-inducible genes such as heat shock genes and pro-opoimelanocortin (POMC).



White, Matthew (Ohio University); Kohli, Brooks; Kilbarger, Molly (Ohio University, Athens, OH, United
States)

Microsatellite DNA variation among natural, supplemented, and broodstock populations of Ohio
River

The muskellunge (Esox masquinongy) is an important game fish species. Although historically considered
to consist of 3 subspecies, none are currently recognized. It has been extensively managed both within
and outside its native range. A previous study indicated little variation in mitochondrial DNA control region



                                                                                                         780
sequences across the entire range of muskellunge. Our study evaluated microsatellite DNA variation
among populations within the Ohio River drainage. Ten populations consisting of 4 broodstock
populations, 4 natural populations, and 2 populations with a history of supplementation were surveyed at
5 tetranucleotide microsatellite loci. DNA was purified from fin clip and scale material. A STRUCTURE
analysis detected at least 5 genetic populations. There was evidence of both contemporary and historical
gene flow and no evidence for population bottlenecks. Mitochondrial DNA data suggested a recent (post-
Pleistocene) range expansion. The data suggests that 1) broodstock populations are retaining levels of
variation found in other natural populations; 2) supplemented populations do not show evidence of
reduced variation, and 3) population connectivity appears to have been maintained despite habitat loss
and lock and dam construction on the Ohio and Kanawha rivers.



White, Travis (Acadia Univeristy); Herman, Tom (Acadia University, Wolfville, NS, Canada); Pulsifer,
Mark (Nova Scotia Department of Natural Resources, Antigonish, NS, Canada)

Habitat selection, site fidelity, and communal behaviour of overwintering wood turtles (Glyptemys
insculpta) In Nova Scotia

The primary goals of this study are to gain a deeper understanding of micro-habitat properties that are
critical to overwintering in wood turtles (Glyptemys insculpta) near their northern range limit, and to
investigate possible relationships between sites selected, site fidelity, and group size. During times of
rapid environmental change, understanding population dynamics, structure, and movements at species‘
range limits is essential. This is usually difficult since most peripheral populations are small. However, our
study area in eastern Nova Scotia (ca.45° N) contains one of the densest and largest known wood turtle
populations within the entire species range. Adult wood turtles (n=25) were captured opportunistically
from May to October 2010 and fitted with radio transmitters. In 2011, 14 additional turtles were equipped,
including 7 juveniles. In November of both years, telemetry was used to locate each overwintering site;
thermal, chemical, and structural attributes were then characterized at each. Temperature data loggers
were deployed at each site. Our findings to date reveal that a notable portion of turtles are using
overwintering strategies that deviate from those reported elsewhere. Conventionally, wood turtles rely on
cool, highly oxygenated rivers and streams, and have been described elsewhere as "anoxia/hypoxia-
intolerant". In our study, most turtles (year 1: n=19; year 2: n=28) appear to follow conventional patterns,
overwintering in highly oxygenated rivers and tributaries. However, in year one, two females used
backwater pools that approached hypoxic conditions. Presently, a female is using an anoxic backwater
site (0.13 – 3.54 mg/L); and 3 females and 1 juvenile are using hypoxic sites with dissolved oxygen
ranging from 1.78 to 8.47mg/L. Of 39 turtles presently being monitored, 18 are aggregated. Visual
observations (year 1: n=3, year 2: n=2) of dormant males within 1 meter of a female suggest that
communal behavior is related to increased mating opportunities. Of 25 turtles monitored in both years, 16
showed site fidelity.



White, William (CSIRO Marine & Atmospheric Research); Last, Peter (CSIRO Marine & Atmospheric
Research, Hobart, T, Australia)

A review of taxonomy of chondrichthyan fishes: a modern perspective

Taxonomic clarity is a fundamental requirement as it forms the foundation of all other life sciences. In the
last decade, chondrichthyan taxonomy has undergone a ‗scientific renaissance‘ with more than 180 new
species formally described. This effort encompasses about 15% of the global chondrichthyan fauna which



                                                                                                          781
consists of 1185 currently recognised chondrichthyan species. The important role of chondrichthyan
taxonomy for conservation management has been highlighted in recent years with new species
descriptions or taxonomic resolution of a number of threatened species. These include Australian gulper
sharks (genus Centrophorus ) and speartooth sharks (genus Glyphis ) in coastal waters of Australia and
Borneo. Closer examination of other wide-ranging species for which the taxonomy was thought to be
stable, have shown that they consist of species complexes, e.g. manta rays ( Manta ) and spotted eagle
rays ( Aetobatus narinari complex), and highlights the need for critical re-examination of other ‗wide-
ranging‘ species. Molecular methods have provided another useful tool to taxonomists and they have
proven to assist greatly with identifying cryptic species and species complexes. However, the limitations
of particular molecular methods being used need to be carefully considered and there are some concerns
about how these are being integrating with classical taxonomy. The fundamental importance of taxonomic
nomenclature to life sciences is often poorly understood but striving for nomenclatural stability is a critical
component of taxonomy. Similarly, biological collections are an extremely vital asset to both taxonomists
and the broader scientific community. These collections have becoming increasingly important due in part
to molecular species identification initiatives such as the Barcode of Life which has resulted in a large
number of voucher specimens linked to tissue samples being deposited. Biological collections are also
proving to be imperative in biodiversity studies as they contain a ‗gold mine‘ of historical collection
information important for assessing changes in faunal assemblages. Resources are typically limited for
taxonomic research and the ‗ageing‘ taxonomic community is another issue of concern for the future of
taxonomy on this important group. Succession planning and better resource allocation will be essential to
ensure that this fundamental discipline is maintained into the future.



Whiting, Martin (Macquarie University); Holland, Brenden (University of Hawai'i, Canada); Keogh, Scott
(The Australian National University, Canada); Stuart-Fox, Devi (University of Melbourne, Canada)

Evolution of a conspicuous dynamic visual signal in an introduced chameleon

Rapid adaptive evolution frequently follows a significant change to an organism‘s environment, such as
during colonization of a novel habitat. Vertebrates, including Caribbean Anolis lizards and Galapagos
finches, have demonstrated a remarkable capacity for morphological change of functional traits (limb
length, beak size) on ecological time scales. Traits that are sexually selected can be similarly affected,
although well-documented examples from wild populations are rare (a notable exception is Trinidadian
guppies). The Jackson‘s chameleon ( Chamaeleo x. jacksonii ) from East Africa was inadvertently
introduced to the Hawaiian island of Oahu in 1972. In its native range, Jackson‘s chameleons are preyed
upon by a wide range of predators, including snakes and birds, which are thought to shape the dynamics
of color change in chameleons. We took advantage of the Hawaiian introduction, an environment with
only a few potential predators and therefore, very low predation pressure, to test for character release of
conspicuous social color signals. To test this hypothesis, we measured color change in response to
multiple social and predator stimuli in wild chameleons in both Hawai‘i and Kenya. We used visual
modelling of colour signals, together with irradiance and vegetation background color, to estimate signal
conspicuousness to both the chameleon and predator (bird, snake) visual systems. The Hawai‘i and
Kenya backgrounds were the same color, but the major difference was in brightness: the Hawai‘i
background was darker. As a result, chameleons from both Kenya and Hawai‘i were brighter against the
Hawai‘i background. However, Hawai‘i males were more conspicuous (courtship, display) against their
own background for some body regions (mainly gular), providing evidence for character release. Also,
Hawai‘i males more conspicuous (courtship, display) to snake and bird predators against their own
background for some body regions. We discuss how relaxing natural selection can result in signal release
in systems experiencing strong sexual selection.



                                                                                                           782
Whittaker, Kellie (University of Caifornia, Berkeley);

AmphibiaWeb: Using Bioinformatics to Track the World¿s 7000+ Amphibian Species

AmphibiaWeb (www.amphibiaweb.org) is a widely used bioinformatic collaboration that integrates
contributions from amphibian researchers, students, and the public with data from museum specimen
collections, using the latest tools in biodiversity informatics. Our goal is to enhance public and global
accessibility to information and specimen data for all amphibians. AmphibiaWeb hosts 15,000-20,000
queries daily on all aspects of amphibian natural history, distribution, conservation, taxonomy, and global
declines for the world's 7000+ species of amphibians. Information uniquely accessible on AmphibiaWeb
includes up-to-date tracking of newly described amphibian species, type locality mapping for new
species, dynamic range and occurrence mapping that incorporates amphibian specimen data from
HerpNET2 with IUCN's range maps, and a taxon-based photo browser that allows visualization of
representative members of any given clade simultaneously. Other features include: community-
contributed multimedia files (sound, video, and nearly 25,000 photos); links to FonoZoo's amphibian
sound files; access to IUCN accounts and links to Amphibian Species of the World taxonomic history for
all species; unique accounts for nearly a third of the world's amphibians, with some accounts in multiple
languages (served to Encyclopedia of Life as well); a Species of the Week; an Amphibian News Box
featuring a current journal article; reviews of factors contributing to amphibian declines; and a
compendium of amphibian decline literature with monthly updates.               AmphibiaWeb has a free,
downloadable iPhone app allowing local area searches and access to the website's content for all
species. Taxonomy is updated on a regular basis. Some major revisions to our family-level taxonomy
(AmphibiaWeb 2.0) have recently been implemented by our multi-institutional working subgroup of
amphibian taxonomic specialists. AmphibiaWeb encourages public participation via our collaboration with
iNaturalist's Global Amphibian Bioblitz. Further, we invite researchers, students, and herpetology courses
to submit photos and write accounts.



Wielstra, Ben (NCB Naturalis); Arntzen, Pim (NCB Naturalis, Leiden, The Netherlands)

The shifting interchange of two species of Triturus newts deduced from asymmetrically
introgressed mitochondrial DNA

If the geographical displacement of one species by another is accompanied by hybridization,
mitochondrial DNA can introgress asymmetrically, from the outcompeted species into the invading
species, over a large geographical extent. This phenomenon is shown by the two crested newt species
Triturus macedonicus and T. karelinii , on the Balkan Peninsula in south-eastern Europe. We first delimit
a ca. 54,000 km 2 area in which T. macedonicus contains T. karelinii mitochondrial DNA. This
introgression zone bisects the range of T. karelinii . Similarity of the introgressed mitochondrial DNA
haplotypes suggests a recent transfer across the species boundary. We then use ecological niche
modeling to explore the suitability of the introgression zone under current and Last Glacial Maximum
conditions. The introgression zone was inhospitable during the Last Glacial Maximum for either species,
but has since that time become suitable. The extraordinary spatial setting of this study, in which the
advance of T. macedonicus created an enclave of T. karelinii , provides insight into the particular
process causing asymmetric mitochondrial DNA: T. macedonicus invaded T. karelinii territory and thus
moved into an area where ‗foreign‘ mitochondrial DNA was present; mitochondrial DNA was not pulled
into the T. macedonicus range by natural selection. The presence of the enclave suggest T. karelinii
was the first to colonize the eastern part of the introgression zone after the Last Glacial Maximum.
Subsequently, it was outcompeted by T. macedonicus , which captured T. karelinii mitochondrial DNA




                                                                                                       783
via introgressive hybridization in the process. The western part of the zone was probably never inhabited
by T. karelinii itself, but T. karelinii mitochondrial DNA could spread there through the bodies of T.
macedonicus.



Wiens, John (Stony Brook University);

Speciation, niche conservatism, and niche divergence in theory and in amphibians

In this presentation, I will summarize recent and ongoing work in my lab (and with my collaborators)
examining how speciation occurs in amphibians, with broader implications for how speciation occurs in
general. Our non-comprehensive analyses suggest that allopatric speciation may be the most common
geographic mode in both frogs and salamanders. What is less clear is how exactly populations become
allopatric (an essential step to initiate allopatric speciation). From first principles, a geographic barrier
consisting of unsuitable ecological conditions may be necessary to geographically split an ancestral
species into two allopatric populations, and this scenario requires that populations be unable to adapt to
those ecological conditions quickly enough to maintain populations and gene flow across the barrier.
Therefore niche conservatism (the tendency of species to retain similar ecological characteristics over
time), rather than adaptation to divergent ecological conditions, should often be an essential part of
allopatric speciation, even if niche divergence occurs later in the speciation process. Some evidence
supports the importance of climatic niche conservatism in allopatric speciation in temperate salamanders,
but the ubiquity of climatic niche conservatism in allopatric speciation is presently less clear in tropical
salamanders and across frogs. New theoretical work may shed light on when speciation should be
expected to occur through niche conservatism versus niche divergence, and why speciation may occur
differently in different groups. I will also address the factors that determine the rate of climatic niche
evolution and how this is related to speciation and species diversification. Finally, I will discuss a
particularly interesting example of non-allopatric speciation in salamanders that we have been studying.



Willey, Lisabeth (University of Massachusetts Amherst); Jones, Michael (University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Canada); Smyers, Scott (Oxbow Associates, Canada)

Patterns of Amphibian Occurrence in Alpine Wetlands in Québec, Newfoundland, and New
England

Arctic-alpine habitats are relatively rare in eastern North America, where they reach their southernmost
extent in New York and New England. Alpine habitats are more widespread and diverse in
Newfoundland, Labrador and Québec, where common alpine wetlands include bogs, fens, and rocky
pools. Alpine areas are subjected to extreme environmental conditions including summer frosts, short
growing seasons, late ice-out, strong winds, frequent fog, and elevated UV exposure. Relatively little is
known about the amphibian communities of eastern alpine wetlands, but they are likely to respond quickly
in response to environmental change and are thus reasonable long-term bio-indicators. We evaluated
patterns of amphibian occurrence in alpine environments in eastern North America at two scales. At a
broad scale, we surveyed 90 pools in 12 mountain ranges in Québec, Newfoundland, and New England.
At a finer scale, we intensively sampled and established long-term monitoring sites on the Presidential
and Franconia Ranges, New Hampshire, and the Monts Groulx in central Québec. Using acoustic
recorders and visual surveys, we documented baseline community structure and related local
environmental characteristics to species richness and calling intensity at high elevation ponds in these
three ranges. Nine species were detected across the region; these exhibited different patterns of



                                                                                                         784
occurrence. We found Anaxyrus americanus , Lithobates sylvaticus , and Pseudacris crucifer broadly
distributed in most alpine areas surveyed in Québec and New England. Lithobates clamitans,
Ambystoma maculatum , Eurycea bislineata , Plethodon cinereus and Notophthalmus viridescens
were sporadically encountered in mainland alpine environments. Some northern species such as
Lithobates pipiens , L. septentrionalis , and Ambystoma laterale were not detected in mainland alpine
areas, although introduced L. septentrionalis are locally abundant in alpine areas in western
Newfoundland, where they co-occur with A. americanus.



Williams, Rod (Purdue University); Burgmeier, Nick; Kraus, Bart; Unger, Shem (Purdue University,
Canada)

Spatial Ecology of Eastern Hellbenders

Studies that combine estimates of population density with spatial ecology analyses provide valuable
information for management of wildlife species, particularly those in need of immediate conservation. The
Eastern Hellbender ( Cryptobranchus alleganiensis alleganiensis ) has experienced drastic declines
throughout its range during the past few decades. We conducted mark-recapture surveys from June 2008
– October 2008 and July 2009 – September 2009 at 35 sites. Density was estimated at 0.06
individuals/100 m 2 and catch per unit effort was 0.05 individuals/person hour throughout the entire study
area. Sex ratios were significantly skewed towards males (2.6:1). No sub-adults or larvae were found and
only two nests were located. To address whether our population was suffering from an Allee effect, we
used radio telemetry to examine the seasonal home range, movement patterns, and habitat use of 21
adult eastern hellbenders. Individuals were located up to three times weekly from July 2008 – October
2009. Mean 100% minimum convex polygon home-range sizes were much larger than previously
reported and largest during the summer. Hellbenders moved very little throughout the year (Mean = 14.1
movements/individual) and over relatively short distances (Mean = 27.5 m) to nearby shelter rocks. The
majority of hellbenders were routinely located under large, flat shelter rocks; however, five individuals
periodically used bedrock, downed trees, and submerged tree root masses along the riverbank. Results
from the mark recapture and spatial ecology study reveal that the Indiana population consists of large,
older-age class individuals that occur at very low densities which are largely isolated from conspecifics.



Willink, Beatriz (School of Biology, University of Costa Rica); Brenes-Mora, Esteban (School of Biology,
University of Costa Rica, San Jose, Costa Rica); Pröhl, Heike (Institute of Zoology, University of
Veterinary Medicine of Hannover, Hannover, Germany); Bolaños, Federico (School of Biology, University
of Costa Rica, San Jose, Canada)

The role of anti-predator strategies driving color variation in the poison-frog Dendrobates
granuliferus

Geographic color variation is an ubiquitous feature of many poison frog species. Previous work has
shown that sexual selection can be an important force driving color divergence among populations and at
least in one species the distribution of color morphs cannot be explained by genetic drift. However, the
role of predators selecting for different colorations and anti-predator strategies in different places is by far
less studied but a possible mechanism. We studied the variation in color, behavior and predation risk
among three populations of the Costa Rican poison frog Dendrobates granuliferus . The dorsal coloration
of this species varies along a latitudinal axis. In the South of its range D. granuliferus exhibits a red
dorsum whereas in the North the dorsal color is green. At intermediate latitudes frogs exhibit a variety of




                                                                                                            785
colorations including orange, bronze, brown, yellow and green. We used visual modeling to determine
color and brightness contrast of frogs and their substrates in each type of population (red, intermediate
and green) and for the vision of a model predatory bird. Red frogs had higher color and brightness
contrast (i.e. were more conspicuous) than green frogs on all substrates. Thus, red and green frogs
seem to specialize on aposematic and cryptic strategies respectively. Behavioral observations support
these results; red frogs spent more time calling, moved longer distances and foraged at a higher rate than
green frogs, that were inactive and motionless for a higher portion of time. Additionally, red frogs initiated
an escape sooner after perceived risk than green frogs which relied on crypsis. Intermediate frogs are
similar to red frogs in color contrast and are intermediate in most behavioral elements, but they have
lower brightness contrast and resemble the green frogs in their escape behavior. However, this apparent
lack of specialization in an anti-predator strategy does not seem to increase predation of the intermediate
frogs. Using red green and brown clay frog models, we found that predation of the different color morphs
depended on the color of the local population, and that at the intermediate population the brown clay frog
models suffered the lowest predation. In D. granuliferus coloration has evolved in concert with behavior,
and different predatory environments may have influenced this divergence. It is possible that the identity,
visual systems and learning capacities of predators vary among populations, but we are still largely
unaware of how predation naturally occurs in most poison frogs.



Williston, Andrew (Museum Of Comparative Zoology);

The Harvard Embryology Collection: a case study on archival histology slides

Extensive embryology and histology slide collections are rare or unnoticed in natural history collections.
Collections focused on keeping alcohol preserved and skeletal whole animals may overlook histological
slides and other micro slides. Still, embryology and micro-slide collections have the potential to be
valuable museum resources. The Harvard Embryology Collection (HEC) is an example of a historic,
archival histological embryology collection available to researchers. The HEC was started in 1890 by
notable American anatomist Charles Sedgewick Minot. The collection was designed to be broadly
systematic, including 60 taxa—over half of which were fish (17), reptiles (15), and amphibians (5). The
HEC was founded in a collaborative spirit as a ―cyclopedia‖ to promote new research and reproducibility
in comparative embryology. The HEC was successful in the early 1900s—being cited in more than 100
papers including two volumes of Keibel‘s Normal Tables. Bashford Dean‘s notable hagfish embryo slides
were deposited in the collection. Fortunately, Minot (a former student of Louis Agassiz) had the insight to
construct the collection according to strict archival standards so, as in other museum collections, HEC
slides would act as permanent vouchers. Indeed, the slides have persisted to this day. Unfortunately the
collection sank into obscurity as embryology research waned after the early 1900s. Still, the collection
remained intact at the Warren Anatomical Museum at Harvard Medical School. Now, despite nearly a
century of disuse, the collection is safely kept at the Museum of Comparative Zoology (MCZ) and is
available to researchers. The collection‘s history stands as a reminder that even the most seemingly out
of place collection objects can have great but unnoticed value. Curatioral improvements are now planned
which will hopefully revive the collection‘s collaborative spirit and value in the research community. The
collection may also serve as a model for researchers building modern, archival histology slide collections.




                                                                                                          786
Willoughby, Janna (Purdue University); Lewis, Timothy (University of St. Thomas, Saint Paul, MN,
United States); Swanson, Bradley (Central Michigan University, Mt. Pleasant, MI, United States)

Genetic impact of demographic decline on wood turtle populations in Michigan

Populations of wood turtles, Glyptemys insculpta, have steadily decreased over the past 30 years due to
the destruction and degradation of necessary habitat. We examined populations of wood turtles in
Michigan, USA to determine the distribution of populations, quantify demographic trends, and measure
the effect of declining population size on genetic diversity. Wood turtle samples (n=68) were collected
from 3 rivers in the Lower Peninsula of Michigan and amplified at 9 microsatellite loci. The programs
STRUCTURE and BAPS identified 2 populations that split sampling sites between a North and South
population. In both populations, MSVar analysis of genealogies estimated r<0, indicating demographic
decline. However, FIS values generated in GENALEX suggested little to no inbreeding has occurred
(average North FIS=0.25, average South FIS=0.23) and no evidence of a bottleneck was detected using
the program BOTTLENECK (p=0.303 North, p=0.290 South). The relatively high genetic diversity
observed in the North and South populations, which is uncommon to find in declining populations, is likely
due to immigration between the two populations (FST=0.043) coupled with the long lifespan of the wood
turtle. The steady demographic decline observed and the slow loss of genetic diversity presents a unique
conservation opportunity to improve populations demographically without the added cost and
considerations necessary in conservation of genetically depauperate populations.



Willson, J.D. (Virginia Tech); Hopkins, William (Virginia Tech, Canada)

Beyond the wetland: Effects of environmental mercury contamination on source-sink dynamics in
a pond-breeding amphibian

Although inter-wetland dispersal is thought to play an important role in regional persistence of pond-
breeding amphibians, few studies have modeled amphibian metapopulation or source-sink dynamics.
Recent modeling studies have suggested that environmental contaminants, such as mercury (Hg), can
negatively affect density and population viability of amphibians breeding in isolated wetlands. Presumably
contaminant-induced population declines          also result in reduced dispersal to surrounding (often
uncontaminated) habitats, potentially influencing dynamics of nearby populations. We used a structured
metapopulation model to evaluate the degree to which detrimental effects of environmental Hg
contamination on individual populations of American toads ( Bufo americanus ) can disrupt inter-
population dynamics. Our study revealed that in the absence of Hg contamination, dispersal from healthy
B. americanus populations can support nearby sink populations that would otherwise decline to
extinction.    Moreover, allowing dispersal between wetland-associated sub-populations substantially
increased overall productivity of the wetland network. However, both the ability of source populations to
support nearby sinks and the increase in overall productivity were dependent on wetland size and inter-
wetland distance. Contamination with Hg substantially reduced productivity of wetland-associated sub-
populations and impaired their ability to support nearby sinks within relevant spatial scales. Our results
have implications for understanding regional dynamics of pond-breeding amphibians, the landscape-level
negative effects of environmental contaminants, and the potential for restoration or remediation of
contaminated habitats.




                                                                                                       787
Wilmont, Brittany (Simon Fraser University); Bishop, C. (Environment Canada, Pacific Wildlife Research
Centre, dfdsf, Canada); Kennedy, C.J.; Nicholson, R.A. (Simon Fraser University, Canada); Skirrow, R.;
Van Aggelen, G. (Environment Canada, Canada)

An in situ study of current use pesticides on the growth, development and gene expression of
Rana luteiventris in the Okanagan Valley, British Columbia.

Amphibians are sentinel species of the aquatic environment and can be used as indicators for risk
assessment and management. We studied the use of current use pesticides on amphibian populations
in the Okanagan valley through the parallel use of in situ field assays and genomic laboratory studies.
Our study sites where located in orchard ponds which were sites of known pesticide contamination and
that were previously examined for deleterious effects in eggs and tadpoles. The predominant chemical
contaminants were identified in source water using ultra-low detection methods. Gene expression of the
Columbia spotted frog (Rana luteiventris) in the brain and liver was assessed using Q-PCR techniques in
frogs at metamorphosies. Some genes of interest include, thyroid hormone receptor-beta (THRB),
estrogen receptor (ERA), androgen receptor (AR), and superoxide dismutase (SOD) play vital roles in the
growth and development of amphibians. Significant reductions were seen on hatching success,
survivorship and size at in-situ orchard pond sites. These observed deleterious effects significantly
correlated with gene expression data. This field and laboratory data will allow a better understanding of
the cumulative nature of chemical, biological, physical and emerging pollutants on the aquatic
environment.



Wilson, Mark (University of Alberta); Grande, Terry (Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, IL, United
States)

Fishes of the World, 5th Edition, by Nelson, Grande, & Wilson

Joe Nelson's book ―Fishes of the World‖ is one of the most widely used and cited references in the world
for fish systematics and taxonomy. Prior to Joe's untimely passing this past summer, he approached both
of us to ask if we would carry on his work by organizing, preparing, and completing a revised 5th Edition,
a project that Joe had already begun. Publication of the new edition is expected in 2014, eight years after
       th
the 4 Edition.       The purpose of this poster is to announce the book project to the ichthyological
community and to invite all of you, including not only specialists on bony fishes but also specialists on
extant chondrichthyans and on fossil fishes, to participate in this project by sending us reprints,
corrections, and suggestions for improvement and updating of the book. The book will only reach its
potential with the assistance of our many colleagues. Fish phylogeny is a rapidly evolving field, and since
the 4th Edition went to press there have been numerous important works improving our knowledge of the
phylogenetic relationships and diagnostic features of fishes. In addition, there continue to be published
revisions and discoveries of new species that change our understanding of the diversity of many groups.
We are honored to carry on Joe's tradition. We look forward to working with all of you and, with your help,
making the 5 th Edition of Nelson‘s ―Fishes of the World‖ the best ever and something of which he would
be proud.




                                                                                                       788
Wimmer, Tonya (WWF-Canada); Corke, Jarrett (WWF-Canada, Halifax, NS, Canada); Cooper, Ernie
(WWF-Canada / TRAFFIC, Vancouver, BC, Canada); McFarlane, Gordon A. (Fisheries and Oceans
Canada, Nanaimo, BC, Canada)

Developing priorities for the conservation and management of sharks in Canada

Globally, over the last two decades, shark conservation and management has emerged as a major
priority for marine conservation. In 1999 the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) developed an
international framework for shark conservation. This framework recommends that all States with fisheries
impacting shark species should participate in their management and develop National Plans of Action
(NPOA) to identify information gaps, issues and priorities for their conservation and management within
their jurisdiction. Despite international commitments, there has been little action undertaken to better
understand, manage and protect elasmobranch species in Canadian waters. The only exceptions to this
are species for which there is commercial interest (e.g. Pacific spiny dogfish and porbeagle) or species
which interact with commercial fisheries (e.g. shortfin mako, tope and sixgill). Canada has developed an
NPOA which has some useful information on commercial shark stocks. However, it does not specify
actions, priorities or timelines to assess or mitigate threats to non-commercial species, nor does it
adequately address issues throughout Canada. Furthermore, Canada‘s NPOA was developed with no
stakeholder input, which is a critical step to developing comprehensive and meaningful plans as identified
by the FAO.

To address this, WWF-Canada hosted regional forums on the Atlantic and Pacific coasts that brought
together experts from government, industry, conservation, tourism and academia to discuss the
conservation of sharks. In total, 42 people participated in the Atlantic Shark Forum and 37 in the Pacific
Shark Workshop (including several international experts). The goal of each forum was to discuss the most
pressing issues for sharks in regards to science, on-the-water practice and policy & management and to
determine the top priorities which would significantly advance the conservation and management of shark
species in Canadian waters. Despite regionally specific differences, the top priorities for both regions fell
into three broad categories: 1) more and better information on stock status and catch data for all species;
2) increased education, training and information sharing about sharks, conservation issues and initiatives;
and 3) advance understanding and research on mitigation measures and handling practices to minimize
mortality of sharks. This information and the collaborations that have resulted will be essential to the
development of national and regional action plans to address threats to these species.



Wind, Elke (E. Wind Consulting); Ashpole, Sara (University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada);
Biebighauser, Thomas (Center for Wetlands and Stream Restoration, Morehead, Kentucky, United
States); Fletcher, Neil (The British Columbia Wildlife Federation, Surrey, BC, Canada); Garcia, Ernie
(Amphibian and Reptile Conservancy, Weaverville, CA, United States); Govindarajulu, Purnima (British
Columbia Ministry of Environment, Victoria, BC, Canada); Liepens, Sarma (BC Ministry of Environment,
Kamloops, BC, Canada)

Wetland restoration for herpetofauna throughout the northwestern USA and western Canada.

The majority of herpetofauna in the northwestern United States and western Canada are dependent upon
aquatic habitats for part of their life history. However, wetlands are one of the most threatened habitat
types and thousands have been lost as a result of land management practices. The Canadian and United
States governments differ in their approach to wetland management, with the latter having more formal
regulations around wetland protection and mitigation. Wetland restoration and creation projects have
been criticised for their inability to replace natural wetlands, and possibly contributing to ongoing wetland
loss due to development (e.g., through compensation). Wetland restoration and creation projects that



                                                                                                         789
occur outside of a regulatory scenario may play an important role in preserving biodiversity, especially for
aquatic-breeding amphibians, given the number of wetlands that have been lost historically.

Individuals and groups are creating natural looking wetlands for herpetofauna throughout the Northwest.
At the helm, Thomas Biebighauser from the U.S. Forest Service and the Center for Wetlands and Stream
Restoration (CWSR) has three decades of experience restoring and creating more than a 1,200 wetland
habitats in 14 states and 2 provinces. In 2002, Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation (PARC)
partnered with the CWSR to offer training workshops that have taught hundreds of people simple, cost-
effective wetland restoration and creation techniques. An informal survey was conducted of individuals
known to have participated in PARC-sponsored wetland training. Participants of three workshops were
polled to see what proportion had since restored or created wetland habitat. Some individuals were sent a
more detailed questionnaire with the objective of identifying factors that may contribute to project initiation
and its successful outcome. The results indicate that: at least 12% of workshop attendees have since
initiated or led a wetland restoration or creation project; the amount of wetland habitat that has been
restored or created is relatively small; most projects have been focused on aquatic-breeding amphibians;
and most individuals felt that their projects were successful as measured by a simple index of amphibian
occupancy. The survey results also suggest that a positive relationship may exist between the amount of
training offered in an area and the number of wetland projects that are subsequently initiated.



Wines, Michael (Auburn University); James C. Godwin, Craig Guyer, Marie Rush, and Valerie Johnson

Optimal Egg Incubation Temperature for the Eastern Indigo Snake (Drymarchon couperi)

The Eastern Indigo Snake ( Drymarchon couperi ) is a threatened species, extirpated from Alabama. ,
Auburn University, the Orianne Society, Alabama Fish and Wildlife, Georgia Fish and Wildlife, and Zoo
Atlanta have teamed up to reintroduce the species to Connecuh National Forest in southern Alabama.
Over a four year period 188 eggs were incubated. 155 of those eggs hatched. The eggs incubated from
78-141 days prior to hatching. The temperature of incubation ranged from 20.6 Celsius to 27.8 Celsius.
During incubation and data analysis after, the optimal temperature was found for indigo snake eggs.
The temperature of incubation correlates with time of incubation.      The lower ranges led to longer
incubation time. The higher the temperature of incubation resulted in the shorter the incubation period.
The lowest mean maximum incubation temp was 23.93, which led to 122 days of incubation. The highest
mean maximum incubation temp was 26.34 which led to the shortest time of incubation of 86 days.
Time of incubation does not correlate to body weight of hatchlings or general health.      The optimal
temperature for incubation of Eastern Indigo snake eggs is between 25 and 26 C. That range leads to
an incubation time of 88-103 days. In that range fewer problems were observed with mold, dimpling or
swelling of eggs.



Witz, Brian (Nazareth College of Rochester); Floyd, Megan (Nazareth College of Rochester, Rochester,
NY, United States)

ELISA Assay for Chitinase in gastric, pancreatic, and intestinal extracts of Sceloporus undulatus

Chitin, a non-branching polymer of b-1,4-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (NAG) monomers, is among the most
stable and abundant naturally occurring polysaccharides known; it is the major component of arthropod
exoskeletons, comprising 25-60% of exoskeleton dry weight. The complete catabolism of chitin involves
two chitinolytic enzymes: first, chitinase cleaves chitin into the disaccharide, chitobiose, and then b-N-



                                                                                                           790
acetylglucosaminidase (NAGase) hydrolyzes chitobiose into the monosaccharide, N-acetyl-D-
glucosamine (NAG). Jeuniaux (1961) confirmed the presence of chitinolytic enzymes in the pancreas and
gastric mucosa of several insectivorous lizard species. Witz and Conheady (2012, in preparation)
confirmed chitinolytic activity of gastric and pancreatic extracts by incubating those extracts with purified
chitin and then assaying for the end product of chitin digestion (NAG) in the insectivorous, side-blotched
lizard, Uta stansburiana. Also, Marsh, et al., (2001) demonstrated chitinolytic activity of stomach,
pancreas, and intestinal extracts of Sceloporus undulatus garmani; they also confirmed that the
immunological properties of Sceloporus chitinase were similar to that of the rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus
mykiss using western blot analysis. We assayed the pancreatic, intestinal and gastric tissue of the
eastern fence lizard, Sceloporus undulatus, specifically for the presence of chitinase using an ELISA
immunoassy. Purified chitin from Streptomyces griseus was used as a positive control, and phosphate
buffer was used as a negative control. The presence of chitinase was confirmed, with the greatest
concentration found in the pancreas, followed in turn, by the stomach, and the intestine. We suspect that
there may be two isozymes of chitinase, one gastric and one pancreatic. Future assays will include
protease inhibitors to determine if these relative levels of chitinase are correct.



Wixson, Joel (Department of Biology, University of Florida); Lillywhite, Harvey (Department of Biology,
University of Florida, Canada); McCleary, Ryan (Department of Biological Sciences, National University of
Singapore, Canada); Heard, Darryl (College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Canada)

Heavy metal contaminants in an insular population of cottonmouth snakes (Agkistrodon
piscivorus)

Snakes are one of the least studied groups of organisms in the toxicological literature.            This is
unfortunate because snakes as well as other reptiles have been experiencing declines in the last decade.
Pollution has been attributed as one of the major causes for reptilian declines. Heavy metals are of
particular concern because of their persistence in the environment. Also many snakes are upper-level
trophic carnivores and scavengers, and the potential for bioaccumulation is high. This study focused on
an insular population of cottonmouth snakes (Agkistrodon piscivorus conanti) at Seahorse Key, which is a
small island located on the gulf coast of Florida, USA. Seahorse Key provides important nesting habitat
for colonial-nesting water birds that nest on the island in the tens of thousands. The cottonmouths here
are abundant due to a mutualistic relationship with the nesting birds, and individuals forage largely or
exclusively on fish carrion that are dropped or regurgitated by the nesting birds. These snakes associate
closely with the nesting rookery where they are exclusively terrestrial and ground-dwelling, feeding on fish
carrion. This relationship between snakes and birds provides a novel opportunity to track heavy metals
as they move from an aquatic to terrestrial environment. We determined the levels of heavy metals in
both liver and blood samples taken from cottonmouths on Seahorse Key, and these were compared with
those from cottonmouths in mainland populations. The snakes on Seahorse Key have significantly higher
levels of Arsenic, Mercury and Cadmium than the mainland populations (3.89 ± 1.76, 5.98± 4.75, 0.19 ±
0.11, vs. 0.20 ± 0.37, 1.91 ± 1.96, 0.04 ± 0.05 ppm liver wet mass, respectively) (mean ± SE; ANOVA, P
values &lt; 0.01). Because the snakes are eating the same prey as the birds, it could be assumed that
nesting birds on the island could have similarly elevated levels of these metals. Both large and small
snakes have elevated levels of these contaminants, suggesting the possibility that female snakes are
transferring heavy metals to newborn individuals. Future research should examine this possibility and
also determine the levels of contaminants in the nesting birds, further quantify the levels that occur in
piscine prey, and ultimately trace the source of these metal pollutants.




                                                                                                         791
Wizen, Gil (University of Toronto Mississauga); Gasith, Avital (Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel)

"Come and eat me" - An unusual strategy for capturing amphibians by ground beetle larvae
(Carabidae: Epomis)

 Epomis circumscriptus        and Epomis dejeani are ground beetles (Carabidae) found in the vicinity of
rain-pools in Israel. Over recent years, laboratory and field observations have revealed an unusual trophic
interaction, in which the beetle larvae attack their potential predators, adult and juvenile amphibians.
Epomis larvae feed exclusively on amphibians, and interact with both anurans and urodeles. Laboratory
observations showed that larvae of E. dejeani preyed upon six amphibian species occurring in Israel
(Anura:      Pseudepidalea        viridis, Hyla savignyi,     Pelophylax     bedrigae, Pelobates syriacus;
Caudata:        Ommatotriton        vittatus    and Salamandra infraimmaculata ), whereas larvae of E.
circumscriptus avoided predation of O. vittatus , exhibiting a congeneric difference in food habit. In
contrast to the larvae, Epomis adults feed on various invertebrates as well as amphibians, however
when preying on amphibians they exhibit the same congeneric difference in food habit as the larvae.
The Epomis larvae ambush amphibians on the ground and appear to be luring the latter with antennal
and mandible movements. Laboratory experiments revealed that the larvae display the movements
regardless to amphibian presence, however when an amphibian is present in the nearby area the
movements' frequency increases significantly. Moreover, the frequency of the luring movements
increases significantly as the distance between the amphibian and the larvae decreases. These
movements attract the amphibian's attention to the larva, which it then attacks, attempting to seize the
presumed prey. Unexpectedly, the outcome of this predatory action is reversed: the beetle larva exploits
the opportunity and grasps the fast-approaching amphibian by its skin, in most cases positioning itself
near the latter‘s throat. It then begins feeding as an ectoparasite and ultimately turns into a predator,
devouring the amphibians. At the end of each instar, the larva drops off the host, molts in a protected
place and then seeks a new host. This trophic interaction is usually fatal to the amphibian. On some
occasions we observed hosts that survived, bearing scars inflicted by the larva's mandibles.



Wojnowski, David (University of North Texas); Malonza, Patrick (National Museums of Kenya, Canada)

Caecilian conservation education project: Educating local peoples about this misunderstood
amphibian.

An overview of a successful ongoing educational program targeting Kenyan villagers' perceptions of the
Sagalla Caecilian (Boulengerula niedeni), rated critically endangered by the World Conservation Union,
will be the focus of this talk. Sagalla villagers often kill the endangered amphibian, similar in appearance
to worms or snakes, when tilling their fields. This conservation education outreach program supports the
idea that respect and understanding of indigenous knowledge, coupled with long-term consistent follow-
up and integration of a scientific perspective has worldwide implications for saving imperiled species.




                                                                                                         792
Wolf, Alexander J. (Southern Illinois University); Hellgren, Eric C.; Bogosian, Victor (Southern Illinois
University, Carbondale, IL, United States); Moody, Raymond W. (Tinker Air Force Base, Tinker Air Force
Base, United States)

Conservation implications of spatial ecology of urban Texas horned lizards

Texas horned lizards ( Phrynosoma cornutum ; THL) are a threatened species in Texas and a state
sensitive species in Oklahoma. Because of the small scale of THL space-use relative to that of humans,
it is conceivable that THL populations may persist in fragmented habitat patches in a matrix of urban
development. To assess spatial requirements for this species, we gathered data on the movements,
home-range size, and home-range fidelity of a THL population on a 15-ha urban wildlife reserve in central
Oklahoma. We monitored this population for 8 years using mark-recapture surveys and radio-telemetry.
There were greater movement rates and larger home ranges during the reproductive period, associated
with mate searching in males and nesting in females. Annual kernel-density estimated home ranges for
individuals monitored for 2 years overlapped by 67% (± 3% SE). Multi-year home-range estimates
calculated with minimum-convex polygons were larger than annual home ranges, but there was no
difference between sizes of multi-year home ranges and annual home ranges when using kernel-density
estimators. Preliminary analyses indicated that juveniles are not shifting annual home-ranges more than
adults, suggesting they are not dispersing. We propose that the relatively large movements of female
THL just before and after nesting may serve as a dispersal mechanism for this species. Overall, our long-
term data set suggests that THL make use of a larger area across multiple years than during a single
year, a notable finding when assessing minimum patch-size requirements for fragmented populations.



Wollenberg Valero, Katharina (Trier University); Wang, Ian (Harvard University, Cambridge, United
States); Glor, Richard (Rochester University, Rochester, United States); Losos, Jonathan (Harvard
University, Cambridge, United States)

Diversification within adaptive radiations: the case of Hispaniolan trunk-ground anoles

The evolutionary processes that produce adaptive radiations are still enigmatic to date, as these are by
definition recognized after the radiation has occurred, which makes it difficult to study them as an ongoing
process. One way to connect pattern to process is to study the processes driving divergence today
among populations of species that belong to an adaptive radiation, and compare the results to patterns
observed on deeper level. In this paper, we tested whether evolution is a deterministic process with equal
outcomes during different stages of the adaptive radiation of Anolis lizards. On the example of a clade of
trunk-ground anoles, we inferred the adaptive basis of spatial variation among contemporary populations,
and tested whether axes of phenotypic differentiation among them mirror known axes of diversification at
deeper levels of the radiation. Although non-parallel change associated with genetic divergence explains
the vast majority of geographic variation, we found phenotypic variation to be adaptive as confirmed by
spatial convergence across the landscape, as well as genetically independent habitat-associated
morphological variation. Morphological diversification of populations occurs recurrently along both tested
axes of diversification previously identified in the anole radiation, but different sets of characters are
affected.




                                                                                                        793
Wollenberg Valero, Katharina (Trier University); Vieites, David (Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales,
Madrid, Spain); Glaw, Frank (Zoologische Staatssammlung München, München, Germany); Vences,
Miguel (Braunschweig Technical University, Braunschweig, Germany)

Madagascar's frog radiations as a model system to test hypotheses of diversification

We review different diversification mechanisms proposed for the fauna of Madagascar, and the
perspectives for testing them. Madagascar has a diverse biota that has evolved in isolation, and is
characterized by regionally pronounced and locally steep environmental gradients, common patterns of
microendemism across taxa and numerous evolutionary radiations. These characteristics establish
Madagascar as a promising system for the study of pattern and process in species diversification.
Species diversification in Madagascar is thought to occur either via mechanisms involving the physical
landscape (e.g., river catchments and mountain chains), or via mechanisms that involve clade-specific
traits. Both types of diversification hypotheses have recently been tested on the endemic Malagasy frog
radiations. The integration of phylogenetic information with distribution records made it possible to study
the effect of extrinsic factors on patterns of diversification, which allowed to imply underlying causal
mechanisms. In contrast, the effect of intrinsic factors on lineage diversification is less well studied as
ecological and life history information on many species of Malagasy frogs is still scarce. As an example
for this type of hypothesis we present a study on the effect of body size variation on patterns of lineage
diversification in the endemic frog family Mantellidae. Based on these results we define a testable
hypothesis under which small body sizes result in limited dispersal capabilities and low physiological
tolerances, causing smaller and more strongly fragmented ranges. This can be thought to facilitate
reproductive isolation and thus favor speciation. Contrary to the expectation of the faster speciation of
such microendemic phenotype species, we only found small body sizes of mantellid frogs to be linked to
higher diversification and substitution rates, but not small range sizes. However, in order to get a better
estimate of the connection between patterns of diversification past and the general underlying
mechanisms, studies using phylogenetic comparative methods need to be integrated with population
genetic studies.



Wood, Perry (Brigham Young University); Jackman, Todd; Bauer, Aaron (Villanova University, Canada);
Grismer, Lee (La Sierra University, Canada); Kumthron, Thirakhupt (Chulalongkorn University, Canada);
Aowphol, Anchalee (Kasetsart University, Canada); Grismer, Jesse; Kin Onn, Chan (University of
Kansas, Canada); Ahmad, Norhayati (Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Canada)

Systematics and biogeography of Southeast Asian Lizard Genus Acanthosaura Gray, 1831:
cryptic species, rapid radiations and selective sweeps

The genus Acanthosaura currently contains 10 species, ranging from Northeastern India east through
Myanmar, Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, and southern China, southward through the Malay
Peninsula to Indonesia (Sumatra). Within this distribution there are three wide-ranging species
complexes ( A. armata , A. crucigera , and A. lepidogaster ) that are highly polymorphic with respect to
color pattern. Genomic data from one mitochondrial gene (ND2) and four nuclear genes (RAG1, PRLR,
KIF24, and MXRA5) from 172 individuals of nine of the ten recognized species were analyzed using three
independent phylogenetic methods, molecular dating, mismatch distributions and Extended Bayesian
Skyline Plots (EBSP). The phylogenetic analyses produced a robust well-supported monophyletic genus
that indicates two of the three species complexes are composed of multiple species. The molecular
dating analysis reveals that Acanthosaura diverged from its common ancestor 35.3-60.1 mya during the
early Cenozoic transition from the Paleocene to Eocene when the initial collision of India and Asia took
place. Following the initial collision of India a major radiation took place during the Oligocene-Miocene



                                                                                                       794
transition 26–23 mya followed by second radiation/demographic expansion during the end of the Miocene
to the beginning of the Pliocene 4–6 mya. These two subsequent radiations took place at times when
sea levels were hypothesized to be 100 meters above the current sea level and refugial forest were more
abundant. This second radiation is corroborated from the independently calibrated EBSP and the
mismatch distributions except for the A. armata complex. The data from the A. armata complex
indicate that a mitochondrial selective sweep has/is independently taking place based on it having a lower
nucleotide diversity than either of nuclear genes.



Wueringer, Barbara (University of Western Australia); Squire, Lyle (Cairns Marine, Stratford, Q,
Australia); Collin, Shaun P. (University of Western Australia, Crawley, Q, Australia)

Intraspecific interactions between sawfish

In Australia, freshwater sawfish Pristis microdon inhabit the upper reaches of rivers during their juvenile
life. In these turbid environments, they are known to move into shallow water, and anecdotal evidence
suggests that they may form groups or aggregations. However, the behavioural mechanisms behind such
aggregations have never been investigated. Bonnethead sharks Sphyrna tiburo form hierarchies within a
group, based on smaller specimens giving way to larger ones when swimming on a course that would
cause a collision. Our behavioural analyses of juvenile freshwater sawfish in their first months in captivity
found that in 58 % of cases that may lead to a potential collision, both approaching are sawfish equally
likely to move out of the way, while in only 26% of cases a smaller sawfish would give way to let a larger
animal pass. This indicates that sawfish may use other strategies to establish hierarchies that avoid
potential collisions with their toothed rostra. One such strategy will be described in detail, based on
findings that sawfish touch each other on various parts of the body with their rostra. Moreover, analyses
of interactions in feeding sawfish clearly indicate the dominance of larger individuals, which use
behaviours of varying aggression to steal food from smaller individuals. Larger sawfish succeeded in
stealing food from smaller conspecifics in 60% of their attempts, while smaller sawfish never succeeded
in stealing food from a larger animal. During such interactions, sawfish may use their rostrum to pin the
rostrum of another sawfish onto the substrate, which results in the pinned animal moving backwards to
escape and the loss of its prey in the process. The present study indicates that removal of the rostrum of
a live sawfish (which seems to become more common in countries where sawfish are protected but
interact with recreational fishermen) may not only affect its ability to sense and manipulate prey but also
to successfully interact with conspecifics. If adult sawfish interact with each other in ways similar to
juveniles, removing the rostrum may also effectively remove them from the reproductive pool.



Wüster, Wolfgang (Bangor University); Hall, Cara; Barlow, Axel (Bangor University, Bangor, United
Kingdom)

Comparative phylogeography of widespread African snakes: is there a pattern?

Comparative phylogeographic studies of co-distributed species or species complexes are potentially
powerful tools in identifying common causes for observed distribution patterns. Here we use a
combination of sequences from two mitochondrial genes and two independent nuclear markers to infer
the phylogeographic history of eight species or species complexes of widespread African elapid and
viperid snakes (genera Naja , Dendroaspis , Bitis ). Our results reveal that most of the widespread
species complexes, both from forests and open formations, originated in the latest Miocene. Forest
species display congruent phylogeographic patterns (Guinea forests, (Congo forests, East Coast)), and



                                                                                                         795
most divergences across the Dahomey Gap are dated to the latest Miocene, highlighting the importance
and antiquity of this habitat break. Open-formation species display largely incongruent phylogeographic
patterns, although most have distinct southern African mitochondrial haplotype clades. The results
highlight the likely importance of the expansion of grasslands habitats in the latest Miocene in either
causing speciation through forest fragmentation or allowing the radiation of open-formation species. The
combination of mitochondrial and nuclear markers also provides strong evidence for substantial cryptic
species diversity in several widespread taxa.



Wyffels, Jennifer (Daemen College); McLaughlin, Donna; Morrissey, John (Sweet Briar College,
Canada)

Scyliorhinus retifer egg jelly liquefaction

Upon oviposition, the eggs of oviparous elasmobranchs are enveloped in three layers of egg white or
jelly, liquid, mucoid and solid. Proximal to the ovum is a liquid jelly contained within the chalaziferous
chamber. This chamber is surrounded by a viscous mucoid jelly. The matrix transitions from mucoid to
solid with increasing distance from the yolk mass. The solid jelly occludes respiratory slits, openings in
the egg case that allow seawater circulation. During embryonic development, the chalaziferous chamber
is compromised as the mucoid jelly surrounding it liquefies. Liquefaction continues radially from the
mucoid to solid jelly until eclosion, when seawater flows freely through the respiratory slits. The
mechanism of liquefaction is not understood but may be the result of secretions from an embryonic
hatching gland. Embryonic development for Scyliorhinus retifer was divided into 6 broad stages using
egg jelly condition and total protein concentration of the liquid jelly. Protein concentration and volume of
liquid jelly present within the egg case increased concomitantly during liquefaction. Liquid egg jelly
begins as a clear fluid that turns yellow and increases in color intensity before becoming cloudy near
eclosion. Liquid jelly samples have less than 1 mg/ml of total protein at oviposition. At or near the time of
eclosion the liquid jelly has more than 6 mg/ml of total protein. Protein and glycoprotein profiles for each
stage of development were compared using SDS-PAGE. A bioassay revealed activity in the liquid jelly
during stages 3, 4 and 5. A range of 0.3-2 mg of protein was liberated per mg of solid jelly liquefied. The
ability of 11 enzymes, lysozyme, proteinase k, alpha amylase, trypsin, hyaluronidase, pepsin, papain,
collagenase, elastase, alcalase and amyloglucosidase, to liquefy solid egg jelly was tested. Papain
successfully liquefied solid egg jelly. Minor protein and glycoprotein fragments were liberated using the
other enzymes.



Xuereb, Amanda (Queen's University); Lougheed, Stephen (Queen's University, Canada)

Landscape and Conservation Genetics of the Eastern Hog-nosed Snake in Ontario

Habitat fragmentation may impose barriers to dispersal and gene flow ultimately affecting the genetic
structure of populations of species. Reptiles are especially vulnerable to anthropogenic features such as
roads as they attempt to cross them while searching for food and mates during the active season, often
with little success. We aim to investigate the effects of landscape features on the genetic structure of a
threatened snake species in Ontario. The Eastern hog-nosed snake (Heterodon platirhinos) is one of the
most mobile snakes in Ontario with dispersal distances throughout an active season exceeding those of
other local reptiles making them particularly susceptible to barriers imposed by a heterogeneous
landscape. It is widespread in eastern North America but Ontario contains about 10% of its entire global
range, restricted to two geographically isolated regional populations (Eastern Georgian Bay and



                                                                                                         796
Southwestern Ontario). Blood and tissue samples were collected from 160 individuals (including roadkill)
captured throughout their distribution in Ontario. Using 454 high throughput DNA sequencing, we
identified more than 100 potential microsatellite markers. We have so far optimized PCR conditions for 13
microsatellite markers and successfully genotyped 110 individuals at these loci. We continue to work on
optimizing conditions for additional primers to obtain a total of 15-20 microsatellite loci for publication.
Preliminary Bayesian assignment analyses using a subset of the dataset revealed 3 genetic clusters for
Eastern hog-nosed snakes. We will also incorporate GIS-based spatial maps and perform minimum
resistance analyses to determine the relative ―cost‖ of movement through various habitat types on a
heterogeneous landscape. Superimposing the genetic clusters onto a spatial map will allow us to infer
landscape features that may act as corridors or barriers to gene flow. At present, there are no genetic
data on eastern hog-nosed snakes available to assess fine-scale population structure of the species and
little is known about factors that impinge on dispersal and subsequent gene flow in this species. As a
result, all populations encompassing the two regional populations in Ontario are managed under a single
conservation unit. Results obtained from this project will justify the appropriateness of this designation
and will allow management authorities to make informed decisions concerning the conservation of this
species.



Yagi, Katharine (Redpath Museum, McGill University); Litzgus, Jacqueline (Laurentian University,
Canada)

Thermoregulation of Spotted Turtles (Clemmys guttata) in a Beaver-flooded bog in Southern
Ontario

Body temperature has a major influence on the physiological processes, growth, reproductive output, and
overall survival of ectotherms. When a habitat is altered as a result of natural or anthropogenic
influences, the available temperatures in the habitat can change, thus affecting an animal‘s ability to
thermoregulate. We studied thermoregulation in response to habitat change in a population of Spotted
Turtles ( Clemmys guttata ) in Southern Ontario, Canada . The study site was historically mined for peat
such that drains were the only habitat containing surface water; historically, turtles were found primarily in
the drains. Following colonization by Beavers ( Castor canadensis ) in late 2005, dam building caused
increased water levels and potentially created new thermoregulatory opportunities for Spotted Turtles.
From 18 March 2009 to 11 October 2009, 19 Spotted Turtles were outfitted with radio transmitters and
iButtons to estimate body temperatures (T b ) continuously throughout the active season. Fifty artificial
turtle models outfitted with iButtons were deployed in the nine available habitat types to collect
environmental temperatures (T e ). Thirteen Spotted Turtles were tested in a thermal gradient under
laboratory conditions to determine the population target body temperature range (T set ). The T set for
the population ranged from 20ºC to 26ºC. In the field, T b was within the T set range 28% of the time
from March to October, and 67% of the time from July to August. Effectiveness of thermoregulation (E)
was calculated to be highest in July and August. The habitat type with the highest thermal quality was the
shallow flooded zone created by Beaver flooding (mean deviation from T set = 1.79ºC), and the habitat
with the lowest thermal quality was the drain bottom, the only aquatic habitat available prior to beaver
flooding (d e = 5.31ºC). This study confirms that Beaver flooding provided a wide variety of preferable
thermal opportunities for Spotted Turtles. Further investigation is needed to determine whether there are
seasonal shifts in T set , and more detailed analyses of Spotted Turtle thermoregulation during nesting
and hibernation are needed.




                                                                                                          797
Yang, Lei (Saint Louis University); Mayden, Richard (Saint Louis University, Canada)

Molecular dating and biogeography of the oldworld cyprind fish tribe Labeonini (Teleostei:
Cypriniformes)

The cyprinid tribe Labeonini ( sensu Rainboth, 1991) is a large group of freshwater fishes characterized
by their amazing diversity of modifications in lips and associated structures. This tribe is widely distributed
in the freshwaters of tropical Africa and Asia. In this study, a total of 34 genera and 144 species of
putative members of this tribe, which represent most of the generic diversity and more than one third of
the species diversity of this group of fishes, were sampled. All major distribution ranges of this tribe are
well represented and make it possible for an extensive biogeographic analysis be conducted. Four
nuclear genes and five mitochondrial genes (totally 9,465 bp) were sequenced. Partitioned maximum
likelihood analyses were performed based on the nuclear dataset, mitochondrial dataset, combined
dataset, and the dataset for each gene. Statistical dispersal–vicariance analysis (S-DIVA) was performed
to infer the ancestral distribution ranges of the tribe Labeonini and the four subtribes included. Molecular
dating was conducted using Bayesian Evolutionary Analysis Sampling Trees (BEAST). Multiple hard
minimum bounds and soft maximum bounds were employed as calibration priors. Our preliminary
analysis suggested that the tribe Labeonini might originate from Southeast Asia.



Yang, Weizhao (Chengdu Institute of Biology); Fu, Jinzhong (University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada)

The genetic basis of adaptive evolution of high elevation amphibians

The rapid and dramatic topological change of the Tibet Plateau in the last 10 MY has generated not only
a large number of endemic species, but also a suite of traits that are adaptive to high elevation
environments. Using the next generation sequencing technology, we are seeking genetic changes that
may facilitate the adaptation to high elevation environments. Our study system includes two sister species
of frogs, low elevational Rana chensinensis and high elevational R. kukunoris . Rana kukunoris was
descended from a common ancestor inhabiting low elevations shared with R. chensinensis , through
colonizing and adapting to high elevation habitats. By comparing their transcriptomes, we have identified
more than 130 genes that bear the signature of recent positive selection. Among them, several involve in
response to UV or hypoxia, and metabolic change. These genes have likely contributed to the adaption of
high elevation life. Interestingly, no hemoglobin related genes are under positive selection, which
suggests that amphibians respond to hypoxia using different mechanisms comparing to mammals. We
are currently examining population level variations of these candidate genes and expanding to other
amphibian groups. With such cross-species examination, we hope to find useful diagnostic markers for
monitoring the genetic impact of abrupt climate change to high elevation vertebrate communities.



Yasumiba, Kiyomi (James Cook University); Bell, Sara; Alford, Ross (James Cook University,
Townsville, Australia)

Density of symbiotic bacteria alters their effects on growth of the chytrid fungus,
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis

Bacterial symbionts on frog skin can inhibit the growth of the chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium
dendrobatidis ( Bd ). Substantial amounts of research are underway with the goal of discovering bacteria
that may be effective at increasing the resistance of amphibians to chytridiomycosis through
bioaugmentation. Bacterial isolates can be screened for production of metabolites that inhibit Bd by



                                                                                                           798
exposing Bd cultures in vitro to either live bacterial cultures or cell-free supernatants. However, in both
techniques the density of bacteria is not known. Bacterial density can affect metabolite production via
quorum sensing. It is therefore important to understand cell density effects when evaluating bacteria as
possible candidates for bioaugmentation. The aim of our study was to provide the first evaluation of how
the density of symbiotic bacteria affects their inhibition of Bd growth in vitro. We sampled cutaneous
bacterial isolates from three frog species in tropical rainforests of Northern Queensland, Australia and
selected ten isolates found to be inhibitory from pilot trials. We sub-sampled each isolate at intervals
during the first 48 hours growth of the bacterial culture, measuring absorbance values, bacterial cell
counts and inhibitory activity of cell-free supernatants at each time point. The challenge assay results
clearly demonstrated that the inhibitory effects of most isolates were density dependent, with relatively
low variation among isolates in the minimum cell density needed to inhibit Bd growth. Inhibition
increased gradually with density in a few isolates, but in most it increased abruptly as density passed a
threshold, suggesting that metabolite production had been initiated through quorum sensing. These
results suggest that the density of bacterial symbionts on frog skin could affect the vulnerability of
individual frogs to chytridiomycosis, and that in selecting bacteria for bioaugmentation it may be important
to consider the density responses of candidate isolates.



Yopak, Kara (University of Western Australia); McMeans, Bailey (University of Windsor, Canada);
Kovacs, Kit; Lydersen, Christian (Norwegian Polar Institute, Canada); Fisk, Aaron (University of Windsor,
Canada)

Can we infer function from elasmobranch brain morphology? A study of Somniosidae

Broad variability has been documented within cartilaginous fishes regarding the size and complexity of
the brain and its major components (olfactory bulbs, telencephalon, diencephalon, mesencephalon,
cerebellum and medulla) . This variability is often associated with habitat or specific behavior patterns,
even in phylogenetically unrelated species that share certain lifestyle characteristics. However, few
studies to date have examined neural specialization in closely related species that vary in their lifestyle
and primary habitat. Somniosidae is a member of the Order Squaliformes, which comprises 7 genera and
17 species. They are benthopelagic fishes that range greatly in size, distribution, and depth preference
(occurring as deep as 2200m). However, few studies have quantified interspecific brain size
(encephalization) or the relative development of major brain areas and discrete subsections of these brain
structures that receive direct sensory input (e.g. optic tectum and the dorsal and medial octavolateral
nuclei) within this group. This study examined the brain of two large-bodied somniosids that are known to
occupy extremely cold waters of the High Arctic, S. pacificus and S. microcephalus, in comparison to
the brain morphology of closely related, deep-dwelling species from more southerly latitudes, such as
Centroselachus crepidater , Centroscymnus owstonii , and Proscymnodon plunketi . Brain patterns
were analyzed in relation to both phylogeny and ecology. In general, members of Somniosidae had
smaller than expected brains for their body mass. Although closely related, the relative development of
major brain areas did not track phylogenetic groupings. In particular, development of brain regions that
receive visual input were relatively reduced in S. microcephalus , while the olfactory regions of the brain
were greatly enlarged. This species occurs at great depths and is heavily colonized by parasitic
copepods that attach to the shark's cornea; its brain morphology might reflect a reduced reliance on
vision for survival. Although this study was not a functional analysis, we suggest brain morphology may
serve as a tool to make predictions about the behavioral ecology, sensory specialization, and predatory
habits in cartilaginous fishes.




                                                                                                        799
York, Joshua (University of Central Oklahoma); Baird, Troy (University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond,
OK, United States)

Do tail displays in juvenile collared lizards function as pursuit-deterrence signals?

Although prey behavior is shaped strongly by the necessity of escaping predators, selection may also
promote behavior patterns that balance risk against other fitness requirements. One possible mechanism
involves signals that are proposed to communicate to predators that prey are in a position to evade an
impending attack. Such pursuit-deterrence signals may be advantageous to both prey and predator. Prey
avoid the potential costs associated with fleeing and taking refuge, whereas predators avoid futile pursuit.
Some lizards are good models for testing predictions of this hypothesis because they use their tails to
display when humans approach. Nonetheless, evidence for pursuit-deterrence signals remains equivocal.
We tested whether or not tail displays by juvenile collared lizards function as pursuit-deterrence signals
using experiments where we slowly and steadily approached subject lizards until they reacted, at which
point we stopped and recorded their behavior. We manipulated the intensity with which our approach
threatened subjects by varying the angle of approach relative to lizard body-axis orientation on the perch.
We also examined lizard body condition in relation to their propensity to signal, because more robust prey
are hypothesized to be better equipped to escape. For trials conducted during the first 1.5 months of their
activity, juveniles performed tail displays in response to simulated-predator approaches, but both latency
to display and display frequency were independent of body condition. Subjects were more likely to flee,
then stop and give tail displays while remaining emergent when we approached head-on while they were
partially hidden on a perch sloping away from the approach. By contrast, when approached from the side
such that they were completely exposed, subjects were more likely to flee and hide in a crevice without
displaying. Tail displays in response to approaches ceased later in the season when juveniles were
longer and heavier. Tail displays when prey were more shielded from a threat is consistent with a pursuit-
deterrence signal because less exposed prey should be in a better position to escape. The use of pursuit-
deterrence signals may decrease when juveniles have grown larger because survival over-winter
increases with size, perhaps diminishing the cost of interrupting foraging when hiding.



York, Joshua (University of Central Oklahoma); Haynie, Michelle; Creecy, James; Baird, Troy (University
of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, OK, United States)

Genetic determination of reproductive success in male collared lizards displaying alternative
social tactics

Strong intra-sexual selection may result in high reproductive success for a subset of males through social
monopolization of space, resources, and females. By contrast, males having lower resource holding
power may be selected to adopt alternative social tactics (ART) that are hypothesized to yield lower
reproductive success. Predicting patterns of reproductive success based on social behavior may be
problematic because females may mate with multiple males even though they appear to pair with only
one male socially, and because parentage may be influenced by post-copulatory mechanisms. However,
coupling genetic parentage analyses with observations of behavior provides a more certain determination
of the distribution of reproductive success. We are conducting such a study on collared lizards in central
Oklahoma. In our population, males in their second season acquire and defend reproductive territories
using high rates of patrol and display, and within which they enter into prolonged courtship interactions
with female residents. Although sexually mature, first-year males employ stealthy subordinate social
tactics and attempt to sneak copulations. Females are usually overlapped spatially by more than one
territorial male and as many as four first-year males. We are combining records of the spatial distribution
and social behavior of adult collard lizards with genetic determination of paternity of hatchlings to test



                                                                                                        800
whether or not females mate with males other than those that appear to monopolize them socially, some
extra-pair copulations are with non-territorial males, and insemination by multiple males occurs both
within and among clutches produced by individual females. Thus far, paternity assignment for all offspring
(N = 10) on a small habitat patch occupied by four adult females and three mature males reveals a
pattern of reproductive success inconsistent with that predicted by mating system theory. Three of the
four females produced a single clutch of eggs, with two clutches showing multiple paternity. Two of the
three males present, both of which were non-territorial first-year males, sired all ten offspring, whereas the
only territorial male present did not sire any offspring. We are expanding our paternity analyses to include
the entire population (N = 45 potential parents, 89 offspring) from the 2007 season, to further test the
extent to which the sneaking tactics of non-territorial males are successful, and the generality of multiple
paternity.



Young, Bruce (University of Massachusetts Lowell); Colayori, Samantha (University of Rochester,
Rochester, Canada); Duong, Taihung (University of Rochester, Rochester, United States); Kohl, Tobias;
Westhoff, Guido (University of Bonn, Bonn, MB, Germany); Bakken, George (Indiana State University,
Terre Haute, United States)

Combined modeling and experimental analyses reveal directional asymmetry and an adaptive
radiation of the pitviper infrared sensory system

The facial pit of pitviper is a pinhole-like sensory organ which detects thermal radiation. The thermal
radiation reaching the suspended pit membrane will depend not only on the exact source of the emitter,
but also on the spatial relationship between the pit membrane and the surface topography of the snake
(the external pit anatomy, which has marked interspecific variation). The spatial relationship between the
pit membrane and the surface topography of the snake was quantified through x-ray tomography
sections. A combination of optical and heat transfer physics was then applied to create point spread
functions, which model the distribution of radiation energy over the pit membrane for any given emitter
location. In every species examined the point spread functions revealed that the pit membrane had
directional asymmetry, meaning that the same thermal radiation would elicit a differential response
depending on where the source was located relative to the surface of the snake‘s head. The theoretical
analysis of the Western Diamondback rattlesnake, Crotalus atrox, suggested that its greatest thermal
sensitivity was located 30° in front of and 10-20° above the midpoint of the facial pit. We tested this
prediction by measuring the neural responses of the sensory membrane (recorded from the Trigeminal
nerve) to controlled thermal radiation stimuli produced by an Infra-red emitter that was presented to the
sensory membrane over a range of vertical and horizontal angles. The experimental results clearly
demonstrate directional asymmetry in the membrane sensitivity with peak sensitivity located at 20° in
front of and 12° degrees above the midpoint of the facial pit. The interspecific variation in the point spread
functions suggest an adaptive radiation within this sensory system. In terrestrial pit vipers peak sensitivity
is generally above the head, while in arboreal forms it is below the head; some species have overlapping
(stereoptic) sensory fields; and the overall size of the area of peak sensitivity varies considerably
suggesting a potential tradeoff between sensitivity and image resolution.




                                                                                                          801
Young, Bruce (University of Massachusetts Lowell);

Transitional tails of tetrapods: How can a tail be semi-aquatic?

The phylogeny of tetrapods includes numerous taxa that have become semi-aquatic or secondarily
aquatic by way of a semi-aquatic evolutionary stage. Most of these taxa appear to have swum using axial
undulation. In most forms of axial undulation the amplitude of the undulatory wave increases caudally. An
aquatic or semi-aquatic species can ―harness‖ the increased amplitude of the caudal undulations by
increasing the lateral projected area of the tail (especially the tail tip) which would increase the propulsive
force of swimming. While moving over land, a tail with increased lateral projected area would increase
drag, predation risk, and potential for tangling the tail in physical features of the environment. Semi-
aquatic and secondarily aquatic taxa are particularly prevalent within the evolutionary radiations
characterized by monitor lizards, mosasaurs, and snakes. The tail of these taxa may have a ―modularity‖
that facilitates localized morphological adapatation, such as increased projected surface area. To explore
the modularity of the tail, and its potential role in aquatic locomotion, the mechanics of swimming were
study in the water monitor (Varanus salvator) which is taken as a representative semi-aquatic taxa. The
results suggested functional modularity within the tail in that the proximal base of the tail produces the
vast majority of the force of propulsion; the distal end of the tail may actual impede propulsion. To test this
further a series of experiments were conducted in which the distal 60% of the tail of Varanus salvator was
ablated. The animals (both before and after ablation) were fitted with prosthetic tails modeled after the tail
of the highly aquatic mosasaur Plotosaurus. Comparisons of the swimming performance of the monitors
both before and after tail ablation, and with the different forms of tail prosthesis support a modular
interpretation of the tail, and suggest that there are two primary routes of modifying a terrestrial tail to
enhance aquatic locomotion.



Young, Kevin (University of Houston-Clear Lake); Richart, Casey (San Diego State University, Canada);
Stringer, Angela (Fire Mountain Consulting LLC, Canada); Hayes, Marc (Washington Department of Fish
and Wildlife, Habitat Program, Canada)

A preliminary analysis of diet in post-metamorphic northwestern salamanders (ambystoma
gracile)

Understanding species‘ diet is fundamental to elucidating ecological processes and energy flow within
ecosystems. The diet of terrestrial life stages can provide unique insights into taxa like amphibians, with
complex migratory patterns between terrestrial and aquatic habitats. This preliminary study addresses the
Northwestern Salamander ( Ambystoma gracile ), an endemic to the Pacific Northwest (PNW). We
selected 50 post-metamorphic A. gracile , randomly stratified by 14 5-mm size classes, from pitfall trap
collections made during the PNW Old-growth Forest study in the fall of each of 1984 and 1985. We
removed and opened entire gastrointestinal tracts and identified their contents to the lowest level possible
without extraordinary means. We recorded a total of 14 higher-level prey taxa for analysis (Acari,
Araneae, Chilopoda, Coleoptera, Collembola, Diplopoda, Diptera, Hemiptera, Hymenoptera, Lepidoptera,
Orthoptera, Phalangida (Opiliones), Pseudoscorpionida, Stylommatophora). The three most frequently
recorded higher-level taxa were Coleoptera, Stylommatophora, and Phalangida. We found no difference
in numbers of prey among salamander body size or gender categories. The only effect of body size on
diet was its positive relationship with the numbers of millipede prey; small sample size limits
understanding of how important this pattern may be. Based on Jaccard‘s coefficient of four body size
categories, intermediate-sized animals (71-85 mm Snout-vent-length) took the greatest variety of prey.
This may reflect the ability of intermediate-sized animals to take the larger prey available to the largest
salamander size class and still regularly take prey typically taken by smaller size classes, but ignored by



                                                                                                           802
the largest salamanders. Importantly, this study provides only a perspective on potential A. gracile prey
because the 4-7 day frequency of trap checks leaves ambiguous what prey were captured before or after
falling into traps.



Youngquist, Melissa (Miami University); Boone, Michelle (Miami University, Canada)

Habitat preference and movement by juvenile bullfrogs (Rana catesbeiana) and cricket frogs (acris
blanchardi) in a semi-agricultural landscape

Despite playing a disproportionate role in population growth and persistence (juveniles survival strongly
influences population growth and they are likely the dispersing stage) little is known about the terrestrial
habits of juvenile amphibians. It is, therefore, vital that we understand how different land uses influence
juvenile behavior, particularly in areas with high rates of habitat alteration. In this study we examined
habitat preference by bullfrogs ( Rana catesbeiana) and Blanchard‘s cricket frog ( Acris blanchardi ). In
the first part of the study we released frogs into 3 x 3 m enclosures to determine how environmental
factors influence habitat choice.     We experimentally manipulated ground cover (with or without cover
boards), shade (with or without shade cloth), or soil moisture (high or low). For each manipulation, we
determined night and daytime preference.           We found that during nighttime, both species showed
preference for no cover, no preference for shade, and a preference for high soil moisture.               During
daytime, bullfrogs preferred to be on the side of the pen with cover, shade, and high moisture. During
the day, cricket frogs had no preference for presence of cover but did prefer shade and high moisture.
In the second part of the study, we released individuals at habitat edge to examine short term habitat
choice and movement patters. Edge habitats tested were: corn-forest, corn-grass, or grass-forest. We
tracked overnight movements using fluorescent powder. We found bullfrogs had random orientation at
all habitat edges while cricket frogs oriented away from forest. Bullfrogs showed no overall habitat
choice, but did seem to prefer to remain in the edge between habitats. Cricket frogs did not show a
preference for corn or grass, but did choose not to travel through forest habitat. Given a preference for
high soil moisture at all time periods, these data suggest that if the majority of dispersing individuals travel
on wet nights then conversion to agriculture may not be detrimental to the dispersal of bullfrogs and
crickets frogs.    These data also support bullfrogs as habitat generalist and suggests that they benefit
from human modified habitats and creation of edge habitat for dispersal.           Finally, these data suggest
that the succession of forest may be detrimental to cricket frog dispersal while preservation of grasslands
may enhance population connectivity.



Yu, Shuangying (Texas Tech University); Wages, Mike (Texas Tech University, Canada); Cobb, George
(Baylor University, Canada); Maul, Jonathan (Texas Tech University, Canada)

Acute Toxicity of Chlorothalonil to African Clawed Frogs Xenopus Laevis

Chlorothalonil is a broad spectrum, non-systemic fungicide that is widely used in agriculture to protect
crops and is also used to control mold, mildew, microbes, algae, insects, mites, and ticks. Although
studies have suggested that chlorothalonil is highly toxic to fish and invertebrates, little is known about the
impact of chlorothalonil on amphibians. Therefore, we evaluated the acute toxicity of chlorothalonil on two
developmental stages of African clawed frog ( Xenopus laevis ; NF stage 8-11 embryos and stage 45-46
larvae). Embryos are less sensitive to chlorothalonil compared to larvae, with 96-h LC50s of 42.14 μg/L
(95%CI: 39.67-44.94 μg/L) for embryos and 11.65 μg/L (95%CI: 10.43-12.67 μg/L) for larvae. Growth was
inhibited at concentrations of 21.6 μg/L and 10.24 μg/L for embryos and larvae, respectively. Embryos



                                                                                                            803
exposed to 36 μg/L chlorothalonil showed abnormal gut coiling. Because it is difficult to identify gut
structures at later developmental stage, larvae were not examined for gut malformations. However,
irregular gut shape was observed in larvae exposed to all concentrations of chlorothalonil. Interestingly,
chlorothalonil caused tail shortening in larvae, and the tail to total length ratios for all chlorothalonil
treatments were reduced compared to control and tadpoles collected from the same clutches prior to the
experiment (P &lt; 0.05). Our results indicate that chlorothalonil could be highly toxic to X. laevis
embryos and larvae, and exposure in the larval stage may lead to lethal and developmental effects.
Disruption of tail development in later developmental stages is likely to impair swimming, feeding, and
predator avoidance, and may have significant consequences on larval survival. Future studies on the
mechanism of tail shortening caused by chlorothalonil and evaluation of chlorothalonil toxicity in North
American amphibians are recommended.



Zamudio, Kelly (Cornell University);

Diversification and conservation of reptiles and amphibians: genomes, populations, and
landscapes.

Microevolution focuses on the processes that lead to divergence and diversification of species and
lineages. These same processes are commonly interrupted or reversed when populations are disrupted
in anthropogenically-modified landscapes. My goal in this talk is to use examples from amphibian and
reptile species I have worked on, to demonstrate how quantifying evolutionary processes contributes to
our understanding of the origin and maintenance of biodiversity. I will review three conservation
genetic/genomic studies focused on an individual taxon, populations within communities, and entire
lineages, to exemplify the application of evolution-based conservation measures in cases of threatened
herpetofauna.



Zancolli, Giulia (Department of Animal Ecology and Tropical Biology, Biocenter, University of Würzburg);
Steffan-Dewenter, Ingolf (Department of Animal Ecology and Tropical Biology, Biocenter, University of
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany); Rödel, Mark-Oliver (Museum für Naturkunde, Leibniz Institute for
Research on Evolution and Biodiversity at the Humboldt University Berlin, Berlin, Germany)

Altitudinal distribution of amphibian diversity on tropical mountains: a perspective from the roof
of Africa

Mount Kilimanjaro is the tallest freestanding mountain in the world and thus it encompasses several
ecological life zones including hot dry savanna, submontane and montane tropical rain forests, subalpine
heathlands and alpine cushion vegetation. It has been designed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site and
included in the Eastern Afromontane Hotspot of Biodiversity. Nevertheless, most of the herpetological
surveys in Tanzania are conducted on the Eastern Arc Mountains and adjoining coastal lowlands,
whereas the herpetofauna of Mount Kilimanjaro has never been intensively explored. In this study, we
aimed to assess the amphibian species richness of the Kilimanjaro area and to investigate diversity
patterns and distribution along an altitudinal gradient. Additionally, we investigated the effects of
anthropogenic disturbance on species richness and community composition. We surveyed the southern
slope of the mountain from the foothill to 4000 m by means of time constrained visual and acoustic
encounter surveys. To prevent underestimating the true species richness we performed additional
opportunistic searches, especially in the forest within the National Park. Here we present the results and




                                                                                                       804
elucidate the picture we have gained so far concerning the pattern of amphibian diversity on Kilimanjaro
and compare it to older mountain blocks in the Eastern Arcs.



Zani, Peter (Pomona College); Archie, James (California State University, Long Beach, Long Beach, CA,
United States)

The evolution and phylogenetic distribution of autotomy

The ability to self amputate the tail (caudal autotomy) appears to be widespread among certain reptile
groups.       It occurs very broadly throughout the Squamata as well as in the Rhynchocephalia.
Furthermore, based on the presence of fracture planes in the vertebrae of certain fossils, caudal
autotomy appears to have been possible in several earlier reptile groups.            While autotomy is likely
ancestral for lizards, numerous species have evolved restricted sites for autotomy or even lost the ability
to autotomize altogether. We review the evolutionary distribution of tail loss in lizards and consider the
macroevolutionary trends of this trait in light of recent higher-level phylogenetic hypotheses. In addition,
we examine the microevolutionary trends of caudal autotomy within species using western fence lizards,
Sceloporus occidentalis , as a case study. We attempt to test the hypothesis that caudal autotomy is
related to predation environment by measuring tail loss frequency of multiple populations across this
species‘ range in a phylogenetic context.



Zani, Peter (Pomona College);

The shift from income to capital breeding with age in female side-blotched lizards

Do animals rely on energy stored from previous seasons (capital) to reproduce or do they rely only on
energy available during the breeding season (income), and does their breeding strategy change with
age? To answer this question, I studied the reproductive strategies of female side-blotched lizards ( Uta
stansburiana ) in eastern Oregon, where lizards can live to be seven years old. Data from nine years of
study indicate that during their initial growing season following hatching, juveniles must allocate energy to
both growth and storage. Previous research on this species has suggested that liver glycogen stores,
not fat bodies, are consumed during winter, but that fat bodies are critical for yolk formation during
reproduction. Thus, energy stores may be classified as earmarked for overwintering or for subsequent
reproduction.      Larger, older females reproduce earlier than smaller, younger females in any given
breeding season even though younger females may enter the breeding season at or above maturation
size. A female‘s reproductive timing advances with age relative to the total population up to about age
three when they reach asymptotic body size. That is, once females cease growing energy can be more
fully allocated to storage for reproduction the following year. This allows larger females to enter the
breeding season ready to reproduce using stored capital while smaller females must acquire additional
energy income before breeding. Thus, due to the added energetic demands of growth, it appears that
female side-blotched lizards can be classified as income breeders during their first breeding season, but
progressively shift to become capital breeders as they age.




                                                                                                         805
Zimmermann, Sigfrido A. (California State University, Northridge); Dickson, Matthew M.; Liwanag,
Heather E. M. (California State University, Northridge, Canada); Espinoza, Robert E. (California State
University, Northridge, Northridge, CA, United States)

Comparative Physiology of an Invasive Reptile: Have Mediterranean House Geckos Adapted to
their Local Niches?

Adaptation is essential for organisms to persist in changing environments. Physiological adaptations are
especially important for ectotherms, which are closely coupled to their abiotic environments. Introduced
species might be more likely to evolutionarily adapt to local climates because of strong selective
pressures in their new environments and small founder populations. To test these ideas, we compared
temperature-dependent rates of evaporative water loss (EWL) and thermal tolerances (critical thermal
minimum, CT min and panting threshold, T pant ) of Mediterranean House Geckos ( Hemidactylus
turcicus ). These familiar ―porch light‖ geckos have been widely introduced throughout North America over
the past century. Introduced geckos were collected from regions representing three climates: Palm
Springs, California (desert: hot–cold/dry), Los Angeles, California (Mediterranean: warm/dry), and
Lafayette and Hammond, Louisiana (semitropical: hot/humid). We hypothesized that geckos from these
three climates would exhibit differences in EWL and temperature tolerances that are consistent with
adaptation to their local climates. Geckos from Palm Springs and Los Angeles had lower rates of EWL at
high temperatures compared to geckos from Louisiana, suggesting adaptive evolution of this trait. Geckos
from Palm Springs and Los Angeles also had lower T pant than geckos from Louisiana. This may be
because the Louisiana populations have higher rates of EWL, which allows them cool without panting at
higher body temperatures. Preliminary data suggest there are no differences in CT min among
populations, perhaps because the unique microniches they occupy buffer them from extreme winter lows.
Future studies will include temperature-dependent metabolism. Ultimately our data will be used in
mechanistic climatic niche models, which can be used to predict the future range expansion of this
species in North America. More generally, developing an understanding of how species that have been
forced (via introduction) into new climates adapt to their new abiotic environment may help us understand
how other species will cope with predicted changes in climate.



Znari, Mohammed (Cadi Ayyad University, Marrakech); Naimi, Mohamed; Aitbaamrane, Moulay
Abdeljalil; El Hajjy, Mustapha; Namous, Salwa; Hichami, Nawal (Cadi Ayyad University, Marrakech,
Canada)

Conservation and restoration potentials of the Souss Valley Tortoise, Testudo graeca soussensis
Pieh, 2001 (Testudines: Testudinidae) in an arid area of West central Moroccos

The Moorish tortoise, Testudo graeca L., 1758, is the unique tortoise in Morocco. It includes three
subspecies two of which are endemic to the country: T. g. marokkensis and T. g. soussensis. It is also
among the Morocco‘s most threatened reptile species as a result of destruction and loss of its natural
habitat, overgrazing, illegal harvest for pet trade and climate change. These threats are more serious in
the case of T. g. soussensis in arid areas of west central Morocco where the chronic drought of the last
ten years, accelerated the population decline as a consequence of a reduced food availability and water
stress. To address this issue, and in order to conserve et restore the tortoise populations and their natural
habitat in arid and overgrazed ares in the central Jbilet mountains, a study of the conservation and
restoration potentials has been carried out. This comprises an experimental captive breeding essay
including a survey of reproduction, natural and artificial incubations of eggs and rearing of young tortoises
born in captivity. The maintenance conditions (housing, feeding, care, etc.) are described. Newly hatched
tortoises, collected in the natural habitat, are also hand reared in the framework of a Head Starting



                                                                                                         806
operation, and will be, as the captive-born tortoises, released in the wild at un age of 5-6 years for the
reinforcement of remnant populations or rehabilitation of the habitats where the species disappeared.
Furthermore, actions of habitat restoration or rehabilitation are proposed and consist, according to the
level of environment deterioration, of an improved resource management or the reintroduction of the
jujube shrub and tortoises which depend on. Finally, the creation of a tortoise sanctuary in the central
Jbilet is proposed and its design described. The conservation and restoration potentials of T. g.
soussensis and its habitat in arid areas of west central Morocco, revealed great opportunities of
measures and actions to be carried out in favor of the safeguard of one of the most remarquable and
threatened species of Morocco.



Znari, Mohammed (Cadi Ayyad University, Marrakech); Hichami, Nawal; El Hamidy, Mohamed; Namous,
Salwa; Naimi, Mohamed (Cadi Ayyad University, Marrakech, Canada)

Osmotic responses of the Souss valley tortoises (Testudo graeca soussensis) to the effects of
chronic drought in an arid area of West central Morocco

The Souss Valley tortoises, Testudo graeca soussensis , occupies various habitats in west central
Morocco, including arid environments where they are frequently confronted to unpredictable chronic
droughts. These can affect their water and osmotic balances due to the lack of water and high salt
concentrations in food plants. Seasonal patterns of osmoregulation were investigated during different
periods between 2002 and 2012 in an arid area of West central Morocco. From April 2011 to March 2012,
plasma osmolality in free ranging tortoises remained relatively constant across seasons, but not urine
osmolality which showed significant seasonal changes due to variation in water availability related to
chronic drought and occurrence of rainfall events. Dehydrated adult tortoises (9 males and 8 females)
which experienced 6-8 weeks of drought during 2008, were captured, weighed, bleeded (100 to 300 µl)
and, occasionally, their voided urinary fluid collected. They were then kept in captivity and rehydrated
while provided with a mixture of fresh vegetables and lucerne and water ad libitum for two weeks. They
were then reweighed, rebleeded, and voided urinary fluids taken 24h before and after an acute KCl
overloading. The plasma and urinary fluid osmolalities, electrolytes‘ (sodium, potassium and chlorine) and
total nitrogen concentrations were measured. The urinary fluid/plasma osmolality ratio, approaching
isotonicity, in both dehydrated and potassium overloaded tortoises was much higher than in rehydrated
ones (respectively 0.80 and 0.86 vs. 0.24). These were indicative of an advanced dehydration condition
in free-living tortoises the urinary electrolytes‘ concentrations of which were relatively higher and
comparable to those in potassium overloaded tortoises. These showed a relatively higher urine total
nitrogen concentration. Implications for conservation are discussed with respect of the PEP (Potential
Excretion of Potassium) hypothesis (Oftedal, 2002) according to which plants high in water and/or
proteins, but low in potassium should be selected in favorable periods.




                                                                                                      807
